

4
Chapter 4 THE CONTROL OF DEVELOPMENT
From say 1950 to 1965 or so was the golden age for the professional…
The age of disillusion or scepticism was between say the mid-1960s and the end of the 1970s…
We are still at this stage today.
Wilfred Burns 1983
THE SCOPE OF CONTROL
With certain exceptions, all development requires the prior approval of the local planning authority.
The authority has considerable discretion in this matter.
Though it must ‘have regard to the provisions of the development plan’ it may take ‘any other material considerations’into account.
Indeed the authority can approve a proposal which ‘does not accord with the provisions of the plan’.
There is, however, a presumption in favour of allowing development applications, and this has been increasingly stressed by the Thatcher government.
The planning decisions of the authority can be one of three kinds: unconditional permission, permission subject to such conditions as is thought fit, or refusal.
The practical scope of these powers is discussed in a later section.
Here it is necessary merely to stress that an applicant has the right of appeal to the secretary of state against conditional permissions and refusals.
If the action of the authority is thought to be ultra vires there is also a right of appeal to the courts.
Furthermore, planning applications which raise issues of major importance, or of a particular technical nature, can be ‘called in’ for ministerial decision.
Development control necessarily involves procedures for enforcement.
This is provided by ‘enforcement notices’ under which an owner who carries out development without permission or in breach of conditions can be compelled to ‘undo’the development, even if this involves the demolition of a new building.
A ‘stop notice’ can also be used in conjunction with an enforcement notice to put a rapid end to the carrying out or continuation of development which is in breach of planning control.
These are very strong powers, and it is clearly important to establish the meaning of ‘development’, particularly since the term has a legal meaning far wider than in ordinary language.
THE DEFINITION OF DEVELOPMENT
In brief, development is ‘the carrying out of building, engineering, mining or other operations in, on, over or under land, or the making of any material change in the use of any buildings or other land’.There are some legal niceties attendant upon this definition with which it is fortunately not necessary to deal in the present outline.
Some account of the breadth of the definition is, nevertheless, needed.
‘Building operations’, for instance, include rebuilding operations, structural alterations of, or additions to, buildings and, somewhat curiously, ‘other operations normally undertaken by a person carrying on business as a builder’; but maintenance and improvement works which affect only the interior of the building or which do not materially affect the external appearance of the building are specifically excluded.
The demolition of a building does not of itself constitute development, though, of course, it may form part of a building operation, or lead to the making of a material change in the use of the land upon which it stood.
Moreover, as is discussed later, there is special protection for historic buildings.
The second half of the definition introduces quite a different concept; development here means not a physical operation but a change in the use of a piece of land or a structure.
The change has to be material, that is, substantial.
It is a concept which it is clearly difficult to define, and which, indeed, is not defined in the Act.
A change in kind (for example, from a house to a shop) is material, but a change in degree is material only if the change is very substantial.
For instance, the fact that lodgers are taken privately in a family dwelling house does not of itself constitute a material change, so long as the main use of the house remains that of a private residence.
On the other hand the change from a private residence with lodgers to a declared guest house, boarding house or private hotel would be material.
Difficulties arise with changes of use involving part of a building with secondary uses and with the distinction between a material change of use and a mere interruption.
This is by no means the end of the matter, but enough has been stated to show the breadth of the definition of development and the technical complexities to which it can give rise.
Reference must, nevertheless, be made to one further matter.
Experience has shown that complicated definitions are necessary if adequate development control is to be achieved, but the same tortuous technique can be used to exclude matters over which control is not necessary.
Apart from certain matters which are specifically declared not to constitute development (for example, internal alterations to buildings, works of road maintenance, or improvement carried out by a local highway authority within the boundaries of a road) and others which, though possibly constituting  development, are declared not to require planning permission, there is provision for the secretary of state to make a General Development Order (GDO) specifying classes of ‘permitted’ development, and a Use Classes Order specifying groups of uses within which interchange is permissible.
The distinction between the Use Classes Order and the GDO is that the former lists changes of use which do not constitute development, while the latter lists activities which, though constituting development, do not require ad hoc permission.
The distinction was of importance during the time when development charges were imposed, since if there was no ‘development’ then no development charge was payable, whereas development was, by definition, eligible for a charge.
In fact, however, exemption from development charge was specifically made for many of these permitted developments.
These complexities are now mainly of historical interest and are not discussed further.
THE USE CLASSES ORDER
The Use Classes Order prescribes classes of use within which change can take place without constituting development.
Thus, Class X is ‘use as a wholesale warehouse or repository for any purpose’, and Class XII is ‘use as a residential or boarding school or residential college’.
For some classes, particular uses which would otherwise fall into a category are specifically excluded: for example, Class I is ‘use as a shop for any purpose except (i) a shop for the sale of hot food;(ii) a tripe shop:(iii) a shop for the sale of pet animals or birds;(iv) a cat's-meat shop;(v) a shop for the sale of motor vehicles’.
As a result, to change a sweet shop into a book shop does not constitute development, but to change a shoe shop into a ‘noxious trade’ such as a tripe shop does.
These categories, it should be stressed, refer only to changes of use, not to any building work.
Furthermore, the Order gives no freedom to change from one class to another; whether such a change constitutes development depends on whether the change is ‘material’.
It should also be noted that in granting permission for a particular use a local planning authority may impose conditions restricting that use and thus prevent the changes in use allowed by the Order.
For instance, a local planning authority may decide that an office of a special character might be allowed in a residential area but at the same time may not wish the premises to be available for any type of office use.
Conditions could be imposed on the planning permission which would overrule the general permission given for such a change in use by the Use Classes Order (Class 11 is ‘use as an office for any purpose’).
THE GENERAL DEVELOPMENT ORDER
The GDO gives the developer a little more freedom by listing classes of ‘permitted development’.
If a proposed development falls within these classes then no application for planning permission is necessary; the GDO itself constitutes the permission.
The order includes certain developments by public authorities and nationalised industries, the erection of agricultural buildings (other than dwelling-houses), and permits the change of use from a shop for the sale of hot food, a tripe shop, and so on(as listed in Class I of the Use Classes Order), to any other type of shop, but not, of course , the other way round.
Permissions given under the GDO are not unqualified.
Apart from a general limitation relating to development which ‘requires or involves the formation, laying out or material widening of a means of access to an existing highway which is a trunk or classified road or creates an obstruction to the view of persons using any highway by vehicular traffic at or near any bend, corner, junction or intersection so as to be likely to cause danger to such persons, particular conditions are also laid down for each of the different classes of development listed.
Thus, under Class 1, the enlargement or other alteration of a dwelling-house is permitted (including the building of a garage) subject to limitations of size and elevation.
This by no means complete account of development is sufficient for present purposes.
The cynic may perhaps be forgiven for commenting that the freedom given by the Use Classes Order and the GDO is so hedged by restrictions, and frequently so difficult to comprehend (though he may note with relief that painting is not subject to control, unless it is ‘for purpose of advertisement, announcement or direction’) that it would be safer to assume that any operation constitutes development and requires planning permission.
The framers of the legislation have been helpful here.
Application can be made to the local planning authority (either as part of an application for planning permission or as a separate application) for a ‘determination’ as to whether a proposed operation constitutes development and, if so, as to whether planning permission is required.
Should the local planning authority determine that the proposals do constitute or involve development, it has to inform the applicant of grounds on which it has reached this decision and also his rights of appeal.
Most planning decisions are administrative acts against which appeal lies only to the secretary of state, but in the case of a determination of whether or not planning permission is required, the question is a mixed one of fact and law: thus not only is there the normal right of appeal against the local authority's decision to the secretary of state, there is also a right of appeal against his decision to the High Court.
(The court's powers, however, are limited to remitting the decision to the secretary of state for reconsideration.)
A GDO is subject to parliamentary approval (or, to be more precise, is subject to annulment by resolution of either House.
Grant notes that ‘proposals for reducing the scope of planning intervention have always proved controversial’.
Thus.
though the Conservative government were able, in 1981, to amend the GDO to increase the scope of permitted development from 10 to 15 per cent, the Labour government ‘were forced to withdraw similar proposals in 1977 following a spirited battle in the House of Lords’.
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT ORDERS
While the GDO is applicable generally (that is, throughout the country), special development orders (SDO) relate to particular areas or particular types of development.
Technically, they modify the provisions of the GDO.
Thus the new towns GDO grants permission for the carrying out of development (approved by the secretary of state) by a new town development corporation within the designated area.
The SDOs for the urban development areas do likewise for urban development corporations.
Other SDOs deal with national parks, areas of outstanding natural beauty, and ironstone areas.
SDOs are subject to the same parliamentary procedure as GDOs.
This can provide an opportunity for testing opinion on controversial proposals such as the reprocessing of nuclear fuels at Windscale and the designation of Stansted as the site of the third London airport.
An unusual use of an SDO was the Vauxhall Cross proposal which though receiving architectural acclaim, was fiercely opposed by the local authority.
This granted planning permission for a very large development including more than one million square feet of office and 260,000 square feet of dwellings on the eastern end of Vauxhall Bridge.
Though in fact the development did not proceed, the use of the SDO procedure for such a purpose involved a high degree of central involvement in local planning decisions.
The case submitted by the DoE was that ‘the purpose of making fuller use of SDOs would not be to make any general relaxation in development control but to stimulate planned development in acceptable locations, and speed up the planning process’.
This is tantamount to saving that the central government knows best.
CONDITIONAL Permissions
A local planning authority can grant planning permission subject to conditions.
This can be a very useful way of permitting development which would otherwise be undesirable.
Thus residential development in an area liable to subsidence can he permitted subject to the condition that the foundations are suitably reinforced, or a garage may be  approved in a residential area on condition that ‘no panel beating or paint spraying is carried out, and the hours of business are kept within reasonable limits’.
The local authorities' powers to impose conditions are very wide.
The legislation allows them to grant permission subject to‘such conditions as they think fit’, but this does not mean ‘as they please’.
The conditions must be appropriate from a planning point of view: the planning authority are not at liberty to use their powers for an ulterior object, however desirable that object may seem to them to be in the public interest.
If they mistake or misuse their powers, however bona fide, the court can interfere by declaration and injunction.’
Three types of condition are specifically referred to in the legislation:
(1)
Conditions can be imposed for regulating the development or use of any land under the control of the applicant, whether or not it is the land to which the application relates, so long as there is a definite relationship between the object of the condition and the development permitted.
(2)
A ‘time condition’ can be imposed on a permission.
This is referred to in the legislation as ‘permission granted for a limited period only’.
Such a condition is particularly appropriate where the proposed development is undesirable on a long-term view, but there is no reason why a temporary permission should not be granted.
This would occur where a local authority has definite plans for redevelopment in the near future.
(3)
A condition can be imposed requiring operations to commence within a specified time.
It should be borne in mind that planning permissions normally run with the land.
This particular condition can be imposed where the planning proposals for the area will require substantial revision, but the degree of risk that the proposed development will conflict with these proposals is not sufficient to justify outright refusal.
Until the passing of the 1968 Act, there was no general time limit within which development had to take place; unless a specific condition was imposed.
planning permission development could take place at any time.
The 1968 Act, however, made all planning permissions subject to a condition that development is begun within five years.
If the work is not begun within this time limit, the permission lapses.
However, the secretary of state or the local planning authority can vary the period, and there is no bar to the renewal of permission after that period has elapsed (whether it be five years or more or less).
The purpose of this provision is to prevent the accumulation of unused permissions and to discourage the speculative land-hoarder.
Accumulated unused permissions could constitute a difficult problem  for some local authorities: they create uncertainty and could make an authority reluctant to grant further permissions, which might result in, for example, too great a strain on public services.
The provision is directed towards the bringing forward of development for which permission has been granted, and thus to enable new allocations of land for development to be made against a reasonably certain background of pending development.
The provision relates, however, only to the beginning of development and this apparently includes digging a trench or putting a peg in the ground.
But (if permission is not a pre-1968 Act one) the trench digger may be brought up against a further provision: he may be served with a ‘completion notice’.
Such a notice states that the planning permission lapses after the expiration of a specified period (of not less than one year).
Any work carried out after then becomes liable to enforcement procedures.
PLANNING AGREEMENTS, BARGAINING AND PLANNING GAIN
Under section 52 of the 1971 Planning Act, local planning authorities have power to make ‘agreements’.
These section 52 agreements became the object of increasing contention in the 1970s, with local authorities seeing them as a means of bargaining for planning gain, while developers, at the extreme, regarded them as blackmail.
A classic (or, more accurately, notorious) example was the Centre Point agreement under which a large increase in density was allowed in exchange for the planning gain of land for road purposes.
Local authorities have had powers of this nature for many years (the origin was the 1932 Planning Act), but it was not until the property boom of the early 1970s that they became widely used.
Indeed, a number of authorities took ‘the opportunity offered by the current preparation of the new statutory local plans to institutionalise negotiated planning control…the draft Westminster District Plan, for example, indicates unequivocally the council's intention to pursue certain planning goals through agreements, in addition to establishing certain minimum gains to be included in planning applications or to be secured through negotiated amendments to submitted applications’ An action area plan for Fareham, Hampshire, similarly states that ‘planning permission for development in the proposed areas will not be granted until…negotiations between developers and the local authority for financial contributions have been concluded’.
The property boom was certainly a factor in the increase of bargaining: developers were pressing for planning permissions while local authorities were experiencing financial difficulties in providing the necessary infrastructure.
Indeed, the 1973 white paper,Widening the Choice: The Next Steps in Housing , after noting that ‘the prospect of  heavy expenditure on ancillary services often makes local authorities reluctant to give planning permission for housing on land which is otherwise ripe for development’, proposed an extension of planning agreements and a compulsory infrastructure charge.
This particular proposal was not carried further, but the ensuing legislation did strengthen the powers for making agreements.
Agreements, however, extended far beyond the most generous definition of infrastructure.
Moreover, some agreements enabled local authorities to obtain gains which could not legally be achieved through a condition.
The crux of the matter is that attitudes on the character and scope of planning have changed.
Economic and social factors now loom large, and can be seen as being of greater importance than purely land use matters, though the courts would not necessarily accept such a line of reasoning (as, for instance, when Lord Widgery held that the London Borough of Hillingdon could not impose a condition that the occupants of a private housing development should be people on the council's waiting list).
Additionally, ‘the move from development plans to structure plans itself allows a move to flexible and broad criteria for decision, which in turn allows the decision-maker wide discretion and hence room for manoeuvre when resolving applications for planning permission’.
The extent to which authorities can achieve gains depends, of course, on their bargaining power, which in turn may be related to current (and local) economic conditions.
The situation in London in 1974 was very different from that one year later in a northern authority which commented that ‘getting a developer to build anything is, in our eyes, a planning gain'.
The growth of planning agreements gives rise to a number of concerns.
The ethics of bargaining are debatable; there is scope for unjustifiable coercion; and equal treatment as between applicants can be abandoned in favour of charging what the market will bear at any particular time.
Additionally, bargaining is a closed, private activity which sits uneasily astride the current emphasis on open government and public participation.
A slim 1981 report by the Property Advisory Group added fuel to the controversy by concluding that, with minor exceptions, ‘the practice of bargaining for planning gains is unacceptable and should be firmly discouraged’.
A spate of articles followed and, after considerable debate, the DoE Circular 22/83 finally emerged, bearing the lengthy title Town and Country Planning Act 1971: Planning Gain — Obligations and Benefits Which Extend Beyond the Development for Which Planning Permission Has Been Sought.
The leitmotif of this circular was ‘reasonableness’, which was dealt with at some length though without a clear conclusion.
CHARGING FOR PLANNING APPLICATIONS
The secretary of state may by regulations make such provision as he thinks fit for the payment of a fee of the prescribed amount to a local planning authority…in respect of an application made to them under the planning enactments for any permission, consent, approval, determination or certificate.
Thus does section 87 of the Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980 make provision for charges for planning applications.
This represents a marked break with planning traditions which have held (at least implicitly) that development control is of general communal benefit and directly analogous to other forms of public control for which no charges are made on individuals.
The Thatcher administration, on the other hand, ‘do not believe that the community as a whole should continue to pay for all sorts of things that it has paid for in the past…
In the general review that has taken place to see where we can reduce spending from the public purse…we came to the conclusion that the cost of development control was an area where some part of the cost should be recovered.’
The Bill provided additionally for fees for appeals but this was dropped in the face of widespread objections from both sides of the House.
Apart from issues of principle, perhaps the major practical objection put forward against charges is that it would lead to an increase in evasion; the incentive to undertake development without applying for planning permission would rise in line with the rate of charge (particularly for ‘householder’ types of development).
Fears on this score were heightened by the stance taken by the DoE on enforcement of planning controls.
Circular 22/80 advised that ‘this permissive power’ should be used ‘only where planning reasons clearly warrant such action, and there is no alternative to enforcement proceedings’.
No doubt the fee structure will change over time, and a detailed schedule is therefore not appropriate.
The scheme has already been changed since its inception.
However, to illustrate, under the 1985 regulations, the fee per new dwelling is £53 (up to fifty dwellings when the £2,650 then payable becomes the maximum for the development); applications relating to commercial and industrial buildings are charged £27 for up to 40 sq.
m., £53 for up to 75 sq.
m., and a further £53 for each additional 75 sq.
m. up to a maximum of £2,650 (the fee payable on 3,750 sq.
m.).
It will be interesting to see whether, as suggested by Malcolm Grant, the fee system will ‘lead to significant changes over time in the relationship between applicants and local planning authorities’.
One likelihood is that developers ‘will be less willing to submit alternative schemes; and there will be renewed pressure from developers to iron  out difficulties in pre-application negotiations with planning officers’.
ENFORCEMENT OF PLANNING CONTROL
If the machinery of planning control is to be effective, some means of enforcement is essential.
Under the prewar system of interim development control there were no such effective means.
A developer could go ahead without applying for planning permission, or could even ignore a refusal of permission.
He took the risk of being compelled to ‘undo’ his development (for example, demolish a newly built house) when, and if, the planning scheme was approved, but this was a risk which was usually worth taking.
And if the development was inexpensive and lucrative (for example, a petrol station or a greyhound racing track) the risk was virtually no deterrent at all .
This flaw in the prewar system was remedied by the strengthening of enforcement provisions.
Development undertaken without permission is not an offence in itself; but ignoring an enforcement notice is.
There is a maximum fine following conviction of £2,000 and a penalty of £100 for each day during which the requirements of the notice remain unfulfilled.
These are very drastic powers; but there are several safeguards.
In the first place, local authorities can serve an enforcement notice only ‘if they consider it expedient to do so having regard to the provisions of the development plan and to any other material considerations’; in short, they must be satisfied that enforcement is necessary in the interests of good planning.
Second, in the case of building or other operations (but not of material changes of use) the notice must be served within four years of the development being carried out.
Third and this meets the case of development carried out in good faith, or ignorance — application can be made for retrospective permission.
It is hardly likely that a local authority would grant permission for a development against which it had served an enforcement notice, but it could, of course, attach conditions; and for the owner there is the usual right of appeal.
Fourth, there is a right of appeal against an enforcement notice to the secretary of state and the courts.
Appeals can be made on several grounds, for example, that permission ought to be granted, that permission has been granted and that no permission is required.
A further enforcement device was introduced by the 1968 Act: the ‘stop notice’.
This is an attempt to prevent delays in the other enforcement procedures (and advantage being taken of these delays) resulting in the local authority being faced with a fait accompli.
Previously, when an appeal was lodged against an enforcement notice, there was nothing to stop development continuing while the appeal  was being ‘determined’.
The appeal could take several months, particularly in cases where a local inquiry was held.
No liability was involved since, until the enforcement order was made (if it was), no offence was being committed.
The stop notice prohibits the continuation of development which is alleged (in the enforcement notice) to be in breach of planning control.
Development carried out in contravention of a stop notice constitutes an offence.
Local authorities must, however, use this power with circumspection, since if the enforcement notice is quashed on appeal they are liable to pay compensation for loss due to the stop notice.
Thus good planning must have due regard for economic realities.
The emphasis on this was greatly increased in 1980.
Before discussing this, however, it is appropriate to deal with other powers related to enforcement.
REVOCATION, MODIFICATION AND DISCONTINUANCE
The powers of development control possessed by local authorities go considerably further than the granting or withholding of planning permission.
They can interfere with existing uses and revoke a permission already given, even if the development has actually been carried out.
A revocation or modification order is made when the development has not been undertaken (or before a change of use has taken place).
The local authority must ‘have regard to the development plan and to any other material considerations’, and an order has to be confirmed by the secretary of state.
Compensation is payable on two grounds: first, for any expenditure or liabilities incurred after the permission has been granted (for example, expenditure on the preparation of plans); and second (following the 1954 Act), for the loss in the development value of the land.
The logic in the latter is based on the curious situation caused by the abolition of development charges.
The granting of planning permission increases the value of the land in question but, since no development charge is now levied, the development value is thus given to the owner along with the planning permission.
The revocation of that permission deprives the owner of a value which has been specifically given to him; hence compensation is payable.
(Before the 1954 Act, logic demanded otherwise.
The fact that revocation thereby deprived the owner of potential development value did not in itself warrant compensation, since if permission had been given the development value would be transferred to the state through the development charge.)
A revocation or modification order is not very often made.
One case which attracted some attention was that of the Eton Fish and Chip Restaurant.
This concerned an application for planning permission to use premises in Eton High Street as a fish and chip restaurant.
The Eton Urban District Council granted permission (under delegated  powers), but after a petition, mainly from local shopkeepers, decided to seek a revocation order on the ground that ‘the existence of a fish and chip restaurant in the High Street would be detrimental to the amenities, would cause nuisance, offence and annoyance to occupiers of properties in the vicinity and to users of the public highway, and would adversely affect the general appearance of the High Street’.
The Order was confirmed by the minister.
In this particular case it would seem that planning permission had been given after inadequate consideration of publicity.
The revocation was therefore a rectification of a ‘mistake’.
Quite distinct from these powers is the much wider power to make a ‘discontinuance order’.
This power is expressed in extremely wide language: an order can be made ‘if it appears to a local planning authority that it is expedient in the interests of the proper planning of their area (including the interests of amenity)’.
Again, ministerial confirmation is required and compensation is payable, for depreciation, disturbance and expenses incurred in carrying out the works in compliance with the order.
Under this power, action can be taken against any development (or use) whether it was specifically permitted under the postwar planning acts or established prior to them.
It would appear that an order will be confirmed only if the case is a strong one.
In rejecting a discontinuance order on a scrap metal business in an ‘attractive residential area’, for instance, the minister said: ‘the fact that such a business is out of place in an attractive residential area must be weighed in the light of an important distinction between the withdrawal of existing use rights, as sought in the discontinuance order, and the refusal of new rights’.
In this particular case, the minister did ‘not feel justified in overriding the proper interests of the objector as long as his business is maintained on an inoffensive scale’.
Other cases have established the principle that a stronger case is needed to justify action to bring about the discontinuance of a use than would be needed to warrant a refusal of permission in the first instance.
It needs to be stressed that British planning legislation does not assume that existing non-conforming uses must disappear if planning policy is to be made effective.
This may often be the avowed policy, but the planning acts explicitly permit the continuance of existing uses.
This problem of non-conforming uses is an extremely difficult one.
As the Uthwatt Committee pointed out:
The question whether the right to maintain, replace, extend and us an existing building is to subsist in perpetuity, notwithstanding that the building does not conform to the provisions of the scheme is fundamental in relation to the replanning of built-up areas.
On the one hand, it would not be equitable, without compensation, at any time and for any reason to remove, or to prohibit the maintenance, replacement, extension or use of an existing building.
On the other hand, an unqualified right, unless compensation is paid, to replace non-conforming buildings and to maintain existing uses permanently is inconsistent with the present conception of planning.
The problem is one of finding a proper balance between the two considerations.
The committee proposed that a life should be placed on nonconforming uses and that at the expiration of that life the use should be brought to an end without compensation.
This recommendation was not accepted, and thus local planning authorities can extinguish a non-conforming use only by paying compensation.
DEVELOPMENT BY SMALL BUSINESSES
The changing nature of ‘town and country planning’ is nowhere more apparent than in the area of what Circular 22/80 calls Planning and Business Activity.
Relevant previous circulars are cancelled, and local authorities were ‘now asked to pick out for priority handling those applications which in their judgement will contribute most to national and local economic activity’.
Particular emphasis is laid on small businesses which ‘the government are particularly keen to encourage’.
Indeed, in striking contrast to earlier ideas about the separation of industry and housing, ‘the characteristics of industry and commerce…have changed…
There are many businesses that can be carried on in rural and residential areas without causing unacceptable disturbance…
The rigid application of ‘zoning’ policies (where indeed it continues) can have a very damaging effect.’
Moreover, far from ‘planning out’ non-conforming industry (which was a worthy planning aim in earlier years) such industry ‘substantially eases the problems of starting and maintaining small scale businesses if permission can be given for such uses to be established in redundant buildings such as disused agricultural buildings, industrial, warehouse, or commercial premises, on derelict sites, or in unsuitable housing’.
There are many generations of qualified town planners who would have failed their examinations had they suggested such a thing.
Yet the circular as published is a considerably milder version of one which was circulated among local authority associations in July 1980.
This came under heavy fire for implying that small firms set up without planning permission should only have enforcement orders issued against them if alternative premises were available.
A shadow of this remains in a section on enforcement and discontinuance.
While stressing that nothing in the circular should be taken as condoning a wilful breach of planning law, there is a highly significant qualification:
…the power to issue an enforcement notice alleging that there has been a breach of planning control is discretionary and is only to be used if the authority ‘consider it expedient to do so having regard to the provision of the development plan and to any other material considerations’.
This permissive power should be used, in regard to either operational development or material changes of use, only where planning reasons clearly warrant such action, and there is no alternative to enforcement proceedings.
Where the activity involved is one which would not give rise to insuperable planning objections if it were carried out somewhere else, then the planning authority should do all it can to help in finding suitable alternative premises before initiating enforcement action.
Similarly, ‘but with even more force’, discontinuance orders are appropriate ‘only if there appears to be an overriding justification on planning grounds’.
A later circular (14/85) on Development and Employment stressed that there is always ‘a presumption in favour of allowing applications for development, having regard to all material considerations, unless that development would cause demonstrable harm to interests of acknowledged importance’.
The development plan is only one of the material considerations, and its policies and assumptions may be out of date.
Circular 2/86, entitled Development by Small Businesses, deals with a number of issues relating to small businesses, including planning permission for home-based businesses:
Many small businesses are started by people working in their own homes.
This will not necessarily require planning permission.
It should not be assumed as a matter of course that such use of part of a dwellinghouse necessarily involves a material change of use requiring permission.
That is unlikely to be involved where the use of part of a dwellinghouse for business purposes does not change the overall character of its use as a residence.
For example, the use by the householder of a room as an office would not normally require permission.
Even where new activities constitute a separate use within the planning unit, the new use may be de minimis in planning terms.
Local authorities are urged to provide guidance about suitable locations for small firms, and generally not to interfere with market forces.
For example, speculative development of unit factories, offices and other premises suitable for small firms is not normally a planning matter: ‘it is for market forces to determine whether there is a demand for such premises’.
Similarly, local authorities should not refuse permission for development by small businesses on the grounds that  established businesses would be adversely affected: ‘planning control is not intended to enable local planning authorities to intervene in the normal operation of market forces’.
CONTROL OF DEVELOPMENT UNDERTAKEN BY GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS
Development by government departments does not require planning permission, but there have been special arrangements for consultations since 1950.
Increased public and professional concern about the inadequacy of these led to revised, but still non-statutory, arrangements during the 1970s, culminating in DoE Circular 7/77 (later by Circular 18/84).
This asserts clearly that, before proceeding with development, government departments will consult the local planning authorities when the proposed development is one for which specific planning permission would, in normal circumstances, be required.
Further, even when consultation would not be required on this basis:
Departments have agreed to notify the local planning authority of development proposals which are likely to be of special concern to the authority or to the public; for example where there could be a very substantial effect on the character of a conservation area, or where there could be a significant planning impact, visually or otherwise, beyond the department's own site.
In any notification case of this kind the local planning authority will be given an opportunity to decide whether, in their view, the proposal should be advertised so as to give the public a chance to comment, and also to discuss with the department ways in which the proposal might be amended to overcome any objections to the proposed development.
CONTROL OF DEVELOPMENT UNDERTAKEN BY LOCAL AUTHORITIES AND STATUTORY UNDERTAKERS
Development undertaken by local authorities and statutory undertakers is also subject to special planning procedures.
(‘Statutory undertakers' are defined as ‘persons authorized by any enactment to carry on any railway, light railway, road transport, water transport, canal, inland navigation, dock, harbour, pier or lighthouse undertaking, or any undertaking for the supply of electricity, gas, hydraulic power or water’.)
Where a development requires the authorisation of a government department (as do developments involving compulsory purchase orders, work requiring loan sanction and developments such as local authority housing on which government grants are paid) the authorisation is usually accompanied by ‘deemed planning permission’.
Much of the normal development of local authorities and  statutory undertakers (for example, road works, laying of underground mains and cables) is ‘permitted development’ under the GDO.
Local planning authorities are also deemed to have permission for any development in their area which accords with the provisions of the development plan.
The secretary of state has power, however, to require them to apply for his permission in any particular case.
There has been increasing concern about local authority ‘self-donated’ planning permissions.
The secretary of state is averse to use his powers of call-in unless important non-local issues are involved, even if the permission is highly contentious.
The justification (in addition to the desire not to increase the department's work load) is that local authorities are elected bodies which have been given the legal power to decide.
It is assumed that they will act responsibly, and if there is maladministration or corruption there is the right of appeal to the ombudsman or the courts, though in practice this is of limited use.
There are over 12,000 deemed permissions annually (1984–85) and most are uncontroversial.
The exceptions relate particularly to those cases where the authority has a financial interest in the outcome, or where it applies standards to its own proposals different from those it applies to private sector applications.
In evidence to the Environment Committee two illustrations were given: ‘attempts by authorities to dispose of surplus school playing fields with the benefit of permission for development; and competing applications for superstore development when one of the sites is owned by the authority themselves’.
The Environment Committee concluded that there was a built-in conflict of interest in the statutory provisions and an absence of necessary balancing safeguards.
They recommended ‘a thoroughgoing review’.
Statutory undertakers wishing to carry out development which is neither ‘permitted development’ nor authorised by a government department have to apply for planning permission to the local planning authority in the normal way, but in the case of ‘operational land’appeals are considered jointly by the secretary of state and the ‘appropriate minister’.
(‘Operational land' is land which, in respect of its nature and situation, is not ‘comparable with land in general’.
This is a rather imprecise definition, but land used for railway sidings or a gas works is operational land whereas land used for showrooms or offices is not.)
Until recently, statutory undertakers could be ‘controlled’ only on the payment of compensation by the local planning authority.
The privileged position of statutory undertakers has not escaped criticism, and two highly controversial developments proposed in 1967 created a public outcry.
The first was the proposal by the Southern Gas Board to erect a 39-metre-high gasholder in the historic centre of Abingdon.
The second was the proposal by the Gas Council for a terminal at Bacton in East Anglia to process North Sea Gas.
In the former case the minister withdrew the Gas Board's right of permitted development, and planning permission for the gasholder was refused.
Compensation of £250,000 was involved, and this was met on a fifty-fifty basis between the local authorities concerned and the Gas Board.
In the Bacton case, permission for development was given after two exhaustive public inquiries, but subject to rigorous conditions.
These cases brought matters to a head.
The original justification for the special position of statutory undertakers was that they are under an obligation to provide services to the public and could not, like a private firm in planning difficulties, go elsewhere.
If a planning authority wished to restrict its activities, it was held that it was only right for the extra costs to be reimbursed.
In the debates on the 1968 Planning Bill, the minister said that the climate of opinion had changed.
It was still necessary for planning to pay sensible attention to the need to provide essential public services economically, but modern industrial undertakings had to be prepared to conduct their businesses in a way which minimised ugliness and to accept any reasonable cost involved in making their buildings, plant and operations acceptable to public opinion.
A working party of officials of statutory undertakers and government departments was set up to consider the planning implications of developments by statutory undertakers and to review the relevant planning legislation.
The first fruit of their work was legislation which provided that no land which was not already operational could become so unless certain planning requirements were met.
The most important of these is that there shall be a specific planning permission for development for operational purposes.
Moreover, a long-standing compensation principle was breached: compensation for refusal of planning permission was abolished in certain types of case.
The privileged position of statutory undertakers was further reduced in 1973 when a code of practice was agreed between departments and commended by the appropriate ministers to statutory undertakers.
Essentially this asks statutory undertakers ‘to ensure that both planning authorities and the public know of proposals for permitted development that are likely to affect them significantly before the proposals are finalised’.
Though there is ‘difficulty of defining classes of development and sensitive areas in general terms’, this in itself ‘makes it the more important that there should be local consultation between statutory undertakers and planning authorities’.
CONTROL OF ADVERTISEMENTS
The need to control advertisements has long been accepted.
Indeed, the first Advertisements Regulation Act of 1907 antedated by two  years the first Planning Act.
But, even when amended and extended (in 1925 and 1932), the control was quite inadequate.
Not only were the powers permissive, they were also limited.
For instance, under the 1932 Act, the right of appeal (on the ground that an advertisement did not injure the amenities of the area) was to the magistrates court hardly an appropriate body for such a purpose.
The 1947 Act set out to remedy the deficiencies.
There are, however, particular difficulties in establishing a legal code for the control of advertisements.
Advertisements may range in size from a small window notice to a massive hoarding; they vary in purpose from a bus stop sign to the demand to buy a certain make of detergent; they could be situated alongside a cathedral, in a busy shopping street, or in a particularly beautiful rural setting; they might be pleasant or obnoxious to look at; they might be temporary or permanent; and so on.
The task of devising a code which would take all the relevant factors into account and, at the same time achieve a balance between the conflicting interests of legitimate advertising or notification and ‘amenity’ presents real problems.
Advertisers themselves frequently complain that decisions in apparently similar cases have not been consistent with each other.
The official departmental view is that no case is exactly like another, and hard and fast rules cannot be applied.
Each case has to be considered on its individual merits in the light of the tests of amenity and — the other factor to be taken into account — public safety.
The control of advertisements is exercised by regulations.
The secretary of state has very wide powers of making regulations ‘in the interests of amenity or public safety’.
The question of ‘public safety’ is rather simpler than that of amenity, though there is ample scope for disagreement; the relevant issue is whether an advertisement is likely to cause danger to road users, and also to ‘persons who may use any railway, waterway (including coastal waters), dock, harbour or airfield’.
Examples are advertisements which obstruct the line of sight at a corner, bend, or obstruct the view of a traffic signal, and illuminated advertisements which are likely to dazzle or confuse road users or are likely to be mistaken for traffic lights.
The definition of an advertisement is not quite as complicated as that of development, but it is very wide:
Advertisement means any word, letter, model, sign, placard, board, notice, device or representation, whether illuminated or not, in the nature of, and employed wholly or partly for the purposes of, advertisement, announcement or direction (excluding any such thing employed wholly as a memorial or as a railway signal), and…includes any hoarding or similar structure or any balloon used, or adapted for use, for the display of advertisements…
Five classes of advertisement are excepted from all control: those on enclosed land, within a building, on or in a vehicle or vessel, displayed on a balloon, incorporated in and forming part of the fabric of a building (for example, incised stonework lettering), and displayed on an article for sale.
As one might expect, there are some interesting refinements of these categories, which can be ignored for present purposes (though we might note, in passing, that a vehicle must be kept moving, or to use the more exact legal language, must normally be employed as a moving vehicle on any highway or railway — and the same applies to vessels).
With these exceptions, no advertisements may be displayed without ‘consent’.
However, certain categories of advertisement can be displayed without ‘express consent’; so long as the local authority takes no action, they are deemed to have received consent.
These include bus-stop signs and timetables, hotel and inn signs, professional or trade plates, ‘To Let’ signs, election notices, statutory advertisements and traffic signs.
It needs to be stressed that amenity and public safety are the only two criteria for control.
The content or subject of an advertisement is not relevant, and a local authority cannot refuse express consent on grounds of morality, offensiveness or taste.
Thus an advertisement which contained the words ‘Chish and Fips’ was considered by the secretary of state, on appeal, to be questionable on grounds of taste, but not detrimental to amenity: the appeal was allowed.
Except in relation to advertisements to which the deemed consent procedure applies, a local authority can serve a discontinuance order when it is satisfied that removal is necessary ‘to remedy a substantial injury to the amenity of the locality or a danger to members of the public’.
There is the normal right of appeal to the secretary of state.
This is not, however, all there is to advertisement control.
In some areas, for example, national parks or near a cathedral, it may be desirable to prohibit virtually all advertisements of the poster type and seriously restrict other advertisements, including those normally displayed by the ordinary trader.
Accordingly, local planning authorities have power to define ‘areas of special control’ where ‘special protection on grounds of amenity’is thought desirable.
Much of the open countryside is subject to special control.
In urban areas special control can be operated only where the secretary of state is satisfied that there is a need for ‘special protection on grounds of amenity’.
In 1984 rather more than forty per cent of the total land area of England and Wales had been defined by local planning authorities as being within an area of special control.
Within an area of special control the general rule is that no advertisement may be displayed; such advertisements as are given express consent are considered as exceptions to this general rule.
This has proved a very difficult field in which to obtain unanimity, but the effectiveness of the controls and agreements is very apparent to the European (and, still more, the American) visitor.
CONTROL OF MINERAL WORKING
The reconciliation between economic and amenity interests in mineral working is an obvious matter for planning authorities.
It would, however, be misleading to give the impression that the function of planning authorities is simply to fight a continual battle for the preservation of amenity.
Planning is concerned with competing pressures on land and with the resolution of conflicting demands.
Amenity is only one of the factors to be taken into account.
Thus it is a general policy to ensure that mineral working is carried on ‘with proper regard for the appearance and other amenities of the area’, and that when the working is finished the land should (wherever practicable) not be left derelict but ‘restored or otherwise treated with a view of bringing it back to some form of beneficial use’.
At the other extreme — where mineral working would involve ‘too great injury to the comfort and living conditions of the people in the area or to amenities generally’— mineral working can be limited or even prevented.
Here a balance has to be struck between the economic need for minerals and the interests of amenity, and it is relevant (and indeed essential) to consider whether economic needs can be satisfactorily met from other sources with less damage to amenity.
There is, however, the equally important matter of safeguarding mineral deposits.
Planning authorities have the positive function of ensuring that mineral deposits are not unnecessarily sterilised by surface development but are kept available for exploitation.
These are the broad policy matters with which planning authorities are concerned.
The necessary powers are provided in the Planning Acts.
Briefly, these are for the making of the essential survey of resources and potentialities, the allocation of land in development plans, and the control (by means of planning permission) of mineral workings.
The planning authority has to assess the amount of land required for mineral working, and this requires an assessment of the future demand likely to be made on production in its area.
Mineral undertakers have long-standing powers to obtain rights over land containing mineral deposits.
These were extended by regulations made under the Planning Acts.
With the range of powers available, mineral workings cannot, without good cause, be prevented by private landowners.
Powers to control mineral workings stem from the definition of ‘development’, which includes ‘the carrying out of…mining…operations in, on, over or under land’.
Further, the tipping of waste constitutes development (that is, a material change of use) if, generally  speaking, the area or height is extended.
Special provisions apply to the National Coal Board's operations, which can be ignored for the moment.
Apart from this, all mineral workings, ancillary buildings depositing of waste and the construction of means of access to sites require planning permission.
Because of the national need for minerals, planning authorities have been strongly advised by the DoE to pay attention to economic considerations: ‘a fundamental concern of planning policy must be to ensure a free flow of mineral products at economic cost.’
The long term view that is required for mineral exploitation means that planning permissions have generally been given for a working with a long life commonly not less than fifteen years, and, on occasion, up to sixty years.
Before reaching a decision on an application it is often necessary for the planning authority to consult a number of interested parties including the Ministry of Agriculture, the Forestry Commission, the regional water authority, and perhaps the Countryside Commission the Nature Conservancy Council (NCC) and the Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission (HBMC).
The representations of these bodies can lead to the making of conditions or the reinforcement of conditions which the planning authority wish to impose in the interests of amenity.
Conditions can be imposed.
for example, requiring a phased programme of work in order to minimise the disturbance to agriculture, or a planned programme of working and restoration can be required.
Conditions relating to restoration are among the most important.
A mineral undertaker cannot however, be required to put the land to any specific use after extraction has been completed, but where practicable, he can be required to leave it in a condition comparable to that in which he found it.
Unfortunately, restoration is not always practicable.
An exhaustive inquiry into Planning Control over Mineral Working was completed by the Stevens Committee in 1976.
The government's detailed response to this report was published in DoE Circular 58/78.
Legislation followed in 1981: the Town and Country Planning (Minerals) Act 1981.
This implemented many of the recommendations of the Stevens Committee.
The committee argued that conditions, standards and attitudes had changed so greatly since the early days of minerals planning that a major recasting of the legislative framework was needed.
Indeed, they went so far as to propose that there should be a separate planning code for minerals.
Though this was unacceptable to the government, the 1981 Act established a range of new powers within the existing planning system and a totally new system for compensation.
The main purposes of the Act are as follows.
First, to improve the conditions that can be imposed on a planning consent for the restoration of mineral working.
In particular to ensure that land that is restored to agriculture, forestry or amenity uses can be  managed in a suitable way for a period after the restoration itself is complete to ensure that it returns to a proper level of productivity by an ‘after-care’ condition.
Second, to provide that existing conditions on a mineral planning permission can be changed with reduced or no compensation payable, provided the changes do not affect certain fundamental elements of the permission.
Third, to deal with mineral workings where the working itself has ceased but the planning consent still remains outstanding.
Two new orders can be promoted: a suspension order, where the minerals are being held for future working, or a prohibition order, where the operator has no intention of working any minerals that remain.
Both orders allow a certain number of new conditions to be imposed, again with reduced compensation being payable.
Fourth, to put mineral planning authorities under a duty to review the planning situation in respect of every mineral operation within their area.
This review is to be repeated as frequently as the county council determines.
The Act applies to Scotland as well as to England and Wales.
Concurrent with the Stevens inquiry on mineral workings, there was an Advisory Committee on Aggregates under the chairmanship of Sir Ralph Verney which reported in 1976.
This highly complex area was treated in full and led first to a parliamentary statement in 1978 and then, in 1982, to new Guidelines For Aggregates Provision in England and Wales.
COAL MINING
Planning control over the operations of the National Coal Board is subject to special provisions.
Briefly, the continued working of mines begun before 1 July 1948 is ‘permitted development’ and therefore does not require specific planning approval.
The same applies to the continuance of waste tipping.
Furthermore, there is a general permission for any development in connection with coal industry activities (as defined in section 63 of the Coal Industry Nationalisation Act 1946) and carried out in the immediate vicinity of a pithead.
However, certain restrictions can be imposed (on the erection of buildings) in the interest of amenity.
Mining operations on new sites require planning permission in the ordinary way.
Among the environmental problems related to coal mining, two are considered here: opencast mining and subsidence damage.
But the starting point must be a reference to the 1981 Flowers Report on Coal and the Environment.
This is a marvellous synthesis of the huge complex of relevant issues.
(Sadly, the commission will not report again because the government has disbanded it.)
An official response was issued as a white paper in 1983.
New guidelines followed in  1984, but these have apparently proved to be less than satisfactory for reasons which are spelled out in the House of Commons Energy Committee Report.
OPENCAST COAL MINING
Opencast working arouses considerable opposition: from farmers local authorities, local inhabitants, amenity organisations and even miners.
Clearly the visual impact of opencast working is far greater than that of deep mining, yet the loss of amenity is temporary, and full restoration is practicable and usual; indeed, there can be a resultant improvement in amenity.
Opencast coal working began during the war under emergency legislation.
It continued under this legislation until 1958 and, though usually constituting development, was outside the scope of planning control.
The Opencast Coal Act 1958 laid down a special method of control operated by the Minister of Power (later the Secretary of State for Energy).
Since 1984 the NCB has been required to apply for planning permission in the same way as other mineral operators.
Planning authorities are required to operate the policies set out in DoE Circular 3/84 which, in essence, require them to ‘balance’ the need to extract coal against environmental damage.
This change was made, for a transitional period, administratively and without any new legislation, presumably because of the difficulty of finding time in the parliamentary timetable to amend the 1958 Act.
Applications from the NCB, operating through the Opencast Executive, are required to be formulated with due regard to the desirability of protecting the environment.
The 1984 arrangements, though subject to considerable criticism, were intended to be transitional.
The evidence suggests that they are inadequate: a view taken by the Energy Committee.
At the time of writing, a new draft circular is under consideration.
Legislative changes are consequent upon the Housing and Planning Act 1986 which will repeal the requirement on the NCB to seek authorisation from the secretary of state for their opencast coal activities.
When these provisions are implemented, the transitional arrangements of Circular 3/84 will no longer be applicable.
The draft circular is intended (when finalised) to replace that circular.
The provisions of the 1986 Act are somewhat technical, but the draft circular promotes a clear political stance: ‘subject to the need to obtain planning permission, the level of opencast coal production is determined by market forces.
Particular investment decisions are for the industry to make, and they will decide the level of opencast output they wish to aim for.
It is the mineral planning authorities’ responsibility to determine the acceptability of specific projects through the planning system.’
Nevertheless, ‘the government is firmly committed to the protection of the environment’ though ‘this need not be incompatible with ensuring that adequate supplies of opencast are produced’.
The circle is squared with the statement that ‘environmental controls are vital to the acceptability of opencast coal working and must be adhered to if sites are to meet current environmental standards’.
It is accepted that ‘noise from mineral workings is often a particular concern for those living near a site’, but a (non-mandatory) code of practice ‘will provide useful guidance’.
The draft circular is enthusiastic about recent progress in reclamation, and ‘proposals for the restoration and aftercare of sites to a subsequent beneficial use should always form an important part of the information submitted with a planning application and in earlier informal discussions’.
Finally, in tune with the government's general philosophy, ‘there is always a presumption in favour of allowing applications for development, having regard to all material considerations, unless that development would cause demonstrable harm to interests of acknowledged importance’.
SUBSIDENCE DAMAGE
The Flowers Committee viewed subsidence as ‘one of the more significant impacts of deep mining’, and its analysis led to the establishment of the Waddilove Committee which reported in 1984.
The complexities proved to be even greater than expected, particularly since the rate of claim for compensation increased considerably over the years up to the setting up of the committee.
The committee's recommendations, in essence, involved a major increase in expenditure on compensation.
Hence it was not surprising that its proposals were not speedily implemented, much to the chagrin of the House of Commons Energy Committee, three years later.
In the words of the committee,
the legal framework for planning and for subsidence damage compensation both require clarification so that there is an efficient statutory framework within which the commercial activities of NCB and its competitors can be conducted.
We regret the delay and we hope that the promised publication on Waddilove will be earlier rather than later in the current session, and that the government will take an early opportunity to publish clearer guidelines on its assessment of ‘national need’ for opencast coal, and the weight to be given to environmental considerations.
CARAVANS
During the 1950s the housing shortage led to a boom in unauthorised caravan sites.
The controversy and litigation to which this gave rise led to the introduction of special controls over caravan sites (by Part I of the Caravan Sites and Control of Development Act 1960).
This legislation has remained as a separate code and is not consolidated in the Town and Country Planning Act of 1971.
(The Caravan Sites Act, which deals mainly with the protection from eviction of caravan dwellers and gypsies, is similarly separate.)
Sir Arton Wilson's 1959 report, Caravans as Homes, highlighted the problems of residential caravanning.
In 1959 about 60,000 caravans in England and Wales were being used as homes by some 150,000 people, mainly young married couples, often with small children.
About 80 per cent of caravan dwellers hoped to move into normal dwellings.
To quote the report, they live in caravans ‘because they could not get other dwellings in the right places or on the right terms; or because caravans meet their needs for cheapness, convenience or mobility’.
Some simply like caravan life.
The report estimated that about 38,000 of the 60,000 caravans were on sites for which permission, usually conditional or temporary, had been given; about 12,000 had ‘existing use’ rights; and about 10,000 were on sites which appeared to contravene planning control.
With some notable exceptions, local authorities tended to regard caravans as a substandard form of accommodation and, less debatably, difficult to control.
(It was the publicity given to a case in Egham which led to the setting up of the Arton Wilson Committee.)
The caravan interests, on the other hand, argued the case for recognition of caravanning as an acceptable way of life and pressed for more positive approaches by the local authorities.
The 1960 Act gave local authorities new powers to control caravan sites, including a requirement that all caravan sites had to be licensed before they could start operating (thus partly closing loopholes in the planning and public health legislation).
These controls over caravan sites operate in addition to the normal planning system; thus both planning permission and a licence have to be obtained.
Most of the Act dealt with control, but local authorities were given wide powers to provide caravan sites.
The Policy Note on caravan sites states:
Planning policy recognizes the demand for sites.
The main objectives of policy are, first, to enable the demand to be met in the right places, while preventing sites from springing up in the wrong places; and, second, to allow caravan sites, where permitted, to be established on a permanent or long-term basis, in order to facilitate the provision of proper services and equipment and to allow the occupants reasonable security of tenure.
Local authorities face strong pressure from their ratepayers ‘to preserve local amenities and property values’, to which caravans are seen as a threat.
The DoE may be clear as to what ‘planning policy recognises’, but the reality differs considerably from the official statement.
Holiday caravans are subject to the same planning and licensing controls as residential caravans.
To ensure that a site is used only for holidays (and not for ‘residential purposes’), planning permission can include a condition limiting the use of a site to the holiday season.
Conditions may also be imposed to require the caravans to be removed at the end of each season or to require a number of pitches on a site to be reserved for touring caravans.
The DoE Policy Note states that it is the aim ‘to steer holiday caravan development to a limited number of areas, usually those in which caravans are already established, rather than allow them to be scattered more widely’.
One group of caravanners is particularly unpopular: gypsies, or, to give them a less romantic description, ‘persons of nomadic life, whatever their race or origin' (but excluding ‘members of an organised group of travelling showmen, or persons engaged in travelling circuses, travelling together as such’).
The appalling conditions in which the majority of the 15,000 gypsies live in England and Wales were portrayed in the 1967 report of the DoE's Sociological Research Section, Gypsies and Other Travellers.
As was stated in the foreword to this report, the basic problem is that no one wants gypsies around: ‘all too often the settled community is concerned chiefly to persuade or even force, the gypsy families to move on.’
Under the Caravan Sites Act 1968, local authorities in England and Wales (but not Scotland) have a duty to provide adequate sites for gypsies ‘residing in or resorting to’ their areas.
A report on the operation of the Act prepared by Sir John Cripps (stimulated by sporadic violence on gypsy encampments) underlined the lack of progress.
He also pointed to the legislative enactments which, together with social (and anti-social) pressures, have dogged gypsies:
Over centuries gypsies have been persecuted in varying degrees; but now they are as much the victims of general trends and events taking place without regard to or for them.
The growing complexity of laws and regulations, with a concomitant increase in form-filling, is an aspect with which I am not directly concerned.
A series of Town and Country Planning, Public Health, Local Government, Caravan and Private Acts, and the byelaws they permit, have steadily eroded their choice of habitation.
In particular, the number of stopping places available to them has been drastically reduced over a period of three or four decades during which the travelling population has  been on the increase, although I have not been able to discover the measure of it.
Cripps's message was clear: the living conditions of many gypsies was scandalous, and no improvement in the slow rate of progress could be expected without a high level of commitment by central government.
A major element in this was a proposed 100 per cent grant to local authorities on the capital cost of providing gypsy caravan sites.
This was accepted and such grants have been available since 1979.
Progress, however, has continued to be slow.
In 1984 there were (in England) 9,929 gypsy caravans of which 6,048 were on authorised sites.
By 1987 the figures had risen to 10,535 and 6,921 respectively.
Put in a different way, the numbers of gypsy caravans on unauthorised sites fell from 3,881 to 3,614: a mere 267.
Reports continue to be produced, but public opinion prevents effective action on the required scale.
PURCHASE NOTICES
A planning refusal does not of itself confer any right to compensation.
On the other hand, revocations of planning permission or interference with existing uses do rank for compensation, since they involve a taking away of a legal right.
There are other circumstances in which planning controls so affect the value of the land to the owner that some means of reducing the hardship is clearly desirable.
For example, the allocation of land in a development plan for a school will probably reduce the value of houses on this land or even make them completely unsaleable.
In such cases the affected owner can serve a notice on the local authority requiring them to purchase the property at an ‘unblighted’ price.
Broadly, such a purchase notice can be served if, as a result of a planning action, land becomes ‘incapable of reasonably beneficial use’.
In all cases ministerial confirmation is required.
The cases in which a purchase notice can be served include:
(1)
refusal or conditional grant of planning permission;
(2)
revocation or modification of planning permission
(3)
discontinuance of use.
Normally, if an owner is refused permission to develop his land, or if onerous conditions are laid down, there is nothing he can do about it except, of course, appeal to the secretary of state.
But, if the refusal or the conditions prevent him from obtaining ‘reasonably beneficial use’ of the land, he can serve a purchase notice.
‘The question to be considered in every case is whether the land in its existing state, taking into account operations and uses for which planning permission…is not required, is ‘incapable of reasonably beneficial use’…
In considering what capacity for use the land has, relevant factors are the physical state of the land, its size, shape and surroundings, and the general patterns of land-uses in the area; a use of relatively low value may be regarded as reasonably beneficial if such a use is common for similar land in the vicinity.’
A purchase notice is not intended to apply in a case in which an owner is simply prevented from realising the full potential value of his land.
This would imply the acceptance in principle of paying compensation for virtually all refusals and conditional permissions.
It is only if the existing and permitted uses of the land are so seriously affected as to render the land incapable of reasonably beneficial use that the owner can take advantage of the purchase notice procedure.
BLIGHT NOTICES
Redress by way of a purchase notice provided for owners affected by planning blight was introduced in 1959.
It was extended in 1968 (since when it has been termed a ‘blight notice’) and further extended in 1973.
The object is to deal with the problem presented to certain classes of owners by the fact that a development is planned to take place on their land at some future (probably uncertain) date.
A development plan may, for instance, show the line of a proposed road, though not necessarily the year in which it is to be constructed.
In the meantime, an owner who wishes to move and sell his property has to wrestle with the problem of blight.
These purchase notice provisions are restricted to owner occupiers of houses and small businesses who can show that they have made reasonable attempts to sell their property but have found it impossible to do so except at a substantially depreciated price because of certain defined planning actions.
These include land designated for compulsory purchase, or allocated or defined by a development plan for any functions of a government department, local authority, statutory undertaker, or the National Coal Board, and land on which the secretary of state has given written notice of his intention to provide a trunk road or a ‘special road’(that is, a motorway).
The introduction of the new type of development plan under the 1968 Act involved revised provisions in relation to planning blight.
Briefly, the effect of these is that in those areas where a structure plan comes into force, blight caused by either the structure plan or the previous development plan is covered by the planning blight provisions until a local plan allocating land succeeds the old development plan.
That local plan then becomes the relevant plan for the blight provisions.
Since local plans provide a much more precise indication of  the possibility of public acquisition of any land, the structure plan is then no longer relevant.
Structure plans, however, lack this precise definition.
Whether they give rise to more or to less planning blight than the old development plan system is debatable.
The Planning Advisory Group thought it unlikely that there would be any more, and ‘in so far as they show less detail (eg town map primary school and minor open space allocations) it may be less’.
On the other hand, in the debates on the Bill it was officially stated that:
When we are dealing with the structure plan for which there is no local plan in force, we have a new problem which is that, owing to the diagrammatic nature of the plans, no one will be able to say with certainty that this does or does not affect the claimant's property, but that nevertheless, because of that very uncertainty, a wider number of properties may be affected.
After parliamentary pressure, the secretary of state advised a wider range of circumstances in which local authorities were urged to use their discretionary powers.
In 1973 the Land Compensation Act gave statutory effect to these, and made other significant changes to the planning blight provisions.
It also extended them to cover land affected by new town designation orders, slum clearance orders and new street orders.
THE LAND COMPENSATION ACT 1973
The 1973 Act extended beyond planning blight and takes us into the much broader area of the law relating to compensation.
This is an extremely complex field, and only an indication of three major provisions of the Act can be attempted here.
First, the Act creates a statutory right to compensation for a fall in the value of property arising from the use of highways, aerodromes and other public works which have immunity from actions for ‘nuisance’.
The depreciation has to be caused by physical factors such as noise, fumes, dust and vibration, and the compensation is payable by the authority responsible for the works.
Second, there is a range of powers under the heading ‘mitigation of injurious effect of public works’.
Examples include sound insulation; the purchase of owner-occupied property which is severely affected by construction work or by the use of a new or improved highway: the erection of physical barriers (such as walls, screens, or mounds of earth) on or alongside roads to reduce the effects of traffic noise on people living nearby; the planting of trees and the grassing of areas; and the development or redevelopment of land for the specific purpose  of improving the surroundings of a highway ‘in a manner desirable by reason of its construction, improvement, existence or use’.
Third, provision is made for ‘Home Loss Payments’ as a mark of recognition of the special hardship created by compulsory dispossession of one's home.
Since these payments are for this purpose they are quite separate from, and are not dependent upon, any right to compensation or the ‘Disturbance Payment’ which is described below.
Logically they apply to tenants as well as to owner-occupiers and are given for all displacements, whether by compulsory purchase or any action under the Housing Acts.
Additionally there is a general entitlement to a ‘Disturbance Payment’ for persons who are not entitled to compensation, and local authorities are given a duty ‘to secure the provision of suitable alternative accommodation where this is not otherwise available on reasonable terms, for any person displaced from residential accommodation’by acquisition.
redevelopment, demolition, closing orders, and so on.
DEVELOPMENT CONTROL POLICIES
The heading for this section looks like a play on words, but it is intended to point out the fact that, while development control is one of the instruments by which planning policies are implemented, there are also policies relating to the actual operation of the control.
For example, it could be the policy that each application should be dealt with very thoroughly and carefully, irrespective of the time and cost involved.
Needless to say that is not the policy.
Indeed, there has been a succession of attempts to ‘streamline the planning process’ and to make it more ‘efficient’.
The reasons for these have differed.
In 1981 the concern was with the economic costs of control, with cutting public expenditure and with ‘freeing’ private initiative from unnecessary governmental controls.
In the early 1970s the concern was with the enormous increase in planning applications and planning appeals.
This, of course, stemmed from the property boom of the period.
The resultant delay created a political situation which was dealt with in traditional style by setting up an inquiry: this produced the three Dobry Reports.
These are now part of planning history, but it is live history: the issues are still very much with us in the 1980s, and there is no guarantee that the current resolution of them will prove sufficiently resilient to withstand the unpredictable changes in the context within which they operate.
It is therefore useful to set out in some detail the position as it was prior to the 1980 Local Government, Planning and Land Act.
DEVELOPMENT CONTROL IN ENGLAND AND WALES 1972–80
Before reorganisation, development control in England and Wales was the responsibility of county boroughs and counties, though in the counties there was a wide measure of delegation to districts.
The amount of delegation depended on the size and staffing of the districts, but there was a clear trend to greater delegation during the 1960s.
There was, however, much criticism (except on the part of the district councils) of the efficiency of any system of delegation.
In their evidence to the Redcliffe-Maud Commission, the Ministry of Housing and Local Government (MHLG)(as it then was) argued that it led neither to an improved speed nor to a better quality of development control: the advantages which flowed from delegating some of the work load to district councils were offset by the shortage of qualified planning staff in most district offices, by the limited range of problems which arose within any one area, by the difficulties caused by the natural inclination of district councils to take a ‘narrow view’, and by the extra administrative complications that limited delegation usually entailed.
The ministry thought that decentralisation of planning control to area committees of the planning authority produced better results than delegation to another elected body.
This view was supported by a report on the management of development control.
The management consultants who undertook this study concluded that, within the context of the two-tier system in administrative counties, area committees provided the best method of reconciling the rights of individuals with speed of decision, low cost and the interests of the wider community.
Delegation was essentially a means of attempting to adjust planning machinery to an outdated local government system.
It was the primary purpose of reorganisation to recast local government in a way which would make such palliatives unnecessary.
But this was not to be, and the new structure made district-country relationships even more crucial to the smooth working of the planning system.
As with development plans, counties were responsible for strategic issues while districts were responsible for local issues.
But since the districts were not subservient to the counties, the concept of ‘delegation’ was inappropriate, and thus it became essential for there to be clear guidelines to distinguish county issues from district issues.
This was done in detail in the Local Government Act of 1972.
Though all planning applications were made, in the first instance, to the district, those which fell within the category of ‘county’ matters were determined by the county council.
These included applications:
(1)
that related to the working of minerals;
(2)
that ‘would conflict with, or prejudice the implementation of, fundamental provisions of the structure plan’;
(3)
that would be inconsistent with a local plan prepared by the county council ;
(4)
that ‘would be inconsistent in any respect with any statement of planning policy adopted by the county planning authority or with any proposals of theirs for development which in either case have been notified by them to the district planning authority’.
This system (unlike that north of the border) was cumbersome in the extreme.
Though it worked with reasonable smoothness in some cases, this was a result of good county-district relationships which were able to overcome the inherent difficulties of the division of responsibilities as set out in (virtually incomprehensible) detail in Schedule 16 of the 1972 Act.
DEVELOPMENT CONTROL IN SCOTLAND
In Scotland, development control is a district or general planning authority function but, as in England, certain powers are allocated to the upper-tier authority.
The powers of the region were never as far-reaching (or set out in such detail) as was the case in the English counties prior to the 1980 Act.
Moreover, there is no reference to ‘county matters’.
The Scottish provisions simply supplement the powers previously exercised solely by the secretary of state by a power of regional planning authorities to call in applications where:
(i)
the proposed development does not conform to a structure plan approved by the secretary of state; or
(ii)
the proposed development raises a new planning issue of general significance to the district of the regional planning authority.
This power can be exercised only in cases where the application is not called in by the secretary of state himself.
Planning appeals continue to be lodged with the secretary of state, but regional planning authorities are notified of all appeals and have the right to take part in the appeal proceedings.
Regional planning authorities are also informed of proposals for revocation, modification and discontinuance of Use Orders, and can make representations or objections on them to the secretary of state.
Finally, they have default powers to make such orders themselves if they think that an order is necessary to prevent ‘material prejudice’ to an approved structure plan.
These powers of a regional planning authority in relation to development control are essentially rights of intervention to give effect to  regional planning policies.
They are defined in straightforward terms (avoiding the complexities of the English legislation).
In all cases there are simple rights of appeal to the secretary of state to enable him to resolve any disputes between a district and a region.
STREAMLINING THE PLANNING MACHINE: THE DOBRY REPORTS
The background to the Dobry Reports has already been indicated; in arithmetical terms, between 1968 and 1972 the number of planning decisions by local authorities in England and Wales increased from 425,000 to 615,000, while the number of appeals rose even more dramatically.
At the end of November 1973, over 16,000 were outstanding, and the average period from receipt to decisions ranged up to sixty-five weeks (for cases decided by the secretary of state after a local inquiry).
This unforeseen situation developed at the very time when local authorities were also facing the problems of reorganisation and of the introduction of structure planning.
Pressure therefore mounted for ‘streamlining the planning machine’.
The DoE issued advice, in a circular bearing this title, on a wide range of administrative matters related to planning applications, increased their inspectorate to deal with appeals, and appointed Mr G. Dobry QC, to undertake a rapid review of the development control system.
Dobry issued three reports: an interim and a final report on The Development Control System, and a report on The Control of Demolition.
The two reports on development control are lengthy, detailed and very difficult to summarise (partly because of the staccato style in which the main analysis and recommendations are presented).
Dobry's detailed recommendations (which totalled 161) were aimed in his words, at giving greater freedom to harmless development but also at guarding against harmful development by retaining the current scope of planning control; at separating from the main stream of applications all those which might cause harm, and disposing of ‘main stream applications’ by rapid and routine procedures; and applying the same approach to appeals.
The most important feature of the proposed system was that of dividing applications into two classes: those that were minor and uncontroversial (Class A) and those that were major or controversial or both (Class B).
Applications would be streamed accordingly.
Though he argued that any attempt to lay down rigid rules for classifying applications would be doomed to failure', Dobry thought that guidance should be given in a national code of practice.
This would ensure that at least the following were treated as Class A:
(i)
all simple cases;
(ii)
all applications conforming with an approved development plan;
(iii)
development which only just exceeds that permitted by the General Development Order, Class I (development within the curtilage of a dwelling-house), Class VI (agricultural) and Class VIII (industrial) developments;
(iv)
the approval of reserved matters relating to cases classed as A' when outline permission was sought.
Standard consultation procedures were proposed with strict compliance to time limits (twenty-one days for Class A, and forty-two days for Class B).
A notable innovation was the proposal that Class A applications should be deemed granted if not decided upon within forty-two days.
No similar proposal was made in relation to Class B applications, but it was recommended that there should be a strict three-month time limit.
However, in cases of specially significant development, local authorities should be able to require an ‘impact study’, and in these cases the time-limit should be six months.
Dobry laid great emphasis on consultations and meetings between applicants and the local planning authority, particularly in relation to Class B applications.
There were several recommendations on this, for example, that the planning committee should interview applicants ‘in suitable cases’(undefined), particularly where there was a difference of view within the committee.
Other recommendations included the introduction of a stamp duty or similar standard charge for planning applications, the retention of detailed design control (‘in spite of its subjective nature’); the use of ‘design guides’ for ‘homogeneous areas’and of ‘design briefs’for particular sites; greater delegation to officers; speedy production of structure and local plans (in accordance with a national timetable); stronger control procedures in ‘special environmental areas’(for example, national parks, conservation areas and other areas identified in development plans or policies); the establishment of local authority information centres and independent planning advice centres (on which details of current pioneering examples are given in an appendix to the report).
DOBRY IN PERSPECTIVE
The starting point for the Dobry inquiry was the lengthening delay in the processing of planning applications, but Dobry was quick to point out that ‘not all delay is unacceptable: it is the price we must pay for the democratic planning of the environment’.
Moreover, his review took account of factors which were very different from those relevant to ‘streamlining the planning machine’: the increasing pressure for public  consultation and participation in the planning process, and the ‘dissatisfaction on the part of applicants because they often do not understand why particular decisions have been made, or why it is necessary for what may seem small matters to be the concern of the planning machinery at all’.
Additionally, he noted that ‘many people feel that the system has not done enough to protect what is good in an environment or to ensure that new development is of a sufficiently high quality’.
Dobry therefore had a difficult task of reconciling apparently irreconcilable objectives: to expedite planning procedures while at the same time facilitating greater public participation and devising a system which would produce better environmental results.
His solutions attempted to provide more speed for developers, more participation for the public and better quality development and conservation.
This is effected by the division of applications into minor and major.
Despite the inherent difficulties of determining this  in advance (at least to the satisfaction of the public and the local amenity societies) it is nevertheless a fact that some 80 per cent of all applications are granted, and that many of these are simple and straightforward.
Dobry's proposal, in essence, was that the simple should be distinguished and treated expeditiously, though with the opportunity for some participation and with a safety channel to allow them to be transferred to the major category if this should prove appropriate.
These Class A applications would be dealt with by officials acting under powers delegated to them by planning committees (or, if this was unacceptable, by small subcommittees of two or three members).
Publicity would be restricted in time to twenty-one days and decisions would be reached within forty-two days, failing which an application would be deemed to be approved.
This, so Dobry believed, would relieve the overloaded planning machine to deal more thoroughly with the major and/or controversial applications (which he suggested would constitute less than a half and, it was to be hoped, only a third of the total).
These would receive greater scrutiny than hitherto, and the period for decision would be increased from the current statutory (but, when applied to all applications, impracticable) two months to three months.
They would receive greater public advertisement, and the more important applications would need to be accompanied by an impact study.
Dobry's scheme was an heroic attempt to improve the planning control system to everyone's satisfaction.
Inevitably, therefore, it disappointed everybody.
For example, though he made a number of proposals to increase public participation his overriding concern for expediting procedures forced him to compress these into a impracticable time-scale.
This was particularly the case with his Class A applications, where twenty-one days was far too short a period for effective  publicity, let alone considered public reaction.
Moreover, it was open to question whether the Class A procedure would relieve planning administration or, in fact, overload it still further.
In practice, the result might well have been either a collapse of the new procedure or a perfunctory and rapid processing which would deny the public participation which Dobry wished to increase.
The biggest shortcoming of the Dobry Report, however, was that it never really came to grips with the major weakness of the development control system: its general isolation from the remainder of the planning process.
Thus Jowell has commented that ‘the major omission of the report is its failure to see development control's place in a planning system whose scope has expanded radically since 1968…somehow development control has not kept pace with this change’.
Nevertheless Dobry started a debate which proved to be of wider and of greater long term significance than was envisaged when he was commissioned to assist in ‘streamlining the planning machine’.
Unfortunately, as we shall see, it is not clear that the substantive outcome is of equal significance.
However, before discussing the events subsequent to his development control reports it is appropriate to outline his final report which dealt with demolition.
THE CONTROL OF DEMOLITION
It has been generally accepted that demolition of itself does not constitute development and, although there is some legal uncertainty on the matter, local authorities have typically assumed that demolition is outside the ambit of development control.
Nevertheless, there are extensive powers (outlined in Chapter 6) to prevent the demolition of buildings of historic or architectural quality.
Also, there had been increasing disquiet in the early 1970s about the lack of clear and ‘blanket’ control of demolition, particularly on the part of amenity societies, but also on the part of local authorities who were concerned at some of the effects of commercial enterprise.
Following the resulting parliamentary pressure, Dobry was asked to report specifically on this issue.
This he did in a terse report published in 1974.
He concluded that there were several persuasive arguments in favour of subjecting demolition to control.
These were, first, that ‘there is a good deal of concern that the planning system should permit town centre and residential development that is sometimes strikingly out of scale or sympathy with the area affected’.
Second, there was some uncertainty as to the law.
Third there was some inconsistency; here the argument curiously was that though there were powers for the control over the demolition of certain buildings there was no overall system.
Fourth, ‘and most importantly there were four practical reasons for the general extension of control over demolition:
(1)
The aftermath of demolition .
Barren sites, inadequately fenced, often become a dumping ground causing general deterioration of the neighbourhood.
(2)
Demolition as a ‘fait accompli' can be used by developers to force the grant of planning permission.
(3)
Premature demolition of houses .
Premature demolition and vacancy of residential accommodation in anticipation of development causes public disquiet.
(4)
Need to preserve commercial and community use .
Premature demolition of shops in a redevelopment area is clearly harmful.
Many think that to prevent the demolition of useful residential buildings, theatres and cinemas is equally important.
GOVERNMENT REJECTION OF THE DOBRY REPORTS
The Dobry inquiry was instigated by a Conservative government at a time when the property market was booming.
On its completion the boom had collapsed and a Labour government had published their outline proposals for the community land legislation.
In short, the planning scene had changed fundamentally.
In purely administrative terms, it was thought that authorities concerned with distinguishing between applications for exempt development, excepted development, designated relevant development and non-designated relevant development could not also be expected to distinguish between Class A and Class B applications, and between outline, illustrative, detailed and guideline applications.
The government's decision on the Dobry Reports was set out in detail in DoE Circular 113/75.
All Dobry's major recommendations for changes in the system were rejected, though it was stressed that their objectives could typically be achieved if local authorities adopted ‘the most efficient working methods.
Dobry's view that ‘it is not so much the system which is wrong but the way in which it is used’ was endorsed, and his Final Report was commended to students of our planning system as an invaluable compendium of information about the working of the existing development control process, and to local authorities and developers as a source of advice on the best way to operate within it.
THE EXPENDITURE COMMITTEE REPORTS
Fast on Dobry's tail came what was (at least up to that time) probably the largest collection of material on the operation of the British planning system: the evidence presented to the House of Commons Expenditure Committee in their 1976–77 inquiry on Planning Procedures.
The 1,224 pages are a veritable goldmine of material, while  the fourteen recommendations which conclude the committee's forty five page report, together with the government's response to them, provide much for discussion.
Some of the matters are dealt with in other chapters; here we are concerned with the problem of delay, to which the committee gave particular attention.
In seeking ways in which planning procedures could be made more efficient, the committee noted that ‘not all authorities are operating as efficiently as they might’ and the greatest scope for improvement lay in assisting all authorities to reach the standard set by the best.
To this end they proposed that ‘a small number of planning assessors should be appointed to give help and advice to local planning authorities and to monitor their performance by continual and informal contact’.
The department agreed to consider this in consultation with the local authority associations.
The Expenditure Committee returned to this field in 1978, and reiterated their recommendations for the appointment of planning assessors and for a review of the planning system.
Though there was no formal (or at least published) review of the planning system, the 1980 Act passed by the subsequent Conservative government certainly effected some major changes in it.
DEVELOPMENT CONTROL IN THE 1980S
The Conservative government which was elected in 1979 lost no time in preparing a revised development control policy.
A draft circular was sent out for comment in mid-1980.
It created alarm amongst the planning profession, partly because of its substantive proposals but also partly because of its abrasive style.
‘The Most Savage Attack Yet’ expostulated Municipal Engineering , while Planner News remonstrated that the results of the circular ‘could be disastrous’.
An example of the objectionable content of the draft was the call for relaxation of controls over private sector housing: ‘local authorities should not lay down requirements on the mix of house types, provision of garages, internal standards, sizes of private gardens, location of houses on plots and in relation to each other, provision of private open space.’
The circular also stated that planning authorities should not attempt to compel developers to adopt designs which were unpopular with customers or clients ‘and they shouldn't attempt to control such details as shapes of windows or doors or the colour of bricks’.
On density, the circular played down its importance and commented that ‘for many of the redevelopment and infill sites now to be brought into use, densities do not provide reliable performance indicators’.
The revised circular, as published,(DoE Circular 22/80) was written with a lighter touch, but much of the message was very much the same.
For example, on design:
Local planning authorities may need to control aspects of the design of housing estates where these have an impact on neighbouring development or agricultural land, for example access or overshadowing.
But functional requirements within a development are for the most part a matter for the developers and their customers.
Such matters would include provision of garages, internal space standards (whether Parker Morris or other) and sizes of private gardens.
In making provision for open space and in considering the location of houses on plots and their relationship to each other local planning authorities should not attempt to prescribe rigid formulae.
They should only regulate the mix of house types when there are specific planning reasons for such control, and in so doing they should take particular account of marketing considerations.
There was much in similar vein.
More generally, the emphasis was on securing a ‘speeding up of the system’ and ‘to ensure that development is only prevented or restricted when this serves a clear planning purpose and the economic effects have been taken into account’.
A major attempt to improve the development control system was made in the 1980 Local Government, Planning and Land Act, which changed the allocation of development control functions between counties and districts.
LESS DIVIDED DEVELOPMENT CONTROL
‘Jaw not war’ was the clarion call of the new division of planning control functions between counties and districts in England and Wales.
In January 1981 district planning authorities became responsible for determining all planning applications which were formerly classified as county matters under the Local Government Act 1972.
As a result, ‘county matters’ were now confined to applications for mineral and related development, for cement works, and for development that straddled the boundary of a national park.
The ‘county matters’ are now clearly matters for which county responsibility is self-evidently necessary.
They are all exceptions to the general rule of district responsibility.
Nevertheless, the 1980 Act makes it abundantly clear that, though districts are the development control authorities, they must direct their decisions to the implementation of the structure plan for their area.
The arrangements for development control schemes have been superseded by new consultation machinery.
A code of practice was agreed by a working party of representatives of the local authority associations and DoE: this is set out in full as an appendix to the DoE Circular 2/81.
AMENDING THE GENERAL Development ORDER
A further, and very significant change, made in early 1981, relates to the GDO.
The background to this is spelled out in clear political terms in a DoE consultation paper of February 1980:
Two of the government's most important objectives are to reduce the proportion of the nation's wealth consumed by the public sector and to reduce the extent to which individuals are held back by the public sector…
An overwhelming proportion of planning applications relate solely to small householder developments.
These consist mainly of extensions, alterations and garages.
In some areas over 50 per cent of planning applications fall into these categories.
The vast majority of them are completely uncontroversial.
Even where an application does arouse some opposition, issues of public amenity rarely arise.
In practice, the planning system is being used to settle disputes between neighbours in a way which was never intended and for which it is not designed.
At a time when the need to reduce the size of the public sector is paramount, we do not believe that this is a justifiable way to spend the money of taxpayers and ratepayers.
This political rhetoric would lead one to suppose that the subsequent proposals would be of an equally clear political substance.
Yet, as noted at the beginning of this chapter, the amendments were essentially the same as those put by the previous Labour administration in 1977 but withdrawn in the face of widespread opposition.
The relaxation of planning controls over minor developments involves three changes.
First, householders are allowed to extend their houses by up to 15 per cent, or 70 cubic metres if greater, without the need for planning permission.
(The previous limits were 10 per cent and 50 cubic metres.)
This relaxation does not apply to terraced properties.
Secondly, private garages only count as part of the limit on house extensions if they are within 5 metres of the house, otherwise they are treated in the same way as other outbuildings.
Thirdly, the limit for permitted extensions to industrial buildings is raised from 10 per cent to 20 per cent, subject to a maximum increase in floor area of 750 square metres (instead of the previous 500 square metres).
There is no relaxation of planning controls in national parks, areas of outstanding natural beauty and existing conservation areas.
There are also relaxations in relation to small industrial premises.
DEVELOPMENT CONTROL AND DEVELOPMENT PLANS
A decade ago, Timothy Raison, the then shadow spokesman for the environment, referred to development control as a ‘tribal system’ based on custom and practice.
Yet the heartsearching about development control which characterised the ten years preceding Raison's remarks continued over the following decade.
Though several changes have been made by government, particularly in the 1980 and 1986 Acts, the debate has been a remarkably uninformed one.
This is simply because of the dearth of research.
How do planning authorities actually decide planning applications?
Does the local development plan (if there is one)‘provide a detailed basis for development control and for the co-ordination of development and other land use’?
What if there is no local plan?
What if the local plan does not address an issue raised by a planning application?
Answers to such questions have not been easy to obtain.
Fortunately, during the last few years, there has been a blossoming of research which considerably increases our understanding of how this part of the machinery of planning works.
Of particular interest is a 1986 working paper from the Department of Land Management and Development at the University of Reading.
This reports on research commissioned by the DoE on the relationship between development plans, development control, and appeals, and was carried out by Davies, Edwards, and Rowley.
The development control study reviewed the relationship between development plans and development control in a sample of twelve districts in England and Wales.
It was found that the most significant characteristic is its variety, which in turn results from the wide variation in the conditions among different authorities, together with the wide area of discretionary power which they all have.
Development plans (where they exist) are certainly used in development control, but many policies are not covered by the plans, and even when they are, they are typically expressed in general terms requiring interpretation of their meaning and allowing a wide range of discretion.
Districts rely not only on these plans but also on a range of nonstatutory documents, including development control policy notes, design guides, development briefs, informal local plans and ‘policy frameworks.’
The authors comment that the range of planning considerations fall into two broad categories:
The practical planning considerations relate mainly to amenity and the form and layout of development.
They have a long history of use in planning practice, there is a wide measure of consensus about their use in control and, where covered by policy, it tends to be as broad, flexible statements in structure or local plans, amplified in detail in supplementary planning guidance.
The strategic and other planning considerations relate to the volume and timing of development and also more recent matters such as planning gain.
They are of more recent origin in statutory planning and, apart from a few basic considerations, tend to vary in their incidence in different districts.
The appeals study comprised a random sample of one in ten (1,286) appeals determined in England and Wales in 1982, and an analysis of appeals during the same year in the twelve sample districts.
This revealed that ‘one third of all appeal decision letters contained no mention of policy, national or local, statutory or non-statutory’.
These included a high proportion of the householder appeals and of the minor and change of use appeals, but comparatively few major proposals.
In general, the main issues they raised concerned amenity, design and infrastructure.
Such issues were not covered by policy, and these appeals tended to have a better than average chance of success (41 per cent as compared with an overall average of 31 per cent).
Two thirds of the appeal decision letters referred to some form of policy, and in these cases the policy usually became the main determinant of the outcome of the appeal; only 26 per cent of such appeals were successful.
‘Inspectors nearly always dismissed appeals, and supported the local authority, on proposals for which there was relevant cover in the development plan.’
On the other hand, they ‘more often allowed appeals which turned on practical appeal considerations lacking firm local policy coverage, but in which national policies were invoked in favour of the appellant’.
The final conclusion, in summary was:
The relationship between development plans and appeals is closer and less varied than that with development control.
This largely reflects the different composition of the case load, with fewer householder proposals, which almost always lack policies.
It also reflects the extent to which inspectors have a close regard to policies, whether it be those in the development plan or those in national sources.
In short, where there is an articulated policy which can clearly be applied to a case, development control and appeal decisions tend to abide by it.
However, some areas do not have plans; some plans do not cover issues that arise in individual planning applications; and much development control has to rely on unwritten policy and professional skill and judgement.
Can the situation be improved?
Obviously more written statements of policy would help, and this the authors recommend: for both central and local government.
But there is a limit to which governments at any level wish to, or can, commit policies to paper.
The more this is done, the more inflexible will planning become, the less will it be able to adapt to changing circumstances, the greater is the likelihood of conflict between policies, and the more confusing the situation will be.
The great merit of the British development control system is its flexibility and adaptability to differing and changing situations.
5
Chapter 5 PLANNING, LAND AND LAND VALUES
It is clear that under a system of well-conceived planning the resolution of competing claims and the allocation of land for the various requirements must proceed on the basis of selecting the most suitable land for the particular purpose, irrespective of the existing values which may attach to the individual parcels of land.
Uthwatt Report 1942
THE UTHWATT REPORT
It was the task of the Uthwatt Committee, from whose report this quotation is taken, to devise a scheme which would make such a basis possible.’
Effective planning necessarily controls, limits, or even completely destroys, the market value of particular pieces of land.
Is the owner to be compensated for this loss in value?
If so, how is the compensation to be calculated?
And is any ‘balancing’ payment to be extracted from owners whose land appreciates in value as a result of planning measures?
This problem of compensation and betterment arises fundamentally ‘from the existing legal position with regard to the use of land, which attempts largely to preserve, in a highly developed economy, the purely individualistic approach to land ownership’.
This ‘individualistic approach’, however, has been increasingly modified during the past hundred years.
The rights of ownership were restricted in the interests of public health.
Owners had (by law) to ensure, for example, that their properties were in good sanitary condition, that new buildings conformed to certain building standards, that streets were of a minimum width, and so on .
It was accepted that these restrictions were necessary in the interests of the community,salus populi est suprema lex , and that private owners should be compelled to comply with them even at cost to themselves.
All these restrictions, whether carrying a right to compensation or not, are imposed in the public interest, and the essence of the compensation problem as regards the imposition of restrictions appears to be this — at what point does the public interest become such that a private individual ought to be compelled on to comply, at his own cost, with a restriction or requirement designed to secure that public interest?
The history of the imposition of obligations  without compensation has been to push that point progressively further on and to add to the list of requirements considered to be essential to the well-being of the community.
But clearly there is a point beyond which restrictions cannot reasonably be imposed on the grounds of good neighbourliness without payment of compensation — and ‘general considerations of regional or national policy require so great a restriction on the landowner's use of his land as to amount to a taking away from him of a proprietary interest in the land’.
This, however, is not the end of the matter.
Planning sets out to achieve a selection of the most suitable pieces of land for particular uses.
Some land will therefore be zoned for a use which is profitable for the owner, whereas other land will be zoned for a use having a low, or even nil, private value.
It is this difficulty of ‘development value’ which raises the compensation problem in its most acute form.
The development which may legitimately — or hopefully — be expected by owners is in fact spread over a far larger area than is likely to be developed.
This potential development value is therefore speculative, but until the individual owners are proved to be wrong in their assessments (and how can this be done?) all owners of land having a potential value can make a case for compensation on the assumption that their particular pieces of land would in fact be chosen for development if planning restrictions were not imposed.
Yet this ‘floating value’ might never have settled on their land, and obviously the aggregate of the values claimed by the individual owners is likely to be greatly in excess of a total valuation of all pieces of land.
As Haar has nicely put it, the situation is akin to that of a sweepstake: a single ticket fetches much more than its mathematically calculated value, for the simple reason that the grand prize may fall to any one holder.
Furthermore, the public control of land use necessarily involves the shifting of land values from certain pieces of land to other pieces: the value of some lands is decreased, while that of other land is increased.
Planning controls do not destroy land values; in the words of the Uthwatt Committee, ‘neither the total demand for development nor its average annual rate is materially affected, if at all, by planning ordinances’.
Nevertheless, the owner of the land on which development is prohibited will claim compensation for the full potential development of his land, irrespective of the fact that the value may shift to another site.
In theory, it is logical to balance the compensation paid to aggrieved owners by collecting a betterment charge on owners who benefit from planning controls.
But previous experience with the collection of betterment had not been encouraging.
The principle had been first established in an Act of 1662 which authorised the levying of a capital  sum or an annual rent in respect of the ‘melioration’ of properties following street widenings in London.
There were similar provisions in Acts providing for the rebuilding of London after the Great Fire.
The principle was revived and extended in the planning Acts of 1909 and 1932.
These allowed a local authority to claim, first 50 per cent, and then (in the later Act) 75 per cent , of the amount by which any property increased in value as the result of the operation of a planning scheme.
In fact, these provisions were largely ineffective since it proved extremely difficult to determine with any certainty which properties had increased in value as a result of a scheme (or of works carried out under a scheme) or, where there was a reasonable degree of certainty, how much of the increase in value was directly attributable to the scheme and how much to other factors.
The Uthwatt Committee noted that there were only three cases in which betterment had actually been paid under the Planning Acts, and all these were before the 1932 Act introduced a provision for the deferment of payment until the increased value had actually been realised either by sale or lease or by change of use.
In short, it had not proved possible to devise an equitable and workable system.
The Uthwatt Committee concluded that the solution to these problems lay in changing the system of land ownership under which land had a development value dependent upon the prospects of its profitable use.
It maintained that no new code for the assessment of compensation or the collection of betterment would be adequate if this individualistic system remained.
The system itself had inherent ‘contradictions provoking a conflict between private and public interest and hindering the proper operation of the planning machinery’.
A new system was needed which would avoid these contradictions and which so unified existing rights in land as to‘enable shifts of value to operate within the same ownership’.
The logic of this line of reasoning led to a consideration of land nationalisation.
This the committee rejected on the grounds that it would arouse keen political controversy, would involve insuperable financial problems and would necessitate the establishment of a complicated national administrative machinery.
In the view of the committee the solution to the problem lay in the nationalisation, not of the land itself, but of all development rights in undeveloped land.
THE 1947 ACT
Essentially, this is precisely what the 1947 Town and Country Planning Act did.
Effectively, development rights and their associated values were nationalised.
No development was to take place without permission from the local planning authority.
If permission were refused, no compensation would be paid (except in a limited range of special  cases).
If permission were granted, any resulting increase in land value was to be subject to a development charge.
The view was taken that ‘owners who lose development value as a result of the passing of the bill are not on that account entitled to compensation’.
This cut through the insoluble problem posed in previous attempts to collect betterment values created by public action.
Betterment had been conceived as ‘any increase in the value of land (including the buildings thereon) arising from central or local government action, whether positive, for example by the execution of public works or improvements, or negative, for example by the imposition of restrictions on the other land’.
The 1947 Act went further: all betterment was created by the community, and it was unreal and undesirable (as well as virtually impossible) to distinguish between values created, for example, by particular planning schemes, and those due to other factors such as the general activities of the community or the general level of prosperity.
If rigorous logic had been followed, no payment at all would have been made for the transfer of development value to the state but this as the Uthwatt Committee had pointed out, would have resulted in considerable hardship in individual cases.
A 300 million fund was therefore established for making ‘payments’(as distinct from compensation) to owners who could successfully claim that their land had some development value on the ‘appointed day’— the day on which the provisions of the Bill which prevented landowners from realising development values came into force.
Considerable discussion took place during the passage of the Bill through Parliament on the sum fixed for the payments, and it was strongly opposed on the ground that it was too small.
The truth of the matter was that in the absence of relevant reliable information any global sum had to be determined in a somewhat arbitrary way, but in any case it was not intended that everybody should be paid the full value of their claims.
Landowners would submit claims to a centralised agency, the Central Land Board for ‘loss of development value’, that is, the difference between the ‘unrestricted value’(the market value without the restrictions introduced by the Act) and the ‘existing use value’(the value subject to these restrictions).
When all the claims had been received and examined, the 300 million would be divided between claimants at whatever proportion of their 1948 value that total would allow.
(In the event the estimate of 300 million was not as far out as critics feared.
The total of all claims finally amounted to £380 million.)
The original intention was to have a flexible rate of development charge.
In some cases 100 per cent would be levied, but in others a lower rate would be more appropriate in order to encourage development ‘on account of economic conditions in the country generally, or in particular areas where unemployment is above the average’, or where it was important to secure ‘a particular piece of development  now, instead of in, say, twenty years’.
However, when the regulations came to be made, the government maintained that the policy which had been set out during the passage of the Bill through the House was unworkable.
The only explanation given for this was that
the whole conception is that the value of land is divided into two parts — the value restricted to its existing use and the development value.
The market value is the sum of the two.
If, by the action of the State, the development value is no longer in the possession of the owner of the land, then all he has left is the existing use value.
Moreover, the fund of 300 million is being provided for the purposes of compensating the owner of land for this reduced value…therefore the owner of land can have no possible claim to any part of the development value and it is logical and right that the State should, where development takes place, make a charge which represents the amount of the development value.
The whole idea of variable development charges (particularly for the depressed areas) was rejected, and a flat-rate 100 per cent levy introduced.
These provisions, of which only the barest summary has been given here, were very complex and, together with the inevitable uncertainty as to when compensation would be paid and how much it should be, resulted in a general feeling of uncertainty and discontent which did not augur well for the scheme.
The principles, however, were clear.
To recapitulate, all development rights and values were vested in the state.
No development could take place without permission from the local planning authority and then only on payment of a betterment charge to the Central Land Board.
The nationalisation of development rights was effected by the ‘promised’ payment of compensation.
As a result landowners only ‘owned’ the existing use rights of their land and it thus followed, first, that if permission to develop was refused no compensation was payable, and, secondly, that the price paid to public authorities for the compulsory acquisition of land would be equal to the existing use value, that is, its value excluding any allowance for future development.
THE 1947 SCHEME IN OPERATION
The scheme did not work as smoothly as was expected.
In its first annual report the Central Land Board ‘noted with concern some weeks after the Act came into operation that despite the liability for development charge land was still being widely offered and, still worse, taken at prices including the full development value’.
This remained a problem throughout the lifetime of the scheme, though the  magnitude of the problem remains a matter of some controversy.
It is certainly true that conditions were such that developers were prepared to pay more than existing use prices for land; but the conditions were extraordinary.
As the Board pointed out in its second report:
The evidence available to the Board of prices paid for land for development suggests that sales at or near existing use value are more the exception than the rule.
To a large extent this is due to the severe restriction on building.
Building licences are difficult to get and the developer who has been fortunate enough to obtain one is often willing to pay a much inflated price for a piece of land upon which to build.
In other words, a scarcity value attaches at present to the possession of a licence.
The theory that the development charge would leave the developer unwilling or unable to pay more than the existing use value for his land is not at present working out in practice, especially since a would-be house owner who pays building value to the seller of the land.
as well as a development charge to the Board, is still paying less in the total cost of his house than he would have to pay for an existing house with vacant possession.
It was to prevent such problems that the Central Land Board had been given powers of compulsory purchase at the ‘correct’ price.
These powers were used, not as a general means of facilitating the supply of land at existing use prices.
but selectively, ‘as a warning to owners of land in general’.
Furthermore, they were used only where an owner had actually offered his land for sale at a price above existing use value.
Thus, purchases by the Board would have done nothing to facilitate an increase in the total supply of land for development even if they had been much more numerous.
In fact, however, their very rarity served only to make the procedure arbitrary in the extreme and, indeed, may have added to the reluctance of owners to offer land for development at all.
The Conservative government which took office in 1951 were intent on raising the level of construction activity and particularly the rate of private house-building.
Though, within the limits of building activity set by the Labour government, it is unlikely that the development charge procedure seriously affected the supply of land, it is probable that the Conservative government's plans for private building would have been jeopardised by it.
This was one factor which led the new government to consider repealing development charges.
There is no doubt these charges were unpopular, particularly since they were payable in cash and in full, whereas payment on the claims on the 300 million fund were deferred and uncertain in amount.’
The position was slightly eased after the announcement that the Central Land Board would accept claims as security for the charge up to 80 per cent of their agreed value.
 But as a white paper issued in 1952 explained:
This easement does not by any means apply to all developers and is in any case temporary: setting off the charge against the claims in this way will not be possible when the fund has been distributed and the money has been spent or locked up in some investment.
As time passes and the prospects of development concentrate and mature in particular places, the gap which in many cases already exists between the amount of the claim and the amount of the development charge will grow wider.
The theory on which the charge is founded will seem even more elusive, and in practice the collection of development charge will have to be made in the face of increasing public resistance.
The basic difficulty was that the purchasers of land were compelled to pay a premium above the existing use value in order to persuade an owner to sell: a development charge of 100 per cent therefore constituted a permanent addition to the cost of development.
Moreover, the basis of the development charge was uncertain:
Since it is assessed on the difference between the value of the land without permission to develop and its value for the development permitted, the amount of the charge is inevitably a matter of judgement and valuation — and therefore for negotiation, in the same way as the price of land is a matter for negotiation.
In some cases quite small adjustments in the two values during the process of such negotiation will have a very large effect on the amount of development charge finally assessed.
This is inherent in the nature of the charge, but the effect is to destroy confidence in its validity.
Those who view development charge as a tax on development — and they are in the great majority — look for some definite relation between the amount assessed and the cost of the land or of the development; and their failure to find any makes them very critical of the method of assessment.’
Further problems began to loom ahead as the final date for payments from the £300 million fund (1 July 1953) drew near.
First, the payment of this sum of money over a short period would have a considerable inflationary effect.
Secondly, all claimants on the fund would receive payment whether or not they had actually suffered any loss as a result of the 1947 Act.
(Some would have already recovered the development value of the land by selling at a high price; others may never have wished to develop their land, and, indeed, might even have bought it for the express purpose of preventing its development.)
But the main difficulty was that if compensation were paid out on this ‘once for all’ basis, ‘it would be exceedingly difficult for any future government ever to make radical changes in the financial provisions, however badly they were working.
For all the holders of claims on the fund would have to be compensated for loss of development value those who will be allowed to develop their land as well as those who will not’.
Some amendment of the 1947 Act was clearly desirable, but though there might have been agreement on this, there was no agreement on what the amendments should be.
There was a real fear that an amendment which satisfied developers would seriously weaken or even wreck the planning machine; the scheme was part of a complex of planning controls which might easily be upset and result in a return to the very problems which the 1947 Act was designed to solve.
Various proposals were canvassed, but the most popular was a reduction in the rate of development charge.
The intention was to provide an incentive to owners to sell their land at a price which took account of the developer's liability to pay the (reduced) charge.
The government took the view that this was not possible: ‘vendors of land, like vendors of any other commodity, will always get the best price that they can, and the development charge, however small, would in effect be passed on, in whole or in part, to the ultimate user of the land’.
Furthermore, the government's objective was not merely one of easing the market in land; they were particularly concerned to encourage more private development, and even a low rate of development charge would act as a brake.
On the (implicit) assumption that market prices for land would rise, the time would inevitably come when the charge would begin to greatly exceed the corresponding claim on the 300 million fund.
Finally, it was felt that once the rate of development charge was reduced there would be no clear principle as to the level at which it should continue to be levied —‘the process of reduction, once begun, would be difficult to stop’.
In short, the government held that the financial provisions of the 1947 Act were inherently unsatisfactory and could not be sufficiently improved by a mere modification.
What was needed was a complete abolition of development charges.
THE 1954 SCHEME
The abolition of development charges was made on the ground that they had proved ‘too unreliable an instrument to act as the lynch-pin of a permanent settlement’.
But, at the same time, if the main part of the planning system was to remain, some limit to the liability to compensation for planning restrictions was essential.
Otherwise effective planning controls would be prohibitively expensive: the cost of compensation for restrictions, if paid at the market value, would be crippling.
The solution arrived at was to compensate only ‘for loss of development value which accrued in the past up to the point where the 1947 axe fell — but not for loss of development value accruing in the future’.
There were some clear advantages in this scheme.
Not only was the state's liability for compensation limited, but it was to be paid only if and when the owner of land suffered from planning restrictions.
The compensation would be the ‘admitted claim’ on the £300 million fund (plus one-seventh for accrued interest on the amount of the claim).
But not all admitted claims were to be met, even where loss of development value was caused by refusal of planning permission or by conditions attached to a permission.
The 1932 Act had clearly established the principle that compensation should not be paid for restrictions imposed in the interest of ‘good neighbourliness’ and this principle was extended.
No compensation was payable for refusal to allow a change in the use of a building; or for restrictions regarding density, layout, construction, design, and so on; or for refusal to permit development which would place an undue burden on the community (for example , in the provision of services).
Some of these matters clearly fall within the ‘good neighbour’ concept,’while others are based on the principle that compensation is not to be paid merely because maximum exploitation has been prevented so long as development of a reasonably remunerative character is allowed.
The 1954 scheme did not put anything in place of the development charge; the collection of betterment was now left to the blunt instruments of general taxation.
Hence the attempt to ‘hold the scales evenly between those who were allowed to develop their land and those who were not’ was abandoned, but the use of 1947 development values as a ‘permanent basis for compensation’safeguarded the public purse.
On the other hand this meted out only a very rough justice to owners.
The official view at this date was that this was not so; to quote the 1952 white paper:
It may be suggested that to limit compensation in the way proposed will work unfairly in certain cases.
Land which in 1947 had little development value, and therefore no claim or only a small claim on the fund, may at some future date acquire considerable development value.
Values will tend to follow the development plans, and land which acquires a high development value will normally be land on which development will be permitted; but there will be exceptions and it may be thought that to limit compensation in these cases will inflict hardship on owners who are refused permission to develop or whose land is bought compulsorily.
It is important, however, to remember that all transactions in land since 1947 have taken place in the full knowledge that the 1947 development value was the most that anyone would hope to receive by way of compensation from the 300 million fund.
Purchasers in future will be able to safeguard themselves by ensuring that permission to develop is forthcoming before they pay more than current existing-use value  or, where a claim on the fund passes with the land, current existing-use value plus 1947 development value.
This, however, ignored the fact that the new scheme established a dual market in land.
Compensation both for planning restrictions (in cases where a claim had been admitted) and for compulsory purchase by public authorities was to be paid on the basis of existing use plus any admitted 1947 development value, but private sales would be at current market prices.
The difference between these two values might be very substantial, particularly where development of a far more valuable character than had been anticipated in 1947 took place.
Furthermore, with the passage of time land values generally would increase, especially if inflation continued.
Whatever theoretical justification there might be for a dual market it would appear increasingly unjust.
Moreover, there is a real distinction between the hardships inflicted by a refusal of planning permission (that is, the loss of the development value of land) and that caused by the loss of the land itself (that is , compulsory purchase).
In the first case the owner retains the existing use value of his land and is worse off only in comparison with owners who have been fortunate in owning land on which development is permitted and who can therefore realise a capital gain.
In the second case, however, compulsory acquisition at less than market price involves an actual loss since the owner is not only deprived of his property but is also compensated at a price which might be less than he paid for it and would almost certainly be insufficient to purchase a similar parcel of land in the open market.
Finally, though it must be generally accepted that individuals cannot be protected from foolish actions based on an inadequate knowledge of the law, the situation following the 1954 Act was so complex and, because of the inevitable unpredictability of the necessity for compulsory purchase, so risky that it appeared likely (in retrospect at least) that public opinion would demand a further change.
There was an omen of this even while the legislation was passing through Parliament.
A certain Mr Pilgrim had bought, in 1950, a vacant plot of land adjoining his house.
To pay for this he raised a mortgage of £500 on his house.
Some years later the Romford Borough Council compulsorily acquired the land at the existing use value of £65.
(No claim had ever been made on the £300 million fund for loss of development value.)
Mr Pilgrim committed suicide.
Naturally the case attracted a lot of attention and, as a result, a new provision was introduced in the 1954 Bill to alleviate the position of persons, usually small owners, who suffered a loss on compulsory acquisition because there was no established claim on the £300 million fund.
This provision permitted the payment of an ex gratia supplement in cases of this kind.
One further aspect of the 1954 scheme needs mention here.
Compensation for loss of development value was payable in the case of land for which there was an established 1947 development value.
This compensation was paid from central government funds, but the decision to refuse planning permission or to impose conditions remained with local authorities.
Since this was a clear case of the Treasury completely underwriting the decisions of local authorities, the latter were exhorted ‘to exercise their discretion with due regard to public economy’.
Furthermore, an applicant who had been refused planning permission could appeal to the ministry.
There was an obvious danger in such a situation — the danger that concern to keep down the compensation bill would affect the ministry's judgement of the planning merits of particular cases.
The same applied to the acquisition of land by local authorities: since they had to meet the cost of compensation there was a danger that they would attempt to avoid sites having an admitted claim under the 1947 Act.
To recapitulate, the effect of the complicated network of legislation which was now (1954) in force was basically to create two values of land according to whether it was sold in the open market or acquired by a public authority.
In the former case there were no restrictions and thus land changed hands at the full market price.
But in the latter case the public authority would pay only the existing (1947) use value plus any agreed claim for loss of 1947 development value.
This was a most unsatisfactory outcome.
As land prices increased, due partly to planning controls, the gap between existing use and market values widened, particularly in suburban areas near green belt land.
The greater the amount of planning control, the greater did the gap become.
Thus, owners who were forced to sell their land to public authorities considered themselves to be very badly treated in comparison with those who were able to sell at the enhanced prices resulting in part from planning restrictions on other sites.
The inherent uncertainties of future public acquisitions — no plan can be so definite and inflexible as to determine which sites will (or might) be needed in the future for public purposes — made this distinction appear arbitrary and unjust.
The abolition of the development charge served to increase the inequity.
The contradictions and anomalies in the 1954 scheme were obvious.
It was only a matter of time before public opinion demanded further amending legislation.
THE 1959 ACT: THE RETURN TO MARKET VALUE
Opposition to this state of affairs increased with the growth of private pressures for development following the abolition of building licences.
Eventually the government was forced to take action.
The resulting legislation (the Town and Country Planning Act 1959) restored ‘fair  market price’ as the basis of compensation for compulsory acquisition.
This, in the government's view, was the only practicable way of rectifying the injustices of the dual market for land.
An owner now obtained (in theory at least) the same price for his land irrespective of whether he sold it to a private individual or to a public authority.
These provisions thus removed a source of grievance, but they did nothing towards solving the fundamental problems of compensation and betterment, and the result proved extremely costly to public authorities.
If this had been a reflection of basic principles of justice there could have been little cause for complaint, but in fact an examination of the position shows clearly that this was not the case.
In the first place, the 1959 Act (like previous legislation) accepted the principle that development rights should be vested in the state.
This followed from the fact that no compensation was payable for the loss of development value in cases where planning permission was refused.
But if development rights belong to the state, surely so should the associated development values?
Consider, for example, the case of two owners of agricultural land on the periphery of a town, both of whom applied for planning permission to develop for housing purposes — the first being given permission and the second refused on the ground that the site in question was to form part of a green belt.
The former benefited from the full market value of his site in residential use, whereas the latter could benefit only from its existing use value.
No question of compensation arose since the development rights already belonged to the state, but the first owner had these given back to him without payment.
There was an obvious injustice here which could have eventually led to a demand that the ‘penalised’ owner should be compensated.
Secondly, as has already been stressed, the comprehensive nature of our present system of planning control has had a marked effect on values.
The use for which planning permission has been, or will be, given is a very important factor in the determination of value.
Furthermore, the value of a given site is increased not only by the development permitted on that site, but also by the development not permitted on other sites.
In the example given above, for instance, the value of the site for which planning permission for housing development was given might be increased by virtue of the fact that it was refused on the second site.
THE LAND COMMISSION 1967–71
Mounting criticism of the inadequacy of the 1959 Act led to a number of proposals for a tax on betterment, by way either of a capital gains tax or of a betterment levy.
The Labour government which was returned to power in 1964 introduced both.
The 1967 Finance Act introduced a  capital gains tax, and the 1967 Land Commission Act introduced a new betterment levy.
Broadly, the distinguishing principle was that capital gains tax was charged on increases in the current use value of land only, while betterment levy was charged on increases in development value.
The Land Commission was abolished by the Conservative government in 1971, but a summary account of its powers and operations is appropriate.
The rationale underlying the Land Commission Act was set out in a 1965 white paper:
In the government's view it is wrong that planning decisions about land use should so often result in the realizing of unearned increments by the owners of the land to which they apply, and that desirable development should be frustrated by owners withholding their land in the hope of higher prices.
The two main objectives of the government's land policy are, therefore:
(i) to secure that the right land is available at the right time for the implementation of national, regional and local plans:
(ii) to secure that a substantial part of the development value created by the community returns to the community and that the burden of the cost of land for essential purposes is reduced.
To enable these two objectives to be achieved a Land Commission was established (with headquarters located at Newcastle upon Tyne, in line with the dispersal of offices policy).
The commission could buy land either by agreement or compulsorily, and it was given very wide powers for this purpose.
The second objective was met by the introduction of a betterment levy on development value.
This was necessary not only to secure that a substantial part of the development ‘returned to the community’, but also to prevent a two-price system as existed under the 1954 Act.
The levy was deducted from the price paid by the commission on its own purchases and was paid by owners when they sold land privately.
A landowner thus theoretically received the same amount for his land whether he sold it privately, to the Land Commission, or to another public authority.
Though the commission could buy by agreement it had to have effective powers of compulsory purchase if it was ‘to ensure that the right land is made available at the right time’.
There were two reasons for this.
First, though the levy was at a rate (initially 40 per cent) thought to be adequate to leave enough of the development value to provide a reasonable incentive, some owners of land might still be unwilling to sell.
Secondly, though the net price obtained by the owner of land should have been the same irrespective of whether the body to  whom he sold it was private or public, some owners might have been unwilling to sell to the commission.
The Act provided two sets of compulsory powers.
One was the normal powers available to local authorities, with the usual machinery for appeals and a public inquiry.
Under these powers the commission had to disclose the purpose for which it required the land.
These powers could be used for purchasing land scheduled for development in a development plan, or for land permitted for development.
The second set of compulsory powers were not to become operative until the ‘second appointed day’ and were to be brought into effect only if it appeared ‘that it is necessary in the public interest to enable the commission to obtain authority for the compulsory acquisition of land by a simplified procedure’.
They were intended to provide a rapid procedure under which objectors would have no right to state their case at a public inquiry, and the commission was not required to disclose the purpose for which the land was needed.
The purpose here was to deal quickly and effectively with landowners who were holding up development.
In fact the powers did not become operative during the lifetime of the commission.
It was intended that the commission would often be acquiring land in advance of need.
It was, therefore, given wide powers of managing and disposing of land; but it could also develop land itself.
Land could be sold or leased to public or private bodies for any purpose, even if the purpose was different from the one for which the land was purchased.
Land which was sold could be made subject to restrictions and future development value could be reserved to the commission.
Such land disposals were termed ‘crownhold’.
Normally, the commission had to dispose of land at the best price it could obtain, but there was one important exception.
This was the ‘concessionary crownhold disposition’ which could be made for land which was to be developed ‘for housing purposes’.
Here the commission could dispose of land at less than the market price.
All such housing land was subject to crownhold restrictions or covenants.
In the case of owner-occupiers the commission had the right of pre-emption on terms which ensured that the amount of the concession (and future increases in development value) accrued to it.
Concessionary crownholds were also applicable to ‘bodies which can effectively supervise the assignment of such houses’, such as housing associations.
The levy differed from the development charge of the 1947 Act in two important ways.
First, it did not take all the development value.
The Act did not specify what the rate was to be, but it was made clear that the initial rate of 40 per cent would be increased to 45 per cent and then to 50 per cent‘at reasonably short intervals’.
(In fact, it never was.)
The second difference from the development charge was that  though the levy would normally be paid to the seller, if ‘when the land comes to be developed, it still has some development value on which levy has not been taken in previous sales, that residual value will be subject to levy at the time of development’.
Thus (ignoring a few complications and qualifications), if a piece of land was worth £500 in its existing use but was sold for £3,500 with planning permission, the levy was applied to the difference, that is, £3,000; the levy, at the initial rate, was £1,200.
If, however, the land were sold (at existing use value plus a ‘hope’ value that planning permission might be obtained) at £1,000, while the full development value was £3,500, the levy would be paid by both seller and purchaser: £200 by the former and £1,000 by the latter.
Certain bodies were exempt from the levy — for instance, local authorities, new town development corporations, the Housing Corporation and housing societies.
The proceeds of the levy were expected to amount to £80 million in a full year.
In fact, however, the amount levied did not approach this figure.
In 1968–69 it amounted to £15 million and in 1969–70 £31 million.
The Land Commission's first task was to assess the availability of, and demand for, land for house-building, particularly in the areas of greatest pressure.
In its first annual report, it pointed to the difficulties in some areas particularly in the south-east and the west midlands where the available land was limited to only a few years' supply.
Most of this land could not, in fact, be made available for early development.
Much of it was in small parcels; some was not suitable for development at all because of physical difficulties; and, of the remainder, a great deal was already in the hands of builders.
Thus there was little that could be acquired and developed immediately by those other builders who had an urgent need for land.
All this highlighted the need for more land to be allocated by planning authorities for development.
The Land Commission had to work within the framework of the planning system.
Though a crown body, it did not operate as such and thus was subject to the same planning control as private developers.
The intention was that the commission would work harmoniously with local planning authorities and form an important addition to the planning machinery.
As the commission pointed out, despite the sophistication of the British planning system, it was designed to control land use rather than to promote the development of land.
The commission's role was to ensure that land allocated for development was in fact developed, by channelling it to those who would develop it.
It could use its powers of compulsory acquisition to amalgamate land which was in separate ownerships and acquire land the owners of which could not be traced.
They could purchase land from owners who  refused to sell for development or from builders who wished to retain it for future development.
In its first report, the Land Commission gently referred to the importance of its role in acting ‘as a spur to those local planning authorities whose plans have not kept pace with the demand for various kinds of development’.
Though it stated its hope that planning authorities would allocate sufficient land, it warned that in some cases it might have to take the initiative and, if local authorities refused planning permission, go to appeal.
In its second interim report its line was much stronger.
It pointed out that, in the pressure areas, it had had only modest success in achieving a steady flow of land on to the market.
This was largely because these were areas in which planning authorities were aimed at containing urban growth and preserving open country.
In 1969–70 the Land Commission purchased 1,000 acres by agreement and a further 240 acres compulsorily.
The use of these compulsory powers was on the increase.
and a further 2,500 acres were subject to compulsory purchase at March 1970.
It is not easy to appraise what success the Land Commission achieved.
The Commission was only beginning to get into its stride in 1970 when a new government was returned which was pledged to the abolition of the commission on the grounds that it ‘had no place in a free society’.
This pledge was fulfilled in 1971 and thus the Land Commission went the same way as it predecessor, the Central Land Board.
THE CONSERVATIVE YEARS 1970–74
Land prices were rising during the late 1960s (with an increase of 55 per cent between 1967 and 1970), but the early 1970s witnessed a veritable price explosion.
Using 1967 as a base, prices rose to 287 in 1972 and 458 in 1973.
Average plot prices rose from £908 in 1970 to £2676 in 1973.
Not surprisingly, considerable pressure was put on the Conservative government to take some action to cope with the problem, though it was neither clear nor agreed what the basic problem was.
The favourite explanation, however, was ‘speculative hoarding’, and it was this which became the target for government action (in addition to a series of measures designed to speed up the release and development of land).
A white paper set out proposals for a ‘land hoarding charge’:
The government's measures to secure more planning permissions for housing development will go a long way to remedy the shortage of building land and so remove the occasion for windfall profits  based on scarcity values.
But they will be frustrated if land speculators continue to hoard land with planning permission.
Many permissions are not being implemented.
In the south east of England (outside London) permissions for new private dwellings substantially exceeded the number started in every quarter since the third quarter of 1970.
In the year ending 30 September 1972 planning permissions were given for an estimated 76,000 such dwellings, but only 52,000 were started.
The government has therefore decided, as the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced in his budget statement, to promote early legislation to introduce a land hoarding charge.
The purpose of this charge is to ensure that land with planning permission for housing is developed promptly, and to penalise the speculative hoarding of such land.
The charge was to be levied ‘for failure to complete development within a specified period from the grant of planning permission’.
After this ‘completion period’(of four years from the granting of outline planning permission or three years in the case of full planning permission), the charge was to be imposed at an annual rate of 30 per cent of the capital value of the land.
The scheme was clearly a long-term one and, to deal with the urgent problem (‘urgent' in political if not in any other terms), a ‘development gains tax’ and a ‘first letting tax’were introduced.
The development gains tax provided for gains from land sales by individuals to be treated, not as capital gains, but as income (and thus subject to high marginal rates).
The first letting tax, as its name implies, was a tax levied on the first letting of shops, offices, or industrial premises.
In concept it was an equivalent to the capital gains tax which would have been levied had the building been sold.
Both taxes came into operation at the time when the land and property boom turned into a slump.
Indeed, it has been suggested that they contributed to it.
THE 1974 WHITE PAPER
The Labour government which was returned to power in March 1974 lost little time in producing its anticipated white paper on land policy.
The objectives of this were:
1) to enable the community to control the development of land in accordance with its needs and priorities; and
(2) to restore to the community the increase in value of land arising from its efforts.
The keynote of the white paper was ‘positive planning’— to be achieved  by public ownership of development land.
The rationale for this was set out at some length:
Our existing negative planning control provides a valuable check on the market, and would at first sight seem capable of safeguarding our heritage and resolving the conflict between private interests and the public good.
But the difficulties inherent in a patchwork quilt of land ownership, and the overwhelming financial problems associated with acquiring land, mean that the best use of land is not always achieved.
This is not to deny that plan-making is a very valuable function of our local authorities; it is rather to point out that the existing powers to implement their plans are restricted by the price that the market puts on some land, and by the fact that the planners' resource is in the hands of private owners rather than at the disposal of the community.
Public ownership of development land puts control of our scarcest resource in the hands of the community, and enables it thereby to take an overall perspective.
In addition, by having this land available at the value of its current use, rather than at a value based on speculation as to its possible development, the community will be able to provide, in the places that need them, the public facilities it needs, but cannot now afford because of the inflated price it has to pay to the private owner.
For England and Scotland, it was decided that the agency for purchasing development land should be local government (thus avoiding the inter-agency conflict situation which arose between local authorities and the Land Commission).
For Wales, however, with its smaller local authorities, an ad hoc agency was to be created (this became the Land Authority for Wales).
In order‘to restore to the community the increase in value of land arising from its efforts’, it was proposed that ‘the ultimate basis on which the community will buy all land will be current use value’.
Sale of the land to developers, on the other hand, would be at market value.
Thus all development value would accrue to the community.
Provisionally, however, development values were to be recouped by a development land tax.
THE Community LAND SCHEME
The ensuing legislation came in two parts: the 1975 Community Land Act provided wide powers for compulsory land acquisition, while the Development Land Tax 1976 provided for the taxation of development values.
Thus the twin purposes of ‘positive planning’ and of ‘returning development values to the community’were to be served.
The Community Land Scheme was complex, and became increasingly so as regulations, directions and circulars followed the passing of the two Acts.
The scheme was planned to be implemented in three stages.
This, it was thought, would ‘enable the build-up of authorities’ acquisition, management and disposal activities to be matched to available resources, in particular of finance, manpower and expertise'.
It would also ‘provide the opportunity for authorities and the private sector to develop good working relationships and adapt to their long-term role as partners and co-operators’.
In the first stage, which started on the ‘first appointed day’(6 April 1976), authorities had a general duty ‘to have regard to the desirability of bringing development land into public ownership’.
In doing so, they had ‘to pay particular regard to the location and nature of development necessary to meet the planning needs of their areas’.
To assist them in carrying out this role, they had new and wider powers to buy land to make it available for development.
Following the passing of the Development Land Tax of 1976, all land acquisitions by authorities were made at a price net of any tax payable by the sellers of development land.
The second phase was to be introduced gradually.
As authorities built up resources and expertise, and became able to take on the responsibility for making available all land needed for particular types of development, the secretary of state was to have made orders providing that land for development of the kind designated in the order and in the area specified by the order must have passed through public ownership before development took place.
These ‘duty orders’ were to be brought in to match the varying rates at which authorities became ready to take on such responsibilities.
When duty orders had been made covering the whole of Great Britain, the ‘second appointed day’(or SAD Day as critics dubbed it) could be brought in.
This would have had the effect of changing the basis of compensation for land publicly acquired from a market value (net of tax) basis to a current use value basis, that is, its value in its existing use, taking no account of any increase in value actually or potentially conferred by the grant of a planning permission for new development.
The scheme, like its two predecessors, had little chance to prove itself.
The economic climate of the first two years of its operation could hardly have been worse, and the consequent public expenditure crisis resulted in a central control which limited it severely.
It is fortunate, however, that a thorough monitoring of the scheme, funded by the DoE, was undertaken by the School for Advanced Urban Studies at the University of Bristol.
The reader is referred to reports of this study.
LAND POLICIES IN THE 1980S
Though the Community Land Act was repealed by the Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980, local authorities still retain considerable powers of compulsory acquisition of land.
Indeed, some of these have been increased by the Act.
For example, a local authority was enabled, with the consent of the secretary of state, to compulsorily acquire:
…any land which is in their area and which is suitable for and is required in order to secure the carrying out of one or more of the following activities, namely, development, redevelopment and improvement [and]any land which is in their area and which is required for a purpose which it is necessary to achieve in the interests of the proper planning of an area in which the land is situated.
The Act also settled a doubt concerning the legality of compulsory land acquisition for the purpose of disposal to a private developer.
Indeed, the government has made it clear that these ‘planning purposes’ powers (which are of particular importance in bringing land on to the market) are generally to be used to assist the private sector.
Circular 8/81 noted that ‘although the Community Land Act is repealed, authorities still have a valuable, though limited, role to play in ensuring that land is brought forward for private development.
Their compulsory purchase powers may be useful in circumstances where the private market is not operating smoothly (e.g. in land assembly development, or where access to land ripe for development is blocked by an owner who is unwilling to sell).’
Additionally, the secretary of state has some formidable powers himself.
First he has the reserve power to direct a local authority to make an assessment of land available and suitable for residential development (see below).
Second, his powers to acquire any land ‘necessary for the public service’ have been extended by the 1980 Act to authorise acquisitions ‘(a) to meet the interests of proper planning of the area, or (b) to secure the best, or most economic, development or use of land’.
(Ironically these provisions are a modified re-enactment of a section of the repealed Community Land Act.)
Considerable debate has taken place since 1980 (as well as before) on the adequacy of land availability.
Given the powers available, the problem is clearly not a legal one.
It is, in fact, partly a financial one (providing the necessary infrastructure), but mainly a political one.
This is particularly the case for a Conservative government aiming at privatisation and the reduction in controls, an ample supply of land for private development, and the retention of land-use planning at the local level.
Patsy Healey has argued that the crux of the political dilemma lies in the traditional Conservative support in the shire counties:
This support combines a concern to preserve the attractive environments in which they live and a commitment to local democracy at the smallest scale.
The 1972 Local Government Act ensured continuing Conservative control of suburban and rural areas.
Conservative governments thus face a dilemma.
At national level they may be concerned to shift land policies more towards production than consumption purposes.
Yet they must not lose the support of the environmental lobby or local Conservative councillors.
In other words, the ideology of limited intervention which the current Conservative administration espouses sits uneasily with its need to respond to the demands of industrial and property production and to those for environmental conservation and local control over land policy.
Of course, the debate is not carried on in these terms.
Instead there are numerous surveys and a barrage of figures.
An illustration of this is the Standing Conference on London and South East Regional Planning 1983 study of housing land supply in the south east (outside London).
This concluded that ‘not only is there sufficient land for building another 250,000 dwellings [in the study area]over the next five years, but already capacity has been identified for building an additional 117,000 dwellings after five years’.
This compares with structure plan estimates of need totalling 231,000 to 233,000 over the five-year period.
All such exercises, of course, rest on assumptions concerning ‘need’.
This involves estimating such factors as new household formation (which itself can be affected by housing supply and prices), the rate of slum clearance, the role of improvements and major repairs to existing houses, and the geographic shift of jobs, retirement migration, second homes, and improved housing standards.
All these are dealt with in a 1984 report of the Joint Land Requirements Committee.
(This committee consists of members nominated by the RTPI, the House-Builders Federation and the Housing Research Foundation.)
The figures which are used in this report could be juggled in varying ways.
Indeed in one section, concerned with the effects of improvement and major repairs on the number of houses to be replaced, the report comments that ‘Solomon himself would not have known the correct answer’.
Among the many points raised by this report is the ‘appropriate’ rate of demolition of old houses.
A figure of 40,000 a year is used (though ‘we have formed no final view about whether this number of demolitions will actually take place’).
In fact, in Great Britain demolitions  fell from 63,000 in 1975/76 to 35,000 in 1980/81 and to 12,000 in 1984/85.
Their total estimate is for 220,000 dwellings annually until 1991 (and rather less in the last decade of the century).
The 220,000 is made up of 60,000–80,000 for replacement of ‘demolitions. geographic shift of industry’, and other factors; plus 145,000+ for new household formation.
The report is coy on major policy implications.
Indeed, the committee submits that ‘throughout our aim has not been to advance any particular viewpoint, but simply to identify the relevant facts.
Where opinions are offered, we have tried to separate these from the facts.’
This may well have been the intention, but in fact the implications are clear: demolition rates are too low, compulsory purchase of homes for redevelopment is inevitable in the future; owner-occupiers cannot be trusted to be the final arbiters of whether their homes arc unfit'; and some existing environments may be so drab as to be not worth preserving'.
The report believes that ‘there is scope for both demolition and rehabilitation’, but implies that the latter need not he an increased preoccupation of the building industry'.
The overall figures and the implications for land rest heavily on the role to be played by slum clearance, the need for which must be greater than current rates (an issue which is discussed in a later section on housing).
Thus for the last decade the report envisages that 25 per cent of new building should be for replacement; at such a rate the demand for greenfield sites might fall.
The report is certain about this:
…patently the demand for new land would fall as these sites are recycled, and new houses are built on cleared sites.
Moreover, some of the new units will be designed for one or two persons, so that it may be possible to come closer to a one for one replacement on cleared sites than would be expected by past experience.
This is clearly debatable, but the major point is important: the amount of demand for new land will be determined in part by the amount of available land in existing urbanised areas, and this in turn will be determined in part by slum clearance.
A rough estimate of the current amount of housebuilding in towns of over 50,000 population is around 15 per cent.
The report comments that with vigorous efforts it may be possible to raise this proportion this decade to say 20 per cent, but even this is not certain'.
Thus, some four-fifths of new building is (on the arguments presented) to be in rural areas.
However, given government commitments on green belts (which increased from 1,475,000 hectares in the old development plans to 1,800,000 hectares in 1983 structure plans), and the very small amount of land needed (estimated at one per cent of the  total land area of England), no national problem exists.
Nevertheless, ‘those areas where pressure to build is greatest are precisely those where pressure not to build is also greatest’; but, ending on an optimistic note.
‘the encouraging fact is that in most areas there is capacity to allow both for the protection of the countryside and to build the number of houses we need.
Wise use of our planning system should make it possible to achieve both objectives.’
In exhorting local authorities to ensure that there is sufficient land for housebuilding (and that adequate consultations are maintained with the industry), emphasis is now being placed on five-year supply' periods.
DoE Circular 9/80 deals, inter alia, with a ‘simplified methodology for future studies’ of housing land availability.
Of particular interest is the strong wording on the question of shortages:
If an assessment reveals that a 5 year supply of land in line with structure and local plan policies is not available, the authorities concerned should take immediate steps, consistent with those policies, to make up the deficiency.
These might include inviting and expediting planning applications, seeking to overcome infrastructure problems quickly, or being prepared to acquire compulsorily land needed for development which an owner is unwilling to sell.
In determining planning appeals for residential development, the secretary of state will take into account whether, in the context of the advice of this circular, sufficient housebuilding land has been identified as available for development in the area of the district.
It is also noteworthy that there is a provision in the 1980 Local Government, Planning and Land Act for the secretary of state to direct a local authority to ‘make an assessment of land which is in its area and which is in its opinion available and suitable for development for residential purposes’.
It is not at all clear what circumstances would justify this or (even more problematic) how useful the outcome might be.
LAND AVAILABILITY STUDIES
Dissatisfied with the quality of many land availability studies, the DoE commissioned Coopers and Lybrand to carry out a study to assess and report on the varying assessments and assumptions about new housing made by the planning authorities and house builders, and to assess the extent to which both the provision in plans and land which is made available for housing takes account of the requirements of the market for new private sector housing'.
Their report was published in 1985, and consists of a summary report and two working papers.
Their  conclusion is clear: ‘there is no doubt that most of the structure plans of the 1970s paid little attention to the market demand for housing.
The structure plans tended to be based on a survey — analysis — plan approach which required a rather determinist view of the issues which they examined.’
But there is a deeper issue: ‘market demand for housing was not and probably cannot (emphasis added) be estimated in an area and over time; this precludes its incorporation into structure plans and prevents any meaningful quantitative comparisons to be made with plan figures.’
This constitutes a fundamental challenge to the basis of the British planning system, and raises a host of thorny questions about the nature and efficacy of the system.
Surprisingly, the nine members of the steering group for this study were not members of the Conservative Party Central Office or the Adam Smith Institute but, with one exception (the representative of the Housebuilders' Federation), were governmental officials, mostly from the Department of the Environment.
Moreover, they have no hesitation in stressing the point that builders do not operate or think in terms familiar to planners; instead they look to ‘market signals’.
It follows that the planning system should concern itself with ways of improving the process to respond to demand.
It is suggested that there are three types of change which are needed.
First, there should be clearer signals from the market.
(A working paper includes a list of possible indicators, together with the suggestion that those operating in the market should work with planners to develop useful indicators.)
Second, ‘the plans themselves should consciously take note of such demand factors and, of critical importance, the plans should be sufficiently flexible to be able to respond to demand in the course of implementation — including the identification of criteria which, when met, should signal a need for a review.
Plans should ensure that sites of varying size and location are available.
Finally, clearer guidance from central government is required, and appeal decisions should be consistent with exhortations.
Review of structure plans should be simplified and accelerated, and other major aspects of the planning process should be strengthened —‘including some possible limit on the extent of public participation’.
The ‘rationale for some of the more rigid land constraints which flow from national policies’ also needs review, particularly the planning presumption against development of agricultural land.
This is the most important report since the Planning Advisory Group's 1965 The Future of Development Plans .
Unfortunately, it has two incidental weaknesses.
First, it is too brief (a rare complaint!); secondly, the fact that it is published by the consultants and not by DoE or HMSO reduces its ease of accessibility.
This may suit some since, as the authors note at the end of their hard-hitting proposals, ‘none of these suggestions offers easy solutions’.
A study by Duncan Maclennan, commissioned by the SDD, is equally critical of Scottish practice.
In estimating demand, Scottish authorities have used inadequate techniques; in particular, they have omitted economic factors.
Builders' estimates, whilst stressing economic considerations, lack a sound quantitative basis.
Maclennan continues:
The importance of current omissions is clearly illustrated by recourse to some basic economics.
In the short run, say a single year, quantity demanded is largely determined by market price.
Over the longer period changes in population, income etc. shift this relationship in measurable ways.
Price and income effects on housing demand are demonstrably important but they are ignored in structure plans.
In consequence 1981 Census based demand estimates could understate 1990 demand by as much as one quarter.
Supply side estimates ignore long term changes in land and construction costs and in consequence probably overestimate the long run level of effective demand.
Thus the omission of economic factors leads to a divergence of demand estimates between builders and regions thus increasing the potential for unnecessary conflict.
Maclennan is more optimistic about improvements in forecasting than the Coopers and Lybrand team, partly because Scotland has a unique source of house price information (known as the Register of Sasines).
Nevertheless, speedy results cannot be expected, since much research remains to be done.
A promising route is indicated by work undertaken at the Policy Studies Institute on the complex relationships between household formation and total population.
GREEN BELTS
The policy of maintaining an adequate supply of land for housing can be difficult to reconcile with policies relating to green belts and the safeguarding of agricultural land.
Though 1987 saw a major policy shift on the latter (which is discussed below), green belts have, for a variety of reasons, remained a strong policy for both central and local government, as well, of course , for the environmental lobby.
A wealth of material is now available in the report of the House of Commons Environment Committee and in Martin Elson's detailed study.
Green belt policy emerged in 1955 after the expression of considerable concern (for example, by the TCPA) at the implications for urban growth of the expanded housebuilding programme.
Unusually, the policy can be identified with a particular minister: Duncan Sandys (who later made another contribution to planning with the promotion of the Civic Trust and the Civic Amenities Act).
Sandys' personal  commitment involved disagreement with his senior civil servants who advised against it on the grounds that it would arouse opposition from the urban local authorities and private developers who would be forced to seek sites beyond the green belt.
Experience with the Town Development Act (which provided for negotiated schemes of ‘overspill’ from congested urban areas to towns wishing to expand) did not suggest that it would be easy to find sufficient sites.
Sandys, however, was adamant:
I am convinced that, for the well-being of our people and for the preservation of the countryside, we have a clear duty to do all we can to prevent the further unrestricted sprawl of the great cities.
The development plans submitted by the local planning authorities for the Home Counties provide for a green belt, some 7 to 10 miles deep, all around the built-up area of Greater London.
Apart from some limited rounding-off of existing small towns and villages, no further urban expansion is to be allowed within this belt…
In other parts of the country, certain planning authorities are endeavouring, by administrative action, to restrict further building development around the large urban areas.
But I regret that nowhere has any formal green belt as yet been proposed.
I am accordingly asking all planning authorities concerned to give this matter further consideration, with a view to submitting proposals for the creation of clearly defined green belts, wherever this is appropriate.
The circular asked local planning authorities to consider the formal designation of clearly defined green belts wherever this was desirable in order:
(1)
to check the physical growth of a large built-up area;
(2)
to prevent neighbouring towns from merging into one another;
(3)
to preserve the special character of a town.
The policy had widespread appeal, not only to county councils who now had another weapon in their armoury to fight expansionist urban authorities, but also more widely.
One planning officer commented that ‘probably no planning circular and all that it implies has ever been so popular with the public.
The idea has caught on and is supported by people of all shades of interest’.
Another noted that ‘the very expression ‘green belt’ sounds like something an ordinary man may find it worthwhile to be interested in who may find no appeal whatever in ‘the distribution of industrial population’or ‘decentralisation’…
Green belt has a natural faculty for engendering support.’
The green belt also formed a tangible focal point for what we now  call the environmental lobby.
However, initially, its biggest support came from the planning profession which in those days still saw planning in terms of tidy spatial ordering of land uses.
Desmond Heap, in his 1955 presidential address to the (then) Town Planning Institute went so far as to declare that the preservation of Green belts was ‘the very raison d'etre of town and country planning’.
Their popularity, however, has not made it any easier to reconcile conservation and development.
The land availability studies are an attempt to do precisely this.
Just how difficult the reconciliation can be is seen by the conflicts created by the draft (and redrafted) 1984 circulars on Green Belts and Land for Housing .
The story is set out in Elson's book but, in brief, there was widespread concern that the government was intending to relax the green belt policy.
The Environment Committee, however, saw these circulars as being ‘complementary and interdependent’: ‘the one, the Green Belt circular, attempts to reinforce presumptions against development in certain areas, The other, the Land for Housing circular, attempts to encourage development in remaining areas other than national parks, areas of outstanding natural beauty…’
Thus the circle is squared!
There was much argument on semantics here, and the DoE responded to the Environment Committee's report in part by changing the terms, but not the substance, of the draft circulars.
(In particular it was emphasised that the protection of green belts ‘must be maintained as far ahead as can be seen.’
But this left unresolved an issue about the location of most new housing.
A 1980 circular (reproduced as an annexe to the Land for Housing circular) stated that ‘the bulk of future development must take place both by rebuilding within existing towns and by expanding the towns within the limits of employment of local community capacity, e.g. infrastructure and social facilities’.
But in the main part of the Land for Housing circular it was stated that ‘while the fullest possible use must be made of existing urban sites suitable for housing, most new housing will continue to be on the new sites.
The planning system must continue to identify, bring forward and permit the development of sufficient new land for housing, taking account of market demand and other housing requirements.’
Nevertheless, the significant outcome of this war of words was an acclamation of the green belt policy.
The green belt policy commands even wider support today than it did in the 1950s.
Elson concludes his study with the reason why this is so:
It acts to foster rather than hinder the material and non-material interests of most groups involved in the planning process, although it may be to the short term tactical advantage of some not to recognise  the fact.
To central government it assists in the essential tasks on interest mediation and compromise which planning policy-making represents…
To local government it delivers a desirable mix of policy control with discretion.
To local residents of the outer city it remains their best form of protection against rapid change.
To the inner city local authority it offers at least the promise of retaining some economic activities that would otherwise leave the area; and to the inner city resident it offers the prospect, as well as often the reality, of countryside recreation and relaxation.
To the agriculturist it offers a basic form of protection against urban influences, and for the minerals industry it retains accessible, cheap, and exploitable natural resources.
Industrial developers and housebuilders complain bitterly about the rate at which land is fed into the development pipeline, yet at the same time are dependent on planning to provide a degree of certainty and support for profitable investment.
Planning may be an attempt to reconcile the irreconcilable but green belt is one of the most successful all-purpose tools invented with which to try.
DEVELOPMENT INVOLVING AGRICULTURAL LAND
The ‘loss’ of agricultural land has been an issue of debate throughout the postwar period.
It is also one on which there is considerable ignorance.
The Joint Land Requirements Committee carried out an interesting public survey which showed that very few people (8 per cent) have even a broadly correct impression of the actual proportion, and a third perceived the proportion to be ten times greater than it is.
The valiant work of the late Robin Best has failed to dispel popular images, yet his figures showed that the annual average transfer of agricultural land to urban land use in England and Wales was only 9,300 hectares between 1975 and 1980 (compared with 17,500 between 1945 and 1950, and 25,100 between 1931 and 1939).
The total urban area is about 1,640,000 hectares: about 11 per cent of the total.
Nevertheless, concern about the loss of agricultural land has had a major impact on development plans, on planning decisions, and on appeal decisions.
This stems partly from local resistance to change, and partly from the postwar approach to agricultural policy.
The decision was taken to develop a strong and healthy agricultural sector.
The 1947 Agriculture Act demanded ‘a stable and efficient industry, capable of providing such part of the nation's food as in the national interest it is desirable to produce’.
That policy has not changed, despite the transformation of the situation, characterised by wasteful and costly surpluses.
The 1976 DoE circular on the safeguarding of agricultural land defined the general policy as being ‘to ensure that, as far as possible, land of a higher agricultural quality is not taken for development where land of a lower quality is available, and that the amount of land taken should be no greater than is reasonably required for carrying out the development in accordance with proper standards’.
This was based on the 1975 white paper which proposed a significant increase in home food production to reduce dependence on imports which had risen sharply in cost.
It also drew a graphic picture of the continuing loss of agricultural land, estimated at 144,000 acres a year, which if continued ‘would imply a substantial reduction in the available agricultural land’.
Times have changed, and a 1987 draft circular notes that ‘at present, by contrast, there are substantial surpluses of the main agricultural products in western countries.
The need now is to foster the diversification of the rural economy so as to open up wider and more varied employment opportunities.’
The circular continues:
The agricultural quality of the land and the need to control the rate at which land is taken for development are among the factors to be considered [in assessing planning applications affecting agricultural land], together with the need to facilitate development and economic activity that provides jobs, and the continuing need to protect the countryside for its own sake rather than primarily for the productive value of the land.
The circular is a mere twelve paragraphs long, but it represents a dramatic change in policy.
There is a clear message from Marsham Street that ‘the government intends to shift the balance away from the encouragement of agricultural productivity, and give full weight to the environment and economic implications of rural development’.
Such a short statement for such a large change of policy does, however, raise some questions of political aptitude.
Be that as it may, there seems no question that change is on its way.
This is further underlined by several initiatives of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF).
First, the Agriculture Act 1986 places a duty on the Minister of Agriculture to:
have regard to and endeavour to achieve a reasonable balance between the following considerations —
(a)
the promotion and maintenance of a stable and efficient agricultural industry;
(b)
the economic and social interests of rural areas;
(c)
the conservation and enhancement of the natural beauty and amenity of the countryside (including its flora and fauna and geological and physiographical features) and of any features of archaeological interest there; and 
(d)
the promotion of the enjoyment of the countryside by the public.
Second, the same act makes provision for ‘environmentally sensitive areas’(ESAs) where annual grants are payable by this ministry to farmers to enable them to follow farming practices which will achieve conservation objectives.
The first ESAs designated are in the Pennine Dales, West Penwith (Cornwall), the South Downs, the Broads, the Somerset Levels and Moors, and in Scotland, Breadalbane (in the Grampian Mountains) and Loch Lomond.
Third, with a remarkable degree of inter-agency co-operation, the ‘Farm and Countryside Initiative’(F&CI) has been launched by the MAFF in collaboration with the DoE, the Manpower Services Commission, the Development Commission, the Countryside Commission, the Nature Conservancy Council and the Agricultural Training Board.
The F&CI utilises the ‘Community Programme’ of the Manpower Services Commission (which provides jobs for long-term unemployed people on projects of benefit to the community) for rural development.
This includes a very wide range of possibilities, including developing nature trails, provision of local amenities, reinstatement of neglected woodlands and provision of facilities for development of small starter businesses.
The scheme operates alongside many others designed to assist in the improvement of the rural economy, particularly in the face of changes in agriculture.
A 1987 report of the Agricultural Economic Development Committee concludes that there will have to be relatively rapid reductions in the number of people employed in agriculture, and that therefore farmers will need to develop new rural enterprises which will provide new employment, while at the same time meeting the demands of the public for greater access, recreation and conservation.
Fourth, new policies were announced by the MAFF in early 1977 for ‘alternative land use, diversification and the environment’.
These include a scheme to encourage the development of farm woodlands to take land out of agricultural production (an extension of an existing forestry grant scheme); an expansion of the forestry programme ‘with particularly emphasis on the private sector and with due regard to environmental considerations’; an increase in the designation of ESAs; and encouragement of the diversification of enterprise on farms by grants for ancillary businesses on or adjacent to farms.
VACANT PUBLIC LAND
There has been increasing concern expressed in recent years over the amount of unused, vacant, derelict or dormant urban land (a variety of terms is used, typically with little precision).
With the growing emphasis  on inner city renewal, attempts have been made to explore how far such land can be brought into productive use.
Concern for this issue stems from a range of different interests, from allotments to aesthetics.
Yet the extent and character of ‘urban wasteland’(to use a Civic Trust term) is unknown.
Indeed, there is even less available information than in the case of derelict land (discussed in Chapter 6).
Several case studies were carried out in the 1970s, of which the Liverpool Inner Area Study (1975) is of particular interest.
Covering 509 hectares immediately to the east of the city centre, 56 hectares (11 per cent) were found to be vacant (excluding land in temporary use).
Only six per cent of the vacant land had been landscaped and maintained.
The most striking finding was that more than three-quarters of the vacant land was owned by Liverpool City Council, being reserved chiefly for housing, highways, open spaces and schools.
Half the vacant land in the study area had been empty for at least two years and, on the likely level of public and private resources, the consultants predicted that three-quarters would still be vacant in 1980, five years after their survey.
A national sample survey carried out by local amenity societies for the Civic Trust in 1976 revealed that, of 279 vacant sites, a third were owned by a local authority, and a further tenth by other public bodies.
The 1977 white paper Policy for the Inner Cities dealt with several aspects of vacant land, while the Inner Urban Areas Act 1978 widened the concept of dereliction and provided for grant aid in certain areas.
Significantly (in view of the stronger actions of the subsequent Conservative government) public authorities were asked ‘to furnish schedules of void sites within the partnership authorities with a view to establishing what could be done to accelerate the development or redevelopment of non-operational sites’.
Similarly, a study group of the Association of Municipal Authorities proposed that records of void and under-occupied land and property should be held by all public sector bodies.
The information would be formally reported to an appropriate service committee or board, along with a progress report briefly showing land and property brought back into use each year.
The public sector would then be required to justify the retention of land held for projects not included in approved programmes and underdeveloped land or property before an independent adjudicator.
REGISTERS OF UNUSED PUBLIC LAND
The 1980 Local Government, Planning and Land Act went further.
It provides that the secretary of state may designate an area where he may ‘compile and maintain a register, of land…owned by a public  body’ which, in his opinion, ‘is not being used or not being sufficiently used’.
Owners of land so registered can be directed by the secretary of state to dispose of it.
The two objectives of land registers are to encourage the disposal of unused or under-used land in public ownership and to provide information for potential purchasers.
These provisions relate to England (where all local authority areas have been designated) and to Wales (where there are six designated areas).
There is no provision for registers in Scotland.
The secretary of state has stressed that:
The publication of land registers for the greater part of the country represents a major opportunity to secure the better use of massive acreages of underused land.
Given the resources also available for dealing with dereliction, it is important that action should be taken to dispose of the land to the best advantage as soon as possible…
It is up to builders and developers to examine registers and seek out the owners to make an offer for any sale in which they are interested.
It is probably too early to judge whether this exercise is worthwhile.
Previous research, though on a small scale, suggests that land vacancy is typically a transient feature of the environment.
However, Howes' study shows that
there has been an increasing acceptance that the government has improved the public sector's own awareness of its stock of unused land which has, in part, been identified through the land register scheme.
This is now leading to an increase in the availability of public sector land for development by the private sector, which is complemented by policies providing financial incentives such as Derelict Land Grant and the Urban Development Grant.
It will now be for the developers, the financial institutions and others in the private sector to use their expertise and to play a major role in realising the full potential of available unused public sector land.
JOINT VENTURE SCHEMES
One other plank of current land policy is the promotion of ‘joint venture schemes’ involving private development on local authority owned land.
There have been many successful partnerships for town centre development (for example Eldon Square, Newcastle and the Arndale Shopping Centre in Manchester).
A report of the Property Advisory Group outlines The Climate for Public and Private Partnerships in Property Development .
This, in fact, is a very slim document, of a mere seven pages, explicitly reporting ‘what is already  familiar to many people’.
Thus, ‘in their simplest form partnerships have involved a local authority leasing land on ground rental terms to a private developer who has designed, financed, built and managed the completed project, any community benefits passing to the local authority’.
Marketability is the crucial test; but in the decaying inner cities something more is needed.
Here the report is less sure-footed:
In the rundown areas of inner cities which are unattractive to developers and other entrepreneurs it will often be only possible to stimulate business activity by an injection of public funds.
on criteria which are initially non-commercial.
Because of the shortage of such funds, it is essential to arrive at methods for their use that ensure that as far as possible:
(1)
they become the high-risk seed money that could lead to the investment of private funds on a commercial basis; and
(2)
they create an environment to which developers.
institutions and other businesses will return.
With uncertain optimism, the report concludes that ‘if this were to be achieved, we consider that prosperity, once created, could spread in the same way as blight has done in the past’.
However, some remarkable schemes of renewal of run down estates and even blocks of flats have been undertaken.
One of the first, and very ambitious, was at Stockbridge Village, formerly Cantril Farm estate, Knowsley.
After a visit by the secretary of state to the estate in 1982, a trust was set up with backing from the local authority (Knowsley), the Abbey National Building Society and Barclays Bank.
Public sector funding came from the urban programme (£11 million) and from the Housing Corporation (£11.5 million).
Private sector funding amounted to £21 million.
The estate (village) was completely refurbished.
In this particular case, the tenants had security of tenure as well as the opportunity to purchase their homes under the heavily subsidised right-to-buy scheme.
There have been many other schemes where vandalised and derelict estates have been transferred to the private sector for sale as luxury housing.
Not surprisingly there is more than one school of thought about the rightness of this.
LAND AUTHORITY FOR WALES
A surprising anomaly in the institutional arrangements for land policy is the survival of the Land Authority for Wales (LAW), an ad hoc body originally established under the Community Land Act.
This provides precisely what is missing from the English scene: a body with a long  term and wide-ranging view of the land situation complete with powers to act positively in order to solve land availability problems.
The LAW's main function is ‘to make development land available as quickly as possible where the private sector finds it difficult to complete transactions’.
It can also acquire land (compulsorily, if necessary).
Its main priority is ‘to make land available for house building in the private sector, but it also provides land for a wide range of commercial development’
Grant has commented that this represents ‘the clearest and least restrictive legislation authorisation for positive planning that now exists’.
He also explains why LAW exists:
Two factors in particular contributed to the authority's success…and prevented their abolition.
First, they are a single purpose authority, and, unlike the local planning authorities of England and Scotland, were able, and indeed required, to pursue positive planning as their first priority.
Second, the authority are not themselves a planning authority.
They operate within the confines of the planning policies administered by the Welsh local planning authorities, and, where their planning applications are refused they have the usual right of appeal to the Secretary of State for Wales.
They have managed therefore to avoid the suspicion of conflict of interest which has often attached to the positive planning efforts of local planning authorities.
In practice they have also assisted Welsh local authorities in land availability studies and with advice on land disposal for development.
The authority has a rolling programme (for example,Strategy and Programme 1984–1989 ), and operates on a self-financing basis.
ENDNOTE: NEW STATISTICS ON LAND USE CHANGE
In 1986, the DoE produced a slim (eleven pages) Statistical Bulletin, Land Use Change in England.
This presents a new set of statistics relating to land use change, based on the first full year's data (1985) of a three-year trial project.
The statistics are presented in a highly summarised form which it is not possible to further summarise.
There are three tables.
The first shows, for 1985, ‘net decreases in agricultural land, in forestry and in vacant land, while land in residential use, outdoor recreation, transportation and utilities increased’.
The second table records changes to and from residential use.
‘About 45 per cent of land developed for residential use was developed, including land already used for housing purposes, or was vacant land in built-up areas.
The other 55 per cent was mainly previously in agricultural use.’
The third table records the previous uses of land changing to residential use in each of the English regions.
‘Across the regions, the proportion of land developed for residential use that had been previously developed or was vacant land in built-up areas varied between 33 per cent in the south west to 52 per cent in the south east, and 58 per cent in the north west.’
It is to be hoped that later publications in this new series will be fuller, with more detailed commentary.
Will the Scottish and Welsh Offices now follow DoE's lead?
6
Chapter 6 PLANNING AND THE ENVIRONMENT
As we approach the last years of the 20th century, environmental damage to the earth, air and water threaten the basic resources on which we depend.’
Stanley Clinton Davis, European Commissioner for the Environment, 1987
AMENITY
‘Amenity’ is one of the key concepts in British town and country planning, yet nowhere in the legislation is it defined.
The legislation merely states that ‘if it appears to a local planning authority that it is expedient in the interests of amenity’, it may take certain action, in relation, for example, to unsightly neglected waste land or to the preservation of trees.
It is also one of the factors that may need to be taken into account in controlling advertisements and in determining whether a discontinuance order should be made.
It is a term widely used in planning refusals and appeals; indeed the phrase ‘injurious to the interests of amenity’ has become part of the stock-in-trade jargon of the planning world.
But like the proverbial elephant, amenity is easier to recognise than to define, with the important difference that, though all would be agreed that an elephant is such, there is considerable scope for disagreement on the degree and importance of amenities: which amenities should be preserved, in what way they should be preserved and how much expense (public or private) is justified.
The problem is relatively straightforward in so far as trees are concerned.
It is much more acute in connection with electricity pylons, yet the Central Electricity Generating Board is specifically charged not only with maintaining an efficient and co-ordinated supply of electricity but also with the preservation of amenity.
Here the question is not merely one of sensitivity but also of the enormous additional cost of preserving amenities by placing cables underground.
Apart from problems of cost, there is the problem of determining how much control the public will accept.
Poor architecture, ill-conceived schemes, mock-Tudor frontages may upset the planning officer, but how much regulation of this type of ‘amenity-injury’ will be publicly acceptable?
And how far can negative controls succeed in raising public standards?
Here emphasis has been laid on design bulletins, design awards and such ventures as those of the Civic Trust, a body whose object is ‘to promote beauty and fight ugliness in town village and countryside’.
Nevertheless, local authorities have power not only to prevent developments which would clash with amenity (for example, the siting of a repair garage in a residential area) but also to reject badly designed developments which are not intrinsically harmful.
Indeed, outline planning permission for a proposal is often given on the condition that detailed plans and appearances meet the approval of the authority.
Unfortunately, many ‘bad’ designs are allowed to go ahead, even when strongly criticised by the Royal Fine Art Commission.
Since the 1950s there has been a marked sharpening of interest in amenity, caused partly by the rapid rate of development, and an awareness of the inadequacy of the planning system automatically to preserve and enhance amenity.
The Transport Act of 1968, for instance, enables the use of a road by vehicles to be prohibited on amenity grounds for certain periods of the day.
Perhaps the most striking provision is to be found in the Countryside (Scotland) Act 1967 and the Countryside Act 1968 which requires every minister government department and public body to have regard to the desirability of conserving the natural beauty and amenity of the countryside in all their functions relating to land.
Lawyers may rightly point out that this does not constitute, of itself, an effective restriction on any statutory power or discretion, but it is an important statement of policy, and one which the statutory and voluntary guardians of amenity will seize upon whenever it is infringed.
There is more to planning than law.
CONSERVATION
Britain has a remarkable wealth of historic buildings, but changing economic and social conditions often turn this legacy into a liability.
The cost of maintenance, the financial attractions of redevelopment the need for urban renewal, the roads programme and similar factors often threaten buildings which are of architectural or historic interest.
This is a field in which voluntary organisations have been particularly active — as witness the work of the National Trust, the Ancient Monuments Society, the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings, the Victorian Society and others.
As is often the case voluntary effort preceded state action.
The Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings was founded in 1877.
The National Trust (or to use its full name, the National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty) was founded in 1895.
Though the first state action came in 1882 with the Ancient Monuments Act, this was important chiefly because it acknowledged the interest of the state in the preservation of ancient monuments.
Such preservation as was achieved  under this Act (and similar Acts passed in the following thirty years) resulted from the goodwill and co-operation of private owners.
It was not until 1913 that powers were provided to compulsorily prevent the damage or destruction of monuments.
ENGLISH HERITAGE (THE HBMC)
Provisions relating to ancient monuments have been amended several times, the latest being 1983 when the National Heritage Act was passed.
Among other things, this established the Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England (HBMC) which has taken over many of the functions formerly carried out directly by the DoE.
(It is usually referred to as ‘English Heritage’.)
The government's objectives in setting up this new body were:
1
to reduce the functions carried out by government departments where those functions could be more effectively carried out elsewhere;
2
to create a single and single-minded body which could be a powerful voice for conservation;
3
to apply an imaginative approach to the presentation and commercial management of this part of the heritage;
4
to tap the abundant goodwill in the heritage field, through private donations and through voluntary assistance.
The commission's functions include:
1
making grants to individuals and bodies in respect of historic buildings, conservation areas, town schemes, ancient monuments and for archaeological investigation (‘rescue archaeology’);
2
acquiring or becoming guardian of ancient monuments and historic buildings;
3
advising the secretary of state on the selection of buildings for inclusion in the list of buildings of special architectural or historic interest, on the monuments to be added to the schedule of monuments of national importance, and on the designation of areas of archaeological importance;
4
advising the secretary of state on applications for permission to carry out works to listed buildings and to scheduled monuments;
5
carrying out, or contributing towards the cost of, research in relation to ancient monuments, historic buildings and conservation areas in England;
6
undertaking archaeological investigation and publishing the results;
7
providing educational facilities and services, instruction and  information to the public in relation to ancient monuments, historic buildings and conservation areas in England;
8
making and maintaining records in relation to ancient monuments and historic buildings in England;
9
advising any person in relation to ancient monuments, historic buildings and conservation in England.
Additionally, following the abolition of the GLC the HBMC has assumed all the special powers previously operated by the council's Historic Buildings Division.
This gives the commission powers in London that it does not have for the rest of the country, where listed building controls are exercised only by district councils or the secretary of state.
The commission is advised by the Ancient Monuments Advisory Committee and the Historic Buildings Advisory Councils which take over the role previously exercised by the Ancient Monuments Board for England and the Historic Buildings Council for England.
The Scottish and Welsh equivalents are the Historic Buildings and Monuments Directorate of the Scottish Development Department, and CADW (Welsh Historic Monuments) with advice from an Ancient Monuments Board and an Historic Buildings Council for each country.
(Confusingly there is a National Heritage (Scotland) Act, but this deals almost entirely with urban museums and botanic gardens.)
ANCIENT MONUMENTS
The term ‘ancient monument’ is defined very widely in the 1913 Act, and it is defined even more widely in the Act of 1979.
An ancient monument is ‘any scheduled monument’ and ‘any other monument which in the opinion of the secretary of state is of public interest by reason of the historic, architectural, traditional, artistic or archaeological interest attaching to it’.
This is so broad a definition that it could include almost any building, structure, or site of archaeological interest made or occupied by man at any time.
The legislation requires the secretary of state to prepare a schedule of monuments which appear to him to be ‘of national importance’.
In this he is advised by English Heritage and the Ancient Monuments Boards for Scotland and Wales.
This ‘scheduling’ is a selective and continuing process.
It has been in operation for 100 years and is proceeding at a very slow rate.
During the year 1976, 452 monuments were scheduled: since then the annual number scheduled has fallen to 46 in 1984 and 74 in 1985.
There are 635,000 known archaeological sites and monuments in England, of which only two per cent(12,860) are scheduled.
This ‘wasting asset’ has received much criticism, and the Environment  Committee, in its 1987 report, recommended that resources be provided ‘forthwith’for a speeding up of the programme.
It is estimated that 60,000 sites are worthy of scheduling.
The fact that a monument is scheduled does not mean that it will automatically be preserved under all circumstances.
It simply ensures that full consideration is given to the case for preservation if any proposal is made which will affect it.
Any works have to be approved by the secretary of state.
Such approval is known as ‘scheduled monument consent’.
Where consent is refused, compensation is payable (under certain limited circumstances) if the owner thereby suffers loss.
In practice, the great majority of applications for consent are approved, often with conditions attached.
‘The department and HBMC have endeavoured to balance the need to protect the heritage with the needs, aspirations or duties of farmers, developers, statutory undertakers and other landowners.
In 1984, 605 applications were received, but only nine refusals were issued.’
The legislation also empowers the secretary of state to acquire compulsorily any ancient monument ‘for the purpose of securing its preservation’.
(Note that this power applies to any ancient monument, not solely those which have been scheduled.)
The ‘archaeological areas’ in the title of the 1979 Act represented a new concept.
Such areas, designated by the secretary of state, are ‘areas of archaeological importance’.
No further definition is provided.
The objective is to provide facilities for the investigation and recording of archaeological remains prior to development.
This is known as ‘rescue archaeology’, and was the subject of much discussion before the bill was drafted.
’ In 1984, the secretary of state designated the historic areas of five cities: Canterbury, Chester, Exeter, Hereford and York.
In a designated area, development is subject to detailed control and is allowed only on the approval by the local authority of an ‘operations notice’.
Both the secretary of state and any local authority can give financial assistance for archaeological investigation.
Grants are also available under the Historic Buildings and Ancient Monuments Act 1953, for the preservation of ‘buildings of outstanding historic or architectural interest’, and of their contents and adjoining land.
There is also power to purchase such buildings or accept them as gifts, sometimes in lieu of taxes.
The 1953 Act was passed primarily to deal with the problems of preserving houses or buildings which were inhabited or ‘capable of occupation’— these were not covered by the earlier legislation.
The commission manages some 400 monuments on behalf of the secretary of state.
These are of great historical, archaeological and architectural significance.
A very high proportion are of great antiquity, including prehistoric field monuments such as Maiden Castle, prehistoric structures such as Stonehenge, Roman monuments, such as Wroxeter and parts of Hadrian's Wall, and a large number of medieval buildings.
These are mostly of two kinds, first the great abbeys abandoned at the Dissolution, including Rievaulx, Furness and Leiston, and second, castles ranging from Dover in the south, Kenilworth in the midlands, to Norham in the north.
A number of post-medieval monuments are also in care, some are great houses, either roofed — Audley End — or ruinous — Sutton Scarsdale; some are industrial, such as Stott Park Bobbin Mill.
From 1 April 1986 the list of important houses was augmented by the addition of Osborne, formerly managed by the Department of the Environment, and Kenwood, Marble Hill and Rangers House from the Greater London Council.
About 360 monuments are open to the public, ranging from substantial structures such as the examples quoted to simple field monuments and standing stones.
LISTED BUILDINGS
Under planning legislation, the central departments maintain lists of buildings of ‘special architectural or historic interest’.
There are two objectives here.
First, ‘listing’ is intended to provide guidance to local planning authorities in carrying out their planning functions.
For example, in planning redevelopment, local authorities will take into account listed buildings in the area.
Dwellings may be preserved with the aid not only of grants from the HBMC but also with house improvement grants available under the Housing Acts.’
Secondly, and more directly effective, when a building is listed, no demolition or  alteration which would materially alter it can be undertaken by the owner without the approval of the local authority.
This is technically termed ‘listed building consent’.
Applications for listed building consent have to be advertised, and any representation must be taken into account by the local authority before it reaches its decision.
Where demolition is involved the local authority has to notify the HBMC, the appropriate local amenity society, and a number of other bodies, namely, the Ancient Monuments Society, the Council for British Archaeology, the Georgian Group, the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings, and the Victorian Society.
Again any representations have to be taken into account when the application is being considered.
If listed building consent is given to demolish a building, either wholly or in part, the Royal Commission on Ancient Monuments has to be notified so that it has the opportunity to make a record of it.
If, after all this, the local authority is ‘disposed to grant consent’ for the demolition (and, in certain cases, the alteration) of a listed building, it has to refer the application to the secretary of state so that he can decide whether to ‘call in’the proposal and deal with it himself.
All these provisions apply to listed buildings (of which in 1985 there were 380,000 in England, 33,000 in Scotland, and 10,600 in Wales) but the secretary of state has power to list a building at any time, and local authorities can serve a ‘building preservation notice’ on an unlisted building; this has the effect of protecting the building for six months, thus giving time for considering whether or not it should be listed.
With a listed building the presumption is in favour of preservation.
Indeed, listing is in essence a collective preservation order.
It is an offence to demolish or to alter a listed building unless listed building consent has been obtained.
This is different from the general position in relation to planning permission where an offence arises only after the enforcement procedure has been invoked.
Fines for illegal works to listed buildings are related to the financial benefit expected by the offender.
The legislation also provides a deterrent against deliberate neglect of historic buildings.
This was one way in which astute owners could circumvent the earlier statutory provisions; a building could be neglected to such an extent that demolition was unavoidable, thus giving the owner the possibility of reaping the development value of the site.
In such cases the local authority can now compulsorily acquire the building at a low price, technically known as ‘minimum compensation’.
If the secretary of state approves, the compensation is assessed on the assumption that neither planning permission nor listed building consent would be given for any works to the building except for those for restoring it to, and maintaining it in, a proper state of repair; in short, all development value is excluded.
The strength of these powers (and others not detailed here) reflect the concern which is felt at the loss of historic buildings.
They are not, however, all of this penal nature.
Indeed, ministerial guidance has emphasised the need for a positive and comprehensive approach.
(Grants are available under the Local Authorities (Historic Buildings) Act 1962, the Historic Buildings and Ancient Monuments Act 1953, the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979, the Housing Acts and the National Heritage Act 1980.)
Local authorities can also purchase properties by agreement, possibly with Exchequer aid under the 1953 Act.
Furthermore, an owner of a building who is refused listed building consent can, in certain circumstances, serve a notice on the local authority requiring it to purchase the property.
This is known as a ‘listed building purchase notice’.
The issue to be decided here is whether the land has become ‘incapable of reasonably beneficial use’.
It is not sufficient to show that it is of less use to the owner in its present state than if developed.
More important is the emphasis on areas, as distinct from individual buildings, of architectural or historic interest.
This was introduced by the Civic Amenities Act 1967 (promoted as a private member's Bill by Duncan Sandys, President of the Civic Trust, and passed with government backing).
This gave statutory recognition for the first time to the area concept, and made it a duty of local planning authorities ‘to determine which parts of their areas are areas of special architectural or historic interest, the character of which it is desirable to preserve or enhance’ and to designate such areas as conservation areas'.
When a conservation area has been designated, the Act requires special attention to be paid in all planning decisions to the preservation or enhancement of the area's character and appearance.
The 1974 Town and Country Amenities Act extended the powers of local authorities in dealing with conservation areas and the preservation of historic buildings.
In particular, it brought the demolition of most historic buildings in conservation areas under control.
In 1985 there were over 5,500 conservation areas in England, ranging from the whole of the centres of such historic sites as Chester to small rural villages.
CRITERIA FOR LISTING HISTORIC BUILDINGS
Criteria for listing historic buildings are divided into four groups:
1
All buildings built before 1700 which survive in anything like their original condition are listed;
2
Most buildings of 1700 to 1840, though selection is necessary
3
Buildings of definite quality and character built between 1840 and 1914, including those designed by the principal architects;
4
A limited number of buildings of high quality designed between 1914 and 1939.
In choosing buildings, particular attention is paid to their special value within certain types, either for architectural or planning reasons or as illustrating social and economic history; technological innovation or virtuosity (for instance, cast-iron prefabrication or the early use of concrete); and association with well-known characters or events: and group value, especially as examples of town planning (for instance , squares, terraces or model villages).
The buildings are classified in grades to show their relative importance as follows:
1
Grade I: buildings of exceptional interest.
(They number about 6,000, about 1.5 per cent of all listed buildings.);
2
Grade II*: particularly important buildings of more than special interest.
(They number about 20,000 — some 5 per cent of the total.);
3
Grade II: buildings of special interest which warrant every effort being made to preserve them.
(They number about 400,000.);
4
Grade III: this was a non-statutory and now obsolete grade.
Grade III buildings were those which, whilst not qualifying for the first statutory list when compiled in 1949–69, were considered nevertheless to be of some importance for planning purposes.
Many of these buildings are now considered to be of special interest by current standards — particularly where they possess ‘group value’— and are being added to the statutory lists as these are revised.
There has been considerable criticism of the rigid cut-off date (which does not apply in Scotland, where all buildings over thirty years old are eligible for listing).
This Scottish practice was recommended by the Environment Committee, and appears to have found favour with the government.
The rule is expected to come into force in 1988 when post-1939 buildings will become eligible for the first time.
Additionally, in very exceptional circumstances, buildings which are at least ten years old will be listed if they are of outstanding quality.
CHURCHES
The situation regarding ‘ecclesiastical buildings’ is complicated, and new provisions were introduced by the 1986 Housing and Planning Bill.
The complexities can be examined by the interested reader in the Environment Committee's report.’
By way of background, it is worth noting that the Church of England owns 16,700 churches, of which no less than 8,500 are  pre-Reformation, and 12,000 are statutorily listed (2,675 in the highest grade).
The Church introduced measures to control demolition over seven hundred years ago, and has been regularly inspecting churches for three hundred years.
It spends at least £55 million a year on the upkeep and maintenance of its buildings (mainly funded by its congregations) compared with about £4 million which comes through state aid.
The result is that ‘a listed Church of England church has a chance of avoiding demolition nearly three times better than a listed secular building’.
There are two parallel statutory systems of control over Church of England churches: the Church's system, and the secular system.
The Church's system is much stricter and more comprehensive.
It involves regular inspection of every church, and embraces not only the fabric of the buildings but their contents and churchyards.
There are two separate statutory procedures applying to parish churches (whether listed or unlisted), according to whether they are in use or redundant.
Safeguards for churches in use are provided by the Inspection of Churches Measure (approved by Parliament in 1955).
There is an elaborate system of inspecting and reporting at the local level, and monitoring at the national level by the Council for the Care of Churches, and at diocesan level by Diocesan Advisory Committees.
Redundant churches are safeguarded by the Pastoral Measure 1983 which provides procedures for deciding whether a church is still required for worship, and, if not, what the future of the building should be.
All church buildings are subject to normal planning control over, for example, changes of use and significant alterations.
They are also listed in exactly the same way as other buildings of special historic or architectural interest.
However, because of the Church's separate statutory procedure, listed building consent is not required for churches in use.
Such consent is required, however, for alterations to redundant churches but not if demolition is carried out pursuant to a scheme under the Pastoral Measure.
Under an agreement with the secretary of state, the Church Commissioners do not proceed with the demolition of a listed redundant church or an unlisted one in a conservation area without providing the opportunity for the secretary of state to hold a non-statutory public inquiry.
The findings and the secretary of state's views are taken into account by the Commissioners.
In evidence to the Environment Committee in 1986 the following report was given on the record of the Church Commissioners over the previous seventeen years, during which the future of 1,053 redundant churches was decided.
Three-quarters are still standing.
Over half of them (583) have been  found new uses, often for the benefit of the wider community.
200 have been placed in the care of the Redundant Churches Fund jointly financed by Church and State.
266 which did not merit preservation by the fund have been demolished, hut in most cases without controversy.
62 of the 266 were, it is true, listed buildings, but in only three of these cases did demolition proceed against the wish of the local planning authority; and in none of those cases did the Advisory Board object.
In only two cases was there a demolition against the advice of the Advisory Board; neither case involved a listed building and in neither was there objection from the planning authority.
But good though this record is, no system is perfect and accordingly the Church Commissioners and the Department of the Environment are now looking at ways in which the non-statutory public inquiries can be improved to become an even more effective forum for weighing all points of view in particularly difficult cases.
The outcomes of the report were new provisions in the Housing and Planning Act 1986.
Foremost among these is the agreement of the Church of England to accept greater consultation with the DoE provision for representation on Diocesan Advisory Committees by local planning authorities and national amenity societies, and the extension of listed building control to the partial demolition of non-Anglican churches.
NATIONAL HERITAGE MEMORIAL FUND
In 1946 a National Land Fund was established from the sale of war stores as a memorial to those who lost their lives during the war.
Some £50 million of Exchequer monies were allocated to the fund for use to assist organisations whose purpose was to promote appreciation and enjoyment of the countryside.
The money was used for the purchase by the secretary of state of buildings of outstanding architectural or historic interest, together with their contents.
The fund was raided by the Exchequer in 1957 and became moribund.
‘The folly of this was illustrated by the controversial sale of the assets of the Mentmore estate in 1977 which exposed the need for a fund which could exercise similar powers to those of the secretary of state, with sufficient resources, and without excessive central government control’.
This is what the National Heritage Act of 1980 does: ‘There shall be a fund known as the National Heritage Memorial Fund, to be a memorial to those who have died for the United Kingdom.’
In addition to normal Exchequer payments into the fund, further payments can be made in relation to property accepted in satisfaction of tax debts.
The fund is administered by the National Heritage Memorial Fund (NHMF).
It can make loans or grants for any property (in the widest sense of the term) which is ‘of importance to the national heritage’.
PRESERVATION OF TREES AND WOODLANDS
Trees are clearly, so far as town and country planning is concerned, a matter of amenity.
Indeed, the powers which local authorities have with regard to trees can be exercised only if it is ‘expedient in the interests of amenity’.
Where the local authority is satisfied that it is expedient, it can make a ‘tree preservation order’, applicable to trees, groups of trees, or woodlands.
Such an order can prohibit the cutting down, topping, or lopping of trees except with the consent of the local planning authority.
Mere preservation, however, can lead eventually to decay and thus defeats its object.
To prevent this, local authorities can make replanting obligatory when they give permission for trees to be felled.
The aim is to avoid any clash between good forestry and the claims of amenity.
But the timber of woodlands always has a claim to be treated as a commercial crop, and though the making of a tree preservation order does not necessarily involve the owner in any financial loss (isolated trees or groups of trees are usually planted expressly as an amenity), there are occasions when it does.
Yet though woodlands are primarily a timber crop from which the owner is entitled to benefit, two principles have been laid down which qualify this.
First, ‘the national interest demands that woodlands should be managed in accordance with the principles of good forestry’, and second, where they are of amenity value, the owner has ‘a public duty to act with reasonable regard for amenity aspects’.
It follows that a refusal to permit felling or the imposition of conditions on operations which are either contrary to the principles of good forestry or destructive of amenity ought not to carry any compensation rights.
But where there is a clash between these two principles compensation is payable.
Thus in a case where the ‘principles of good forestry’ dictate that felling should take place, and would result in too great a sacrifice of amenity, the owner can claim compensation for the loss which he suffers.
Normally a compromise is reached whereby the felling is deferred or phased.
The commercial felling of timber is subject to licence from the Forestry Commission, and special arrangements exist for consultation between the commission, the central department and the local planning authority.
Planning powers go considerably further than simply enabling local authorities to preserve trees.
The National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 enabled planning approvals to be given subject to the condition that trees are planted, and local authorities themselves have power to plant trees on any land in their area.
With the increasing  vulnerability of trees and woodlands to urban development and the needs of modern farming, wider powers and more Exchequer aid have been provided by successive statutes.
Local planning authorities are now required to ensure that conditions (preferably reinforced by tree preservation orders) are imposed for the protection of existing trees and for the planting of new ones.
Co-ordination of voluntary effort in relation to the promotion of tree planting and the protection of trees is effected through the Tree Council.
This is ‘a forum for some twenty-five national voluntary organisations and professional associations with a central aim to promote the conservation, planting and good maintenance of amenity trees and woodlands’.