

From:
Date: Mon, 2 Aug 1993 14:14:06 +0100 (BST)
Subject: Hibs Report
I was a bit bored this lunchtime, so I though I'd type in a bit of a report that I read in the Daily Mail about the Hibs game.
I missed out the boring bits about HiIbs by the way!!
‘NEW BOY DEANE SO QUICK OFF THE MARK’
A spectacular spot kick save by John Lukic denied Hibs a consolation goal in this one sided friendly.
Lukic had conceded the 80th min penalty when he pulled down Keith Wright after a mistake by Jon Newsome, one of United six second half subs.
Brian Deane had earlier claimed the first of what he hopes will be many goals for Leeds.
The towering striker put United 2–0 ahead in the 68th minute of a match they dominated for most of the time.
Both Deane & Rod Wallace had shots blocked before Deane swept the ball home.
Strachan who played only the first half engineered Leeds' first goal with a 29th min cross for Noel Whelan to head in at the near post.
Hibs manager Alex Miller said:
‘We were given a lesson on how to pass the ball.
Leeds’ possesion play was excellent, and I don't think that they will be far away from honours come the new season’
Miller went on to express his admiration for the depth of Leeds resources, saying ‘They started with 3 internationals in Midfield, then put on another three in the second half!!’
Howard Wilkinson declared himself satisfied with Leeds' pre-season progress so far, and was especially pleased that Deane had got his first goal.
‘I'm happy with him and I'm sure the public will be as well.
Brian leads the line well, and brings others into play as well which is important’
Team:—
Lukic, Kelly, Sharp, Whelan (Dorigo 85), Fairclough (Whetherall 46), O'Leary (Newsome 59), Strachan (Hodge 46), Wallace, Deane, McAllistair (Batty 46), Speed (Rocastle 46).
Sunil
From:
Date: Tue, 03 Aug 93 15:40:34 GMT
Subject: season start
Well fellow supporters the season is nearly upon us and hopefully it will bear fruit.
I feel a cup win this season but what I, d like to know is what does anybody think the score will be in our first game.
It'a away at Man City and considering the last two visits to Maine road where we let in 4 goals each game, Is there any chance of us winning this game? considering also that we didn't win any away games last season.
Any predictions?
Richard 
From:
Date: Wed, 4 Aug 93 15:50:35 BST
Subject: Re: Sums
OK Here is my attempt at a list of buying and sellings since Wilko took over in Sep/Oct 88
In.
Out (Not Including Frees & Non Renewed contracts — too many of them)
That's the best I can do — a deficit of 11M in 5 ys.
Affordable I suppose given recent success, gates, sponsorship, TV money etc.
But I doubt there's much left for this year.
From:
Date: Thu, 5 Aug 93 11:08 GMT
Subject: sums
Start (Norway)
He was definately bought from Witon Albion (non league), an Im sure for just 30k 
50K wasnt it?
Didnt we get Shutt PLUS cash in an echange deal for Bob Taylor?
Cost 100k 
Close enough!!:-)
Well this highlights my point I made in a previous message…how many of the above transfers out can you say we should have got more?
Remember this — most of the players were regular first team players, so, exxcluding the very first transfers, all the players were playing for the 2nd Div champions, or a top 4 team in the country.
I cant understand it…you cant even say all the players were past it.
The money IS there for this sort of defecit though…like any asset you get depreciation so you shouldnt expect to have a nil balance on ins and outs.
11M isnt that much over 5 years at all…but then you do have the day to day running costs and (eeek) wages…
Wilkos recent statements about having to sell players before he can buy is just the number of players he has…not that we havent got the money.
Mark 
From:
Date: Thu, 5 Aug 1993 10:18:47 +0000
Subject: Comments on Spending
It is worthwhile noting that Liverpool have spent a colossal amount rebuilding Anfield in addition to their outlay on linguistically-challenged scandinavian defenders.
Did anyone see in the papers that Shez is asking for a transfer from the Wednesday pigs on account of the pay he's getting.
All the buying they've been doing must be starting to hurt.
Any club that wants to get anywhere has two options:
1.
Develop a good youth setup which provides cheap talent
2.
Buy your way to success
Arsenal have done well with the former, Liverpool in the past took the latter path with great success.
Man U have used strategy 2 and 1 and most would say have underachieved.
Rangers have defined themselves by their success at (2).
Leeds have done well with (2) since ‘89 and have wisely pursued (1) in the last couple of years too.
But youth alone cannot buy what it takes to win honours.
Sunderland have tried this and failed dismally.
Eddie Gray tried it for us and look where it got him.
There's no denying it, if you don't spend a lot of cash, you go down.
Only Arsenal have bucked this trend.
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 5 Aug 93 12:44 GMT
Subject: BUYING = SUCCESS
Its Francis who is the problem.
He is a tight git.
A crap man-manager.
It happened at QPR, and its resurfacing now.
He just does not want to pay his players decent wages.
Lets face it they get reasonable crowds every year, and last year they got to both cup finals…hence the money for Walker.
I am suprised they agreed personal terms.
Give it a year or so, when Walker will want a rise…
Whaddya mean Scum underachieved??
What about the invincible ‘fergies fledgelings’??
Oh yeah, we stuffed them twice heheheheh.
If you get a class player a season youre doing well from youth.
With Batts and Speed we were extremely lucky…we now seem to have a glut which we had back in the early Revie days…the trouble is these days keeping them, with freedom of contract etc.
Eddie Gray did well, but at that time the board was tight.
Look at what that team has gone onto…not a bad side really!
Just needed one or two top experienced players…
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 5 Aug 1993 15:52:17 +0100 (BST)
Subject: Bad News (For me anyway!!)
I just phoned up Leeds for tickets for the Arse game on 24th August, and they tell me that ‘Tickets will only be available for members’, and here's me thinking that I don't need to bother with a premier /membership card this year to get my tickets.
By the way, It looks like they've improved the ticket line a bit, there is now a queueing system which you get held on, so you now get through after about an hour rather than 3, and then hold on in the queue for the other two hours:-)
Anway, for the Man C. game membership cards aren't needed, but for the next 2 away games they are.
See ya,
Sunil
From:
Date: Mon, 9 Aug 1993 12:34:06 +0100 (BST)
Subject: Charity Shield
I remember that fantastic day last year, forgive me if this bores you but my day went something like this:—
The train journey down to london was nothing to rave about.
The bacon burgers were awful and the coffee was at 1000 degrees C, but that months copy of VIZ helped to pass the time.
We arrived in London a little after 10.30.
We walked around and saw some of the sights until lunch time when we found a nice quiet little pub not far from the Hard Rock Cafe, where we fed our faces.
With still hours to go before the match we had another little walk about, somehow we found ourselves on Park Lane.
The sun was beating down on our backs and our throats were becoming as dry as a proverbial nuns.
Without a pub to be seen for miles we decided to try our luck in the bar of the hilton.
Two pints of lager and a pint of bitter came to £8.50 but what the hell, we were unlikely to ever visit the Hilton again.
It was now time to move on to Wembley and the Greyhound.
What was this?
Leeds and Liverpool supporters drinking and singing together (are you watching Manchester?), unbelievable!
Why does this kind of crowd behaviour fail to reach the media?
Anyway, on to the match.
Unfortunately I could only get a ticket for the liverpool end.
I didn't know what to do when the whites scored their first goal.
What a relief it was when a couple of hundred other leeds supporters started going crazy, so I thought what the hell and joined in.
The liverpool supporters, although a tadge irritated by all these cheering Yorkshiremen took it very well and gave as good as they got when they equalised.
Particularly the two eight year old scousers sat directly behind us, they loved it they did the cheeky little so and so's.
Thankfully we had the last laugh when that french fellow (I can't remember his name) scored the winner.
What a long journey home it would have been if we'd lost.
A truly memorable day.
Take us back there soon lads, it's been too long already.
Si.
From:
Date: Mon, 9 Aug 93 15:40:30 BST
Subject: Chappie
In a way, I am sad to see him go.
His goals were very important in winning both Div 2 and Div 1.
He was with Leeds for only 3 and 1/3 seasons but he must be fairly high in the list of all-time scorers.
At a guess he must have scored about 65 league goals in about 115 games + around 10 more in other matches.
On the other hand, I was very critcal of his lack of pace and ability to run with the ball.
It was amazing that him and Shutt were so sucessful together.
I am looking forward to seeing Brian Deane, I think he has more strings to his bow than Chapman.
From:
Date: Mon, 9 Aug 1993 15:55 GMT
Subject: Re the Man City game
Here we go again, I've just filled in my pools coupon and I've put Leeds down for a win.
I didn't it has to be said win the pools last year as I always put Leeds for a win and Scum for a loss.
I reckon we'll win 3–1.
Deano will score the first goal of the season just like he did for Sheff.
last year.
Declan
From:
Date: Mon, 9 Aug 93 16:09 GMT
Subject: Grimsby…
Man City
First off…has noone posted the Grimsby result??
If not Grimsby — 0 Leeds — 1
Apparently wilko used 19 players!!
Noel Whelan scored (again!)
Wilko was happy.
Best performance of preseason, more chances than in all the others together, only a superb performance by their keeper kept it close.
ANOTHER CLEAN SHEET!!!
Everyone fully fit except…
Kerslake, Sterland, Fairclough and Dorigo!!
Who said we had too many defenders!:-) All these ‘injuries’ arent serious and should all be ok for saturday.
Did anyone get to the game?
Apparently Kelly played well again…we might see him at right back vs Man City.
Okay, my prediction for Man City…2–1 or 3–1 to us.
I dont think we will lose.
The last two results there have been freaks.
They havent even got any new players to ‘pep ‘them up.
Ive got tickets for the West Ham match…anyone in the London area fancy sharing petrol costs??
Got tickets for the KOP YEEEEEEHHHAAAAHHHH!!!!
Only 7–50 each!
BTW The capacity MUST be well over 40K at the moment surely??
I mean, when its done the ground will be 40K all seater…and all they are doing is putting seats in the KOP — reducing its capacity.
17K east stand, 13K Kop, 7000?
South stand, 11K west stand = 48K????
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 9 Aug 93 16:20 GMT
Subject: Chappie
I think thats conservative…he scored 19 last year, 21ish title year, 31 year before and at least 11 in the promotion year.
Lets hope Deane can hit that consistency…then again Deane scored 20 for Sheff Utd last year!
I remember not too long ago we hadnt had a striker who scored 20+ goals since the Revie days.
Even then we didnt get many seasons over 20 for the leading scorer.
I think Davison would have done it easily in the promotion year but he got injured…apart from that (altho didnt Ray Hankin score 20 in about 79?)
No doubt Deanes athleticism will be a MAJOR plus factor for him and the team.
I expect him to score 25+.
I watched the official video for our first year in Div 1 (when chappie scored 31 goals) again over the weekend…
I was quite suprised how good he was that year…back heeling the ball to set up at least 2 goals…and the drag back and turn for a goal vs Wimbledon (I think)!!
NOt to mention the superb headers vs Liverpool (4–5) and Wimbledon away.
ANd what about THAT goal vs Sheff Wed in the title year (6–1)!!
Yep…thanks Chappie…you helped pull us back into the big time and gave us a lot of enjoyment (even when you fell over when trying to control the ball:-).
Thanks also for opting for Portsmouth, I hope we never see him playing for the opposition in a ‘real’ match as it might spoil memories…bit like Shez and the Frog…
Oh, and good luck
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 9 Aug 93 16:21:09 BST
Subject: Re: Re the Man City game
I'm afraid Mr. Optimist here cannot see Leeds winning, or keeping a clean sheet.
I'll go for 1–1, failing that a 2–1 defeat.
Kev.
(looking forward to it nevertheless).
PS I'm always interested in who will be the surprise team, either failure or success.
I think Norwich will do badly.
Reluctantly, I think Chelsea may have a better season.
I wonder if Hoddle will use the sweeper system and/or play.
From:
Date: Mon, 9 Aug 93 16:56 GMT
Subject: Capacity
Im almost certain the 8.5K limit was upped midway thru last season.
Even if it hasnt, and your figure for the south stand is right, thats still more than 39 thousand.
The new stand is definately 17K and the west stand is definately over 10K.
The East stand is somewhat of a boon for us ‘traditionalists’ who like to stand to watch our teams play…when the Leeds Bond came out one of the perks was season tickets for the new seats in the East Stand at Kop standing prices (for then existing Kop season ticket holders) which is/was 180 quid.
If only 3,000 took this up thats 3000 extra spaces available on the kop — not to mention those who got East stand season tickets this time round anyway.
If I was sure I was going to at least 10 home matches next season Id get a kop season ticket straight away!
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 10 Aug 1993 08:58:26 +0000
Subject: Chapman's all-time ranking
Here are the all time top scorers.
The columns are as follows: League goals, Overall goals, League goals position (1–10), Overall goals position (1–10).
As I see it Chapman might just have made it to number ten, but I doubt it.
However compared to old duffers like Hyde and Wainscoat his contribution was far greater.
Chappers has to be up there with Sniffer and Mick where scoring crucial goals is concerned.
Also his playing career with us was far shorter than a lot of these blokes.
He did look crap though didn't he.
Gave me more laughs than any Leeds player especially when under the influence of old frogslegs he began trying to control the ball with his feet.
Tim
From:
Date: Tue, 10 Aug 93 10:15 GMT
Subject: Grimsby
Hello Joanne…
I thought you said you were going to this match!:-)
Okay, how did Rocastle compare with Strach??
I reckon this is the biggest selection question for Wilko.
Also where did Kelly play?
Oh yeah…and I was right about the kit then;-)))
(BTW the cheapest Ive seen the shorts being sold is 16 quid!!)
From:
Date: Tue, 10 Aug 1993 14:05:10 +0100 (BST)
Subject: Tickets
Hi,
Just a quick one.
Does anyone know if you can order more than one ticket with the new membership cards, or is it one ticket per member?
Sunil
From:
Date: Tue, 10 Aug 1993 14:46 GMT
Subject: Chris Whyte
I think Chris Whyte was a victim of the new back pass rule last season.
He did play really well in the Championship year but any time I saw him last year he seemed to be nervous on the ball, surely not a good thing for a Centre Half.
Still 200K isn't a lot of money for a player of his class at only 31.
At 31 Centre Halfs should only be coming into their prime, Paul McGrath is a case in point.
Good luck to him anyway.
Mark Kelly seems to have impressed everyone who saw him play this preseason, I hope he get's his chance to prove himself, Ireland could do backup for Dennis Irwin at right back (cue the flames for mentioning a Scum player)
I notice that neither John Scales or Alan Kernaghan have moved clubs yet so there is still hope that we'll purchase one of them.
Finally, I read yesterday that some managers, most noticably the two Scots that were in Wembley at the weekend, are talking about banning transfers after the season start and only allowing them for a limited period over Christmas.
Has anyone any other info on this?
Declan
From:
Date: Wed, 11 Aug 93 11:18 GMT
Subject: Swansea result: -/
Ah…well this goes back a LONG time…well back to 1980 I think.
We were in the 1st Div…it was the first game of the new season, and we were playing the newly promoted Swansea away.
We lost 5–1!!
That year we got relegated:-(
And if you thought our away form was bad last year…
That year I think we lost our first 7 or 8 away games, and they went something like…
5–1, 4–0, 4–0, 3–0, 4–1, 2–0…
At the same time our home form was good up till about xmas.
I think we only lost about 4 home games.
We did win away a couple of times (one was a 4–1 win at the high flying aston villa!).
We wasnt in the bottom 3 until after our last game of the season — away to Coventry, when we lost 2–0.
We were still only 4th from bottom (ie safe), with only one match left in the division.
Coventry (again) were playing West Brom, West Brom were below us and had to beat coventry to stay up and send us down.
Needless to say they did…
From:
Date: Wed, 11 Aug 93 12:54 GMT
Subject: Oh happy days…;-)
Yep, Ive been there.
Why was it every year ended sort of optimistically and every year we expected to go back up?
At least talking about that will make us appreciate just what weve got now…and what Wilko and ALL the players have done…right back to old Mickey Thomas.
Who went to the first home game in our promotion year?
Midweek vs Middlesboro.
Elland road full to the brim, thousands locked outside (even though the south stand wasnt entirely full as it was members only).
I was in the Kop that day…what a day it was.
The usual song of ‘East Stand’, ‘West stand’ etc ‘Give us a song’was complemented by ‘Car Park, give us a song’which they did!!
Vinnies home debut, came on as sub to huge cheers.
All eyes were on him…
Merv was about to kick the ball out, Vinnie was there waving his hands like a lunatic…calling for the ball on his head (for his first touch), merv obliged with an accurate kick…
Vinnie rose 5 feet into the air…and unfortuantely missed the ball entirely, having completeyl mistimed the jump:-))) Bobby Davisons superb goal after about 2 mins…
All capped off by the horrendous own goal.
:-) Classic.
Remember that season was started off with a freak result vs Newcastle.
fat boy Quinn scoring 4 on his debut.
Erm, no it was Coventry wasnt it?
Or did they do that too?
I do recall Jimmy Hill spouting on about it being all seater and anti-hooligan.
Anyways…thats all definately in the past…lets just look forward to some juicey results this year…in the mould of 6–1 vs Sheff Wed, 4–1 away to Aston Villa, 5–2 vs Blackburn, 4–1 vs Chelsea…
AND LETS FINALLY BEAT THE SCUM THIS YEAR…
Mark 
From:
Date: Wed, 11 Aug 93 12:15:45 CST
Subject: Re: Swansea result: -/
Why are we discussing events that happen 12 years ago, talk about that season is bringing back painful memories.
Being the only Leeds fan in a London inner city school with Alan Clarks famous speach about bring Success to Leeds in 3 Years, is causing me to go into cold shivers and giving me a pessimistic mood about the new season, I can still remember the years of telling school friends at the end of each season that we are rebuilding and that we would come up the next season.
didn't we also tear apart the west brom ground after they beat us 3 nil.
Regards Brian.
From:
Date: Thu, 12 Aug 93 10:04:34 BST
Subject: Re: Swansea result: -/
I believe the situation was:
Leeds needed a point to stay up, but lost 1–0.
West Brom were then safe and were not too bothered about letting Stoke beat them to send Leeds down after the trouble that Leeds fans had caused at the Hawthorns.
If the trouble had not occurred, there would have been an enquiry about the West Brom performance in the final match, but there was enough anti-Leeds feeling for it to be brushed under the carpet.
In the West Brom v Leeds game Frank Worthington (Leeds only goal scorer) was suspended for accumulating disciplinary points.
Gary Owen and Cyrille Regis had sunpensions received for recent sendings off delayed.
Both played.
Bert Millichip of West Brom was chairman of the FA at the time.
From:
Date: Thu, 12 Aug 93 10:26 GMT
Subject: THAT season!
Yes, Yes, Yes:-) I must have formed a mental block on the exact details due to the severe trauma involved!
I knew it was 2 midlands clubs, and that West Brom were involved…didnt realise it was stoke tho.
Why did I say coventry??
Strange.
Altho I wasnt too old (about 13)…
I do now remember the thing with Regis.
If I remember rightly West Brom should have thrashed Stoke really (based on their current form).
What made this worse was that we (there were a few of us Leeds fans in my school) we friends with a west brom fan, and had been taking the piss all year…hadnt they recently gone up to div 1?
Surely youre forgetting Peter Barnes;-))) Or Kevin Hird (aaarrghhhh!)
And they wonder why Leeds had a persecution complex.
What did the FA do for us with the Stuttgart incident last year?
Sweet FA.
The germans had their FA, their TV companies and their Govt ‘lobbying’.
It wasnt as if we didnt deserve to win anyway…but what do you reckon they would have done if the roles were reversed and Leeds played an illegible player?
The FA are still charging us and SCUM over holding back our youth players for the pre-tournament tournament England U18's.
Even though England won the real thing…
I wonder if they would have done that with only SCUM?
Oh well…not to worry…were gonna win the league this season:-)
And is nt Noel Whelan knocking them in??
He did look impressive when he played for England…
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 12 Aug 93 16:06 GMT
Subject: Erm…dickhead alert…
Okay, first off, am I the only ‘fortunate ‘person on the list to get this mail?
Well, I got 3 posts from ‘IT’??
Just wonderin…before I flame the bollocks off the stupid little shit:-)
see ya in a mo!
From:
Date: Thu, 12 Aug 1993 15:21:07 +0000
Subject: Guardian Report
I don't generally disbelieve the Guardian, but I listen to Radio 5 all evening and this morning until 8am.They are normally very quick to report any transfer activity and there hasn't been a whisper of this one on any of their twice-hourly broadcasts.
So I reckon (hope!) the Guardian has got hold of this off some Derby source who is talking out the back of their heads.
The Guardian is usually way behind the pack where transfer news is concerned so they may be a bit gullible.
I got the impression that Rocastle is well-liked by Wilkinson despite not starting many games.
It's just that Strach was fitter last season than we could have hoped, and we needed his blood and guts leadership to dig us out of the mess we were in.
You have to laugh at Everton and their lack-of-transfer saga.
Now Bright won't go there according to Radio 5.
What are the odds on them going down this time I wonder…
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 12 Aug 93 16:22 GMT
Subject: J.Donnelly…he knows his stuff…
NOT!!
From: NEWTON:: MPH ‘’ 12-AUG-1993 16:19:27.69 To: CBS%UK.AC.UKNET-RELAY:: UK.AC.SHU:: J.DONNELLY CC: MPH Subj: Re: Chapman vs Deane 
Look twat…first off that mail was for a PRIVATE LEEDS MAIL LIST
I dont know how or why you got your pathetic little paws on it…but hey…no big deal…
Now, if youre gonna do summink, do it right for christs sake.
I forwarded your little ‘message ‘to the others on the group…just for a laugh.
I take it you know a lot about football then <ROTFL>.
So, on what basis are leeds the ‘crappiest team in the world’??
Why am I a ‘thickhead’??
Thatd be interesting to hear.
As it happens Ive got a lot of time for honest people like Mr Bassett.
But its thickhead supporters like you that get a bad name for him.
therefore i dont like him at all…
DURRRRRRRRR MY BWAIN HURTS.
Do us all a favour…get a life, then get a clue.
Ok…your final task for the day is to name your ‘brilliant’ midfield…and we'll have a little comparison shall we…in fact Ill use Leeds' reserves to make it fairer.
Im sorry, I really have to go now…something more interesting to do, like say pick my arse…
seeya loser
hahahahahahahahahahahahahehehehehehehehehehehehehahahahahahahah.
From:
Date: Thu, 12 Aug 1993 16:52:20 +0100
Subject: List abuse
Re Mark's ‘dickhead alert’.
First off, this is a public list for Leeds supporters; if you're not interested in Leeds United, I think you'd feel more at home elsewhere.
Giving and taking jibes and insults is very much part of being a footie fan; usually it's fun.
However, if flames and abusive stuff get out of hand, I can take the offending parties off the list, no matter who they support.
I certainly don't want to have to do that, but if it becomes a problem I will: I'm not going to put to the continuation of the list here in jeopardy (or for that matter my good name, such as it is!)
When you want an electronic punch-up, please keep it off the list.
On a happier note, list subscriptions are now in the mid-40s; pretty good going.
Mark, did you send off anything to TSB or the programme people?
That could bring in a few more.
Happy leeds-listing, Gavin
From:
Date: Thu, 12 Aug 93 16:53 GMT
Subject: The dickhead
It looks like ‘it’ was reading someone elses mail, and got my post about how ABSOLUTELY PISSING CRAP Sheff Utd were, and HOW ONLY COMPLETE MORONS would ever begin to support them.
IT then went into a froth.
ITs name is J.Donnelly.
Maybe its the same one that Leeds bought a few years back and kicked out cos they werent good enough??:-)
I forwarded my official reply to the group…as that had ITs mail address…maybe Gavin could check the list of names and see whose mail IT is reading?
Alternatively we could all post lots of nice messages to him…by the time he finished trying to read them, Sheff Utd would have been RELEGATED…cos they are SO CRAP (I like this:-)
So, Ill be signing off now in a CRAPPY SHEFF UTD sort of way.
Brian Deane supports Leeds hahahahahahahahahahahahaha BRIAN DEANE, BRIAN DEANE, BRIAN DEANE Brian Deane WANTED to leave you lot and JOIN LEEDS hahahahahahahaah Never mind…youve still got…erm,…
Brian Gayle.
Nice goal Brian Gayle BTW…two touches — UP with the knee, HEAD that ball into the goal and…we…are…the…
CHAMPIONS!!!!!!!!!!
From:
Date: Thu, 12 Aug 1993 16:14:58 +0000
Subject: rumours
I was talking to someone who knows a Leeds solicitor who is involved with the club and he was allegedly letting this colleague in on some inside info.
The following two snippets I shall pass on, with the caution that the bloke who told me is a Man U supporter.
1.
Rocastle has been doing illegal drugs
2.
The *actual* figure on the transfer papers for Cantona was 1.8 million.
Just rumours, probably a load of crap.
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 12 Aug 93 18:15 GMT
Subject: Rocky
I think if his back problem is sorted, and he stays injury free he can.
I cannot for the life of me see Wilko releasin Rocky, especially for only 1 Million.
The absence of any sort of news on teletext only confirms this.
Lets face it — hes been linked with other clubs since last october.
I must confess to not really taking in Rocky at his best, so I dont know what his potential is.
Strach is a master at taking people on in and around the box.
Even last year he was doing it.
I remember the FA cup matches vs The Arse in particular.
At Elland Rd he left dixon on his arse on the left wing, and also there was one classic moment when he was being closed down by 2 arsenal players from either side — he dragged the ball back and both the arsenal players clattered into each other and fell over while Strach trotted upfield with the ball!!
He still has a lot to give…even if he doesnt play every match.
Yes, I agree about the full backs.
However, It was a majestic sight seeing Leeds hammer a side into submission, especially at Elland Rd…being attacked from all sides.
These days there are too many quick forwards to do that unless you have an extremely quick centre back.
Still, it made for exciting viewing;-) Thats what I miss about Sterland…few full backs are better coming forward than he was.
Strach has missed him overlapping too…gives him options and a bit of space to do the damage.
Rod is wasted there IMO.
Best to let him move freely up front.
If you want crosses from the second forward then bring in Shutt.
Wallace should feed off Deane very well.
With chappy you could never tell what angle the ball would deflect;-))
It is an interesting tactic/selection decision Wilko has to make.
Do we defend by attacking as we used to, or do we keep numbers back like last year?
Do we go for balls down the channels for wallace/deane to run onto, or use Deane as a target and have Wallace running off him?
Do we push the wide midfielders forward for crosses, or overlap the fullbacks?
I hope we mix it up and play some nice sweet and deadly football…with Batty getting some of the credit he deserves.
Incidentally, Ron Atkinson was today praising Gary Speed, and saying how he is the most versatile player in the country since Paul Madeley, and how he tried several times this summer to sign him but was told no by Wilko every time.
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 12 Aug 93 18:32 GMT
Subject: SQUAD NUMBERS **********
I just Heard these…some indication of the first choice team.
No mention of Rocky leaving WHATSOEVER!!
Number 21 looks class;-))
Okay, they also said that KELLY would be playing vs MAN CITY, so it looks like Sterland isnt quite ready.
It also looks like Shutt is on his way out…bit of a shame really.
And what about Rob Bowman??
There ya go folks!
Looks like the 11 I predicted will be playing saturday <gloat gloat>;-) Lets just hope the 3–1 result is right too.
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 13 Aug 93 12:01:34 BST
Subject: Re: SQUAD NUMBERS **********
I think, on balance I am in favour of the aquad numbers.
Being a traditionalist it was nice to have just 1 to 11.
There is not so much glamour attached to say shirt no 17 as No 9.
The numbers could still be a reliable guide to a player's position even with all the playing formations these days.
If you see an unheard of player in a no 9 shirt, there is a good chance that he is a centre forward.
The squad nos will make each player more identifyable, especially wth their names on.
Although I'm sure this could have been achieved with permanently named shirts and removable (Velcro?) numbers.
It will be interesting to see if players ‘graduate’ to different shirt nos next season.
It seems as though Strachan and Sterland have got their shirts on the basis of length of service.
I hope nobody does an ‘Argentina’ and number their players alphabetically.
The other problem is that team listings may continue to be displayed in numerical rather than positional order for which there is no set convention since the days of 2–3-5.
I wonder how the programme will display the appearances.
It used to be by shirt no for each game.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 16 Aug 1993 10:27:21 +0100
Subject: Leeds v Blue Mancs
Man City 1 Leeds United 1
This was one of the most one-sided 1–1 draws I've ever seen.
Tony Coton should get a large fat bonus to supplement his pay check — he earned it, and saved City from being on the wrong end of a large fat scoreline.
Leeds had the ball in the net three times; Man City had about three shots on target.
The first 10–15 minutes should have seen a few goals in the net for Leeds.
Strachan, Whelan, and Macca all came very close.
Noel Whelan had a very impressive first half; I'd be happy to see him start the next few matches.
He actually had the ball in the net in the first half: City were playing a very boring offside game, Whelan thought he'd got free a few yards inside the city half, but with Coton bearing down on him, he was judged offside.
He still went on to do an enormous lob over Coton's head, and what seemed like half an hour later the ball sneaked itself over the line.
The Leeds fans loved it, the ref didn't — he had a word with the boy, and had to have another word in the 2nd half when he got into a scuffle.
He's good, but looks like being temperamental.
Deane looked good and happy to be there, and had enough chances to promise great things in the future.
He's clearly got more to offer outfield than Chapman.
Others who impressed included David O'Leary.
He made a world of difference to the Leeds defence.
Not only does he collect the ball well when under attack, he also distributes it magnificently on occasions, picking out midfielders with great accuracy, sometimes over 20–30 yards.
He also kept his head when some of of the City young things were running at him — 35 years old, but he can keep up well enough (cf Mel of the Mars Bars).
Fairclough looked a lot happier playing alongside him, Dorigo was as Dorigish as ever, and Kelly did reasonably well at right-back.
Midfield had Speed Batty MacAllister and Strach.
Strach was in good form, but went off injured in the second half, possibly as a result of Curle doing a fine impression of a large concrete block at him (for which he was booked).
Rod Wallace was the chosen sub.
Macallister had one clear run at goal in the first half, and looked to have enough speed to round the keeper and score, but instead he pulled up clutching his back.
Speed and Batty were as good as ever.
Batty went head first over the top of somebody at one point, thereby earing the rage of the City crowd.
Like most of the Leeds fans at Maine Road, I spent most of the second half with my hands on my head groaning in disbelief.
So many shots, so many near misses, so few goals.
In the first half, it didn't really matter, cos it was great to see Leeds doing so well away from home.
The second half saw Leeds do even more, but it just ended up frustrating.
City had a few chances, and unfortunately they took one late in the second half, shortly after we'd started shouting ‘What's like to be outclassed’ at the boys in blue.
Somebody crossed in from the right, Lukic blocked a shot from Sheron, but the ball fell at the feet of Flitcroft who couldn't really miss.
That was one of those sickening moments so familiar to travelling Whites last season.
‘What's it like to be outclassed’, sang the city fans cleverly.
Thankfully Leeds thundered back, Deano had one disallowed, then one that was allowed.
‘What's it like to be outclassed’, we sang, smugly, and the whistle went.
Leeds will play more testing outfits this season — City had five players injured — but this was an encouraging start.
Everything but the goals, really.
Other observations
Rocastle wasn't even on the subs bench.
Maybe there's some truth in the transfer rumours?
Other subs after Wallace were Newsome and Beeny.
The stripy away shirts are dead good, and I'd say that on the backs of the fans, they outnumbered the white hooped jobs by about 10 to 1.
Gary ‘Wash and Go’ Speed has had a Roy Keane-ish haircut
Even after the Man City pitch invasion against Spurs, they still serve bottles of beer at the burger bar.
But at 1–60 a bottle (half pint) there's not many who could afford to get scuttered on it.
The new stand at Maine Road is crap.
They have a lower level of seats, like the new East Stand, but instead of an upper level of seats they have executive boxes for the assorted reptilia who frequent such places.
Plus a large, unsightly wall which looks like the inside of a barn.
So that was that.
Leeds to do West Ham very comfortably on Tuesday night.
Gavin
From:
Date: Mon, 16 Aug 93 10:35 GMT
Subject: Man City
Given the performance a truer reflection of the game would have been a 6–0 win to Leeds.
Even all the London press were raving about Leeds…which means they MUST have been good…okay, the team;
I was listening to Radio 5 and Leeds had had 3 good chances after 5 mins.
According to the Telegraph, Man City had only 3 attacks of note in the whole match.
Wilko and Macca were praising Tony Coton who put in a world class performance to keep us out.
He made at least 5 WORLD class saves, the best to deny Noel Whelan.
Speed could have had at least 3 goals, and Deane could have had 3.
Man City scored their goal after 87 mins…with only their 3rd ‘real’ attack.
Lukic saved well initially but the ball fell nicely for Flitcroft to score.
On about 89 mins Deane put the ball in the net, but the goal was disallowed for a Wallace push on a defender.
He did give a little shove to a defender who was shielding Wallace from the ball as it was running thru to Coton, but Coton could nt hold it anyway so IMO it didnt affect the ‘goal’.
2 mins later Leeds DID score, A McAllister corner, good header on target by Speed, Coton could only push the ball out and Deane swept it in.
As I said, the LEAST we deserved, and things are looking very good.
Without Coton the score would have been at least 7–1.
Man City were without Quinn, but apart from that they had no injuries to speak of, with Curle and Phelan playing.
Mike Sheron also played, so they had their best 4 players, and we wont come across a much quicker defence this season, and STILL managed to create chances all the way thru the match.
Did anyone go to the match??
That was me:-)
If we dont win 4–0 I will be disappointed.
West Ham will go down this season, they are crap ALL OVER the pitch.
Norwich played crap yesterday aswell…so lets hope they continue next week.
If all goes well we will win our next two home games comfortably, and be handily placed:-)
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 16 Aug 93 10:46:49 BST
Subject: Re: Leeds v Blue Mancs
Gavin, Did Niall Quinn play?
If so, how did Fairclough and O'Leary handle him?
I have reservations as to how well the defence will cope with lots of high crosses to big forwards, particularly with ‘Christopher Lee’ Lukic's recent record.
Of course the trick is; to dominate the game enough so that the other team can't get any crosses in — or there is nobody getting forward to receive them.
Leeds invariably did this in the championship year.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 16 Aug 1993 10:52 GMT
Subject: Saturday's game
I too, was listening to radio 5 on Saturday and was utterly devastated to hear that we'd gone 1–0 down with a couple of minutes to go, but at 2.7 million Deano saved the day.
It was interesting to listen to the comments after the game from the Radio 5 reporter who said that we'd had enough chances to last us ‘till Christmas, maybe it'll make a few people sit up and recognise that we have a team capable of winning something this season.
Great to see O'Leary playing well maybe another signing of Strachesque proportions!!
I'd say he had a little smile, to himself, when he heard the score from Highbury
Declan
From:
Date: Mon, 16 Aug 93 11:18:09 BST
Subject: Liverpool v Leeds game
Hi,
I just wanted to know what the ticket arrangements are for the Liverpool game at Anfield later in September.
As I live in Liverpool, I can't make Elland Road, but I would be able to go to Anfield.
My friends are Liverpool fans and they say they can get me tickets for the KOP, but no way am I standing with a bunch of idiots.
Any info will be gratefully received.
Cheers..
From:
Date: Mon, 16 Aug 1993 11:19:41 +0100
Subject: RE: Leeds v Blue Mancs
No; he was one of the 5 injured ones.
My impression of the defence — and Lukic — on Saturday was favourable.
When Kerslake comes back, it will probably be even better, tho Kelly was largely ok.
One of the reasons Lukic went wobbly last season, apart from the trauma connected with the infamous Rangers punch, could have been the state of his ever-changing defence.
My hope is a more settled and competent defence this season will help him re-gain a lot of confidence.
With the lack of repeated high crosses to test him last saturday, though, it remains to be seen; but the signs are good.
Gav.
From:
Date: 16 Aug 93 11:02:27 GMT
Subject: Norwich & Liverpool matches
I'm looking for help on getting into a couple of matches — can anyone help?
I haven't been to a Leeds match for absolutely ages and could do with any info on getting hold of tickets, which parts of the ground need tickets and the best places to stand/sit…and park the car etc.
The reason I'm asking is that I'm attempting to get to the games coming up against Norwich at home and Liverpool away.
Any hints on getting into any other grounds would also help as I've actually got time this year to go and watch them.
Any info greatly appreciated.
Thanks, Phil
BTW The bad news for me is that I'll be unsubscribing at the end of the week when I finish working here — what a bummer!
From:
Date: Mon, 16 Aug 93 12:02 GMT
Subject: Man City
Can someone let me know who the 5 injured Man City players were?
Were these 1st team players?
If so they are extremely lucky that their best players werent injured (namely Sheron, Flitcroft, Curle and Phelan).
OK, Quinn is a diving bastard…but Whyte wasnt there to push him this time.
Incidentally I think we should get less free kicks against us now, and both O'Leary ans Fairclough are seen as ‘fair’ players, so should get SOME sympathy when the likes of Quinn and ‘timber ‘Hughes fall over a lot.
For those who dont get 1st Div results, Portsmouth lost 3–2, but Chappy scored both portsmouth goals.
One a ‘cheeky’ lob type affair.
Amazing!
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 16 Aug 1993 12:16:08 +0100
Subject: Getting tickets
Getting Leeds tickets for matches.
To find out what tickets are available, how much they cost & c you first ring Ticket Call (0891–121680) where you pay money through your nostril to hear someone bloater on about competitions and how to enter them before you get the info you rang for.
Then you ring Dial-A-Ticket (0532–710710) which is generally engaged, so you re-dial at frequent intervals till you get through to a recorded ticket office girl blotering on about similar information.
After a while she runs out of things to say, so she says ‘hold on till we can answer your call’, and that is followed by a lengthy silence (for which you pay more money through your other nostril).
Later rather than sooner a real live girl deals with your call in person.
You can get two tickets per credit card no matter how many membership cards you can cite.
They charge you an extra quid for booking with a credit card, and say they can't be held responsible if the postman wobs the ticket in transit.
(Never lost any yet, tho.)
Less costly on the nose is a letter to the ticket office in which you enclose a cheque, which may have to be blank, and an sae.
Again, it's only two tickets per cheque regardless of membership cards (makes you wonder why they have 'em really).
Ultimately, the best way to get tickets is to live near Elland Road, or have a relative who does, so you can get to the ticket office in person.
Or get a season ticket and collect away tickets on match days.
(Are there any season ticket holders on the list??)
For Leeds tickets at Livehpewl I think it's members only, and I guess they'll be limited, but trying the above numbers should help you find out all about it.
Popular away games will be members only, others will be open to one and all.
Gav (not enamoured of LUFC's ticketing malarky.
Thankfully, it's worth it in the end:-)
From:
Date: Mon, 16 Aug 1993 13:08:16 +0000
Subject: Getting to Liverpool FC
Here is a tip on how to get to the robbing scouse gets.
Go down to the end of the M62.
Look to turn right, across a busy junction at the end of the motorway.
Follow that long dual carriageway and you'll see signs for the turnoff.
There's a massive field in Stanley Park where everyone parks for Everton and Liverpool games.
It costs about a pound.
Warning: You'll be stuck in it for hours after the game.
Tim
From:
Date: Mon, 16 Aug 93 14:35 GMT
Subject: Tickets
Yes.
You can cut out the first step generally, and risk your life waiting for the 710710 nu mber to become free, then get details of what areas are still not sold out etc.
The one time I tried this year i ended up in some void somewhere.
Previous years were ok once you got the sought after dial tone.
My favourite method still has to be the good ol' fax.
Never been engaged.
Ask for tickets in order of preference, mine is always Kop first.
Give credit card details, say ‘please debit my card accordingly’, state whether you want it posted or if youll collect it on the day, and finally give your voice number for them to call ‘if there are any problems’.
I normally get my tickets the next day, or in two days.
Thats for Home games.
you can try for away games too, but I dont normally decide about away games until the week before.
Then its always worth calling the away club direct and asking if they sell visitors tickets.
9 times out of 10 they do.
If you really want to go and all the away tickets are sold then you can
1)
go along and buy a ticket from a tout…or even off another Leeds supporter who has one spare.
In the all ticket days you could often wait for the first coach from Leeds to turn up and they would have 20+ tickets for us poor souls who couldnt get one!!
Nothing if not resilient Leeds supporters:-)
2)
get a ticket in the home section.
Do nt worry, you often get Leeds supporters all round the ground…
‘Leeds fans here, Leeds fans there, Leeds fans everyf*$£ingwhere…’ as they say.
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 16 Aug 93 14:44 GMT
Subject: Newspaper reports
Just back from my daily ‘read-every-newspaper-in-the-shop’ trip.
Makes satisfying reading.
Noel Whelan is the star of the moment.
Tony Coton apparently embraced him at the end and gave him soime words of encouragement.
Said later that hes an exceptional talent and only bad luck stopped him scoring, and to keep plugging away.
Wilko said hes the best athlete he has seen playing football.
In most of the papers the man of the match was between Coton and him.
We got good reviews in every paper…everyone saying how we outclassed them.
Even Peter Reid was quoted as saying how we were exceptional or something.
how we were back to our best and they were extremely lucky not to get a good hiding.
So, EVERYONE cant be wrong!
One review summed it up saying how we were ‘classes better in every outfield position’, City were extremely fortunate to get a goal, let alone a point.
I pity West Ham (…
NOT)
mark
From:
Date: Wed, 18 Aug 1993 11:30:13 +0100
Subject: Boring Admin Stuff
Hi,
This is a bit boring and non-Leeds, but it may prove useful to know:
Two or three people have been having problems with the listserv software here this week, and it's been to do with personal mail addresses, as shown in the From: field of the header of every message each of us sends.
When you subbed to the list, the software took your current From: address and put it on the LEEDS-UNITED list.
Every time you want to mail to the list, or unsub/suspend mail through listserv, your current From: address is checked against the one on the list.
If the addresses match, your mail will be posted, or your subscription cancelled; whatever you asked for will be done.
If they don't match, you'll get a cryptic error message and nothing else will happen.
So if you get an error message, yet you know you're on the list, it's a 99% chance your From: address has been changed slightly.
For example, instead of would confuse the software entirely and it would refuse to co-operate.
If this is happening to you, you can first check out why your From: address has changed with your systems people.
If the change is permanent, re-sub yourself with your new address, and write to tell me to get rid of your old address.
And then everything should be okay again.
If you need more help on this, you can get in touch with me.
End of useful-but-dull admin stuff.
No, Declan, I didn't see the West Ham game last night, I just had the radio on.
It sounded like a good win in the face of negative tactics.
and Tim Kennedy said they were off, though; maybe they'll have something to say about it in due course.
They must have had long journies, so I expect they're having a lie in, I know I would.
Gavin
From:
Date: Wed, 18 Aug 1993 11:49:00 +0100
Subject: RE: Boring admin stuff
I've heard from Tim and Mark, as well as others (Kevin and Arif and Phil and Neil), and it seems this change-of-address thing is happening to loads of you.
I'll check things out at this end to see if anything might be causing it here — you can't all have just suddenly changed your addresses!
Apologies for the interruption to normal service.
Meantime, seeing how my messages get through, I'll send on match reports from Tim and Mark.
Gav.
From:
Date: Wed, 18 Aug 1993 11:52:08 +0100
Subject: Tim's West Ham Report
Subject: Leeds vs West Ham 17.8.93
LEEDS UNITED 1 WEST HAM 0
Crowd: 34,588
Elland Road looks fantastic these days.
The new stand looks very imposing as you come down the M621 towards it.
The Old Peacock was jampacked with the new away tops.
It has to be said that the new home top looks really sad on a large beergut.
Sterland should never be allowed to wear it.
The pre-match entertainment was interesting.
It was a penalty shootout between a page 3 girl in West Ham kit and an extremely dapper Frank Worthington, in coffee coloured seventies-style suit!
Frank seemed to have scored with the young lady too — some things never change.
This game was a let down in most departments.
I had high hopes after Saturday, but I reckoned without the team destined to be the most unpopular in the Premier League — West Ham.
They fielded a ten-man defence which for some time looked like achieving the 0–0 draw they desired.
Worse than Wimbledon.
Leeds began brightly and there were some nice touches.
Defensively they were good, Kelly is a fine right back and is good on the overlap too.
Whelan showed considerable grace and skill up front but the strategy of putting high balls into the West Ham box was never going to work with their defensive blanket, and a highly competent goalie.
Leeds were all over them though and it was totally one-sided.
Whenever a West Ham player somehow broke free in the Leeds half he seemed so overawed that he just Geoff Thomased the ball.
They confined their attacks to pulling down Deane.
Anyway the first half ended goalless.
I hoped for a chance for Leeds to display their abilities on the ground.
The second half unfortunately continued in the same fashion.
It was a nice bit of play by Deane which gave Speed the opportunity to translate our complete domination into material advantage.
The goal was a great relief, but alas West Ham returned to stifling the game, sitting back on our 1–0 lead like an Alice In Wonderland Arsenal.
Strachan had been his usual sparkling self for much of the game but even he started to f- up.
Batty was pretty aggressive but only occasionally showed the flair and intelligence of which he is capable.
McAllister had a great chance but put it over the bar.
We won corner afer corner but failed to make anything of them.
O Leary was booked for nothing.
The referee was a complete twat Roger Dilkes, a miserable midget who contrived to spoil what was already a poor game by turning a blind eye to West Ham's negative game and penalising Leeds wherever possible.
Wallace came on shortly before time and showed what could have been with some fast ground-oriented attacking.
Deane is evidently capable of playing football, they should give him more opportunity to do it.
I'll put this lapse down to the paucity of opposition.
The only player on the pitch worthy of a West Ham shirt was Miklosko the keeper.
Right at the end they began attacking frantically and threatened to cause an upset, because our defence appeared to have been caught off guard.
Luckily they were totally useless in front of goal.
The 34 thousand crowd were comparatively quiet, when the Lowfields broke into song it was awesome, the cantilever roof really gives a good sound.
‘Give it to Chapman’ said someone in the Kop as yet another high ball was fruitlessly aimed into the arms of Miklosko.
Still, can't wait till the next game.
See yer then.
Tim
From:
Date: Wed, 18 Aug 1993 11:53:07 +0100
Subject: Mark's West Ham report
Subject: Leeds Report Content-Length: 4468 X-Lines: 79 Status: RO
From:
Date: Wed, 18 Aug 1993 11:53:07 +0100
Subject: Leeds Report
Subj: Leeds- 1 West Ham- 0
Team was exactly the same as saturday;
Lukic, Kelly, Dorigo, Fairclough, O'Leary, Strachan, McAllister, Batty, Speed, Deane and Whelan.
Subs; Rod Wallace, Newsome, beeney
The match was a little disappointing, mainly due to West Ham using 3 central defenders (plus the two full backs), and basically all the midfield players dropping back.
To say they were playing for a 0–0 is an understatement.
Leeds had 99% of the possession and play, but didnt create any clear chances as such.
The final ball (cross/corner/throw) was invariably wasted.
The only other slightly ‘negative’ thing as far as I was concerned was there seemed to be a lack of ‘thrust’up front.
Whether this was due to Wilko's tactics I do nt know, but noone ever looked to get behind their defence…noone was making darting runs across and behind.
I feel if we had tried to turn their defence we might have had some luck.
Saying that they were playing very deep, but Im sure Wallace would have been looking for those balls and giving the player in posession that option.
That aside it was a good performance.
All the players had good touch and skill.
McAllister was taking the piss with little flicks and turns.
Strachan embarassed Dicks more than once by nipping in and streaking up the wing.
Deane looked good and strong on the ball, aswell as being good in the air.
Speed played well, Dorigo looked like he was on drugs the way he was running around — at one point Breacker (Headless chicken) was thinking he had got past Dorigo/Speed and running towards the corner flag — Dorigo went into overdrive and caught him within 3 strides from a standing start!!
Kelly made some superb runs, and was one of the better crossers of the ball.
I think he will be 1st choice right back because he is quick too.
The central defence looked solid and confident, especially with Allen and Morley pushing/holding every chance they got (and getting away with it).
WHelan didnt look out of place, but in this match I feel that he and Deane were both looking for the same balls and not really working as a pair.
As Ive said, this is down more to the way West Ham played (or didnt) than them.
I feel Wallace would have been more effective in this match…to give that option.
The best chance in the game fell to Speed, who go onto the end of a Strachan pass after a lovely move down the right.
He smacked the ball and it was heading for the roof of the net but it hit a west ham player on the head and almost knocked his head off!
The goal came after midway through the second half…
Deane picked the ball up outside the area and run diagonally at goal, beat 2 or 3 defenders and took it past another but the ball was running away and Speed came in and hit it with his right foot.
he didnt connect cleanly but it went into the bottom left corner of the goal.
After that it picked up for a while, and we looked quite sharp again.
West Ham had to come forward, and they did at least twice!
There were a few scares at the death, nothing happened, just they got their first corner after about 90 mins…and after last year…however nothing came of it (or their second and last corner 3 mins into injury time), except one header which Lukic watched wide.
One major down on the evening was the performance of the referee/linesmen.
The ref was appaling.
The linesman (one in particular) wouldnt make a single decision but waited to see what the ref was giving before flagging.
Needless the say there were a lot of bad decisions.
Nothing too outrageous…just the constant annoyance of fouls being called against Leeds when there werent fouls and throws being given to West Ham unless it was patently obvious that a West Ham player kicked it off.
Id be interested to see what Kev thought of this??
Because I play the game I cannot stand referees at the best of times…am I being biased here?
Also, as West Ham were wasting time the whole match (until we scored), why do referees play the injury/extra time?
The only team who would have benefitted was West Ham…
Ok, If both teams in the match were doing it…but West Ham were blatant, and the only team to do it.
And why was O'Leary booked for jogging away with the ball for a West Ham free kick…and then he stopped O'Leary taking a kick quickly 10 mins later???????
Perfectly legal — stationary ball, from the right spot????
I think we should have a 2nd referee next to a monitor in the stand.
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 18 Aug 1993 12:20:20 +0100
Subject: Problem solved
Hello again.
My department's equivalent of Inspector Morse has been on to the change-of-address problem.
Happily he's wrapped the case up, and even now should be off down the boozer for a bottle of the usual.
It's only a problem for UK subscribers, most of whom automatically have a choice of 2 From: addresses — a long one and a short one.
When everyone first subbed, the local mailer machine always chose to use the long form (eg ).
This week, ‘they’ changed the mailer to use short forms instead (eg ).
Hence the number of confused Brits unable to contact the list.
No warning was given of the attack on the mailer; they just did it, with messy consequences.
I bet ‘they’ were Man U fans.
Apologies to one and all.
So, we're in the process of changing the affected addresses on the list at this end.
You don't have to do anything about it.
Everyone should be able to post as normal very shortly.
Phew.
Gav.
From:
Date: Wed, 18 Aug 93 11:32:29 GMT
A 1–0 result that should settle us down for the coming weeks especially with Liverpool and Arsenal back to back.
2 tough games and both away.
I see Chapman got sent off for Portsmouth.
I think its his first time.
He never got sent off for Leeds.
Leeds youth team are playing in Dublin tonight against Home Farm youths.
I will post the score tommorrow.
Richard
From:
Date: Wed, 18 Aug 1993 13:23:48 +0100
Subject: Radio 5
I heard the match on radio 5 an all, although CEEFAX said the ko was 8.00 so I missed a few minutes at the start.
Kelly seemed to be everywhere and got the praise of all the commentators, as did Whelan.
The crowd gave a good send-off to the latter when he was substituted so I suppose he did well.
The crowd seemed to be getting a little impatient just before the goal (as I'm sure we all were listening to it on the radio) but can you imagine what the scum crowd would ahve been doing to their team if they hadn't scored within twenty minutes?
They're quicker at getting on the backs of their players than Cuntona is onto another player's wife.
So-called ‘best fans in England’ my arse.
Who was the boring twat on radio 5 as guest commentator?
I missed the beginning so I wasn't sure if it was Mick Mills or Mick McGivern (ex West Ham bore who follows John Lyall around the place).
At least the FA Youth Cup drubbing of Fergie's Babes got a mention,
Stu
From:
Date: Wed, 18 Aug 1993 14:18:09 +0100
Subject: Re: Radio 5
Mark,
Yeah, you're probably right.
Once Deano/Whelan/Wallace had built up an understanding then the goals would have come a lot easier.
Still, it was the sort of match that we'd have only managed to draw last season, i.e. all over them but couldn't put the ball in the onion net.
So I suppose we should be thankful for 3 points.
Basically the same poeple who wank on about Man Utd all the time being the biggest and best at everything — biggest Stadium (aka sewer), biggest world support (but where were they in the 1991–1992 season?), best youth team (I don't think).
Unfortunately, these same arseholes are the ones that are on TV all the bloody time.
I don't know if anyone saw Football focus on Grandstand but I couldn't believe that two loonies had tipped Sheff Wed over Leeds to win the Championship.
Leeds were quoted at 20–1 to win it, even though they'd just shown an interview with Howard saying the squad we have now is better than the one we had when we won the thing.
I went to the bookies to put a bet on it, only to find out that the odds had shortened to 14–1.
Maybe Ladbrokes know a bit more about football than messrs Wilson, Motson, et al.
Couldn't agree more.
Even when Chappie was at his most inept the majority of the crowd resorted to muffled sniggers rather than abuse and barracking.
Speaking of which, did anyone read how Chapman got sent off last night?
I gather it was an elbow.
Stu
From:
Date: Wed, 18 Aug 1993 15:28:19 +0100
Subject: Attention UK subs
We've tinkered with the list a bit, and lots of people with dicky UK addresses will have had inscrutable messages saying you've been subbed onto the list again.
A few will have had two copies of a message or two.
Don't let any of this worry you; it just means we've added your ‘short’ address form so you can post to and get off the list when you want to.
Hopefully that's the end of the saga, but let me know if there are any probs in the future.
If you want to check your entry on the list, write to  and say in your message QUERY LEEDS-UNITED — it'll show you what you're down as.
Gavin
From:
Date: Wed, 18 Aug 1993 14:35:45 +0000
Subject: Cantona Subculture
I was amazed to see the club shop still flogging large glossies of ol Frogslegs.
And worse, there are plenty still buying them.
Who are these Cantonite Leeds fans?
Are we witnessing a Jacobite uprising amidst Whites?
Some spurious loyalty to a ‘king across the Pennines’?
Face it suckers, he's gone forever.
He is an ego on legs and we're well shut of him.
Anyway I read in the programme that Whyte has definitely gone to Birmingham City for 1/4 million.
Not bad considering age and form I'd say.
Tim
From:
Date: 18 Aug 93 15:11:27 GMT
Subject: Re: Cantona Subculture
On the day he signed for Birmingham City Central TV news reported the figure as stlg475,000, before they interviewed him.
I subsequently choked on my tea as I'd heard it was 250,000.
Anybody know what the correct fee was in the end?
Phil
From:
Date: Wed, 18 Aug 93 16:20 GMT
Subject: Personalised Shirts
Yes, you too can walk round with ‘Batty’ on your back.
Leeds are offering a ‘personalised shirt service’.
Details were sparse in the proggy but this is what it said:
‘Have your shirt personalised by name and number
HOME SHIRT (single flock letter/number)
Individual letters 50p each.
8’ Full block single number 3 pounds 8’Full block double number 5.50
AWAY SHIRT (double flock letter/number)
Individual letters 1 pound each 8’ Full block single number 4 pounds 8’’’double number 7.50
Personal callers to the LUFC Souvenir shop…’
A few questions spring to mind…can you have ANYTHING printed on it, or just players names…
Can you mail order a shirt with the details on it?
Is it ONLY personal callers?
Can you take/send in your existing shirt to be personalised?
Could be amusing with really personalised stuff on them:-)
Its funny (sort of), Iwas contemplating sending a begging letter to Mr Humphries to see if he could get hold of a shirt for me…
I thought it would be cool:-) Now EVERYONE can have one…steal my thunder a bit, I think the away top with HUMPHRIES on the back will be cool for work:-)
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 18 Aug 93 16:24 GMT
Subject: Transfer fees
250,000 is the most common figure Ive heard…and as it was in the program too…
What annoys me is why there is always confusion over exact transfer fees.
You ALWAYS get different figures quoted — OK, most of the time the difference is little…but why???????
Whats the big secret??????
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 18 Aug 93 16:59 GMT
Subject: TSB Article
This has been lovingly hand typed straight from this seasons first issue of The Square Ball…all typos are mine!!
A tribute…
Manchester United Champions
Champions once more!
Man Utd today celebrated yet another championship triumph, their second in only 26 years, to continue their ‘domination’ of English football.
Alex ‘spit’ Ferguson said about last nights delerious scenes at old Trafford, ‘It is becoming a habit now isnt it!
Theyll have to give us the trophy for keeps if we win it again in the next quarter century.
Mind you, the cup does look a bit different this time — I always thought it was a sort of big fat thing with a pointy top?
Or is that Clayton blackmore?
Oh well, I'm especially delighted for those magnificent supporters etc etc.
Its great for everyone connected with the club etc etc.
Old Trafford, Theatre of Dreams etc etc’.
Mr ferguson has won an astonishing one league championship in only his seven years at Old Trafford.
His shrewdness in the transfer market has meant that approximately 20 million pounds have been spent on incoming ‘talent’ and many of those world class players such as Jim Leighton, Mike Phelan, Neil Webb and Danny Wallace have played a crucial part in this seasons triumph.
Mr Ferguson was also quick to rid his squad of ‘dead wood’ such as 1992 footballer of the year Gordan Strachan (thanks Alex) and 1993 footballer of the year Paul McGrath.
Mr ferguson has also placed the emphasis on youth with his son Darren a shining example of the old adage that, even if you're crap, you can still play for a professional football team if your dad is the manager.
Also the multi-talented winger/disco dancer Lee Sharpe (Sharp with an ‘E’— quite appropriate really) who has now overcome the mystery illness, lately diagnosed as viral meningitis, and presumably contracted at one of the many ‘raves’ which young Lee (with two ‘E's) likes to attend.
Lets hope Lee takes it ‘e'asy now!
Alex ferguson also brought ‘home’ Sparky hughes, that wonderfully sporting Welsh striker whose outside interests include acting and self abuse.
hughesy is renowned as a ‘hard man’ although this appears to be a one way thing — he doesnt mind dishing it out but if anyone comes within a foot of him he crashes to the turf, usually clutching his face and rolling around frantically in an attempt to get a fellow professional booked/sent off.
What a pro!
No Analysis of U-ni-ted's season would be complete without a special mention for that wonderfully talented frenchman Monsieur Cantona.
His gallic flair has illuminated Old Trafford and the United supporters have taken him to their hearts — they have even invented (in their usual witty and original way) a song which goes ‘Ooh Aah Cantona, Ooh Aah cantona’.
Eric himself had this to say; ‘I am very ‘appy.
I dont know why but I Lurv you.
I ‘ave founf my spiritual ‘ome etc etc’ Sounds vaguely familiar.
STOP PRESS Eric has today announced that he is joining Icelandic Second Division side Fram Reykjavik.
Said Eric ‘I am very ‘appy.
I ‘ave found my spiritual ‘ome etc etc’ no official reason has been given for Eric's sudden departure although rumours are rife that Eric was discovered sodomising Sir Matt Busby's pet labrador ‘flossy’in the showers at Old Trafford.
One ‘unofficial’ source told me ‘the club didnt mind what went on with young Ryan on away trips — after all they were roommates and what roommates do — well they do at this club anyway — but Sir Matt's dog!
The poor thing cant walk properly anymore and may have to wear nappies for the rest of its life.’
QUESTION.
Is John MOtson Eric cantona's agent? he cant talk about his Gallic flair without sounding like hes become sexually aroused.
It was so bad in the last match against Wimbledon that I felt nauseous —‘Alex Ferguson's masterstroke’ Not the only thing getting ‘stroked’, eh John!
…end of part one…
From:
Date: Wed, 18 Aug 93 17:11 GMT
Subject: Shirts
Maybe it is just for personal callers then??
Mind you Idlike to think its professionally done, not some woman in the back with an iron:-)
Well, you dont HAVE to get your/a name put on it…just the number I spose.
The away shirt will look better with it I reckon, cos It will be white and black (or blue?), rather than just plain blue.
That way it will look ‘proper’ rather than something you had to bribe yer mum to do:-)
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 18 Aug 93 17:27 GMT
Subject:…
Part 2
A Tribute…(continued)
Many famous names from United's past paid tribute to the current squad last night.
george Best said ‘You're my best mate pal so you are, hic, you and me against the f**cking world, hic, f**cking best mate a bloke ever had, hic, do you want a fight or what, hic’ George then vomited and began coughing up blood so I grabbed hold of Dennis Law who said ‘Younaaaa theeeerm Maanchessterr Uuuniitedd younaanarr’.
Whatever that may mean.
United director Bobby Charlton, looking resplendant in his United Blazer with a very attractive rosette pinned to the front (and his distinctive side parting above the ear & ‘sweepover’ hairdo) was his usual uncontroversial self, unlike his elder brother who has at least got a personality (and played for a decent football club)
The last word must go to Uniteds magnificent supporters who have supported the club so vociferously, ALMOST drowning out the 500 Leeds supporters who were allowed into the ‘Theatre of Dreams’ last September.
The sportingness and fairmindedness of those supporters has been clearly demonstrated on many occasions, particularly following their sides sad departure from the FA Cup at Bramall Lane where there was only one ‘serious disorder’ outside the ground — nice to know they can take defeat so graciously.
They also enjoy a sense of humour, finding the late great Don Revies death from motor neurone disease a particularly rich vein of material.
Their very amusing fanzine ‘red issue’ is full of such witty articles as well as lots of new and original jokes about Yorkshire folk and sheep (very amusing, yawn yawn)
EDUCATIONAL POINT: West Yorkshire is a heavy industrial area and is not Emmerdale Farm.
The only sheep around here are the sad bastards who walk around in Man Utd shirts (particularly the fat bastard in Wakefield who has No.7 and Cantona stencilled on the back) who were presumably sexually abused at a young age and hence feel the need to rebel — why not go the whole hog and dress up as a woman, you wouldnt look half as silly.
From:
Date: Wed, 18 Aug 93 18:12:53 BST
Subject: Re: Personalised Shirts
How much are the shirts themselves, Do the shop take Credit Card orders over the phone What is the number of the club shop?
I reckon 6 Lewis on an away shirt will look great.
I wonder if they would do 6 Hunter.
Might strike terror into the opponent in a friendly kick about.
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 19 Aug 1993 09:25:05 +0100
Subject: RE: personalised shirts
Thirty-three quid I think it was.
Yeowch.
Yup.
0532–706844
I'm sat waiting for mine, ordered yesterday.
Gav.
From:
Date: Thu, 19 Aug 93 10:15 GMT
Subject: Shirts
I think the shirts are about 32 quid.
Yep they do cc orders over the phone AFAIK.
Number is 0532 706844 
Well, they might even consider putting names/numbers on older shirts aswell?!??
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 19 Aug 93 11:32:29 BST
Subject: last night
I see everything is quiet after Scum & Scouse gits won convincingly last night.
Both look to be playing pretty well.
I'm quite pleased that Norwich won last night in a funny sort of way.
I couldn't really see them losing three in a row.
I've a feeling that the victory makes them less likely to sneak a point.
Let's go for another prediction…2–1 for Leeds.
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 19 Aug 93 12:04 GMT
Subject: LAST NIGHT
Erm, well I dont think these results are as good as they might seem.
Certainly the scousers have had the better results, Saturdays was no big deal…2–0 at home to 10 men Sheff Wed who were totally impotent up front.
Last nights looks good tho…having said that they are at full strength…‘cept for Barnes.
SCUM have had nice little fixtures.
Away to Norwich, who were completely lame against them…no passion at all…and home to Sheff Utd, who will be lucky not to go down.
The good thing about Sheff Utd (from SCUMS point of view) is that I doubt they would go there just to get a draw…they beat SCUM twice last year so might have thought they had a chance.
Id rather play Sheff Utd at home than West Ham, cos at least Sheff Utd arent boring 10 man defence.
SCUM are probably kidding themsleves that they are so good…be even sweeter when they come crashing down!
I wish we were playing them, or they were playing the Scousers/Arsenal/Man City even.
Playing a team who didnt just believe the hype and went for it.
The Arse showed pre-season how to do it (aswell as blackpool/Bury hehehehe).
I have a feeling they will come to Leeds to do just that.
However, Gunn isnt as good on crosses as Miklosko is, and by then we might have had some practice!
Robins played crap vs SCUM, so lets hope they are just as crap vs us.
I cant remember who they played last night, but I think the win will mean they will be more than happy with a point.
If they had lost they might have wanted 3 a bit more.
I reckon Norwich are on a very fine line between being a half decent side, and one which could go down.
It only takes a couple of players to have mediocre starts for them and they will be down there and lose confidence.
Their game is all about confidence…and hitting teams on the break.
If Fox doesnt play well I cant see any danger.
Mind you, even if he does, hell have to face Dorigo or Kelly, and they are both quick enough to deal with him.
Ive every confidence in our back 4 this year, and the midfield is classy enough to control any match.
Last year we got caught on the break too many times…this year we have the pace/organisation to deal with that…and Lukic isnt bad at 1 on 1's…
I do wish he'd command his 6 yard box more on crosses and corners tho 
If we get an early goal then we could score a few…but seeing as Norwich will go to spoil Ill go for another 1–0 win, or maybe 2–0.
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 19 Aug 1993 13:49:33 +0000
Subject: Concern
I'm still a bit concerned about the side, although they look 100% better in defence with DOL in charge.
They seem to lack ideas.
There was a stage about two thirds into the first half when (because they hadn't scored yet despite aggressive assaults on the West Ham box) Batty square-balled it after crossing into their area.
The rest of them just paused and hesitated.
I blame this on McAllister and his indecisive captaincy.
Also too often they broke away only to lose the initiative by letting the cockney donkeys get back.
Another thing: not enough men would be in the middle waiting for crosses when they came and like I said before the crosses were mostly aiming for heads — or for Deano's head.
He and Whelan would have had a better chance if they had come along the floor more often, even despite the permanent ten-man claret and blue wall.
Worst of all the defence totally lost concentration after about eighty five minutes gone.
West Ham got a corner and started to vaguely threaten for the first time.
Remember Oldham away last season? 2–0 up with 2 minutes to go, it ended 2–2 (admittedly after a ludicrous extension of extra time.)
I hope Wilko knocks these lessons into them before Saturday.
And I think Norwich will come looking for a win.
This team won 15–0 in a foreign friendly a few weeks ago, they are out for blood.
They won the most aways of anyone last season (7 I think).
Anyway here's hoping Leeds thrash the arses off ‘em.
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 19 Aug 93 15:40 GMT
Subject: Concern
First off, its a little premature to judge them at this stage.
I agree they SEEMED to be lacking in ideas when in posession sometimes, especially when the 2 centre backs had the ball, or Batty was bringing it out.
The reason for this was the lack of movement up front.
Noone was looking for the ball or running into space.
I have a feeling they were working rigidly to Wilko's plans for this game, and attempting to get round the 3 defenders in the middle of there defence by getting the ball wide.
When we had posession wide we did well, more often than not getting crosses in.
The quality of those crosses wasnt up to much most of the time — but some credit has to go to their keeper who was taking everything within 12–13 yards of his line…
McAllister was playing well enough himself and we looked comfortable at all times.
Just lacked the normal sense of urgency…maybe this is a deliberatle ploy by Wilko too?
Theres not much in the way of creation to be done against a blanket defence…all you can do is try to get behind them by getting it wide…which we did until the final ball.
Im sure that will come.
I dont think theres anything to be gained from throwing everyone in the box for one of the crosses.
I do think we could have been ‘sniffing’ for the second ball better (ie the cleared headers/knock downs).
I think EVERYONE got nervous then…purely based on last season and conceding late goals after controlling the match.
I think they continued to concentrate admirably.
I certainly didnt see any mistakes or lack of marking etc.
It was tense for a few minutes…but it was the first home game…and the first win at stake.
If I remember right, first home matches have been similar for a few years now.
If you look back to saturday youll see that theres nothing wrong with the team.
No lack of confidence or ideas.
Just the opposition and maybe the system of play (Wilko's orders).
A friend called me up who went to the City game, and he was raving about Leeds.
he doesnt normally do that (promise!).
Basically everyone raved about Leeds that day — and Tuesday was a comfortable if a little uninspired.
A little more passion (from the players but more importantly the crowd) will solve that one.
hehehe.
Yep, Norwich did the Sad Gits Preseason Tour of scandinavia.:-)
Crystal Palace also do this every year, and they invariably win 7–0, 8–0 etc.
It will be worse than last year…soak it all up then try and break (with Ruel Fox).
If you want uninspired you should have seen them versus SCUM on sunday.
if they come for a win, itll be a win gained from getting us on the break.
Id dearly love Norwich to come and try and win it ‘properly’.
In any case…if we have 9 or 10 points from our first 5 games Ill be happy (away to Scousers and Arse).
From:
Date: Thu, 19 Aug 93 16:07:31 BST
Subject: Comments
Well I've been off work for a bit and got back to a massive 156 messages from the group!
I went to the match on Tuesday and was a bit disappointed with it after the promising start at Man.
City.
I think it was something to do with the 9–1-1 formation West Ham adopted.
A couple of points:—
Macca played as well as I've seen in the first twenty minutes.
Our defense looked pretty solid with some classy Dorigo touches, good solid preformances form O'leary and Fairclough and some speedy overlaps from Kelly.
Did you notice how their attacker with long hair seemed to crouch down and try to catch the ball every time a ball came near, Fairclough was excellent at marking him, I think they wore the same pair of shorts!
Strach played his heart out typified by a hilarious diving header to save the ball going for a throw (unfortunately Kelly then kicked the ball straight out of touch.
Lukic made a couple of brave and decisve dives to feet (I don't think he'd have done that last season)
Deane won loads of ball with his head in the area but most of his knock ons went somewhere harmless.
The Centre half(s) marking him was pretty good though, against lesser opposition he'd be able to go straight for goal.
The crowd was a bit quiet but when everyone did sing it was awesome!!
A pity we couldn't keep it up all the time.
West Ham should have bought Chapman.
Well unfortunately my girlfriend is dragging me off to Rhodes for a week so I'll miss the Norwich, Scouse and Oldham game.
When I come back I expect you all to have worked hard and got the team another 9 points and a top of the league position.
(does Rhodes have Sky?)
I was thinking of writing to TSB and the programme desk tomorrow advertising our group, I'll send a draft letter so you can comment on it.
How many of us go to home matches: we should orgainse something on a match day.
Maybe we could even get official supporters club status which might allow us to get bulk tickets easier.
Well I've definately worked too hard today reading all your messages, time to hit the pub.
Cheers,
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 20 Aug 93 10:54 GMT
Subject: Phil…
Phil, all is not completely lost…
All you need is a computer (of some description), a modem (cheap n slow is ok) and a local BBS which has Email.
You can then log in every night and read/send messages.
You could even get an off-line-reader to cut down the phone bills to hardly anything.
If you have a computer…youre half way there…if not you could get a cheap Amiga500 or 600 for about 200 quid.
Second hand for about 100. 2400 baud modems will cost under 100 quid.
For downloading mail packets you dont need much more.
just an idea!!
Mark
PS If you have/get an Amiga I can send you all the necessary terminal/comms and off line reader software.
From:
Date: Fri, 20 Aug 1993 10:57:59 +0100
Subject: Leeds fixtures in TeX
Anyone else out there use TeX at all?
I've got a plain TeX version of Leeds' league fixtures for this season all nicely done in a ruled table.
You can fill in the results as the season goes on and re-print it whenever you update it.
It's a sort of computer nerd's version of the kind of thing they hand out free with Shoot! every now and then, only you typeset it instead of using crayons.
It's set using standard postscript fonts; you can change them to something else if you want to.
Mail me if you'd like a copy.
Gavin
PS Good luck, Phil — great to hear you've enjoyed the list, hope you'll be back on line as soon as possible!
From:
Date: 20 Aug 93 10:14:46 GMT
Subject: Bye
Well I'm afraid it's now time for me to send one of those boring sending off messages that everyone usually skips straight past.
Well tough — I'm sending it anyway!
This list has, believe it or not, really got me in the mood for venturing back to see United — tommorrow should see me travelling up the M1 if I can get the transport arranged — and hopefully I'll be seeing quite a few games throughout the season.
To all who've been involved in setting this thing up a big thanks.
The Novell networks I've been working have constantly been bleeping and displaying ‘New message from ’ far too frequently to the annoyance of those around me — but who cares.
It's added a certain anticipation as well to the placement job I've been doing —‘Oh come on someone must have something to say’ was a regular feeling/thought as I looked at the monitor in anticipation.
Anyway I'm not signing off until about 5.30 tonight so I'll keep waiting and reading those messages until then — after I've been to the pub at dinner time of course!
So long Leeds fans — keep posting!
Phil
ps 2–1 to Leeds tommorrow
From:
Date: 20 Aug 93 11:00:30 GMT
Subject: Re: Bye
Well this year has been a placement year in the middle of my Computer Studies Degree so I'm returning to Derby Uni at the end of September for my final year.
I'm hoping that maybe I'll be able to re-sub then, but I've heard from other students that the Uni aren't too keen on users using JANET and INTERNET and so on.
We'll see.
I'll be hassling them when I get there…believe me!!!
After that, I haven't got a clue.
Maintaining a LAN at Elland Road (or Headingley, home of my other great love LEEDS RL) would be quite satisfactory.
Phil.
From:
Date: Fri, 20 Aug 1993 12:10:50 GMT+1
Hi
Some news on Rocastle's transfer rumors.
It was reported last night in my local paper ‘Irish Press’ that Rocky stated that he did not want to leave Leeds and was prepared to wait his chance like everybody else.
Also Kerslake is going to play his first game since injury for the reserves in mid-week.
Jim
From:
Date: Fri, 20 Aug 1993 14:01 GMT
Subject: Tomorrow's game
I heard on the Radio 5 lunchtime sport report that O'Leary and Deane are both doubtful for the game tomorrow.
Anybody any ideas.
I know that O'Leary got a knock on the head on Tuesday.
Phil, Sorry to hear your leaving us, hopefully it'll only be a short while before your back on line again.
Declan
From:
Date: Fri, 20 Aug 93 14:22 GMT
Subject: Team news
I didnt see any probs with Deano??
Might be a bit of a blow for tomorrow…
I can see a bit of success in the air against them.
Maybe Wilko will play Whelan and Wallace, or Whelan and Forrester…we could go mega midget and play Wallace and Forrester:-) I reckon they could make a good pair, like to see mssrs Bruce and pallister cope…
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 20 Aug 1993 14:37 GMT
Subject: Leeds V Arsenal
With a bit of luck I'll actually get to see my first competitive Leeds match next Wednesday v the Arse at Highbury.
It was interesting to hear DOL on the Radio the other night commenting that he wouldn't feel any emotion walking onto Higbury pitch wearing Leeds colours.
I'd say he'd give anything to score though (just like Chappy when he came to Leeds).
I wonder what kind of response the crowd will give him?
Declan
My prediction for tomorrow: 3–1
From:
Date: Fri, 20 Aug 93 15:16:58 BST
Subject: Re: Leeds V Arsenal
Thought it was Tuesday.
From:
Date: Fri, 20 Aug 1993 15:41:53 +0100
Subject: Re: Leeds V Arse
It is Tuesday, 7:45 k.o. — at least that's what's printed on our tickets, which arrived today.
(That's me, Stuart, and another mate — anyone else we know going?). tells me all the Leeds tickets are sold out already so getting a ticket now means feigning cockneyism and ringing Highbury.
I used Mark's FAX method to get a ticket, and it worked a treat.
Gavin
From:
Date: Fri, 20 Aug 1993 15:55 GMT
Subject: The game with the Arse
Sorry people I stand corrected, the game is on Tuesday night, I'll still be there though.
I'm going with a Scum season ticket holder and Newcastle Utd fan should make for an interesting evening all round.
Declan
From:
Date: Mon, 16 Aug 93 14:35 GMT
Subject: Tickets
Yes.
You can cut out the first step generally, and risk your life waiting for the 710710 nu mber to become free, then get details of what areas are still not sold out etc.
The one time I tried this year i ended up in some void somewhere.
Previous years were ok once you got the sought after dial tone.
My favourite method still has to be the good ol' fax.
Never been engaged.
Ask for tickets in order of preference, mine is always Kop first.
Give credit card details, say ‘please debit my card accordingly’, state whether you want it posted or if youll collect it on the day, and finally give your voice number for them to call ‘if there are any problems’.
I normally get my tickets the next day, or in two days.
That s for Home games.
you can try for away games too, but I dont normally decide about away games until the week before.
Then its always worth calling the away club direct and asking if they sell visitors tickets.
9 times out of 10 they do.
If you really want to go and all the away tickets are sold then you can
1)
go along and buy a ticket from a tout…or even off another Leeds supporter who has one spare.
In the all ticket days you could often wait for the first coach from Leeds to turn up and they would have 20+ tickets for us poor souls who couldnt get one!!
Nothing if not resilient Leeds supporters:-)
2)
get a ticket in the home section.
Dont worry, you often get Leeds supporters all round the ground…
‘Leeds fans here, Leeds fans there, Leeds fans everyf*$£ingwhere…’ as they say.
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 20 Aug 93 16:05 GMT
Subject: Leeds vs Arse
Declan…how/why you going?
Are you here in London anyways?
Yep…heres what to say…
‘Awright theaa mee ol chinah, ows it gowen den…
Look mate, I really need a ticket fer the ol Leeds U-ni-ted match nex tewsdee.
Any chance me ol son?
Mite be wurf a few sovs to ya?
OK mate, guv, nah probs…yeh, awright, Ill come to the ticket office on the day like and get is sorted befor the match.
Cheers mate…’
Any offence caused to cockernees is purely intentional.
Im a londoner meself (but from the more cultured West London) hehe;-).
Actually I dont think we got any cockneys on the list (East London), and norf lunderners speek more like that.
:-) Im much more posher, honest I am guv…strike a light…a fair cop me old son etc etc
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 20 Aug 1993 16:17 GMT
Subject: RE: Leeds vs Arse
No I'm actually going over to Northamptom working for the week so we've just orgainsed to go down and see the game.
The other option was going to see the scum v Villa on Monday but that fell through, they wouldn't/couldn't pay me enough money to go through with it.
I suppose it makes a change from the last English match I saw which was Carlisle v Norwich in the Coca Cola cup last season, 2–2 it ended.
Declan
From:
Date: Mon, 23 Aug 93 10:39:46 BST
Subject: Re: Leeds vs Norwich
Let's all not get guilty of over-reacting to an awful result.
Leeds had many such performances last season, but equally some very good ones.
Yes we have obviously got problems throughout the team, and I think it was too much to expect Leeds to put in a real championship challenge.
The great disparity between home and away form last year was more of a freak than either aspect taken alone.
The true form was somewhere between the two.
The final league position was slightly false, but not amazingly so.
In fact there were only 12 points between 20th and 6th places, a couple of away wins and a little luck could have seen us finish around 8th.
That would have been an equally false position.
Remember Liverpool only got their act together in the last couple of months and finished 6th.
Looking at the team — Lukic had an awful time last year, was as bad as when we got relegated.
He won't be quite as bad again, but will not be much better either.
We know he can't deal with crosses so we need a centre-half who can.
The defence as a whole do not deal with the back pass rule well.
Essentially they should not do it it unless absolutely necessary.
Dyring the championship year, Dorigo and Whyte proved excellent at anticipating the long ball, nipping in, and knocking it back.
You cannot do that now.
The midfield cannot get to the by-line to cross the ball.
Speed wants to come inside (he really wants to play central mid-field, Strachan does not have the change of pace to beat a full-back any more.
Consequently the full-backs are being asked to provide all the crosses.
Dorigo and Kelly got caught out many times on Saturday, the central defenders are suspect, so the full-backs should be helping them not leaving them more exposed.
I'm afraid Kelly was completely found out, leaving the other three defenders out of position as well.
On a couple of goals Dorigo had been dragged right in beyond the centre of the pitch, with the other defenders no-where, and where did Speed get to, it is part of his job to help/cover the left back.
I personally hope that Rocastle and Wallace are given a chance now, and that Noel Whelan and Kelly are given time to mature in the reserves.
However despite all this, I think: a/ Leeds can finish in the top third.
b/ We can put together another home run.
c/ There will be an improvement at Arse and Liverpool.
d/ Our away form will improve.
Keep Smiling.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 23 Aug 93 12:26:36 GMT
Subject: Disaster
I watched the Leeds game on Saturday night on Match of the Day and it certainly was for Norwich.
They completely outclassed us.
We were lucky it wasn't 6.
There third goal was a beaut. never see another volley like it.
Wilko said after the game he was shocked.
So was the 30,000 crowd.
If that is a sign of things to come then it will be a long season.
If the players had any regret they would forgo their wages until they earned them.
If thats the kind of performance we can expect from well paid professionals god help us.
With Arsenal and Liverpoolthe next 2 games lets keep our fingers crossed.
Richard ()
From:
Date: Tue, 24 Aug 93 10:26 GMT
Subject: Disaster
Well, I had yesterday off.
No, I wasnt getting my wrists stiched back up!!
Did anyone go to the game?
I avoided M.O.D saturday evening (WHY have the cameras for our worst home result since about 1980????), and only caught the last 3 goals on the Sky roundup on sunday.
I was listening to radio 5 who had reports.
From what I could gather, we played crap for the first 20–25 minutes.
Then ‘started getting back into it’, McAllister and Speed were mentioned.
The next report came in for the 3rd goal, and again said ‘Leeds are beginning to get back into the match, but Norwich have scored a 3rd’…all other reports/comments just mention the goals.
Ive come to learn there little/no point hoping to get a report of the match when a side wins 3 or 4 nil, because its immediately a one sided contest and all you hear is a one sided report.
My initial impressions, from hearing the occasional report (as above) was that we made a disastrous start, and went a goal behind…that took us a while to get over, in the meantime Norwich were boosted.
When chasing the game we were always succeptable to the counter attack and conceded 2 goals on the break, whilst the other was another mistake.
So, I got the impression it was a bad result — but the performance wasnt necessarily that bad (ie we werent dominated for 90 mins).
Anyhow if someone did see the match Id be interested to hear what happened possession wise during the match…who was in control etc.
Apart from that…
1)
Why is it that the 2 or 3 (albeit horrendous) mistakes ended up with goals?
2)
When was the last time Dorigo made 2 mistakes like that?
3)
Why are we always confronted with an inspired keeper when we are totally in control (Man City)?
4)
Why do rebounds (after Lukic saves) always fall to opposition players?
It really is about time we had a BIT of luck.
It looks like a repeat of last year in that any/every mistake is punished with a goal.
We should have SOME games in the season where we are outplayed and yet get a result.
If we have been outplayed to any degree in the last year, the opposition scores goals and wins.
The convers is NOT true (look at the away results).
Ok…well it looks like weve had one superb performance, one good but uninspired, and one bad.
You get ‘funny’ results for the first couple of weeks…lets hope that we learn lessons, and get down to work.
Something needs to be done about Lukic.
He cannot handle the back pass…never has done.
That is unfortunately a major part of a keepers job these days.
He is not compensating by making instinctive stops or commanding his area to take crosses.
He IS good at one on ones, but thats not enough.
Beeney should get a chance, if not the youth keeper (Pettinger?), he looked good and confident at crosses.
Rocastle will probably start tonight…lets hope he has a good run.
What about Tinkler in defence?
Finally, O'Leary will be out for weeks with an achilles injury.
Did Deane play saturday?
Who with??
I reckon we can do the Arse tonight, but my prediction is 0–0 (always close).
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 24 Aug 93 16:44:12 +0200
Subject: hello
Things sure have gotten quiet here lately.
Is this because of that dismal performance against Norwich?
I couldn't get the game on tv or radio, but was glued to BBC world service for any news on the game.
When it went 0–1, I wasn't too worried.
Then came 0–2 —’ oh, oh, this is going to be tough’.
Then 0–3’ Aw, bollix!!’
The rest is best forgotten.
Still, the season is still young and I'm prepared to follow my heart rather than my brain and predict a win (1–0) against Arsenal tonight.
Hopefully, that result against Norwich was the kick in the arse they needed to get them moving.
Can anyone out there tell me what frequency Radio 5 broadcasts on…by any chance on shortwave?
Vin
From:
Date: Wed, 25 Aug 93 09:16:07 BST
Subject: Arse
Hi, Listened to the game on R5 last night.
Again it was one of those games where defensive mistakes gave the points away.
I'll leave the report to somebody who went.
Judging from comments it seemed that after Leeds got over the first 15 mins.
They actually had most of the mid-field posession.
Unfortunately this did not create many chances.
Things did liven up after the break when Wallace replaced Whelan.
Mark Lawrenson summarising felt that the Leeds mid-field, although capable of dominating a game, do not really open defences up.
(He also thinks we should try to play less football, which I don't agree with).
It seems to be the same old story.
A/
We dominate games terratorially without scoring.
B/
Concede goals on the break and seem incapable of surviving the few moments in a match that we are under pressure.
C/
Leeds can never relax and play and Arsenal/Norwich type game, because even if we get ahead we always look likely to concede goals.
Kev.
From:
Date: Wed, 25 Aug 1993 09:52:15 +0100 (BST)
Subject: The Arse
Hi, I'm not going to do a match report, even though I went to the game last night.
Instead I've got some comments.
First off, I agree, that it seems we are trying to play too much football, there always seems to be one pass too many, it's all very pretty, but it doesn't get us behind the opposition defence and create chances.
Last night, we had nearly all the play in the first half, without creating a great deal of clear cut chances.
It just didn't seem like we were going to score.
Secondly, I know everyone goes around saying it, but I didn't really believe it ‘til last night, but the defence really are crap!!
All that the Arse were doing were playing simple balls over the top of Fairclough & Newsome, for Wright & Campbell to run onto, and the defence couldn't really cope.
We were sat in the North Bank (couldn't get tickets for the Leeds end), and in the second half we had a good view of the amount of space that the Arsenal forwards were getting, it was unbelievable.
Every time they came forward, you expected something to happen (perhaps It was sitting in the north bank with the Cockney scum that made me think this!!).
Anyway, a couple of plus points, Strachan was outstanding (superb goal), Batty was as good as ever, & Kelly played quite well,(apart from being at fault for their second goal).
Deane was a bit quiet, well marshalled by the Arsenal donkeys, and Wallace was quite lively when he came on.
Here's hoping that things get better at Liverpool:-)
Sunil
From:
Date: Wed, 25 Aug 93 10:35:58 BST
Subject: Wilko
I have one very simple question.
In the footballing faternity, Wilko is highly regarded as someone who reads the game well.
Why is it then that he refuses to acknowledge that the defence is bad and needs improving?
You may argue that he is not easily panicked.
Fair point, but the Leeds defence has struggled for almost a season and he still hasn't put it right.
Is he constrained by lack of funds?
Fans must not seek consolation from comments such as‘…we dominated but didn't score…’ or ‘…with a bit of luck we'll do better…’.
The stark reality is that if we don't start winning games, we'll go down.
You only get points for winning, not dominating and near misses!
From:
Date: Wed, 25 Aug 93 10:50 GMT
Subject: Arse
Me too 
Ditto 
I agree.
Itd be interesting to see the corner count for this game.
We did have all the posession without SOUNDING like there were any chances of note in the first half.
It did show excellent character to bounce back from the start…one plus point from the first half.
When Wallace came on we immediately sounded more threatening.
Can someone who went say if the midfield started looking for him…ie played it through the defence occasionally for him to run onto?
I said vs West Ham that Whelan and Deane we too similar, both looking for the same ball — or not feeding off each other.
They werent looking to get behind the defence at all.
Wallace does, and a lot of the time a forward can ‘force’ a midfield into a certain ball/pass.
If Wallace shows and moves towards space — the midfield will pass.
The midfield cannot easily force the forward into space.
What Im saying is the running of the forwards creates space and chances.
Wallace and Deane look like the ideal combination as once they start passing to wallace it makes space for deane to also run into space so give HIM the variety too.
I think we all chose these two as our starting forwards.
Credit to Whelan — hes played well enough, but strikers work in pairs…
Well, I can see what he meant.
Theres no cutting edge at the moment.
There seems to be a distinct lack of aggression or passion.
We were famous for bombarding teams for the first 20 mins of games…beating them into submission…p[laying at a pace.
Thats what I want to see.
It gets the crowd going which motivates the players.
We really need someone like Vinny Jones to get them fired up.
i cant see where we could have such a player…but all our players are too nice at the moment — maybe they can start showing the nasty streak.
I certainly do NOT want Leeds to play like Norwich/Nottm Forest.
I want slick passing, quick passing and to get the ball BEHIND the defence occasionally.
Turn the defenders.
Vary the styles.
Excite the crowd.
Entertain by scoring goals and being dangerous attacking.
At the moment its all to deliberate…defences know that when we get the ball centre midfield we will play it out wide and try and get a cross in from there.
Wallace will make the difference as he will give us options, so the defence wont know what to expect.
He will feed off Deanes flicks aswell.
I think we ALWAYS play well against Arsenal.
We always control midfield.
But the way they play that doesnt matter…they just knock it forward as soon as posible and rely on Wright.
Now if we created when we were in control we will win against them…or find an inspired Seaman.
I see he made another outstanding save last night.
At the moment, any time the opposition has a good shot/attack it goes in — whereas Leeds need to have 4 or 5 good shots to score.
Maybe Lukic isnt doing his job.
He is the last line of defence but when was the last time he won us points with a save???
The last decent performance I remember was vs Stuttgart at Leeds.
Overall, weve had 1 excellent game, 2 good games (with regard to possession) and one bad.
We are NOT getting the points our performances deserve.
I do feel its only a very fine tweaking job to be done and we will be unstoppable.
Even allowing for the obligatory cock up in defence = goal.
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 25 Aug 93 11:15 GMT
Subject: Wilko & Lady Luck
I agree about Wilko.
He used to be 100% sure of what was needed…but not only the defensive problems…things so obvious as using Deane and Whelan when he should be using Deane/Wallace.
The performances individually are ok but it seems the tactics are wrong.
I did have a little thought last night that maybe he is not expecting much this year but looking to get us on an even keel for an attempt next year on the title (with maybe another central defender).
That thought is too depressing for words…player for player we are probably the strongest squad in the premier league.
I really do think it s time to change keepers, Lukic is a good keeper — but is uninspired these days.
You have a decent keeper and you are almost there.
With someone like say Schmeichel in goal, the defensive cock ups you make might be ok.
Nearly every match he is making excellent saves and earning scum points.
Any defence will have their work cut out against Wright/Campbell the way Arse play.
From the radio I seemed quite confident that Newsome could handle the running at him.
The space behind is another ORGANISATIONAL problem.
Praps the tactic of flying full backs has to stop?
If they do that then maybe the opposite full back needs to drop in the middle and say Batty cover the opposite midfield area?
What Im saying is with the midfield and full backs we have theres no need to be under much pressure.
We keep getting caught out of position so maybe its the tactics at fault?
You look at Liverpool, Arsenal, Scum…and how many defenders they have back at all times.
When do you see Irwin/Parker come forward???
Only when the opposition are right back on the defence or for free kicks.
With us we try and break down the flanks with the full backs.
Thinking about it it used to work with Sterland, but then he only came forward AFTER strach had the ball and when the opposition were pushed right back…and he crossed it while in front of the defender rather than having to get round him.
Thats it.
We get caught out with long balls to where our defender has just come from.
We get turned and cant pass back to Lukic unless its VERY safe, and even then he kicks it straight out of play so relieving the pressure on the opposition AND putting pressure on us.
I think we need the sweeper system, OR forget attacking using the full backs unless we are completely in control — and push Speed/Strach wider and have them running into space pulling the full backs wide, so giving wallace/deane more space to run into in the middle area.
Someone forward this to wilko for me…ive solved all our problems;-)
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 25 Aug 1993 11:20:45 +0100
Subject: Leeds v Arse
I don't know if I've the will to do a report on the Arse match.
Why not just read up on away reports from last season instead?
It was the same old story — plenty of Leeds dominance, and a defence that rolls over and sticks its feet in the air with great regularity.
Oh yes, and a strike force that never quite manages to strike properly.
Bit like a cobra with arthritis in its neck:-)
I think the first minute and a half will stay with me for quite a while.
At the kick off, Arse canter upfield, Merson or someone puts in a cross from the right which Arse players in the box ignore but which Jon Newsome guides home past Lukic.
As that well-known Leeds fan Victor Meldrew would say, ‘I don't bloody believe it’.
After the next kick off, Arse reckon they'll try that again, only this time Lukic jumps at the ball on the edge of his area, makes a nerve-jangling hoke of it and nearly lets it get to an Arse player before scrabbling it away.
Leeds fans howl in anguish.
Thereafter things improved; we got several thousand corners while Arse got none at all.
Lukic and Newsome's nerves were throughly shot, however, and there were several Newsome-Lukic 1-on-1's where it seemed anything could happen.
Lukic was panicking, dealing with Newsome's backpasses by drilling them off the park headlong into the stands.
As the half went on, Leeds really had the better of things, in terms of possesion, going forward, corners, and shots on goal.
But no goals.
Second half I was expecting to see a lot more action from Leeds at the Leeds fans end part of the ground.
Leeds battled well in midfield, but so often passing moves broke down with errors, doubtless as much through frustration as anything else.
The ball never seemed to run quite right — Wallace (I think) looked to have through ball on the keeper at one point, but it landed a crucial half yard in the keeper's favour.
Wallace came on 2nd half instead of Whelan, and hasseled well without Scoring The Goal.
Deane didn't seem terribly comfortable to me.
I can't remember much about the second Arse goal, scored by Merson; maybe Sunil on the north bank can say what happened.
Strachan was inspirational, and his goal was the highlight of the match — running at the defence, he twisted through for a fine shot about fifteen yards out.
Just brilliant.
I thought that might get rid of some of the nerviness, and that a well-deserved equaliser was on, but the stop-start nature of the game continued, and the goal didn't come.
Arsenal really do keep things tight; they gave little or no room in which to manoeuvre.
Leeds on the other hand, go all out and leave a lot of space behind them.
In defence of the defence, Wilko has made changes, but they were both injured last night.
Lukic looked a lot better by the end of the night, plucking out a few high balls as happily as Seaman had been doing for Arse all night.
I'm afraid I can't see much changing for the red scouse game on saturday, though.
Other points coming up in a sec.
Gav
From:
Date: Wed, 25 Aug 93 12:38:27 +0200
Subject: Re (2): hello
This was from  (Kev)
Kev,
Thanks for the info.
I might be able to pick up Radio 5 when conditions are good cos I can usually get Radio 2 and even RTE (Irish station) late in the evening.
As for the game against Arsenal; it's hard to tell not having seen it or heard a radio commentary, but it looks like we're continuing on nicely from last year:-(
Vin
From:
Date: Wed, 25 Aug 1993 11:48:54 +0100
Subject: Other bits on Leeds v Arse
Other points from last night's Leeds v Arsenal match
I can understand Leeds fans expressing frustration at the defensive errors going on, especially after Norwich, but the continual barracking Lukic and Newsome got from some can't have helped at all.
Doesn't support mean shouting encouragement rather than abuse?
Ian Wright really does behave like a shithead.
He was booked in the first half for having a go at Whelan, and did a few other challenges worthy of his bad name.
I think he also took a dive in the penalty area in the 2nd half after Macallister??
Speed?? cleanly dispossesed him.
There was a new ‘official’ Leeds glossy magazine on sale.
It's just like the programme except the info in it is a bit more out of date and it's about twice the size.
There is a general section in the middle which probably goes into all such official club magazines — it craps on about Man U and Gazza a lot.
The final result is a sort of halfway house between the programme and TSB; it will be of interest to Leeds fans alright.
Crowd behaviour.
In the absence of much to shout about on the score sheet, Leeds fans reverted to taking the mick out of Arse fans' feeble singing by doing antiphonal ‘red army, red army’ chanting in high-pitched silly voices.
Always good for a laugh.
‘Leeds fans here, Leeds fans there, Leeds fans everyf***ing where’— a removal or two took place in the Arse pen nearest the Leeds bit.
If Sunil was on the north bank, I reckon it must have been Declan.
The away end bogs, according to who was forced to abandon half-times plans for a piss, are Heysel revisited — one narrow tunnel going into and coming out of the place was crammed with hundreds of fans all going in and out at the same time, plus a few old bills looking on saying helpfully ‘I shouldn't do that if I were you.
I incurred the wrath of the old bill as well, by sitting on the top of my seat with my back to the wall.
‘Sit in your seat properly,’ I was told.
It was like being at primary school again.
At least I didn't get my photo taken by the zoom-lensed police photographer on the touchline (at least I don't think I did).
Pre-match activities included a Leeds v Arsenal pool match in a local boozer involving Stuart and me, a couple of other Leeds fans from Halifax, and two friendly gooners.
Final score 1–1.
Then we lost the match.
Frustrating it was, but somehow I still had a good night out.
Anyone for Anfield?
Cheers, Gavin
From:
Date: Wed, 25 Aug 1993 13:17:04 +0100
Subject: Re: Other bits on Leeds v Arse
In reply to a note from Jim Doody:
Lukic Kelly, Fairclough, Newsome, Dorigo Strachan, Batty, Macallister, Speed Deane, Whelan (1st half) /Wallace (2nd half)
Not that I'm aware of; but then I didn't see anything of the Norwich game.
Nope.
He was rumoured to be in the squad for the game but didn't make an appearance.
As Strachan was clearly knackered at the end of it, I thought he could have had a run out for the last 10 mins or so.
Yep, I'll go alonmg with that.
Likewise, Gavin
From:
Date: Wed, 25 Aug 93 13:53 GMT
Subject: Norwich match
Im sorry…
I just couldnt avert my gaze from the football magazines this lunchtime…
Only flicked thru one (I cant handle trauma in large doses, I will ‘do’ the others — one a day).
The match stats made interesting reading.
Altho the players marks were as expected…you cant take anything from these normally as I reckon they do them from match reports rather than from going to matches…the one thing they CANT lie about is the shots/corners scores…and here goes…
Shots on target: Leeds — 7 Norwich — 6
But I thought it was completely one sided?? 6 shots on target and 4 goals…not bad strike rate eh?!
And I presume the 2 disallowed werent in that figure?
Corners: Leeds — 11 Norwich — 2
Say what???
Erm, exactly when/how did leeds get these corners if they were pissed on the whole match??
At best you could say all Leeds' 7 shots were saved and tipped round the post, that still leaves twice as many as Norwich.
I have to conclude that Leeds didnt play as bad as they were made out to.
I said at the time that reports are ALWAYS one sided when the score is 3–0 or 4–0, this coupled with what I actually heard on radio 5 and what Ive seen of the goals is that Leeds had plenty of the ball, just found it hard to break a 6,7,8 man defence, and norwich looked dangerous on the counter attack.
Even then they required huge cock ups to actually ‘create’ the chances.
Sounds to me like a similar performance to that of the West Ham match, except norwich are better at getting you on the break cos that is how they play.
pity they couldnt do that vs Scum…maybe Leeeee Sharpeeeee took robins aside for a quick trip before the match??
Praps leeds should scout the old raves for a pill popper and nobble the opposition similarly?
Praps mel can get out his white suit and medallion, comb his chest hair and do the job??
Come on wilko…get it sorted man.
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 25 Aug 93 14:55:10 BST
Subject: Lukic v Sprake
Hello, Just how does anyone who's old enough to remember compare the two I only saw Gary Sprake play twice (famous so I can't really remember how bad he was.
In those days Leeds used to be on telly quite a bit but of course there was not the coverage of every game as now.
I do recall him throwing the ball into his own net at Anfield, and dropping a cross onto Gilzean's head when playing for Wales v Scotland.
He did, of course benefit from having a very good defence.
A guy who used to take me to watch Oxford, but apart from that I respected his football knowledge, used to say he was Leeds weak link, but I don't remember too many details.
(The bugger ended up running off with my mum anyway.)
Anyway I'm sure we can all swap some Lukic stories so here are some memories.
1.
1983 FA Cup 3rd round replay at home to Asenal. 119 minutes Connor scores.
From the kick off Hird looses his head and fouls somebody.
Free Kick to Arse 40 Yds out to the left of Leeds box.
Rix shapes up to cross the ball to the far post, Lukic moves to cover, Rix instead clips (not powefully) along the ground round the wall.
The ball rolls slowly inside the near post.
Aaargh.
Arsenal still bought Lukic 6 months later.
2.
‘Blinded by the Light’ backward punch into his own net last season at Ibrox.
3.
‘Here you are David’(Hirst) at Hillsborough last April/May.
4.
Back-pass clearance v Norwich on Saturday.
You must all have particular favourites.
There must be loads from 1981–82 I just can't remember them now.
I wonder how Gary Sprake would have coped with the back pass rule:-) kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 26 Aug 93 10:38 GMT
Subject: League cup draw…
Ive been reliably informed that we have drawn SUNDERLAND in the 2nd round of this years littlewoods cup.
I was told this morning at work, so I dont have exact details of where and when the games will be played.
The good news is that sunderland are C-R-A-P.
I think they are in DIV 2 now (did they go down last year??).
Whatever division they are near the bottom and lost 5–0 recently.
Its over 2 legs so even allowing for a ‘lukic’ of a game, we should get thru, and maybe if the season hasnt got going by then it will give us the start.
BTW, last nights results proved interesting!!
All the previously unbeaten sides lost, leaving only SCUM unbeaten (but theyve had easy games except for the home game to newcastle which was 1–1).
Liverpool lost AT HOME to Spurs <pfffttt!! > Everton lost, Ipswich lost…christ even chelsea won (qpr therefore losing again <double pfffttt!! >
Oh yes Sheff Wed lost AGAIN.
MMmmmm, that 5 million quid you spent seems like a good investment Trev.
So, what does this mean??
It means that considering the difficult start weve had, we are still OK.
In our championship year we had an average start…but crucially did nt lose I spose.
Then again SCUM lost 2 of their first 3 (drew the other) last year…
Could be an ‘interesting’ season.
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 26 Aug 1993 09:52:03 +0000
Subject: Liverpool game
Is anyone going to the game on Saturday?
I wonder if you'd be able to get in on the day without tickets.
I've been trying to ring Liverpool direct but its constantly engaged.
From:
Date: Thu, 26 Aug 1993 11:29:26 +0100
Subject: Re: League cup draw…(++)
lets hope so — but Sunderland has done us before…
yeah — Lukic again — —why—did not Wilko buy a top class keeper before this season? they —do—come around pretty cheap — i think the prices paid for foreign guys like Kharin, Thorstvedt, Schmeichel, Bosnich are pretty low compared to your average midfielder/attacker…
wrong;-) coventry is also unbeaten…
yeah — and —not a single goal—yet for Trevors team…
‘we are still OK’?
NOT.
well — we are sixth from bottom and I guess Pool will be giving us a hard time at Anfield after loosing against Spurs.
If so happens and no points are included in the luggage back to Elland Road or even with one point at Anfield we still will find ourselves far behind already…
it already is…
cheers,
halvard /scandinavian whites
From:
Date: Thu, 26 Aug 93 12:06 GMT
Subject: So far…
When…‘73;-))
Actually our recent record vs Sunderland is VERY good.
Home and Away.
Keepers can have the one off season…to be fair this season AFAIK hes only made the one ‘howler’.
Its debatable if his indecisiveness at coming/dealing with back passes have caused the other mistakes or not?
We also havent conceded anything from a corner or cross (except that goal vs norwich…but you couldnt expect him to get that one!).
Saying that he hasnt made any good saves as I understand…
Its one thing not making a mistake, another not having a good game.
I think we can expect our keeper to have a good game always, with exceptional games often enough.
Oh yeah…give me Lukic over Kharin ANYDAY:-)
Arent they?
I seem to think they were?
Were they losing badly but came back then?
They must have drawn at least 2 games then.
But he has 2.7 million Sinton, Xmillion rated Hirst (4?), 3 million rated Warhurst…had Waddle been playing, if so its even funnier.
:-)
Given our games, and how everyone else has done its not too bad.
Especially as we have been the better side 3 out of 4 matches.
Away to man City, Arse and Liverpool isnt easy.
Home to West Ham (1st game) isnt the best game.
Pressure to win easily.
Home to Norwich isnt the best game either…better to play them away when they dont have a 5 man defence, and have some pressure on them.
Its best to play the good/big sides at home, so they come looking to win and not just defend, and playing the crap sides away — so they again try to win maybe.
That OR play a team like Aston Villa home or away as they try and win whatever…so you always get open games.
Liverpool and Man Utd have both had good games for a seasons start.
Arsenal have had also apart from the first game, where I doubt coventry went looking to attack, rather than counter attack.
Thats what I reckon anyway.
Hopefully Oldham will prove me right…that SHOULD be an ok game as they are too crap to come and defend for 90 mins, so might try and attack us (especially as its on the box).
From:
Date: Thu, 26 Aug 93 17:26:02 BST
Subject: Best Squad?
As there has been very little traffic today, I just thought I would comment on somebody's statement that Leeds have possibly got the best squad in the premier league.
Defence.
Most of the top premier sides Scum, Red Scouse, Arse, Villa, Weds, even Spurs, would not want any of our defenders (inc keeper) except for Dorigo if we paid them.
Mid-field.
Here we can compete with the best, Only Scum, Wednesday match Leeds for quality.
The scouse, Arse and Scum, have better depth of squad.
Forwards.
Again we do not really compare to the six above + Blackburn, although the strikers are on almost on a par with most compared to the defence.
Overall.
The players we have who would be really coveted by most of the above clubs are: Dorigo, Batty, McAllister and Speed, with Deane better than one or two of his equivalents.
Confidence, Motivation, and Organisation play a part in a succesful team.
It was those factors as much as individuals' ability which won the league 2 seasons ago.
Leeds seem to have lost a bit of all of those attributes lately.
Lastly, looking at the quality and depth of squads in terms of individual players, I would rate them in this order.
Scum (Yuk) Liverpool Arse Villa Wednesday Leeds Spurs Blackburn
This will get evryone arguing with me, I should think.
From:
Date: Fri, 27 Aug 1993 10:29:25 +0100
Subject: matches this weekend
Anyone going to the scouse or the Oldham games?
It looks like I'll be getting to both.
We've got scouse rather than Leeds tickets for Saturday, and I think I've got a kop ticket for myself at the Oldham game.
(We got the Liverpool tickets a week or so back, Joanne, from a Liverpool mate's dad…)
There was 2 quid off tickets for the Oldham game for members, even in the kop (it costs 5.50).
Presumably that's to encourage people to turn up instead of piling down the pub to watch it on sky tv.
Gavin
PS Kev's analysis of the ‘nobody wants us’ defence sounded about right, but what about Kerslake?
I thought he'd acquitted himself well before getting crocked?
And sad though it is to say, I agree the scum set up still looks the best in the premier league.
From:
Date: Fri, 27 Aug 93 10:56:12 BST
Subject: Scouse Game.
Hi.
Can anybody tell me if there are any tickets available for the Liverpool game tomorrow?
I live in the scouse pool and this is one of the opportunities that I have of going to watch Leeds.
I don't mind where I go in the ground, just as long as I am not with all me scouse mates.
Cheers.
Neil.
From:
Date: Fri, 27 Aug 93 11:48:56 BST
Subject: Sunderland
I understand we've been drawn against Sunderland (1st leg away) in the whatever-it-is-these-days cup 2nd round.
Anybody know the dates the games will be played, I haven't seen a paper yet.
Kev.
From:
Date: Fri, 27 Aug 93 12:06:10 BST
Subject: Re: matches this weekend
I don't think I' make a prediction for the scouse match, but I reckon we'll beat Oldham.
If that is the case, then it will be only the Norwich game at which we have really under-achieved.
One bad result can make a lot of difference to a league table at this stage.
Arse and Liverpool were always gonna be tough.
The net six games after Oldham don't contain a real toughie, so I think 13 points from them is about par.
Mmmn, that would have to include an away win.
If the ‘Victor Meldrew’ syndrome is prevalent of course, anything can happen.
Kev.
PS.
I wasn't saying Kerslake was crap, just that I would swap him for Dixon, Parker, Nilsson or Rob Jones.
He does compare OK with May, Barrett (as a full-back) and Austin I suppose.
I always admired him in his Swindon days, and advocated him as a viable replacement/competitor for fat Mel.
I think Paul Reaney would have had a job settling in to the defence last year.
From:
Date: Fri, 27 Aug 1993 12:40 GMT
Subject: Recent results
Well what a week, thank God it's Friday.
First of all we SUFFERED that defeat last Saturday next I knacker my ankle playing on Sunday and lastly I arrive in Northampton on Monday morning to find that we could only get tickets for Arsenal end on Tuesday (So Gavin it wasn't me being escorted away by the men in black, even though it the current season doesn't improve quickly I might be escorted by mem in white.)
Tuesday comes and I'm all set to head down when diaster strikes (stupid computers they never do what you tell them to) and the trip is cancelled.
We organise to meet later and listen in to Radio 5.
Now I had watched the Villa v scum match on Monday with my united mate and didn't pass too many comments (they were too bloody good to pass comment on) when he heard that Leeds had lost again my life was hell.
Where are we going wrong?
Why can our midlfield not score goals?
Why did we not buy another younger centre half?
What's the meaning of life?
Declan
From:
Date: Fri, 27 Aug 93 12:44 GMT
Subject: Re: matches this weekend
That fence comfy Kev!;-))
Agreed 100%.
Did you go to the Norwich match??
If so were the figures I posted for corners etc totally false, or were we like ‘Cobras with arthritis’ again?
I dont berluddy beleeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeve it!!!!
S ‘funny, I ve become quite good at that impersonation…
I reckon us Leeds fans must be the best Meldrew impersonators.
Praps someone could do a song for it…either terrace, or even the ‘lovely’ Cantona one (complete with dozey birds trying to dance and miming the words?)?
Just a thought.
Oh, 1–1 for the scouse game.
3–1 for oldham.
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 27 Aug 1993 13:12:08 +0100
Subject: Leeds United Meldrew song
I couldn't resist this.
Here goes, to the usual well-loved tune, more or less, to be sung Victor-style:
For ever and ever I've followed this team It's Leeds United They make me scream We always get mastered By who?
By some load of bastards I don't believe it!
We've lost again!
I'll try it at the Oldham game — I might get live on national tv…
Gav
From:
Date: Fri, 27 Aug 93 14:25 GMT
Subject: Meldrew song Number][
Ok, heres my song.
Bit too complicated I fear for a terrace chant…still — I like it!!
To the tune of ‘Im a believer’
…
Did you see that goal?
I DONT BELEEEEVE IT Thru Lukic's legs, In injury time Every match, all the possession all the corners — same old result
and Did you see that foul??
I DONT BELEEEEEEVE IT!!!
Just took him out, right from behind Jesus Ref, where are your glasses-take some classes you usless c**t
Oh no…did you see that goal?
I DONT BLEEDIN BELEEEEEEEEEVE IT!!!! 10 Yards offside, you could see that from here The linesmans flag?
Course you dont see it, coz hes concealed it right up his arse…
NO — No back pass…
I DONT BELEEEEEEEVE IT!!
Superbly taken — but at the wrong end Were losing again…
But it dont matter cos were much better except for the score…
Weve won away!?!?
I DO NOT BERLEEEEEEEEEEEEEEVE IT!!!!!!
Dubious Penalty, AND a late goal It must be dream, Its taken a year, but now that its here you watch us go…
There you go, only flaw is thats the only bit of the tune I can get into my head right now…that doesnt matter though — any tune is extravagant these days!!
If anyone can add verses or even the inbetween bits then maybe we could send it onto the square ball or summit:-))
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 27 Aug 93 14:26:36 BST
Subject: Re: matches this weekend
No, but I have been stoically quoting your figures to defend Leeds against the baiting I've had on the basis of the MOTD footage that everyone seems to have seen.
Kev.
From:
Date: Fri, 27 Aug 93 14:40:20 BST
Subject: Re: Meldrew song Number][
Doesn't that song start with a line about fairy tales??
‘You can believe them if you try’ Kev.
From:
Date: Fri, 27 Aug 93 14:49 GMT
Subject: Norwich…
MOTD
Do you reckon any of us went??
If anyone did maybe they threw themselves into the Aire after leaving the ground;-)
As for MOTD…well they are EDITED HIGHLIGHTS.
In that match I feel we would gain some consolationf from having 11 corners and maybe want to see the moves leading up to those…as they didnt amount to anything they may have just shown the ‘dangerous’ attacks.
This is giving the editors the benefit of the doubt.
In all honesty I think they are exactly the same as newpaper reports in that if a team wins 3–0 or 4–0 they automatically say it was a trouncing, and then dredge up ‘facts’ to evidence their overall assumption.
You always hear of the 2 goals they had disallowed…so!?
They were offside.
Simple.
They maybe should have been booked for continuing to put the ball in the net…aswell as Lukic maybe not trying to save (as if that made a difference;-) The Wallace incident at maine rd however is a different story.
Nobody has said that Norwich werent offside…so why bother telling us theyd ‘scored’?
It shows we were trounced of course.
Anywayz, Im glad the corner count was so convincingly superior…that should shut most people up…
From:
Date: Fri, 27 Aug 1993 11:38:36–0400 (EDT)
Subject: Victor Meldrew???
Forwarded message: Yes, just who IS Victor Meldrew?
PS: This is but the first in a series of dumb questions…
Will explain later.
From:
Date: Fri, 27 Aug 1993 16:00:31 GMT+1
Hi
Please forgive my lack of knowledge but who is Victor Meldrew?
Jim
From:
Date: Fri, 27 Aug 93 17:32:55 BST
Subject: Victor Meldrew
Victor Meldrew is a very English elderly character in a TV comedy series called ‘One Foot In The Grave’.
He is a man who stumbles through life going through various coincidences and improbabilities.
If anything can go wrong — it will.
Hence he is always saying ‘I don't believe it’ His sense of despair makes him seem very cynical, although he is really quite a sensitive soul.
The series has become a bit of a cult in the UK, with Victor becoming much better known than the actor who plays him, Richard Wilson.
Foreigners tend to see him as a ‘whingeing pom, brit etc.’ and do not like the program.
They miss the point.
It is about a guy struggling from one crisis to the next and part of the appeal is that he is not particularly likeable, so you don't mind seeing him get a rough deal, but like an awkward Grandfather you hopethings will turn out OK.
Sometimes they do, usually they don't.
Check it out on TV or video if you ever get the chance.
Kev.
From:
Date: Sun, 29 Aug 93 14:16:02 EDT
Subject: Re: Subscription to mailing list leeds-united
REVIEW LEEDS-UNITED
From:
Date: Sun, 29 Aug 93 14:31:32 EDT
Subject: Squad & fixtures for this season
Hi,
could somebody send me the current squad for this season & also the fixture list.
I'd be interested in reports about any of the games played so far…not looking to good is it!
Thanks,
From:
Date: Mon, 30 Aug 93 09:46:40 +0200
Subject: liverpool game
Hi everyone,
another great result!!.
Well, we only lost 2–0.
I meant to bring in one of the Sunday papers today to type in the match report, but that'll have to wait till tomorrow…
I'm a bit forgetful these days…too many beers last night.
Anyway, the title of the report was’ LEEDS ROBBED BY KOP’
That just about says it all.
The reporter thought Leeds were really unlucky and dominated big periods of the game.
One of the Liverpool goals was lucky, Deane should have had 3 penalties, the ref got a lot of stick from the Leeds fans, etc.
Sounds like the same old story really.
Again the defence got the blame, though I think myself if the forwards aren't putting away the chances we'll never get anywhere.
They just dont seem to be sharp enough or is it that midfield aren't providing good service — I can't really say as I've seen none of the games, just read reports.
It sure is frustrating this playing well and still losing.
Oh, looks like it's coffee break time — again.
Vinnie
From:
Date: Mon, 30 Aug 1993 08:25:33–0500
Subject: lineup
Can someone post email me the lineup against Liverpool?
Thanks in advance.
Joo
From:
Date: Tue, 31 Aug 1993 10:16 GMT
Subject: Last Night
Ok guys,
I know that you people are just over a bank holiday weekend and so will be slower than usual voicing your comments to the net but WE WON after all.
Was anyone at the game?
If so was it as bad as it sounded on the radio?
We again dominated for long periods just like against ‘Pool on Saturday but just could not score.
We seem to lack the cutting edge right now.
With Beeny in goal and Newsome and Wetherall at centre half did the defence look more assured?
From the comments of Jimmy Armfield (what does he know about football I hear you ask) Deane looked completly out of place and completly uninterested.
The commentators seemed to be saying that Deane didn't seem able to lift his feet to jump for a ball, again any comments?
For those who didn't hear Leeds beat Oldham 1–0 last night with Strachan scoring after 11 mins of the first half.
Strac also won man of the match.
the team was
Lukic
Dorigo Wetherall Newsome Kelly
Speed McAllister Batty Strachan
Wallace Deane
I dont think any subs were used
Declan
From:
Date: Tue, 31 Aug 93 10:29 GMT
Subject: Liverpool match
It really was quite ‘funny’ on saturday.
You listen to the radio 5 ‘reports’ and get a bit encouraged that Leeds played well enough, just didnt get a break in front of goal.
‘Typical’.
Liverpool get a penalty —‘suprise suprise’(especially as they had a pen against them during the week, one of very few no doubt).
Anyhow, rumours of match highlights on MOTD, so force myself to watch.
Have to sit through another healthy dose of SCUM arse licking.
Then we get a very brief highlights…basically 2 Leeds shots, and the Liverpool goals and probably their other 3 half chances.
Get thoroughly sickened at the ‘penalty’.
Nice jump Rob…been watching walters in training no doubt.
As for Rush ‘s goal…
Id only just been telling my girlfriend my favourite quip about how he only scores because hes SO ugly he scares the defenders.
We then see the goal, hopeful chip into the box, Rush attempts to take it to one side on the half volley with Fairclough bearing down, misses it completely, flies up and hits him in the shoulder.
There was a difference of opinion what happened next — she thought it went in from there, I was convinced it hit him in the head and went in.
I then quipped ‘probably hit that huge nose’.
Anyway — no second replay, no discussion about that goal or the ‘penalty’.
So, Meldrews syndrome was well and truly evident, with various profanities splattered with a few ‘…believe it's.
Worse was to come.
Sky have a roundup on Sunday, where they basically show the same 3 featured matches as MOTD, but generally have different highlights.
There was a far more extensive coverage of our match.
Lo and behold Leeds actually had more than 2 efforts on goal, and I would say these highlights were a much truer reflection of the match.
In one way you feel better knowing that we played well, the other way li ‘l ol’ Victor springs to the fore of the mind time and again.
They didnt show the Deane penalty appeals at all…
I would have felt worse had they.
They did repeat the rush goal from every angle and it DID hit him on the head…more later…they also discussed the penalty and concluded that was a joke.
Later I scanned Teletext as you usually get a few after match quotes appear.
They had one from Rush.
‘I shut my eyes, the ball hit me on the nose, and when I opened them it was in the back of the net’.
I DONT BLOODY BELEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEVE IT…
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 31 Aug 93 10:47 GMT
Subject: Oldham remarks…
I saw this match on Sky.
Team:
Beeney (Yep Lukic dropped to subs bench) Kelly Dorigo Newsome Wetherall (Fairclough dropped) Batty Speed McAllister Strachan Deane Wallace
SUBS: Hodge, Forrester, Lukic
I will let Gavin do the match report as he went I believe.
‘Stracha’ scored a ‘cracker’(sorry!) on 11 minutes.
Wallace had a good goal disallowed as Strach was on the far edge of the 6 yard box and deemed to be interfering with play when Wallace scored.
I agree you are if/when the defence are pushing out trying to catch you offside, but the Oldham defence werent, and didnt even know he was there.
They didnt appeal after the goal and seemed pleasantly suprised after!
Deane almost scored with a delightful back heel flick type effort (you have to see it to know what I mean).
Oldhams keeper played well.
Leeds dominated TOTALLY for 65 minutes.
Oldham got their first corner after about 70 minutes.
The last 20 minutes was scrappy with nerves setting in for Leeds.
Oldham only looked threatening Id imagine because I had victor on my shoulder telling me they were bound to score.
they had about 3 shots the whole match, 1 on target.
Beeney was solid as a rock, dealt with the back pass superbly, and only kicked ONE out of play the whole match.
The rest went slap bang into the middle of Oldhams half, therefore continuing to keep pressure on Oldham.
He was quick off his line, came for what crosses there were.
He must have done enough to be selected for the next match.
Wetherall and Newsome were impressive in the air, and never really looked in trouble.
Kelly had another good match, Strachan was superb, Wallace was my Man of the Match, Deane caused them problems all night, McAllister Speed and batty were good the first half, but Speed especially seemed to drop out of the game in the second half.
Dorigo was as good as ever.
So, individually we played extremely well again, maybe Im being unfair to Speed and Macca — I might be expecting too much from them?!?
OK thats my opinion of the players…
Itll be interesting what gav says.
Mark
PS the result was 1–0 and moves up to 12th
From:
Date: Tue, 31 Aug 93 10:54 GMT
Subject: Shutt
Yep, it was Carl who scored for Brum.
Hes on loan, how long for I dont know.
Theres every chance he will sign for them I reckon.
I only saw one Sunday paper, but he was their Man of the Match (Whyte getting 6/10!).
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 31 Aug 1993 11:18:54 +0100
Subject: Scousers (match report)
Didn't see a match report so I'll chip in my brief comments here on what I saw.
It wasn't really a match of two halves — indeed it wasn't really a match of anything.
Leeds had the majority of play, did some very neat football, but always looked vulnerable in defence and never really looked like scoring.
The first half was pretty even with both teams having equal amounts of play.
Some amusing moments came with the Wallace-Ruddock encounters (I wonder who came off better?), and Batty's continual square balls or back passes.
I know it's a standing joke with Leeds fans about Batty's getting the ball and running around 8 players before he passes the thing (or gets the team into total schtuck by giving it away) but it does get a bit tiresome.
The scouse goal, when it came, was on the cards I'm afraid to say.
The final putting the ball in the onion net was a total fluke, Rush mis-hit it (one paper said it bounced off his nose), and Lukic and Fairclough looked on with stunned bewilderment.
I say it was on the cards because throughout the match the Scousers used the tactic of playing the long ball towards Rush and it was then quite simply a one-on-one race with either Fairclough or Newsome.
Leeds were naive in defence, provided no cover, and could have conceded a few more (for the record though, Fairclough played very well and made some very timely interceptions).
In attack we looked like a team without any ideas.
Deane waddled about seemingly distracted by something (not the ball I might add) and when he had a clear chance he headed it safely into the arms of Grobblebum.
Wallace looked menacing and was through at one point when Burrows hacked him down (the scouser should have been sent off for that and a clear ‘professional foul’ in the second half against Deane).
Yet it was all frustrating.
We would string together about seven or eight passes, then go backwards for a bit, then sideways, and then eventually the likes of McAllister, Speed, or Dorigo would get fed up , boot the ball in the box for either a) an easy catch to the goalie, or b) for Deane to flick it on to an easy catch for the goalie.
The penalty, if it was one, seemed a bit harsh (but then the ref was clueless throughout).
My view was obscured by a pillar and I haven't seen replays yet but the wisdom of the surrounding scousers was that it was a foul.
I saw Lukic launch into the tackle and it looked, for all the world, like it was going to end up as a foul but I couldn't see if it was outside the area.
Nevertheless, what was important was that it occurred because Leeds were caught out (again) at the back and Jones was thundering in.
The 2nd half was much of the same with Leeds having even more of the play but creating even less chances (or so it seemed).
Highlights here was jan Molby giving Speed a headlock and rub of the new haircut, and Wallace being substituted.
The latter sent the Leeds fans (who totally outsang the Kop) into howls of rage and a chant of ‘What the f*** is going on?’
(Don't believe the papers that printed ‘What the hell is going on?’).
The substitution did seem strange as I couldn't see why Wallace was being taken off and not Deane (or a defender).
But still, the chants and boos directed at Wilko were, in my opinion, totally over the top.
True it is frustrating that Rocastle isn't even on the bench, and it is bewildering why Wilko didn't notice the totally crap defence we've got as quickly as everyone else did, but that's no reason to have a go (the chants were virtually to a man I would say).
All it did was piss Wilko off, probably effect the team, and please the scousers.
IMO,
Stuart
From:
Date: Tue, 31 Aug 93 13:03:12 +0200
Subject: newspaper report liverpool game
Ok, here's what the News Of The World (cough, choke, vomit!!) had to say about last Saturday's game.
If yer fed up reading about it just skip this, though then again you might want to savour the highest standards of reporting as found only in NOTW:-)
LEEDS ROBBED BY KOP
Leeds charged back down the M62 still mouthing off at the injustice of defeat.
And Howard Wilkinson's men had good reason.
Their last win at Anfield was 22 years ago and with this kind of luck hell will freeze over before they do it again.
Ian Rush's scruffy 24th minute strike was followed by an even scruffier penalty 16 minutes later.
Rush usually has a high sense of occasion for landmarks but his 200th league goal for Liverpool came when the master hit man seemed to mistime Don Hutchison's chip eight yards out.
The ball just bounced passed (sic) a bamboozled John Lukic.
Then came the kind of spot award that gets Anfield a bad name.
Lukic was guilty of no more than a challenge for a 50–50 ball with the speeding Rob Jones around the 18-yard line.
Rfereee Robbie Hart saw intent where nobody else did and Jan Molby smacked in the penalty.
Referee Hart suffered jeers of ‘Cheat, cheat’ from the Leeds hordes.
And he didn't endear himself by refusing three penalties to Deane.
The last one, a second half tackle by Neil Ruddock, has Wilkinson so anguished that a police woman had to tell him to quieten down.
His angry frustration was understandable.
Not many teams have dominated Liverpool in front of the Kop as Leeds did after halt time.
During that period Lukic had little more than back passes to worry him (AND SCARE THE SHIT OUT OF THE LEEDS FANS SEZ ME)
But nothing went right for Leeds as they pounded down on Liverpool's goal.
Rod Wallace blazed across goal.
Gary Speed was close twice and when Deane looked like bullocking through, David Burrow's tackle was so desperate that the left back was booked.
Leeds began as if their miserable Anfield record was no more than a myth and Liverpool had the indignity of being pinned in their penalty area in front of an affronted Kop.
Though Leeds looked good going forward, their back line looked shakey.
There was no escape when Rush struck in the 24th minute, though there was luck about the Welshman's strike.
Hutchison's chip seemed to hit Rushy and bounce past the spellbound (IS THAT AS BAD AS BAMNBOOZLED?)
Lukic.
Five minutes before the break, Jan Molby's pass gave Rob Jones a chance on the edge of the penalty area.
Lukic charged out and seemed to hit him in what was no more than a 50–50 challenge.
But after deliberation, referee Hart pointed to the spot and Molby cracked in the penalty.
Value for money rating: Liverpool 5 Leeds 6
Ok, that's it.
After reading some of the comments from people who saw the game or who listened on the radio, the above seems to be about as true reporting as you'd expect from the NOTW.
vinnie.
From:
Date: Tue, 31 Aug 93 14:31:30 +0200
Subject: leeds 1 oldham 0
just in case some of you don't have access to rec.sport.soccer, here's something that's just arrived:
Leeds 1–0 Oldham
Strachan
Leeds courageously took the lead after 15 minutes with an excellently taken shot from the old reliable Gordon Strachan.
It was one of the only bright spots of the night punctuated mostly with sloppy, nervous play from a Leeds team desperate for a win to take away some of the mounting pressure and criticism generated from recent team performances.
Leeds seems to have been under instructions from their manager Wilko to get the ball up the field as quickly as possible, contrary to the previous two games where the more cultured route paid no dividends.
Leeds goal came with a move started from the middle of the Oldham half with a ball stabbed forward from McAllister (probably the only thing either good or bad he did all night) to Speed on the edge of the box.
Speed saw Strachan running wide and free to his left (right of goal) and he scooped/sidefooted the ball into Strachans path.
Strachan took one touch, lined the ball up and struck with the trusty right foot.
The goalkeeper got a finger to it but couldn't keep out the screamer.
Leeds could have gone 2–0 up before H-T except for some sharp goalkeeping from their young keeper when he reflexed a sidefoot effort from Deane, from a cross by Wallace.
Wallace had a seemingly good goal disallowed when Strachan was adjudged to be offside though there was an Oldham defender on the goal line when the shot was taken.
I didn't understand why the goal didn't stand.
Leeds started out the second half the way they played the first, but lost their way badly during the course with Oldham coming back into the game strongly.
Oldham took advantage of the nervousness in the Leeds game and even had a goal disallowed on a marginal offside decision.
If Leeds had been playing a better team they wouldn't have won but such is the game that you can't play the big boys everyday (thank God) and Leeds eventually, to the fans relief, and mine too, registered their first win in four games and hopefully gained a confidence booster both for their defence and for our new goalkeeper Beeney who was called on to make only two saves, important as they were.
Gary Kelly was impressive with his calm approach to the game.
He should turn out to be a very useful right/full back.
James.
From:
Date: Tue, 31 Aug 93 09:00:14 EDT
Subject: Rocky…
Rocky…
Rocky
Hello,
I noticed the following comment in a letter today (from ?):
Did I miss something?
I was led to believe that Rocky had moved to Derby.
If this is NOT TRUE then it's excellent news as he was probably the best signing Wilko's made (possibly excluding Strachan).
Could someone inform me…thanks.
From:
Date: Tue, 31 Aug 1993 14:33:25 +0100
Subject: Re:Rocky…
Rocky etc
Rocky is still on the Leeds books.
There was a lovely picture of him on telly last night peering woefully over the fence dressed in snazzy suit.
Captions please?
‘Which of the players’ wives do I have to sleep with before I can play an all?’
Stuart
From:
Date: Tue, 31 Aug 93 09:41:11 EDT
Subject: Re: Rocky…
Rocky…
Rocky
Ok,
I'll send a thankq to everyone via the list before I get *many more* replies!
I now understand that Rocky is still at LUFC…proposed link with Derby on rumour…
I get my info from an Arsenal fan so no wonder it's unreliable (but consistent:-))
Now, the REALLY BIG QUESTION: why not find a place for him…yep I appreciate that Batty, McAllister, Speed & Strachan are all bloody good BUT I personally think Rocky is a far more skillful player than Batty, more likely to score goals (than Batty) & generally far more of an attacking player.
So, why not drop Batty & play Rocky?
I know this may not be popular…in some ways I'd prefer to drop Strachan…but he keep defying age & playing brilliant!!
Of course if you don't like this…perhaps the idea of  may appeal:
(hope you don't mind MPH;-))
From:
Date: Tue, 31 Aug 93 15:17 GMT
Subject: Rocky
Isnt it ironic that Leeds always step out at Elland Rd with the theme from Rocky blaring out!(well the first bit)
Do any other teams come out to specific ‘tunes’?
Im impressed with the Leeds one though…specially with the fanfare (was/is that at the start of the real record (Eye of the tiger)?).
Get the volume cranked up, then the crowd roar as they step out…awesome.
Any suggestions for other teams??
…this is getting silly:-)
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 31 Aug 93 15:40 GMT
Subject: Rocky
:-)…once bitten twice shy.
NEVER ask for direct email reply:-)
BTW How many answered the plea for the full squad list??
I didnt because I wasnt feeling sadistic this morning;-)
The only problem is who will hold that covering position?
Batty hasnt had a particularly good start to the season from what Ive seen, then again you tend to appreciate him more when you arent playing so well.
He does sometimes get into a ‘delayed’ mood where he thinks he has more time than he does…the reason for the square/back passes I reckon is noone moves into space for him or looks for it up front.
He rarely passes the ball away, and in his role you need that.
When people are moving up front he can pass well.
Talking of slow motion, last night Newsome made several forward ‘runs’.
Was it me or did it look like the game was in slow motion then?
Even the opposition seemed to slow in sympathy, but he still kept the ball and did quite well each time.
Changing the subject completely, I had a quick glance through one of the soccer mags this dinnertime, and someone had written in about Leeds.
I cant remember what they said, but Jimmy Greaves is the columnist.
His reply was something like ‘No Leeds wont do much better than last year, when they won the title everyone had exceptional seasons and played above themselves, last year was a true reflection of how good they are…’.
Why has everyone forgotten we were 4th the year before (above scum), and the year before that won the 2nd division?
What odds for James back on the bottle??
Mind you he has become a bit of an opinionated arsehole recently…more like Jonathan King, or Nina Myskow — y'know being deliberately contentious to get people to write in.
Even when they won the league you could see he wasnt happy, and St John was always trying to force a half decent comment from him.
Sad git still probably thinks West Ham are good…
Markl
From:
Date: Tue, 31 Aug 1993 09:42:02–0500
Subject: Changes
Since there has been some mention of Rocky (Rocastle) on the mailing lists recently, I've add in my two cents.
Seems to me that Wilko is content with playing the Strachan-Batty-McAllister-Speed quartet in midfield.
While that's the same starting four for most of last season.
I would certainly like to see Rocastle get a run of first team matches (and soon).
The question is who does he displace in midfield?
My choice would be McAllister, did I hear something?
Rocastle can go forward and also help with the defense.
He hasn't play in the 1st team since a long while and will be bring some enthusiasm to the team.
The problem is where would he play?
Centre midfield with Batty?
Comments welcome.
Joo
From:
Date: Tue, 31 Aug 93 10:46:27 EDT
Subject: Re: Rocky
How about 
I'll stop before I get far to sick & perverted!!
more?
glynn
From:
Date: Tue, 31 Aug 93 17:02:57 EDT
Subject: Re: Changes
It was indeed the starting line-up for most of last season…but I'm not so sure it was the best one!
Absolutely!
Not such a good idea!
Are you suggesting that he should replace McAllister because they are the same type of player?
If so I'm not convinced that would be wise.
I wouldn't say McAllister lacks enthusiasm/motivation…infact if anyone does maybe it's Batty?
(I honestly have NOTHING against Batty…infact I'm a big fan!)
Uhmm, this is now tricky…
Strachan/McAllister centre midfield with Rocky & Speed ‘pushing forward’(nice phrase eh;-)).
This may not be the obvious preferred option…but I think the quality is there, I also think that Strachan & McAllister can provide the balls accurately & fast enough for Deance/Wallace with Speed & Rocky providing a pretty good ‘second line’.
As I've said before…
I would prefer to see a straight Rocky-Strachan swap (as I expected last year) but I guess the wee man is still playing to well for this.
Glynn
BTW what happened to the prospective move into management for Strachan.
I thought it was on the cards (Barnsley possibly?) during close season?