

From:
Date: Fri, 1 Oct 93 12:04:25 BST
Subject: Sunderland Game.
Hi, Anybody know if this game is all ticket.
Also as much info I can get as to what parts of the ground non-members etc. can buy tickets for and the prices would be helpful.
I would prefer to go in the kop, but failing that I'd like to try the new East stand.
Kev.
From:
Date: Sat, 02 Oct 1993 14:57:59 +0100
Subject: Score
I'm stuck in some bloody conference with my only contact with the outside world being a terminal.
If anyone could post the half-time score and final result when it comes through I'd appreciate it.
Stuart
From:
Date: Sat, 2 Oct 1993 16:48:59 +0100
Subject: Leeds v Wombles final score
And I'm stuck behind my terminal at work, so here's the result:
Leeds 4 Wimbledon 0
Speed (2) Macallister (2)
Splendid!
It was about time we had a match where everything went right.
EIEIEIO up the football league we go — third to be eggsact.
Gav
From:
Date: Sat, 2 Oct 93 12:11:46 EDT
Subject: Leeds vs Wimbledon
4–0 for those who didn't see the other posts, plus our man Vinnie managed to miss a penalty, just to add to the fun, according to my BBC World Service report this side of the Atlantic.
Team news and eye-witness accounts ASAP pleaze!
BTW, I didn't think much of Wednesday handing scum a 2–3 win.
How many points are we behind them?
When was the last time we won 5 in a row (is it 5?)?
Well that win has set up my week — are there any midweek matches this week (CCC perhaps)?
Finally many many thanks to the UK ‘reporters’ who do an A1 job keeping the exiles in touch.
John
From:
Date: Sat, 2 Oct 93 17:14:07 BST
Subject: RE: Leeds v Wombles final score
AND Vinne Jones put a penalty past the post!
Gav
From:
Date: Sun, 03 Oct 1993 12:03:12 +0100
Subject: 3rd and looking good
Still at the conference but managed to catch Match of the Day this morning.
For once, Leeds actually got major coverage (the last time we did was the 4–0 defeat to Norwich).
From what I could see we looked absolutely first class for about 70% of the game.
McAllister, Speed, Strachan, Kelly all played superbly (Speed particularly so — even Trevor ‘Triffic’ Brooking thought so) and Deane began to look a bit more menacing.
But for the woodwork he'd have been on the score sheet.
The defence looked sound, and very similar to the formation played at Coventry.
Only problem was, and far be it for me to dampen any thrashing of another team, was that Wimbledon were allowed to play for a good bit in the second half and could have come back.
The penalty seemed pretty clear-cut and it was a stroke of luck that they'd just substituted Fashanu as he is their usual penalty taker (pretty reliable from what I can recall).
It was left to Vineyard who put it wide of the post.
As Macca said on Grandstand ‘we played in spurts’.
If we can keep up our concentration for 90 minutes no-one will be able to live with us.
It's just those lapses (which were punished last year) which we can't allow to happen.
Macca said that we've got more points now than when we won the championship.
Is this true?
I thought we had 20 after 10 games.
The Great Desmondo on MotD also muttered that we didn't have a win of 5 matches on the trot in ‘91-'92.
Can't be arsed to look that one up.
Look out Ipswich, here we come.
Stu
From:
Date: Mon, 4 Oct 93 09:51:25 MET
Subject: Majestic or not so Leeds
Leeds 4–0 Wimbledon
Speed (2,90) McAllister (18,81)
Was there no traffic on the Leeds LISTSERV during the weekend, as I received nothing at all about our glorious or not so glorious win, whichever newpaper you bothered to buy at the weekend.
Leeds thoroughly trounced the Wombles with two each from Speed and McAllister.
Vinnie Jones even chipped in, with a missed penalty when the score was 2–0.
I listened to 6 sports reports on Saturday and not one of them mentioned who scored for Leeds.
It was all about the Scum, you would think they had already won the league the way the commentators were describing the display Saturday.
Such things as ‘building insurance up for the title’, ‘Masterly performance’ were par for the course.
One only has to look at who they were playing — a team that has only won one of their first 9 games and now have only 7 points from their first 10.
Sheff.
Wed.
aren't exacyly world beaters.
On the other hand Leeds handed out a whopping defeat on a team who had only lost 1 of their first 9 and whose manager had just won manager of the month for September.
We showed him what we though of that, didn't we.
James.
From:
Date: Mon, 4 Oct 93 09:52:39 BST
Subject: Bis and Bobs
Speed and Strachan scored v. Sheff Utd.
Deane has yet to score at home!
non-Members can get tickets for all parts of the ground subject to availability.
Today is the first day that tickets are on sale to non-members so its best to ring up and see whats left.
Prices are (approx) Kop: 7:50, East Stand 16, NE corner 14 quid.
I thought coming forward Leeds played brill on saturday but they still looked a bit lazy and complacent at the back (esp.
2rd half ‘till we scored the third.) and we where very lucky not to concede a goal.
What was Newsome trying to do?
Speed had a stormer as a central midfielder but how can we keep him there when Batts gets back?
One particular move was outstanding which started from Dorigo left back then went to Deane, Kelly, Strachan, Kelly on the overlap who crossed for Macca to head down.
Unfortunatly Stach shot straight at the Keeper.
It would have been an amazing goal as the speed and accuracy of the passes was awsome.
Strach's dummy was also very clever and I think 3 of the goals (both of Speed's and Macca's free kick) could be contenders for goal of the month.
5-in-a-row is the best run we have had under Wilko.
This week marks his 5th aniversary in charge.
I hope we find the net as easily on Wednesday against Sunderland!
Cheers, Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 04 Oct 1993 12:06:08 +0100
Subject: Confused
Is it me or are there some totally bizarre comments going around that are wrong?
See if you can spot the inconsistencies in the following (assuming the facts I have are correct:
1)
Both Macca and Wilko said we have more points now than when we won the Championship.
According to a book I've got it says the first ten games of that glorious start saw is in with 5 wins and five draws (we then went and lost to palace in the last minute).
Doesn't this make 20 points as opposed to our present 19?
2)
Wankers like Tommy Docherty et al are crapping on that Man Utd are well clear now, who can stop them, and they can only see them losing half a dozen games.
When I was at school (a long time ago I'll grant you) half a dozen was six.
In ‘91-'92 the scum lost six games in total but failed to win the championship (we all know who did!).
Also, in their first 10 games they had 26 points, i.e. one more point than this season but still only 6 points ahead of us).
Are the printed facts in the book I have totally wrong?
Or can anyone be a football researcher?
Stu
From:
Date: Mon, 4 Oct 1993 11:51:01 +0000
Subject: Batts Back
When Batty comes back, why not preserve the current formation and make him the fifth defender, seeing as Speed seems to revel in the central midfield.
I remember Speedy saying he liked playing in the middle best, during our championship-winning season.
After all Batty is not likely to be scoring much and he is great at ball-winning.
I continue to have doubts about Newsome's competence, though he is alright when the rest of them are confident.
Tim
From:
Date: Mon, 4 Oct 93 13:04:48 MET
Subject: 19 < 20 anyday
Stuart,
You are right — 19 points is less than 20.
We started the 91–92 season with 5 wins and 5 draws = 20 points.
This year we are only a point behind that pace.
Our first loss, as you correctly said, was at Palace, and it was not only lost in the last minute, it was in the 94th minute of a terrible game.
That's one of the occupational hazards of listening to people talking football — Docherty talking through his arse for a few quid.
What does he know about football anyhow?
Well, I can't claim complete recall but I do remember 91–92 like it was only last year;-).
James.
P.S. Here is the upto date table in electronic format:
From:
Date: Mon, 4 Oct 1993 12:45 GMT
Subject: RE: Batts Back
Based on this new 5 man defence does this mean that we're playing with only Deano up front or with Wallace on the left wing and Strach on the right?
If not does it mean that we only have Dorigo on the left.
Now Tony is a wonderfull player (just in case his mother has actually joined up) but playing on his own on the left wing??????
Batty more or less played this 5 man in defence anyway with just the odd run forward, so maybe Wilko will just ask him to drop back a bit.
Anyway it bring's back the age old question, should we play Batty when he comes back or should we leave well enough alone?
I suppose the same applies to DOL.
I wonder whether his influence is being felt at the back anyway.
Is he involved in the coaching end of things using his experience for the young guys?
If so surely it was an inspired move.
Anyway it's the first time since the Revie years that we've won 5 on the trot in the league so lets just be happy for a while.
Declan
From:
Date: Mon, 4 Oct 93 15:50:10 BST
Subject: G.A.R.Y.
After watching MOTD I can only assume we need to buy more players called Gary…
Players called Gary appear to play vert well for Leeds.
Actually, I don't think it's the word Gary just the Letters G.A.R.Y.
For example;
apart from the current guys, we can look back on other great Leeds teams:
SPRAKE
GRAY (x2)
any others?
Also, I've figured out what Wilko's doing with Rocky.
He's buying up Arsenal to put out a strong reserve team:
There's Rocky; O'Leary (soon); Lukic; Whyte (he was at Arse wasn't he?) and I'm sure a few more ex-Arse players in the reserves…good ploy Wilko!
Glynn
(I think the G.A.R.Y.
theory is a REALLY good one!)
From:
Date: Mon, 4 Oct 1993 14:54:46 +0000
Subject: McAllister in Good Game Shock
The formation last Saturday was as follows:
Strach and Wallace are the wings.
I get the impression that opposition teams have unconsciously downgraded Leeds because of the last twelve months and are caught offguard.
Leeds are the same team basically but needed a spell out of the limelight: everyone is totally obsessed with Man United now and lets hope it will tell on the scum — we are definitely benefitting.
The Grauniad reckoned Vinny seemed totally confounded by the affection radiated at him by Elland Road and this had an effect on the game!
The first recorded example of a team (player) being loved to death possibly.
Whoever said Elland Road was an intimidating atmosphere (->)
I still have that t-shirt somewhere.
Tim
From:
Date: Mon, 4 Oct 93 18:08:26 BST
Subject: v Sunderland
Hi, After lengthy negotiations in private, Gav & I are going along to the Sunderland game together on Wednesday.
We're meeting between 2–2.30 at the little chef on the intersection of A34 and Oxford Ring Road.
If anyone is going past there on their way, let's get introduced.
Point of call on the way will probably be Leicester Forest East 3.30–4pm where we could meet up with anyone from South-East area.
Mmm, Pehaps we should publish a full time-table including pubs and nosh places and times up in Leeds and for the return journey:-)
By the way, there will be room in the car for anyone interested in joining anywhere along the way.
Preferred route is A34, M40, A46, M69, M1 but slight detours/variations could be made.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 4 Oct 93 14:07:11 EDT
Subject: Re G.A.R.Y., plus other LUFC questions
Whyte was sold to Birmingham City wasn't he?
I saw Shutt cropping up on some other team's score sheet.
Is this the same as Carl, who we transfer listed at the end of last season?
Also, can someone explain a bit more the team formation.
Are we playing a back2 or a back5?
Is anyone playing a sweeper role?
Why (according to the diag that some nice person whose name I've forgotten) is one winger (Strach) in the midfield, and the other (Rod) in the front line.
WIHIH?
Who is ‘marshalling’ the defence (I guess this what DO'L was bought for).
As for Batty's return, I'd say if all the team are playing well then don't change a winning combination.
That's enough comments and questions for now.
I'm looking forward to the CCC match.
If anyone gets any team news please post.
Thanks
John
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 1993 10:02:02 +0100
Subject: Fwd from Richard Manning
Richard's having trouble posting to the list, so I'm forwarding a copy of his message to the list.
From:
Date: Mon, 4 Oct 1993 17:56:39–0400 (EDT)
Subject: RE: Boring Boring Admin
This appears the only way to get through — so please ignore the heading BORING!
I have been listening in to the E-Mail for some weeks, and in fact even coming in on weekend to pick up the results and comments.
I just want to say a big THANK YOU to the organisers and correspondents for keeping me up to date with the progress of THE WHITES this season.
I've been working in Cleveland, US for 4 months now, and am amazed that I get more up to date information on the week's activities than when I lived outside London!
I have been sent a Leeds United 1993–94 squad picture from the Evening Post and this now adorns my office wall, much to the amusement of my colleagues.
Having watched Leeds from an early age when my father was a season ticket holder in the 60's, I have been through the good times and the bad times.
My first game was Tottenham at home in 1967, though I don't remember too much of it.
After that I went regularly, though every home game, even ending up in the ‘Scratching Shed’ which was the old South Stand with a full crowd of Man.
Utd fans in 1970!
Although Law, Charlton, Best etc. were on show, I was so scared of the mob around me I kept my head down most of the time, although I seem to remember we drew 2–2.
Eventually my father lost inspiration with the Clough/Armfield/Stein/Adamson era, but not before I had a chance to see Leeds beat Anderlect (3–0 in the fog) followed by Barcelona (Cruyft, Neeskens, etc. 2–1 for the aging ex-Revie team to make their way to Paris in 1975.
I remember quite vividly, the EC final.
We all piled into a coach filled with hope and anticipation, was sickened by the display of the match officials, and came home sad and drunk!
(I can still see the Lorimer drive blasting into the back of the net with Bremner barely off-side and no-where near interfering with play.)
I continued to go off and on although I do have some special memories as a youngster running on to the Hillsborough turf to shake John Giles's hand after beating Birmingham 3–0 in the Cup semi-final (1972).
Eventually, I ended up a rather poor student, so my games were very limited.
I went to Leeds's last game in the 1st Division before being relegated in 1978 (?).
We were 1–0 to Brighton at home with around 15 mins left.
Then Barnes decided to start playing and we won 2–1!.
Unfortunately we lost our last game and other results went against us so we were down and out.
Since moving to London in 1980, I have been very much restricted to opportunities to see Leeds live due to the crowd problems and ensuing all-ticket matches, club cards, etc.
However, I managed a League Cup match in 1990 (QPR 3–0 after 20 mins — we murdered them), and the debacle at Watford in the same competition last year (1–2).
I was astonished how fast the game has become since the back pass rule has changed.
There seemed to be no time on the ball, and poor Dylan Kerr was run ragged down the right wing.
The team played well BUT far too fancy.
It was very entertaining going forward, and extremely frustrating waiting for them to score Goal-Of-The-Century!
It happened after we were 2–0 down with 15 mins left!
It was the only time I saw Cantona play for Leeds live.
I was left a little uninspired with his overall display although his flicks were magical.
Perhaps he was just to bizarre in the end, wanting too much clever play.
Since he moved to Man.
Utd (which I was totally amazed about when I read it in the newspaper) he seems to have settled down and appears to put in more effort.
I personally think he suits their style more and will probably do good things for them for a while, until he gets bored, or dropped, or injured.
I have been impressed with the way Wilkinson has built up the squad over the last few years.
In the mid-70's there were a number of players (notably McQueen and Jordan) who wanted to leave Leeds.
It never seems right to have players who want to leave — we should have a team where people are excited to be a part of the setup.
That's why the youngsters are so encouraging.
When I heard Deane had begged the Sheffield board to let him come to Leeds, I was really pleased that we had someone who really wanted to be here.
So much for my observation from abroad.
I tried to get this message on to the network by sending to  but the seems to screw things up.
If you can get it to everyone that would be great, otherwise thanks for all the work anyway.
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 93 11:21:06 MET
Subject: How do they calculate those scores?
How do they calculate those things anyway?
Having done Mathematics on college I have absolutely no idea how they come up with their ‘current ratings’.
I suppose it is like those astrology charts that appear in the newspaper.
You can't but peek at them just to be titillated, not really believing what they are saying, since they are concocted by charlatans.
Similar scenario for those soccer astrology charts.
Why should we be worried anyhow: the longer it take everyone to realise we're back the more victories we will pile up.
Long may the scum have their day in the light.
Ours is just around the corner.
Don't laugh, but I had a dream that Leeds beat Sunderland 7–0 in the return of the CCC a few days ago.
Remember you heard it here first:-).
James.
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 93 10:42 GMT
Subject: Wimbledon
I wasnt in work yesterday (injured foot from football sunday).
Im just reading the mail…and remembered a ‘spooky’ occurence on Saturday.
Well, the score was 2–0 at half time.
I listened to the radio 5 report.
I then couldnt bear to listen to the radio for the rest of the half, so I decided to occupy myself for 40 mins.
I switched on my computer and pissed around on it — and put the new PSB's CD on in the background.
My other half switched on teletext after about 15 mins and I couldnt stop myself from looking…still 2–0.
I then banned any viewing of teletext:-)
It was now 4.38ish…the vide-printer on grandstand starts about then, so I abandoned the computer, sat next to the tv.
I apprehensively switched on the teletext…still 2–0.
Then, ‘Go West’ came on the stereo (from the PSB Cd).
This is an uplifting anthem sort of a record.
I was previously commenting that Id like us to score another and break the 2 goal hoodoo.
As the first couple of bars of Go West rang out I said ‘Leeds are gonna score now’ and said the record was an omen.
Within 5 seconds the teletext flashed up that Macca had scored…
Ok, in ‘real life’ he would have scored about 3 mins earlier…but hey!
Another slightly spooky thing…
I had an old (circa 1979) Leeds mirror up in the hallway.
I only got it about 6 years ago, but the badge is the smiley or ‘penis’(smiley penis!?!).
About4 weeks ago I realised I had only put this in the hallway after the title season, and promptly took it down.
This was 2 days before the Oldham match.
Strange but true.
Anyone fancy helping me out on a few voodoo dolls dressed in a famous black with blue/orange trim kit?:-)
Marl
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 93 10:58 GMT
Subject: Title record
No, not the ‘ooh aah cantona — dernt ner wha a lerv yoo’ one.
Yes, a bit strange this…
Des was chatting with Macca on football focus in the morning, and then he said the same thing.
I ve just checked the stats…after 9 games we had won 5, drawn 4 (19 pts).
After 10 games it was won 5, drawn 5 (20 pts).
So we are 1 pt behind.
However, if we win our next game we will be ahead as we lost to Palace in the title season.
Crucially though — in the title year we then hit very good form, winning 7 of the next 8 matches.
To keep up with that we need to win 8 of our next 9.
BUT, that took our average to above 2 pts a game, a spell of 4 draws brought it all back down again…so 8 wins and 4 draws will be fine this time:-) Even better 10 wins and 2 defeats.
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 93 11:59:10 BST
Subject: PUB MEET
For those of you who are going to the Sunderland match tommorrow, how about mmeting in a pub before/after the match?
We usually park about 5mins walk from the ground near a pub called the Imperial.
If anybody is interested mail me!(we will also need some method of identification).
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 93 11:21 GMT
Subject: Soothsayer
Yeah, Ive looked.
I tried to think of specific areas…like number of wins — home record — goals etc.
But as this was also mentioned before the match — only ‘as good as when you won the title’ fits to those areas.
Did you see him on Sports Saturday on sky??
The bloke is the biggest twat Ive ever seen.
How the fuck he ever managed any side I dont know.
He was asked questions, and every time demonstrated his lack of knowledge.
Fair enough — but the way he answered he made out as if he knew what he was talking about.
One minute he was talking about Leeds struggling against Wimbledon because they hoof it into the air, next minute that Wimbledon do/can play some nice football, the very next statement that they always just kicked it as hard as possible into the air.
He was then asked about Wallace.
He said ‘Yes hes a very good little goalscorer — hell always score goals — Wimbledon know hes the man they have to look after’.
At that point I laughed and said — yeah along with Strachan, Speed, Macca, Deane…
I ca nt even remember what he was saying about other matches — I was laughing at his ‘expert’ comments too much.
My mum knows more about football — and all she knows is that QPR play in a pretty kit.
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 93 11:31 GMT
Subject: Batts back
Wilko has some tricky decisions to make.
What about when DOL is fit?
Wetherall is playing very well.
Fairclough (as Ive said on numerous occasions) is excellent when given a job to do…as he is in this formation.
Disagree.
I havent seen anything to suggest he is incompetent.
The only thing on saturday was a Holdsworth run and shot.
Holdsworth is a good player.
In newsomes situation I would have maybe challenged him before he got to the box and maybe given a foul away in the process.
Experience tell you what to do and when to do it…and hes is risking a sending off if he makes it look too obvious.
The defence is solid…remember we were playing Wimbledon…the last thing they do is give the defence an easy time — I thought they coped well and limited Wimbledon to a few shot from the edge of the box — which beeney coped with admirably.
Speed does look best in central midfield (his own preferred position).
Batty could fill in Fairclough's role…but for specific games we might have to leave one of the midfielders out, as Fairclough is superb with specific man-marking jobs.
Id like to see the present formation kept as is.
Mark (who might actually do some work today!)
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 93 12:47:03 +0100
Subject: Re: How do they calculate those scores?
Hey, James, you weren't by any chance just after downing 7 pints of the black stuff in McSwiggans (sp?):-).
Vin
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 1993 12:53:21 +0000
Subject: Smiley Curse/Toothbrush Luck
I was a great admirer of the 70's smiley too.
Funny though, I started wearing a really smart metal badge of the 77 Tony Curry style home kit with the smiley on the shorts after we won the title in 1992 and whoops apocalypse!
Then a few weeks ago, after the Arse/Scouse/Canaries debacles, I lost it.
Since then what has happened to Leeds???
It did look really smart though.
I had a good luck toothbrush that won us the title in 92.
It was white, with the Admiral logo on the handle and ‘Jordan’ on the side.
I got it when things started drifting away from us around February time.
I couldn't believe it when I saw it cos we had just cemented the ill-fated Admiral deal.
Of course it went shite next season.
What a sad man I am.
Tim
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 93 13:05 GMT
Subject: Ratings
It must be purely subjective.
Some bloke sits there, and thinks ‘leeds utd…there not playing well…mmmm…4’.
Im sure the lower divisions are better as the people doing the rating wont know much to have a ‘feeling’, and look at results — and get a more mathmatical figure.
Ive seen the premier figures change by 2 points after one game.
Dont be suprised to see marks of 7 or 8 for Leeds this week — as all of a sudden its becoming well known that weve won 5 on the trot — and pretty hard to ignore us.
I agree…
Im happy in some ways for us to be ignored.
On the other hand Im sick to the back teeth of scum hype, and its nice to see Leeds get some of the credit they deserve.
Oh for the days of Leeds hype…
I didnt dream it…but Ive a good feeling about it (for a big score).
5 or 6 maybe.
I had a dream last night funnily enough about Leeds (I dont normally — honest!).
It was away vs West Ham.
We were winning 3–0 when I woke up.
i did know the scorers but Ive forgotten.
Probably Maggie Thatcher, Bishop of Aukland and Huckleberry Hound;-)
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 1993 10:04:07–0400 (EDT)
Subject: Re: Soothsayer
Yes, Tommy Docherty is a wanker.
Here in Canada we are badly isolated from regular contact with soccer, so when it comes time for the World Cup, the cable sports network dredges up some living bodies to do the commentary.
The special analyst they got for Italia 90 was Docherty, and he was, on the whole, pretty pathetic (although I was amazed when, during England- Cameroun, he stated that England was playing terribly; didn't expect this from someone commenting for a TV audience which was solidly pro-England).
Wanker!
(I like the word, we don't have it here.)
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 93 14:15 GMT
Subject: Batts Injury
Anyone see Football Focus on Saturday?
Anyone notice how coy Macca was when asked about Batts?
Well, in a couple of todays papers the mystery is explained (by Batts).
The broken wrist happened in the warm up before the Sheff Utd game.
Batts went in goal for a while, and broke his wrist trying to punch/save a Macca shot!
It seems Batts has learned his lesson:-)
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 1993 15:26:39 +0100
Does anybody know the story behind the Batty injury?
I saw Macca interviewed on Grandstand and when asked about it, he said with a smile that he broke his wrist in a ‘freak accident’, but wouldn't say anything more.
Nobody else seems to have mentioned it.
Have I missed something?
Andy.
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 93 16:04:31 MET
Subject: I smell a man who was in Mcswiggs before
Vin,
I smell a man who knows Galway.
I've no excuse as I don't drink, and before you start ‘an Irishman who doesn't drink’, there are a few of us around, Declan speak up.
While on the subject: I started supporting Leeds when I was about 5.
I was a lapsed fan for about 4 years until I was 9.
My father worked part-time in a dance hall and he picked up a Leeds United badge which I wore everywhere for about 6 months until I lost it:-((((.
I was devastated, I remember the badge well.
but it left me with an interest in Leeds United which I've never shaken off, nor have I ever wnated to.
Back to normal services…
James.
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 93 16:21 GMT
Subject: Docherty AND DORIGO TRANSFER SPECULATION??
First off…
Dorigo
Teletext has a brief item saying;
‘Howard Wilkinson has denied rumours that Leeds have received a £1m cash plus Nigel Worthington offer from Sheff Wed for Tony Dorigo’
Probably Francis jumping the gun again (remember him agreeing terms with Blackburn for the sale of Warhurst because he assumed Deane would join them?)
No way hose.
Well
1)
Hes stupid
2)
Hes Scottish
3)
Hes a piss head
Perm any 2 from 3.
What about cunt??
Not heard an American or Canadian say that.
Equally applies to Docherty too.
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 93 17:51:54 +0100
Subject: Re: I smell a man who was in Mcswiggs before
Ok, I've been in McSwiggans…once.
Nice town Galway.
I'm originally from 80 Km north of there — a wee place called Castlebar and before you start slagging off Mayo footballers, I'd better let you know I know this year's hurling result!!!
Anyway, enough of non-Leeds stuff.
I started supporting Leeds the day they lost to Munich in 1975.
I didn't really support any team until then, though my mother had bought me a Chelsea hat ‘n scarf a few months earlier.
That match left a big impression on me.
The injustice of it all.
The skill of that Leeds team.
So, I guess I started supporting Leeds just as they started their downward trend.
The Chelsea gear mysteriously got lost (had to lose it as nobody wanted it…do ya blame them?).
To make matters worse I've got a brother who supports the Scum…winning the championship a couple years ago ahead of said scum even more enjoyable.
As for this year.
Bad start, good run at the moment though I don't think they've found top form.
If you're going for 7–0 tomorrow, I'll be a bit more cautious and go for 2–0.
Vin
p.s. saw Celtic play here a few weeks ago — a really SHITE team at the moment.
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 1993 17:56 GMT
Subject: Keep your F! $%; ∘ hands off Dorigo
Just heard on the Radio 5 sports report that Wilko has denied a rumour that Sheff.
Wednesday were offering 1 million + Nigel Person for Tony Dorigo.
Now I know it's only rumours but with Wilko's abilities when selling players you never know.
So this is my message to Wednesday,
F $%; off and leave Tony alone.
Declan
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 1993 20:17 GMT
Subject: RE: I smell a man who was in Mcswiggs before
Sorry James,
I can't help you here.
I'm quite partial to large quantities of the black stuff and Mc Swiggans is one of the better places in the country to get it,(Guinness that is)
Declan
From:
Date: Wed, 6 Oct 93 09:46:50 MET
Subject: Odds for CCC
Leeds are 22–1 with some bookie or another for the CCC.
Not bad odds if you are a betting man.
James.
From:
Date: Wed, 6 Oct 93 10:05:33 +0100
Subject: I'm back
Well having now returned to Derby Uni I've managed to get hold of a mail account, which means I can join you lot again.
Last time I was on the list I was about to go to the Norwich and Liverpool games — well at least I saw plenty of goals!!
Good to see things have changed quite considerably now though.
Phil.
From:
Date: Wed, 6 Oct 93 12:16:02 BST
Subject: Pessimistic
I am not very confident about tonights game.
I know we are playing well and Sunderland are a bag of shite but its a cup match and we seem to be shit at cup matches.
The last time I saw Leeds win a cup match was almost 3 years ago (Aston Villa 4–1) and since then I've seen them lose to the Scum (*3, Rangers, and Arsenal(*2).
Everytime I am about to go to a cup match I imagine myself travelling back home feeling like shit.
It would be even worse this time 'cos Durham is full of Sunderland fans.
I know I'm being pessimistic but all I think about is that depressing drive home!
I need cheering up!!
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 7 Oct 93 10:11:00 +0100
Subject:?????????
Oh, oh, it's already 10 am and nobody's posted last night's result.
Does this mean we didn't win????
Vin
From:
Date: Thu, 7 Oct 93 10:42:33 BST
Subject: Last night
We Lost to Sunderland 2–1 and we were crap!
We started off brightly with Deane, Dorigo and Macca going close with only the wood work or inspirational saves preventing a goal.
Then Goodman scored a soft goal with his head for a free kick near the corner flag.
Then after a awful back pass from ‘tortoise’ Newsome Sunderland scored again.
For the first ten minutes of the second half, we started playing a bit (but at this time we needed 4 goals to go thorough) and Whelan scored after a good cross by Kelly.
After that we never got started, as soon as we got a bit of momentum the sunderland players wasted time by falling over and claiming injury.
Strachan was carried off with what looked like a nasty injury.
Rocky played for 20 minutes but didn't do much.
Strandli was a headless chicken but went close once.
The team selection and tactics were a bit dodgy.
Wallace was injured but Newsome was man-marking Goodman instead of Fairclough.
The more I see of Newsome the more I think he is crap!
So we lost, but I knew we would.
We seem to be crap in cup games.
Any explanation?
Maybe we just panic.
Didn't see you in the boozer Gav et.
al.
Cheers,
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 07 Oct 1993 10:44:46 +0100
Subject: Last night
It was Leeds 1 — Sunderland 2 (2–4 on aggregate).
I'll leave it to the people who went to explain the debacle.
Stu
From:
Date: Thu, 7 Oct 1993 11:42:48 +0100
Subject: Last night's fun
Well, sad to say I thought Sunderland deserved their win last night.
Mark's given you the outline of what happened — one sneaky header from a free kick, and another Newsome-on-keeper backpass nightmare.
The start of the second half promised an exciting come back after Whelan scored, but it wasn't to be: Leeds' play became increasingly frenetic and desperate, and Sunderland players kept going over like someone in the crowd was working them over with a machine gun.
There were plenty of chances for Leeds, which is encouraging, but they all hit posts, crossbars, Makems, & c , and refused to go in.
Dorigo had a great game, I thought, but all too often seemed to have been left in sole command of the entire left side of the pitch — every time he went forward alone, large gaps appeared behind him, and the gaps were frequently filled by the ball and Sunderland players.
As he came on, Rocky got a great reception from the crowd and a yellow card from the referee.
Strachan looked in a bad way (hacked unforgivably from behind) so maybe we'll be seeing more of Rocky in the next few weeks.
Many apologies, Mark, for not making it to the pub as agreed.
The four of us (Kev, Mark H, Kirsty, and me) wanted to go, but copped out after we got soaked just queueing for a burger outside the ground.
Having sailed up the M1 in Kev's car through the monsoon, we didn't fancy the final swim up the road to the Imperial.
Next time, hopefully.
We did make it to a boozer afterwards, though, and we all agreed it was worth making a note of for future reference.
It was The Gate, 500 yards down the road from the Barnsley turn-off off the M1.
Plenty of seats, a bracing smell of fresh gloss paint, cheap beer, and lots of great music from the live disco crew: their most recent offering was Billy Joel's ‘Uptown Girl’, and only Kev could identify their oldest offering.
It was a pleasant end to a crap night, footie-wise.
Gav
From:
Date: Thu, 7 Oct 1993 10:44:34 +0000
Subject: Leeds Out of the League Cup
Noone seems to want to say it, but we lost 2–1 again, which is 4–2 on aggregate to the filthy makems of Sunderland.
The first goal was the fruit of a woeful backpass from Newsome, my favourite defender, not.
Beeney did OK from the sound of things though.
Rocky came on in the 60th minute but could not affect the game.
Whelan was felled early on by Ball who should have walked then, and who did similar to McAllister in the second half.
Whelan scored the consolation goal.
Leeds had two early attempts that had to be well-saved, but from the Guardian and Radio 5 reports Sunderland were well worth their win.
Hello again defensive problems, it's like you've never been away.
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 7 Oct 93 12:27:01 BST
Subject: Re: Last night
I'll just add a bit to  's report.
I travelled up with Gav, and Kirsty.
Firstly Wetherall and Newsome should never be allowed to play together again, and the 5 (or 3+2) man defence should be abandoned too.
I suspected it may leave holes somewhere else.
It meant that Dorigo was constantly faced by two playesr in defence and attack.
He was expected to get the crosses in from the left and get back to cover the left of defence.
Wallace's angled runs were badly missed:-the Whelan/Deane partnership did not work at the beginning of the season and never looked like it last night.
The latter had countless powder-puff headers, but his most memorable work was an early shot, and a secon-half run and cross.
Sunderland played the game exactly right.
They fought well, looked dangerous on the break esp.
Goodman, and a combination of luck and good defending/ goalkeeping was sufficient to keep out Leeds when we managed to build up a head of steam.
The worrying thing was that at no time did Leeds actually put together a great move which tore Sunderland apart.
We relied on balls into the box, to hope something would happen.
Given that we rarely ever got to the bye-line, Sunderland never looked really troubled by this.
One bizarre thing was that the defence seemed obsessed in treating Beeny to back-passes of increasing difficulty.
(‘Lets see if we can ruin your confidence too’).
Eventually Newsome came up with a super 50–50 pass back which resulted in the second goal.
All in all nobody played particularly well.
If I had to nominate Leeds's MOM I would say Dorigo (Cos his Mum's reading).
Newsome, Wetherall were poor.
Batty, Wallace and DOL were sorely missed.
Gv's mentioned the Gate pub near M1 Junc 37.
It was just like the Rovers Return 20 years ago, but with an ageing Bet Lynch behind the bar.
— Brill.
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 7 Oct 93 14:16:32 BST
Subject: More about last night
Sorry, I forgot to mention that the fax and collect method works for tickets, mine was waitning for me last night.
It also sorted out a personalised shirt.
It is an away one with No.6 LEWIS on the back.
(as if I didn't look daft enough anyway).
Now You'll all be able to recognise (and avoid) me.
That is unless Gav, Mark H, or Kirsty set fire to it.
They reckon it's a jinx after last night.
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 7 Oct 1993 13:37:33 +0000
Subject: Mak us a cuppa tea, Mam, we beat Leeds
This is how they were in the first few games of the season.
I thought we had got away from the ‘Where's Chapman's head?
Oh shit, Upton Park!’ syndrome.
What has happened with Jamie Forrester, he is far more accomplished than Whelan IMHO.
Come to that is Walla
From:
Date: Thu, 7 Oct 1993 14:43:21 +0000
Subject: Tasteless personalised top
Munich 58
I wonder if they'd let you do it…?
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 7 Oct 1993 16:47:41 +0100
Subject: Fwd II from Richard Manning
Another note from Richard, whose problems in posting to the list continue to mystify me…
Gav
From:
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 1993 16:54:37–0400 (EDT)
Subject: RE: Boring Boring Admin
Gav,
Thanks for the note and getting the message out to the masses.
I noticed that there were NO comments from the group, which surprised me a little, particularly my comments on Cantona.
I got the feeling that the majority of Leeds fans felt betrayed when Cantona left to join Man Utd (can't get too enthused about the term Scum myself), I know I did.
But I do feel his style didn't suit our forward play and that working with Giggs and Hughes is better for him.
The Leeds midfield is the envy of the Premier League, and yet without the correct foil to play alongside, it never quite worked.
I liked Chapman, and even saw the odd game where he played the ball well on the ground, but he and Cantona didn't quite blend.
One thing I have noticed about the American way of life is the emphasis on the positive.
People don't seem to moan on but tend to look more at the positive angles.
That's why we should look at as many of the positive angles in the Leeds setup as possible.
For one who had to listen to the gloom of the poor Leeds team of the 80's pre-Wilkinson, I am just excited that we are there or there abouts.
One final comment.
Having watched Leeds during their high spots, particularly the early 70's, I feel that the Championship team of 1992, while not being individually anywhere near as good as the old masters, the TEAM itself played more attractive and exciting football.
I know most of you will have seen the 7–0 vs Southampton (32 passes wasn't it), or the 5–1 vs Man Utd, but I reckon the 4–0 murder of Aston Villa (who were in the top 5 at the time) at Villa Park and the 6–1 at Hillsborough were some of the best soccer I have ever seen.
Does anyone else have similar comparisons?
As far as sending messages to the subscibers, I try and fail — not that I have much to add!
I tried: and  to no avail.
If I remember correctly, I could get to  either and someone put me on the system.
I guess I'll just listen and not talk (if that's OK).
Regards, Richard
From:
Date: Thu, 7 Oct 1993 10:47:42–0500
Subject: injuries status
Does anyone has an up-to-date report of O'Leary's injury progress?
Also, any word on Batty's recovery?
Will they be ready for the Ipswich game?
Thanks.
Joo
From:
Date: Thu, 7 Oct 93 17:54:47 BST
Subject: Re: Richard Manning
I agree about Cantona myself.
Although a player of undoubted talent, he was not reliable.
He scored some great goals but missed some sitters.
His flicks on into nowhere used to infuriate me.
Particularly away to Stuttgart when Leeds were desperate for someone to hold onto the ball to give the defence some respite.
He did not gel with Chapman in that niether xepected to do any defensive chores or chasing about.
In time he might have proved a good replacement for Chapman, but it would have needed a refinement in tactics.
I think he does look a more complete player at Scum, having Hughes with him to do some of his work and take the pressure also helps.
You're right about it being good just to be in the premier league and be one of the better teams.
Also player-for-player the team circa 72 was probably better, but Strachan ranks up with those immortals and in time Speed, Batty, McAllister Dorigo and Rod Wallace may do too.
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 7 Oct 93 17:58:11 BST
Subject: Re: Tasteless personalised top
Even my wharped mind had only got as far as thinking.
something like
‘Lesley Ash’ 69
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 7 Oct 1993 16:02:18–0400 (EDT)
Subject: Richard trying to get on!
Gavin,
I've now tried a number of different ways of doing this, and having the SMTP% infront plus the’’ marks seems to allow me to write!
I'll see if it comes up on the Leeds list.
If it does, HELLO!
Richard
From:
Date: Thu, 7 Oct 1993 16:29:10–0400 (EDT)
Subject: AT LAST –0400!
Thanks to GAv for sorting me out!!
I am now open for questions on the ‘early years’(you know Ferenzvaros in the Inter Cities Fairs Cup Final 1968, etc).
Does anyone remember the sock tabs that the players used to wear with their number on?
I've still got Johnny Giles' from the Hillsborugh Cup Semi.
Other trivia available on request.
Richard
PS Taped the English Soccer on ‘Sports CHannel Ohio’ last night and got up at 6:15 to watch the highlights before going to work.
The first two goals against Wimbledon were awesome.
But, what does this new dance mean after scoring — I saw it in a number of games?
From:
Date: Thu, 07 Oct 1993 21:42:45–0500 (EST)
Subject: Re:At Last
ee lad Ferencvaros in 68.
Did Albert Johanson play ont' left wing or was the oldbugger injured as usual?
I had mi grandads' season tickt that year but I ca nt says as a remember much o' game.
Ah remember tabs and all that.
When team came out they'd kick a load a footballsinto crowd.
All part of Don Revie's plan to bring a bit of glamour t' game.
he wer a big fan of Real Madrid tha knows, thats where all white strip came from I wer a ball boy at Elland Road between 1972–74 (its when they were building the kop to replace the mound a muck that used to be the Gelderd end).
But mi main job was to look after Gordon McQueens' & Joe Jordans' Rod Stewart Lps.
(I don't know why they used to bring em to match day)
Here's a trivia question for ya.
Did the following line up ever play together? 1 Harvey 2 Reaney 3 Cooper 4 Bremner 5 Charlton 6 Hunter 7 Lorimer 8 Clarke 9 M.I.C.K Jones 10 Giles 11 E.Gray Sub 12 Madeley?
Perhaps the expats could do an Old Codgers Corner.
From:
Date: Fri, 8 Oct 93 09:23:48 MET
Subject: Agony upon agony
So it seems that 22–1 wasn't such a good price after all:-(.
Leeds are compiling an atrocious record in recent cup competitions.
Sunderland are absolutely nobodies and will be lucky to survive in the *first* division this year.
I hope the result will not detract from the overall confidence of the team as the premiership is there to be won, if we keep up our record good record in the league.
Thankfully the scum are still in, as much as it sticks in my gut.
The more games they play the more likely they are to win nothing.
Ipswich next weekend will be a good test of the team and their prospects.
They now have a week off to review things and figure out what to do after Wednesday night debacle.
Nothing much has been lost, we might as well lose in the second round as in the semi-finals (like two years ago).
I know about the money benefit, but money isn't everything; *).
Richard Manning wrote:
Well Richard, we all know what they didn't quite mix.
Would you, if your soccer partner was getting to know you marital partner in a way which is not optimally conducive to homely bliss.
Never mix work with pleasure is always a good policy in work and personal relationships.
James.
From:
Date: Fri, 8 Oct 93 09:40:42 BST
Subject: Re:At Last
I'd say No.
Reason — I think Harvey only replaced Sprake just before 1972 cup final.
Cooper broke his leg before this.
By the time Cooper came back from injury (He was never the same player) Jack Charlton had retired (Probably immediately after the final)
Throughout the whole of 72–73 Madeley played Centre-Half and Cherry played left back.
ie Harvey & Charlton only played a hanful of times together, during which time Cooper was injured.
Kev.
From:
Date: Fri, 08 Oct 1993 10:48:30 +0100
Subject: Burnley goal
Wasn't it Jones who was lying on the floor?
They show it on the Leeds United — The Glory Years video about three times and it always appears on the ten best goals of all time.
The other goal in that match is quite amusing as well when he chips the goalie.
The answer to the possible team that never was would probably be in the book Leeds United — The Complete Record.
However, I haven't got a copy to hand and even if I had I can't be arsed looking through it.
My prize posession used to be a key-ring which had a small white book on the end.
When you opened it there was a pull-out strip with pictures of all the Super Leeds team.
Last time I saw it was about 1976.
Hope it's still in my parents' attic somewhere!
Stu
From:
Date: Fri, 8 Oct 93 10:54:35 MET
Subject: Was it?
Tim,
Didn't we have a black guy who played for a few season in the second division with Revie before the real glory years.
I can't remember his name though!
Sounds like someone is giving you grief?
Hurling insults is some peoples way of showing they care.
if they didn't then why would they bother then?
Not that it makes a whits difference to how the team plays or what team Wilko puts out on Saturday.
James.
From:
Date: Fri, 8 Oct 93 11:11:14 BST
Subject: Line up
Hnag on…so Cooper didn't play in the ‘72 cup final then?
Did Madeley play left-back in that game?
If so who came on as sub when Jones did his shoulder in?
Glynn
From:
Date: Fri, 8 Oct 1993 10:17:00 +0000
Subject: Re:At Last
I asked a trivia question on rss a long tme ago about the famous Eddie Gray goal against Burnley where he dribbled round eight players and then scored — the question was: Who was the Leeds player lying injured as he did it?
I ‘ll pose it again!
Another one: who was the first black Leeds player and when?
Incidentally I reserve the right to make sick jokes and hurl abuse at the scum, or any opposition, or even Newsome no matter what.
This list isn't officially censored yet, even by well-meaning californians.
Tim
From:
Date: Fri, 08 Oct 1993 11:49:07 +0100
Subject: Cup Final
No one came on as sub, did they?
I though Jones did himself a mischief right at the very end.
BTW Gavin is off to Holland today for a week.
He'll be there for the England match so keep an eye out for him (for those who don't know what he looks like he's the spitting image of Eric Cantona — this is true, honest).
So if there are any problems drop me a line.
He's back for the Ipswich game which I'm going to try to go to but not sure yet.
We thought about going down on the saturday and staying at Great Yarmouth and then driving to the match.
Anyone else going?
Stu
From:
Date: Fri, 8 Oct 93 11:04 GMT
Subject: Personalised tops
Yeah, and its cheaper than HUMPHRIES 21
I was thinking…
I wonder if theyd sell the letters/numbers on their own — for DIY ironing?
I was thinking this anyway.
I was also thinking of sick slogans:-)
That one has a nice ring to it.
Ill be sending my comments on the Sunderland Match later — but a revolutionary idea we came up with was velcro shirts…with stick on everything…
I also wagered itd be an advantage for corners to get several players sticking to each other in steps to get a 10ft player.
At one point we thought one of our players (ca nt remember who — Whelan?) had got stuck to an opposition armpit…but then remembered that the velcro shirt was still an idea only.
So — any other sick personalisations for me to consider??
Anyone frightened of being too sick in public can send me email:-)
MArk
From:
Date: Fri, 8 Oct 93 12:22:54 BST
Subject: Re: Line up
I believe Madeley played in different positions in each of his four Wembley Finals.
68
League Cup v Arsenal — Centre Forward (Jones cup-tied)
70
FA v Chelsea — Right Back (Reaney broke leg 5 days before)
72
FA v Arse — Left Back (Cooper broke leg)
73
FA v Sunderland — Centre Half (Charlton retired).
Strange really as the majority of games early in his career were in mid-field as deputy for E.Gray.
Later on he took over the No.6 (never quite sure what to call that position these days).
From:
Date: Fri, 8 Oct 93 11:35 GMT
Subject: ‘dances’ with Prats
Welcome to the heady heights of writing to the list:-)
New dance??
Do you mean the one that Newcastle seem to do??
The EXTREMELY suspect one where they run to each other(or more likely one sad git runs to the scorer…desperate to get some attention), hold hands, trot backwards stroking each others hands in the process??
Id prefer them to snog to be honest.
WHY do they do it?
Dont they realise they look COMPLETELY bent, and completely sad, and completely STUPID.
The other nauseating one was when Gazza scored for england…and MR CompleteUnco/HeadlessChicken/LameHorse carlton palmer ran over to him, joined hands, and ‘wiggled’ his lips…sorry I mean hind quarters.
WHAT A TWAT.
Didnt you want to punch him?
Didnt you want to punch Lee Clark?
Can you imagine Batts doing that??
I reckon hed kick someones bollox if someone came up to do that to him.
Batts' only celebration is to run and jump on someone, and ruffle EVERYONES hair who comes within 10 yards.
And then maybe do the Leeds Salute to the crowd.
Everyone else is completely normal at Leeds.
Macca runs to a corner, and ‘throws’.
Speed runs to the touchline/crowd and runs along…nearly always spitting just after scoring.
Strachan is always good for some improvisation/funnyChappyness.
Nah, what Id like to see is Batts join in one of these PONCEY opposition dances…do a few wiggles…stroke a few hands…then PUNCH the bastards in the head, and maybe pick up any teeth and casually toss these aside one by one whilst running for his early shower…
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 8 Oct 93 11:49 GMT
Subject: ‘Trivia’ questions
Trick question…none.
Albert Johanneson was merely enjoying the view, not injured:-)
And he didnt dribble round 8 players…what he did was much more skillful (about 4 drag backs).
And his first goal tends to get forgotten…but it was 100 times better than Cuntona's effort a few weeks back, and better than Peles effort…in fact probably the best goal of that type (45 yard lobs) youll ever see.
Johanneson…early 60's werent it??
Maybe even late 50's.
I think we shouldn't need to do this.
People who want to NOT make sick jokes etc should be ‘reserving the right’:-))
Maybe its a bit difficult for people with either a non UK sense of humour (I include you Irish folks in UK…sorry guys, but couldnt think of a better description…
British Isles??),
OR with people who arent subjected to the scum hype directly.
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 8 Oct 93 11:56 GMT
Yes he did didnt he??
It was Reaney with the broken leg.
Right back 
Phew…confusion reigns here guys…
Jones got injured vs the Arse.
And, despite what many people say, it wasnt while delivering the cross for Sniffers goal — it was right at the very end of 90mins…so noone came on for him when he injured his ELBOW.
Hunter escorted the strapped Jones up to the royal box…and HRH Prince Philip asked Hunter…
I know cos I was sitting immediately behind them.
(Spot the blatant lie)
Mark:-)
From:
Date: Fri, 8 Oct 93 12:25 GMT
Subject: Sunderland comments
Right, own up.
My ‘SmileyPenis’ mirror remains un-hung (fnarr).
It werent my fault.
how about the Admiral Toothbrush??
Who wasnt wearing the correct lucky underpants??
Im not quite as down on the performance as others seem to be.
Sunderland played well.
Well above their position (like the 1st leg).
BUT we deserved to win on Wednesday, and by enough goals to put us through.
We deserved to win the 1st leg too.
Within 5 mins their keeper had made 2 very good (OK excellent) saves.
One from a superb control-turn-shot from Deane.
One from a superb low free kick from Macca.
Another free kick was almost a repeat of the Wimbledon one, only approx 4 inches wide.
At least 2 shots hit the bar…one from strach who had a good strike which was going in…it hit a sunderland player and looped up…still going in it looked…but hit the corner of post and crossbar.
Numerous other ‘near things’.
This was just in the first half kids.
As I said, Sunderland played well…and had a few chances on the break — only to be expected.
In the second half we had 2 headers/shots off the line within 1 minute.
I ca nt remember how many headers we had throughout the night which just didnt have the power, and hence slid harmlessly past either post.
We came up with the idea of attaching nose rings to all our players and getting someone in the kop to give a hefty tug when necessary.
Coupled with other tactics (velcro shirts etc)— we had it sussed.
Wilko was guilty IMO of a tactical cock up.
The 5 defenders situation is fine in league matches…even in cup matches…but if you dont score with a break in the box…you need to change.
he left it too late.
Fairclough is excellent at man-man marking.
Why wasnt he doing goodman?
He was in effect doing nothing…so even retaining the formation we should have had a midfielder in his postion.
Criticism of the defence is unfair again IMO.
They looked as solid as reasonable to expect in the circumstances…the midfield were looking to get forward, and being caught on the break is fair enough when chasing a cup tie…and Goodman is one of the better players around…suprisingly fast.
Newsome did the crap back pass.
His balls forward werent too good…thats not what he is there for.
Even the back pass could have been salvaged had Beeney realised how crap it was a second earlier, and even then, he could have tried to kick it to either side on Gray, as opposed to trying to kick it as hard as possible…straight at gray.
Sunderland were lucky, the ball could have gone anywhere.
Beeney…not aided by appalling 1st half conditions, had an attack of the lukics, and wasnt getting good direction on kicks, a lot of the time.
We all know DOL at the back would help both newsome and wetherall.
They were both marking, which they shouldn't have been…fairclough should have taken goodman out of the game…leaving one of the others to clean up.
Up front, we missed wallace.
Whelan is an extremely good player, but him and deane, whilst individually playing well enough, werent given the variety of balls that wallace would have demanded from midfield (ie balls on the ground occasionally).
Forrester would definately been a better choice to partner Deane in this match.
The conditions were appaling in the first half.
A definate leveller, coupled with Leeds apparent unwillingness to play balls behind their backs ON THE GROUND meant that any through balls bounced too far, out of touch or to the keeper.
For them, they played it on the ground, and so their forwards could get to the ball…or pressure the defence for a back pass, or a throw in.
Another point…
Batty would have been useful in this match…not only in the playing sense, but we had lots of throw ins level with their box, Batty would have got these into a danger area…
Well, Ive waffled enough.
Its bad enough going out I suppose, but the most annoying thing is we still need to get into the habit of not losing games.
Our recent record in the cups has been bad…but you look back — it always has been!
If we progress past the 2nd playing round in either — we tend to go a long way…otherwise we tendto get caught cold as it were…and in the FA cup draw the finalists/winners…
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 8 Oct 1993 8:54:19–0400 (EDT)
Subject: Question & Answers
1.
Old Codgers Corner — got a sort of ring to it!
Maybe its area for famous memories…
2.
The Eddie Gray goals…
I seem to remember they appear on the Glory Years tape (as someone mentioned).
It looks somewhat easier everytime I watched it but I remeber at the time Keith Macklin (commentator) almost having one with excitement.
I'd need to study the tape to discover the body on the ground.
Perhaps another trivia question might be how many players did he beat TWICE in that run…
3.
The Team…
Well I'd guess that they never played together.
I would agree that Charlton didn't appear much after the ‘72 final.
It was amazing that, after Reaney had broken his leg in '70 and missed both the Cup Final and the trip to Mexico (as well as the famous end-of-season run in), Cooper broke his leg two years later (at Stoke I think) and missed the ‘72 Cup Final.
That apart, I would guess the other 11 played in the game against Arsenal.
Actually, I was surprised when looking through some book a couple of years ago to find that players like Gray played relatively few game per season, often being injured.
Fill players like O'Grady and Hibbit, then later Bates and Yorath played quite a few games.
Richard
P.S. Thanks to Mark the new ‘funny antics’ after scoring.
I wouldn't mind seeing Batty do this improvised dance if he scored more!
His goal scoring tally by no means reflects his overall team contribution.
From:
Date: Fri, 08 Oct 1993 14:12:04 +0100
Subject: Stupid dances
Didn't all that start with Milla of Cameroon?
I seem to remember him doing some inane arse wiggling at the time.
It may have started earlier but I can't recall anyone doing it.
Strach usually comes up with a couple of good uns.
There's the one when he scores against Sheff Utd a couple of years ago and takes the piss out of Vineyard, and the one when he scored for Scotland and tried to get his leg over (oo-er) the advertising boards.
Stu
From:
Date: Fri, 8 Oct 1993 14:06:57 +0000
Subject: Gerry Francis
Was the first black Leeds player.
He played the old ‘outside right’ position and signed in ‘57, debuting vs Everton in 1959 (a 3–3 draw).
He was a South African like Albert, but eventually settled in England and after a period at York City became a postman.
He netted 9 goals for United.
I think he might have been the first black player in England but I know Celtic fielded jazz and rap pioneer Gil Scott Heron's Dad in the 30s — a great success there apparently.
Tim
Bob Holness
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 1993 10:50:41 +0100
Subject: Sterland
Regardless of whether Mel's injuries are serious or not, surely we can't possibly be considering playing him any more?
He really isn't up to it.
OK he tackles hard, has a fierce shot (or did have) but he just hasn't got it anymore.
Wasn't this demonstrated when the scum did us in the semi's a couple of years ago?
He was sold for pace everytime.
I can't believe that after, what's in effect, a year's absence will have quickened him up any.
BTW did anyone see wor Jackie sporting his Leeds shirt on the new Shredded Wheat advert?
stu
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 93 11:02:32 BST
Subject: Re: Wilko bids for Jobson…
Jobson's a good player, but more of a Fairclough type at 5'11 than the dominant force we really want.
Very odd that he sold Kerslake eh?
His sliced clearance and subsequent foul when trying too hard to make up gave Sundeland their goal on Wednesday.
If he were the only ‘rookie’ in defence, I would not be so worried, but Newsome and Wetherall are hardly going to be a stabilising influence.
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 93 11:09:04 MET
Subject: Jackie question
Who did he score against, when, and where?
I think it was 1969.
James.
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 93 11:23:29 +0100
Subject: Re: Wilko bids for Jobson…
The rag I read mentioned Leeds might switch their attention to Alan Mclaren of Hearts if they can't lower the price being asked for 30-year-old Jobson.
Same paper says Leeds are looking ar right-back David beardsley of QPR.
Vin
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 93 10:28 GMT
Subject: Thin Ice;-)
:-)
Yeah, sorry…to be honest I do regard you Irish as the same as me (whatever that is!).
I dont know whether thats a compliment or not; -p
Politically its another matter of course…pretty much the same as if Wales suddenly became independant — politically it wouldnt be UK, but I dont think they would suddenly lose that British sense of humour.
Cannot call you/us Europeans in this context (humour).
No way have we got the same sense of humour as most of the rest of europe:-)))
Maybe its just European Leeds fans?!?
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 1993 11:35:43 +0100
Subject:?
Leeds — Sunderland line-up?
could someone post the complete line-up (with subs!) for the game against Sunderland?
(also — below is an old comment from my keyboard)
halvard /scandinavian whites 
my comment from August — Mr Clearvoyance strikes again:-) as seen in the ‘pred-league’— NOT!(my only correct result last week was in fact Leeds vs Wombles 4–0.)
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 93 10:37 GMT
Subject: Wilko bids for Jobson…
I read this in a sunday rag…who normally are quite au fait with soccer…
It said Leeds HAVE BID (not WILL bid) 2 Million for Richard Jobson (of Oldham).
Its not all cash…but cash plus Steve Hodge.
My other half also told me that she saw somewhere (I ca nt remember) on the weekend that Leeds have offered 1Million for Bardsley (QPR).
I said I doubt QPR would accept that much…but she said that Gerry Francis (that ex Suffragette/Black/Leeds player;-)) is looking for replacements as he is resigned to losing Bardsley…not necessarily to Leeds Id imagine.
Oh, for those who dont know…
Jobson is a centre back…highly rated (I ca nt comment cos I havent seen too much of him) Bardsley is a Right back…again highly rated…on the fringe of an England place (has a few caps).
I have seen Bardsley and he is a good player.
Very good coming forward and crossing.
Maybe Sterlands' injury is career threatening??
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 93 11:30 GMT
Subject: Right Back.
Take your word for it…but from someone who takes 5 mins to find a toilet when being told and it being right in front of them;-))))
Wasnt he tipped for England not so long ago?
Yeah, unless this was his intention all along…to get Bardsley.
I certainly think that Kelly is better than Kerslake…or Sterland or Ray Wallace.
Oooh…heres a thought…maybe Strachs injury looks quite bad, and Wilko is looking for a right back, so he can have Kelly as a choice for right midfield aswell as right back (and striker).
Mmmm.
A little unfair.
The conditions in that first half were atrocious.
Even so the kids not going to learn without making a few cock ups.
The goal wasnt a direct result of his actions…the free kick was near the touchline and some 18 yrds from the dead ball line — something we still should have dealt with.
It was a good freekick, and slack marking.
But, even if it WAS all his fault…on the whole he is playing excellent and made a few vital interceptions (Soton for one).
True…we need an experienced head when under pressure.
Luckily we are playing well enough to not be under much pressure at all lately.
The sooner DOL gets back the better IMO.
Although Newsome and Wetherall ARE learning.
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 93 14:02:42 BST
Subject: Re: Sterland
I'm not necessarily advocating playing Sterland, but saying all he could do was tackle and shoot is being unfair.
1.
He always looks comfortable on the ball.
In attack or defence and his distributuion is very good.
Reads the game well, makes many timely interventions on the far post in defence.
He times his overlaps perfectly and is the best crosser of the ball from right back I've seen.
His understanding with Strach on the right was a feature from 1989–92
He is very good on free kicks and penalties and scores quite a few from INSIDE the box as well.
True his lack of real pace when left exposed has shown up occasionally.
But experience can often make up for a yard or two of pace.
I think the critical point is how much he has lost in pace and whether those other attributes are in decline.
He certainly seemed below par in the few mid-season matches last year, but the whole team looked poor in those.
I believe old Mel played in some pre-season games and proved his fitness??
He's still only 32–33 so should still have a season or two left in him.
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 93 14:37:20 BST
Subject: Re:?
Leeds — Sunderland line-up?
The line Up v Sunderland was.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 1993 14:43:07 +0100
Subject: Jobson/Bardsley
Is Jobson really 30 years old? 2 million quid seems an awful lot of money for a 30 year old, although I would like to see us buy a really top class centre back.
From what I've seen of Bardsley, he reminds me a bit of Sterland — he looks very good going forward but he seemed to leave gaping holes at the back when he played for England (can't remember who it was against).
I agree that it would seem very strange to sell Kerslake and then buy another right back though.
By the way, I had a dream the other night that we'd bought Steve Bruce!
Remember, you heard it here first!
Andy.
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 1993 14:51:31 +0100
Subject: Re:Sterland
Woops!
Think this message may have gone twice.
Anyway, here's my proper response.
Yes.
To be fair his game did exceed that.
Glurk.
I may have hit the Mel Sterland fan club here.
Perhaps it was just the times I saw him in the Div II Championship year and the season after that.
His pace was virtually non-existent and I think he was on the end of a few ‘Whose ate all the pies’ songs.
He was very strong (and keen) to get forward but unfortunately his bulk didn't allow him to get back quick enough when the other team made a break-away attack.
I just always remember the sad spectacle of him floundering against Sharpe (or was it Giggs) in that semi.
He read the game appallingly, was caught out several times, and chuffed his way around the back right like a horse that was due for the knackers yard.
Remember that that was a year and a half ago.
The attackers have got more experience, and probably quicker, but I can't imagine ‘Zico’ has.
Don't think he'd get much of a look-in with free-kicks now with Dorigo and Macca fighting over it.
See above.
I suppose my point is that if things are to get better (or should I say keep getting better) then we can't really look to the likes of Mel to come back.
We need new blood, new talent (Kelly looked fine to me) and not rely on players who were suspect a couple of years ago.
IMHO.
Stu
P.S. Still, he did the most amusing celebration with the Championship Trophy I suppose.
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 93 15:07:51 BST
Subject: RE: Right Back.
If we buy Bardsley & Jobson.
I think we could let Sterland, Hodge, Newsome, Strandli and Wetherall go.
Remember Leeds have the best youngsters in England.
I reckon we could get by with 3 centre backs and blood a youngster if injuries occurred.
Now to really be controversial.
I reckon we could do with a left-winger.
Speed really wants to play more centrally and lets face it is better making runs into the box, for crosses and knocks-down than he is at beating a full-back and crossing the ball.
Strach is not quick enough to beat his full-back either — so as it is we have to rely to much on our full-backs overlapping if we want to get to the bye line.
Rod Wallace could, I suppose play wide on the right, but this would restrict him too much.
Of course with any luck Rocky will eventually get a chance to show us what he could do, but getting a real left wing may be an option to coping with life after Strach.
The sort of option in midfield, up front I'm Thinking of are:
What does anyone think.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 1993 14:07 GMT
Subject: RE: Right Back.
IF and I repeat IF we buy both Jobson and Bardsley who's going to go?
Assuming DOL comes back to full fitness that leaves us with DOL, Newsome, Wetherall, Fairclough and Jobson for effectively 2 places, and thats before we start looking at the youth team players.
We then have Mel, Kelly and Jobson fighting for 1 place.
Kelly is hardly going to take over from Strach (if his injury is that bad) with Rocky in the wings.
Now all this competition for places is great if you can afford it but surely we'd be better investing our money in other things.
Anyway IF (again that word) we buy the guys then I go let Newsome go and let Mel take a nice handy coaching job in the 3rd division.
Declan
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 93 14:49 GMT
Subject: Defenders…
My guess is that Wilko will buy only one player…whoever that is.
The defence needs a bit of experience…
I prefer Bardsley to be honest, but then again Im a great fan of Kelly…
Id like to see him continue in the side (in any position).
He has got potential.
Hes doing better now than Speed did in the side when he first came in — Speed tended to be rather anonymous (something Wilko actually said too), but he had the potential to ‘have people leaving the ground saying ‘That No. 11 was a good little player’ ', those were Wilkos very words.
I think people will be leaving Leeds games saying that already about Kelly.
I wouldnt be too sure.
Rocky is a different type of player to strachan.
If Wilko decides he needs greater width (as he will in a 5/3/2 formation) then Kelly could very well be Right midfield.
:-) Such ?I think its fairly unanimous that if any department needs improving its the defence.
These days the emphasis seems to be on ground speed rather than aerial abilities for modern strikers — Id like to see a fast/quick centre back.
Id then be happy that Leeds could compete against any type of side.
MH
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 1993 16:10:45 +0100
Subject: selling Strandli, Newsome and Wetherall?
(RE: Right Back.)
hey — sell strandli and wetherall. strandli is 20 or 21 and Newsome and Wetherall are not too bloody old either are they?
Newsome is not the best of defenders i agree.
but these guys have talent — at least Frank has.
i know — i —am—biased.
having seen Frank playing in our Norwegian ‘premiership’— i can only say: this guy has talent and give him a couple of more years on his neck he will become a real threat to any defence.
and how much of a threat has dino been — HEY 1 goal in 10–12 matches — what kind of killer attacker is that — even good ol ‘e Chapman is better than that!!
yeah — Sheff Utd fans has reason to be satisfied.
Flo which was bought for a tenth of the price of which dino was sold has scored 5 goals in 6–7 matches and dino (saurus?) has notched one — hey — even i could have scored on that one:-);-)
so — i guess i would call your sell-out: far-out…
hmm — just two days now for those vital clashes: Holland — England and Poland — Norway
halvard /scandinavian whites /norwegain mood
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 1993 16:28:35 +0100
Subject: RE; Sterland
Re: Mark,
True, he was a vital part of the 2nd Div side but then so were a lot of players who really weren't up to it when it came to Div I. It was, as Wilko realised a totally different ball-game.
Still, Mel was good enough for a first team place in our first year back and did OK.
Nothing better.
Thanks, couldn't remember it.
But I do remember Sterland giving an interview before the final saying that he was basically taken to the cleaners by the boy.
Wasn't it some illness which scuppered Sharpe.
Not an over-zealous celebration on his 20th?
I dunno, maybe my memory is fading a bit.
But although he was beaten for pace quite a few times, it seemed that alot of the time he was out of position.
But then again I'm not trying to put that defeat down to one person.
Erm, well, I assume you mean out of recent Leeds United players (you can't seriously be comparing him with the real greats of football can you?). he could certainly hit it, and sometimes goal-bound (and quite often into the wall or behind for a goal kick).
But do you really think he's up there with THE best?
Dorigo's one against Sheff Wed in the 6–1 defeat was equally as good.
And Macca lets loose a thunderous shot.
But he also has the talent to place the ball to perfection, as shown against Wimbledon.
He deserves the credit as does every member of the team who got us up.
It's just that some have lasted better than others.
Anyway, anyone in their late twenties/early thirties who is overweight, likes beer and pies (one assumes) is OK by me.
stu
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 93 15:40 GMT
Subject: Re:Sterland
I tend to agree…
He was a crucial member of the 2nd Div championship side, and very good in our 1st yr back…
Sharpe 
It was a young Sharpe…who has slowed down since (as players do when they hit 20).
He was quick then.
Quicker than Sterland — but he was also quicker than a lot of defenders in those days.
Im not saying Mel is fast — he aint…but hes not as slow as he looks (he played right wing for Sheff Wed — the same size).
When he came back shortly last year he was fast enough to get back to Ruel Fox and let Fox fall over for a penalty.
Erm, wrong:-) Sterland is one of THE best free kick takers Ive seen.
If you saw the one vs Sheff Utd (away) in our Div2 Champ year youll know what I mean.
Fully 40 yards, and he didnt bend it/lob it/place it.
He blasted it and it went in a straight line from his foot to the top right hand corner.
The keeper saw it all the way and still couldnt ge near it.
He was also very good at playing the ball down the line, bending it to keep it in play — and take play up to near their corner flag cos all the defender could do was kick it out (then Vinny steps up:-)
See above:-)) Having said all that I have…
I agree he is probably past it — Just lets give the bloke some credit — he was a key figure for us, and not as bad as a lot of people make out.
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 1993 15:48 GMT
Subject: RE: Right Back.
Ok agreed, I don't think we'd generate a lot of money for those 5 though.
(new winger)
Kev, Does that mean you'd go for a 3 man central midfield or would play McAllister on the wing.
I'd doubt he'd like this as outpacing fast full back would not be his strongest point.
Ok I agree that Speed should be given a chance in the middle of the park now I'll be controversial and say leave Batty out let Speed do the tackling with Mc Allister also in the middle.
I'd give Rocky a chance on the right or if not move Kelly forward with Bardsley in behind (kind of like the way Jack Charlton plays Terry Phelan behind Steve Staunton) and probably go for a new left winger to help Dorigo (sorry Mrs. Dorigo Anthony).
Declan
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 93 15:50 GMT
Subject: Winger
Mmm…only a few players Id like to see in the side to be honest.
In that formation/side Id like to see maybe Peter Ndlove…in a 4/3/3 
With the full backs pushing up, and wallace/Ndlove moving around the front line…looking for balls down the channel/getting crosses in, and at the same time one of them looking for Deane flicks etc.
Also Macca/Speed wouldnt be on left/right…but moving around.
Might leave us a little open sometimes, but with the pace we should cope, and also we are gonna score a few goals!!
OR…(with the current squad — assuming a life-after-strach scenario)
With Speed pushing right up and supporting the 2 forward…would enable him to make his runs into the box, also get on both flanks to cross, or get on the end of Wallace crosses…
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 93 17:07 GMT
Subject: Sterland
Nah, the addiction to E's came a bit later.
Young players slow down as their bodies put on weight…especially thin little shits like Sharpe.
Giggs is the same now…although he does look slighter than Sharpe so possibly he wont slow as much.
Just compare a couple of pictures on Sharpe now and then, even Batts was thin when he was 18–19:-) You dont notice this slow down in players like Batts — whose play doesnt rely on speed.
Sharpe used only speed to get past players…thats why you dont see him go past players much anymore…cos he ca nt run fast enough.
I ca nt remember much about the game really…still havent got around to watching it again.
Even so— its a bit rough to judge him on performances over a couple of weeks against the same side/player.
I always thought that what he lacked in defensive qualities he made up for in attacking qualities.
As someone said…him and Strach had an uncanny knack of supporting each other when needed.
He was superb on the overlap.
Nope…
Sterland is one of THE best free kick takers.
Better than Dorigo (sorry Mrs D), better than Macca.
Better than any old leeds player I can think of.
If he hit it into the wall…at least it took someone out:-), and with the power he got behind it…when it was on target it was in.
All free kick takers work on percentages.
80% of free kicks arent goals…you dont see the ones missed unless its a Leeds player (where you see all the free kicks).
No way was Dorigo's goal vs Sheff Wed as good as the one vs Sheff Utd.
That free kick is the best Ive ever seen by ANY player.
Noone was at fault (ie bad wall positioning, keeper asleep etc).
And Ive never seen a ball hit from that far out, rise in a straight line (showing the power behind it).
You sometimes see volleys go in like it…but never a dead ball situation.
Hence the nick-name Zico.
You wouldnt believe it wasnt at altitude…instead of a typical Sheffield day!
IMO of course:-)
MH
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 93 17:23 GMT
Subject: Strandli
Yo, Halvard…
I agree with you here!:-)
Frank needs time to adjust to the pace etc etc, and also could do with losing a little weight…but he is definately one for the future.
Wilko said (sorry for repeating myself — Ive said this before I think), that he was as excited signing Frank as he was when signing Hirst.
Ive seen him play for Norway U21s, and he does look very good.
A sweet left foot.
Good in the air.
Good control etc.
And as for selling Newsome/Wetherall…tell me, who is going to be the next generation of central defenders?
Who is going to be the experienced head for the youth memebers coming thru??
Im getting sick of all the young Leeds rejects coming back to haunt Leeds, or even just be touted as million pound players.
We let the following young players go for next to nothing…how much for them now…
Phelan, Irwin, Linighan, Deane, Sellars, Seaman, Taylor (Bob), Scales.
Right there you have Englands No1 keeper, 2 international full backs, Scales and Linighan in the centre, Taylor and Deane up front…not to mention Sheridan etc. in midfield.
What Im saying is that theres no harm keeping these players…maybe loan some of them to lower clubs to get more experience etc.
You have to look to the future…not just 10 years away, but 2,3,5 etc.
Well…2 goals acktewrally.:-)
Im happy enough with Deano…how many goals has Rush/Clough/Saunders/Atkinson/Whittingham etc etc scored??
He has lots of time yet.
Well…we (England) are all rooting for you to beat Holland in the last game:-)
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 11 Oct 93 18:54:39 BST
Subject: Re: Sterland & tank top
I'm sorry, but if it's power from free kick you're after what about Lorimer?
I'm pretty sure he could hit the ball as hard as Sterland (dead-ball & volley).
On the subject…and referring back to an earlier posting…
I've got a pair of number 7 sock tags (not Lorimers I'm afraid) somewhere.
Also, I must be one of the few people to get Cloughies autograph at a training session while he was Leed's manager.
AND a picture of me, Alan Clarke & David Harvey with the championship cup and a Knaresborough Leeds Supporters Club do.
I was about 8–9 I then and am waring a particually fetching striped tank-top, this is a problem ‘causee I'm really proud of the photo, but not so proud of the dress sense!!!
Glynn
From:
Date: Tue, 12 Oct 93 10:14:38 BST
Subject: My 2p
There has been some interesting talk about defenders which is all very good BUT remember the source of the info about Jobson/ Bardsley was the News of the World.
Although the paper said that Wilko HAD made an offer it still could be a load of Bull.
(anybody rung clubcall??)
Still If it were true it would obvioulsy good to get some more experience.
IMO:—
I reckon Wetherall and Kelly seem good prospects, Sterland has probably played his last game, Newsome is not (yet?) up to standard.
Jobson, DOL, Fairclough and Wetherall would be a good set of squad centre halfs.
The first choice line up would depend on current fitness and form
Right back is a problem as Kelly has no replacemnet (except for Ray Wallace)
Dorigo and Sharp are good enough to cover the left back slot.
I hope we bounce back against Ipswich on telly on sunday!!
BTW I don't agree with selling Fat Frank.
I would class him as one of the promising youngsters (he is only about 21 and on the verge of the Norway team) Remember Standli is Wilko's ‘most exciting’ signing since he got Hirst for Sheff Wed.
From:
Date: Tue, 12 Oct 1993 10:34:24 +0100
Subject: Free Kicks
Lorimer was the name that sprung to mind as well as a match for Sterland but then I suppose he wasn't a defender.
Outside of that Lee, Charlton (B), Zico, and that big dutch bugger Ronnie (can't spell the surname Kulmann?) take some beating.
Had a look at the records last night and saw that Sterland scored 5 goals in the Div II championship and 7 in the 20-odd matches he played in the Div I Championship.
Better than I remember, so maybe the image he portrays belies his talent.
Still, going back to my original point, if Sterland was declared fit, would anyone want to play him above Kelly?
Totally different point, we got a mention on the Newman and Baddeil show last night.
And was that Gavin I saw being deported from Holland? haven't heard anything from him this morning so I assume not.
Stu
From:
Date: Tue, 12 Oct 93 10:59 GMT
Subject: Sterland, Tank top, Lorimer:-)
Yeah, well when I was typing that bit — I actually said originally except Lorimer.
Lorimer could certainly hit it harder than Mel — but I came to the decision that he wasnt really the specialist free kick taker.
I never saw Leeds live in those days (living in london — being a whippersnapper — and noone else in the family into football <cue violins>).
Ive seen a few free kicks on the Glory Years.
Based on that I have to give it to Mel cos he could also bend the ball around the wall to score — I never saw Lorimer do that (he didnt have to!).
If someone tells me used to do that aswell Ill believe it, and put him up there with Melvyn.
Ssshh…who'd know??:-)
From:
Date: Tue, 12 Oct 93 11:04 GMT
Subject: Bardsley rumours scotched?
Scanning teletext for the last 2 days has only revealed ‘Gerry Francis has denied rumours he is selling Bardsley to Leeds’
For what thats worth.
Also Ive read somewhere that Wilko is waiting for Oldham to put a realistic price on jobsons head…the 2million (cash plus hodge deal) being the upper limit.
Did someone say this on here???
I ca nt remember where I saw it:-)
MH
From:
Date: Tue, 12 Oct 93 11:12 GMT
I think I said ‘that Ive seen’ when talking about Mel didnt I??
Well, obviously thats all I can say — Kuemann (?) has a good strike too etc, but look at that company…all allegedly world class players…youd expect them to have a half decent free kick:-) All those players are acclaimed too.
you mention mel and people think of some fat lard trundling down the right side of the pitch.
I wouldnt today…but Im a big fan of Kelly.
Mel hit a bit of a purple patch in the 1st Div if I recall…scoring in 5 out of 6 games or summink.
I also remember that goal vs Leicester in the 2nd Div…crucial (all the goals in that match were superb goals…strachs was excellent — as was macca's and probably made Wilko's mind up to get him)
MH
From:
Date: Tue, 12 Oct 1993 09:33:28–0500
Subject: england team
What is the general opinion of England's squad vs Holland?
Eight starters from Man Utd and Arsenal, Yucck.
If you haven't seen the England team for Weds, its
Seaman
Parker Dorigo:-) Pallister Adams
Palmer Platt (c) Ince Sharpe
Shearer Merson
Not the best England has to offer, I suppose.
Why Merson??
He was awful against Liverpool a week ago.
Its going to be tough with this lineup tomorrow.
Joo
From:
Date: Tue, 12 Oct 1993 15:47:00 +0100
Subject: trivia /rumours /norway
hi again — as we (norway) once again prepare for a clash against Poland i thought i bring an update on a posting a made some weeks ago.
actually this guy is —also—a leeds fan.
he is indeed a co-member of the scandinavian whites.
i spotted this in the last number of ‘Peacock News’ and what's more: one of the norwegain fans sent a fax to wilko mentioning Leeds-fan Pedersen. this is taken from a copy of the fax printed in PN:
‘dear 
Many thanks for your letter received by fax.
Regarding the player you recommend, we are aware of him and will investigate further.
Kindest regards.
Yours sincerely
H WILKINSON MANAGER’
yeah — i think he is good enough for the premiership — and he will surely be picked up sooner or later.
Young Mr Nilsen is in fact going for a 14-day trial at Sheff Utd right after Norway's match tomorrow.
So there might be two norwegians at Sheff Utd quite soon.
Also Tore-Andre Flo — the young brother of Jostein Flo is supposed to train for a week or two at Sheff Utd; but this is just a training stay — nothing to do with Sheff Utd offering him a contract or so.
Tore-Andre is in fact the most hunted player in Norway just now — this fall he has played himself into our succesful U-21 team and at the moment eight out of twelve norw. ‘premiership’ clubs are offering him a contract…
Some other tidbits (?) from the Peacock News.
Frank Strandli has his own Q&A pages and here's some stuff from them:
What do you think of Leeds buying Deane.
With a price tag on 3 mill £ Wilko will not place on him the bench — even if he doesn't do so well?
: Wilkinson will not hesitate to do that.
If his play is not good enough he will be placed on the bench just like the rest of us.
Look at Rocky — he cost 2 mill £ and he has not played that many games.
Besides — he is one of several players i have to compete with and i take that as a challenge.
Do players like Hodge and Rocky show any misgrief (?) with not being in the first-11?
: No — they work hard to get their chance like the rest of us.
They do not show any negative attitude even if they are expensive bought players.
Also lots of stuff on the team: is our central defence good enough?, some Rocky-stuff and some DOL.
thats it:
good luck to England tomorrow — hopefully you wil beat ‘De Oranje’! ahh — and McAllister is captain for Scotland tomorrow.
halvard /scandinavian whites
From:
Date: Tue, 12 Oct 93 16:34:34 BST
Subject: Re: england team
What is up with Ian Wright?
Palmer looks a negative choice, he's not playing well either, I like to have seen a right side player in there?
It does seem stange to make any unenforced changes.
With the changes due to injuries, it might just destroy all the cohesion from the Poland game.
I'd be surprised if any of them besides Platt and Adams have scored more than 1 goal for for England.
(Someone may know).
I hope evn the scumites do their stuff tomorrow.
I don't know if I want Turnip to loose his job yet.
Wilko may be in the frame, I wouldn't want him to leave Leeds.
Kev.
From:
Date: Tue, 12 Oct 1993 15:51 GMT
Subject: RE: england team
I hate to say this guys but lets compare the Irish with the English squads for tomorrow.
I stress the Irish squad is probable 
Interesting to compare as our players no better or worse than yours.
Ok like all teams we have weak points (Bonner) but also our strong ones McGrath Quinn etc.
The point I have to make is that with the exception of Andy Townsend (who's injured) the team picks itself.
There's no problems everyone knows his place, what he has to do etc.
Just like Leeds appear to be doing at the moment.
Surely this is the biggest problem England have.
After beating Poland so well in Wembley to go out and make 5 changes which, with the exception of Dorigo and Shearer will weaken the team, the guy needs his head examined.
I wish England luck (believe it or not) but with this formation I don't feel to optimistic.
Declan
From:
Date: Tue, 12 Oct 1993 16:52:28 +0100
Subject: RE: england team
hmm — and here is the norwegian — quite good also if i may so so;-):-)
the norwegian is not — i have included team names for those of you unfamiliar with norw. futba (he, he)(team just announced on norw. teletext):
weak spots: Grodas might be — Erik ‘The Viking’ Thorstvedt (Spurs) is out because of his red card against Poland and also Fjortoft is not at his best — he has scored even less at Swindon than Dino at Leeds.
our defence is among the best in world (3 goals conceded in 8 world cup qualifiers so far) and our midfield (5 players) is also quite good — a good blend of techies — Bohinen and Mykland has to be two of the best ever technical players to emerge from norw. futba, Flo is ‘quite’ good up in the air, Halle is stable as is Rekdal who also got a powerful shot (as shown on Wembley:-)).
also we have coach Egil Olsen — the football proffesor who after the Poland game spent 50 hours in front of his video player to analyze the match…
me too — i predict a very tough game for the englishmen — specially without Gazza and Ferdinand.
Wright is not that much of a loss — in the games he has played for the national team which i have seen he has not been up to par.
also i think players like Palmer, Pallister and Adams will see some big trouble with slick hollenders tomorrow — if they prove me wrong i will be happy: i hope for an english victory — but most of all a norw. point against Poland.
halvard
From:
Date: Tue, 12 Oct 93 16:26 GMT
Subject: Norway stuff
[Lots of interesting stuff from Halvard deleted…]
Im sure i speak for the rest of us on the list, but Id like to thank halvard for all this gossip/info from Norway etc.
Good stuff…keep it up mate:-)
On the subject of Leeds fans, I strongly believe that you will get more effort from a player who supports the club…and I think wherever possible you should get those players.
Its obvious there is talent in Scandinavia especially, that Leeds could tap into (not to mention the financial benefit aswell).
Carrying on from that, there was a little piece of info on Damien Henderson, an ex-Leeds junior who recently joined Huddersfield (I think).
He said he hopes to play well for Huddersfield etc, but his real dream is that Leeds sign him up again one day in the future.
Wouldnt it be better for clubs in this sort of situation to be able to loan young players on an extended basis.
With competition at big clubs, you often get young players who ‘die’ in the reserves etc — often they get sold to lower division clubs for their own good…but then the big clubs end up spending millions to get them back again.
The reason there arent loans in this situation is I believe there is a limit to 1) the number of players signed on loan during the season, AND at any one time.
2) There is a limit to the length of any loan period full stop.
I reckon it would benefit everyone, especially English football to have schemes where young players could get loaned for a season at a time.
MH
From:
Date: Tue, 12 Oct 93 16:42 GMT
Subject: England team
I lost any faith I had in Taylor the day he named the side for the game vs Norway.
He hasnt got a clue.
Parker at right back????
WHAT is he thinking??
Jones is probably the best choice…ok so hes had disciplinary problems recently — this is no time to start making petty examples of players.
Whats wrong with Bardsley all of a sudden??
What the f*ck has parker done?
Scums defence is as dodgy now as its been for 3–4 years.
Merson???
Hes ok, but not exactly Mr reliable.
Even his club manager thinks so.
Sheringham should be way ahead of him, as should most of the strikers in the premier league…
Cole, Deane, Wallace, Newell, Chapman even for christs sake.
As an advanced midfield player hes ok, but as an out and out striker…
Please!!
And all this bollocks about waiting for Pearce to fail the fitness test.
I bet Tony's really chuffed — makes him out as some sort of last resort.
Pearce has been crap (not just average) for nearly 3 years now.
FERCHRISTSSAKE TALYOR…look at where his f*cking inspiration has got Forest — near the bottom of the 1st division.
We seriously need someone like Jack Charlton who not only knows what hes doing…he is his own man and doesnt cling to pathetic stereotypes — or do what the press think is best.
I want England to win, but if we dont then at least we have got rid of that arsehole the way he deserves.
Lets just hope Lee Sharpe gives Dorigo some sort of support this time, instead of pissing off and leaving tony to cover the whole left flank — AND to get in crosses.
Yes Lee…you can actually run wide to pull a defender away from him every now and again.
Fingers firmly crossed
MH
From:
Date: Wed, 13 Oct 93 09:55:17 BST
Subject: re England Team.
Regarding tonight I'd be very suprised if Merson plays right up front.
I reckon he will play wide on the right to try and restrict the space of the nippy Dutch winger.
Palmer could well be given a marking job on Bergkamp.
IMO.
Also Parker is a better defender than Jones, if England do have someone else on the right hand side to get forward.
Platt will also be playing in his best position.
I expect the team to look like this:-
If the team adjust to this formation I can see this being OK.
I reckon Wright will come on at some stage unless England are actually winning.
Possibly to try and get in on some long balls 1 on 1 with Koeman as Holland push forward late in the game.
Assuming this formation is the right one (I prefer British teams to play 4–4-2) I suppose there are no better uninjured/unsuspended players available.
Kev.
From:
Date: Wed, 13 Oct 1993 09:23 GMT
Subject: RE: England team
Mark in two words F!
O. Charlton applied for the England job the time Bobby Robson got it and didn't even receive a reply from Lancaster Gate.
He has never forgiven the FA for that and being the kind of character he is I'd be very surprised if he did.
Anyway the fishing is better over here.
:-))
From:
Date: Wed, 13 Oct 1993 10:17:06 +0000
Subject: Davey Bassett
I am likely to be going to a Sports Dinner with my company (who sponsor Crewe Alexandra) this month.
Well the after dinner speaker is none other than Dave Bassett of Sheffield United.
I always liked them especially after the celebrated own goal incident back in 1992.
I wanted to get his autograph on a copy of Flashing Blade fanzine — the ‘Double Over Wednesday’ issue, and ask him a cool question.
Any suggestions?
Tim
From:
Date: Wed, 13 Oct 93 11:43:58 BST
Subject: clubcall
CLUBCALL NEWS (via a mate who rang up!)
Strachen is out for a month
DOL needs 2 or 3 more reserve games
Batty should be back for Sunday
DOL said that Kelly would be an almost certainty for the Rep.
Of Ire.
World Cup Squad.
Cheers, Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 13 Oct 1993 12:04:28 +0000
Subject: Blackburn 23rd October
My mate Mike has dropped out of the ‘lineup’ for the home game vs Blackburn.
I don't mind going on me own but if anyone is going it'd be good to meet up.
Anyone interested?
I am driving over from Merseyside, so if the lad from Warrington is reading this, perhaps he'd like to cadge a lift.
I'll warn ya, I'll be playing me Led Zeppelin tapes:-)
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 14 Oct 93 08:37:38 MET
Subject: Wilko 7/2 favourite for England job:-(
Seems like Wilko is the bookies favourite for the England job when it becomes available.
This is quite distressing news, but the question is would he take it if offered?
I can't make up my mind whether he is the kind of guy that would be tempted by that sort of dead end job or not.
Any opinions?
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 14 Oct 93 10:00:41 BST
Subject: Re: Wilko 7/2 favourite for England job:-(
I was just thinking on my way into work ‘who'll get the England job now the Turnip has gotta go (the onlt +ve point to last night)?’
IMHO there are only 3 possible contenders from what I would call the ‘managerial school’:
1)
El Tel…well he won't get it obviously!
2)
Big Ron…he's thick as mince (here him last night ‘just for fun’) and can't be popular with the ‘powers that be’
3)
Wilko…who I guess would be good at the job…best managerial record of recent years from an English guy.
I can't believe he'd take it if offered.
He likes Elland Road, he's built up a squad that looks like it could develop into a REAL force over the next few years & he'd be mad to leave for a job where he has a competition every 2 years/a draw's a bad result/and nobody likes him!
However, there are a number of possibilities from outside of the managerial school.
Players who know international football.
The obvious two are Kevin Keegan — he'd be crap…he's just a jumped up little Geordie who still hasn't shown he can produce a really imaginative team; and Glen Hoddle — now, hed be my choice…why? because he's young, has the respect of the players, would introduce the concept of playing football into the national team (after all, if you look at the individual skill level of English players it's as good as just about anywhere in the world…it's just that managers have refused to let them play).
Also, I like the idea of a player manager for the national team:-)
Othe possibilities include Brian Robson (experienced international) Ray Wilkins (experienced & I think he'd be pretty good).
Overall I'd go for Hoddle.
He's still young, could go into club management after a spell with England, and I bet he's probably the *peoples choice* which would make his job easier as the press would think twice before having a go at him.
Glynn
PS Why aren't Wales a brilliant side?
If you look at the players they've got you'd think they'd destroy just about anyone (Giggs/Rush/Saunders/Hughes/Speed/ Southall/Hazelwood (sp?)).
Comments?
PPS Do you think Big Jack will play Kelly (an attacking right back) in the crunch match vs N. Ireland?
From:
Date: Thu, 14 Oct 93 10:16:10 BST
Subject: Re: Wilko 7/2 favourite for England job:-(
I assume Keegan and Francis are also well up in the betting.
Let's hope for Leeds' sake that some of the doddery old gits in the FA are too scared to give it to Wilko.
I think Wilko would accept if offerred the job.
Especially as he has been getting a rough deal from some sections of the crowd.
Revie showed that the best club managers are not necessarily the best at international level.
Perhaps it's time for England to try the ploy of getting a recently retired International Player (Hoddle, Wilkins, Robson — hope not, Keegan or Francis).
Kev
From:
Date: Thu, 14 Oct 93 10:16:34 BST
Subject: Blackburn Game.
Hello Tim,
Well, I would be interested in going to the Blackburn game, that is if there is still room in your car!
Can you tell me how much it is to get in Elland Road these days, I would also give you petrol money.
I am the boy from Warrington, who lives in Liverpool now!
Neil.
P.S. — Sorry I sent this to the group, I had a problem sending it direct to you Tim.
From:
Date: Thu, 14 Oct 1993 09:53:44 +0000
Subject: Tony Dorigo
He was MOTM for England last night.
His free kick that hit the post would have been the goal of the year if it had gone in.
And it was the scum players that f-ed it up.
Pallister was responsible for one goal and Ince gave away the free kick for the other.
Sharpe was more sad than ever before.
Platt was the invisible man — he did nothing — hah!
I thought that the Arse lot did well, Adams, Merson and especially Semen who was outstanding.
But that referee…
He was appalling to both sides at least you can give him that.
Marco Van Basten
From:
Date: Thu, 14 Oct 1993 10:58:33 +0100
Subject: Nightmare
I couldn't believe it, and even after trying to zap away a monster of a hang-over with a can of Lucozade Sport and 4 cups of coffee I still can't believe it.
180 minutes of sheer hell.
I took the afternoon off to see Ireland (land of my birth) illustrate just why Man City are a pile of shite, and then the agony of the evening.
Match summary: Both teams played well, England were unlucky when Dorigo hit the post from an excellent free kick, and Platt should have tucked it away when he was through.
Holland had a perfectly good goal disallowed for off-side when Rijkaard clearly wasn't.
Second half, Platt went through on goal, Kuemann (?) pulled him down it what was the most blatant professional foul I've ever seen, and yet still remained on the pitch (Graham Failure's epo about this after the match was hilarious).
To rub it in he then scored from a free-kick (which he was allowed to take a second time!).
The second goal doesn't deserve comment.
Only good thing was Dorigo (apart from the first few minutes) who played brill.
Did anyone see Wales?
How was Speedo?
Stu
P.S. If it's any consolation the Polish woman I work with said ‘Is no problem.
Poland will beat Holland.
You see.’
From:
Date: Thu, 14 Oct 93 10:17 GMT
Subject: Wilko favourite for England
Well, I dont understand how he was something like joint 8th favourite about 2 months ago…now favourite.
Having said that I would have thought hed be favourite — being the only English manager to win the league in the last 8 years or so (other being Kendall).
Also hes been involved in the England set up to some degree for a number of years, and was an official ‘spy’ or scout for England during the last 2 world cups (time on his hands this time around!).
He was even involved in the England set up when he wasnt a club manager.
We do need someone like him, but fuck England — I want him at Leeds.
I wouldnt have minded Atkinson, but last night brought home just how much he has lost it.
He says inane comments ‘for fun’.
He is the master of hyberbole ‘for fun’.
I could carry on writing ‘for fun’.
Whoever it is needs to be able to see through hype and bullshit.
And needs some tactical sense.
The quicker Taylor gets out the better.
MH
From:
Date: Thu, 14 Oct 93 11:34:23 BST
Subject: Re: Nightmare
My wife gave me a right old bo*****ing last night when I started shouting abuse at Keumann (sp?)
(‘You're gonna get you're f****** head etc etc’).
I was so angry!!!!
However, I did actaully sorta enjoy singing ‘On the dole, on the dole, on the dole’, as Turnip was whinging about the non sending off incident.
I agree his interview was very funny (but also very sad!)
I think Holland were the better side last night…patient & pretty smooth moving the ball around (compated to our typical British ‘pashion’).
The question will Polland do us as favour by beating the Dutch?
I think they might…they still owe us from the famous Wembley farce in the 70's.
Mind you, I don't think we'll get 7 vs San Marino
I'm really hacked off now.
One reason I chose to work in the USA for 1994 was to watch England win the WC;-)
Glynn
From:
Date: Thu, 14 Oct 1993 11:35:21 +0100
Subject: Nightmare — NOT!!!
well — what can i say?
We (Norway) are through after completely demolishing Poland in the second half.
0–0 at half time (Poland had a couple of chances) was 3–0 to us at the end — and could easily have been 5 or 6.
Mini Jakobsen (MSV Duisburg/ Germany) came in as a substite and had 4 (4) great chances (3 times alone with the polish goalie) and tech-boy Bohinen (who put us 2–0 up against England at home) was trying to be too clever when twice lobbing over the polish keeper.
The second norwegian half was bloody excellent from Norway and for the first time a norwegian team wins a away in eastern Europe.
Also me feelings go to my english friends today — i watched some 30 mins of highlights on TV and you were not ex. lucky — Ronald Koeman (correct spelling, guys!) should clearly have been sent off.
Scorers for Norway were Flo (Sheff Utd) with a tap-in from a corner-kick, Fjortoft with his special right-left move alone with the keeper form a back-flick header from Flo and finally Johnsen (from Lyn, Oslo a team Leeds beat 10–0 way back then in the european cup) with a header from a corner kick.
all you guys can hope for a big win against San Marino and some major reconstruction of Poland to their clash against Holland.
also it looked like Ronnie ‘the runner’ Rosenthal was in excellent shape for Israel against France — he looked sharp as hell from the glimpes Ive seen of the israelian goals — is he still at Liverpool??
halvard /scandinavian whites
From:
Date: Thu, 14 Oct 93 11:45:49 +0100
Subject: Re: Nightmare
Yeah Dorigo had a very good game and Macca had a brilliant game for Scotland.
Spent the evening flicking between:
Portugal v Switz
Italy v Scotland
France v Israel
With all the shagging channels on cable here, not one showed the Holland v England game live.
Had to put up with poor BBC radio reception.
Dutch radio was coming in good but the commentators were extremely biased and almost wet themselves a few times.
Anyway, by that stage I was already pissed off after the result in Dublin.
Vin
From:
Date: Thu, 14 Oct 93 12:37 GMT
Subject: Whites on Duty
Ah, nice to hear about Macca.
Pissing crap Sportsnight didnt have England highlights, so you thought they would give some coverage to the other ‘UK’ sides…nah.
All we saw of Macca was him being handed back his captn armband by the ref when it fell off.
He didnt even kick a ball in the ‘highlights’.
they had extensive coverage (sort of) of Wales.
Speed was involved in about everything, and played well.
All of the other ‘big names’ cocked up with appaling misses at some stage.
giggs did a complete air shot when 6 yards out.
Rush continued his crap run of form ever since his nose goal vs Leeds.
Speed had a couple of good efforts, one from a narrow angle which missed the junction of post/crossbar by inches, and another which hit the outside of the post.
So, all our boys did well…including frank for Norway U21's right halvard?
Anyone see how McLaren played for scotland?
I heard his name mentioned once…but as I said there was no coverage really.
Looks like its gonna be a complete waste of time watching next years WC.
Ireland choked — if they get thru we can cheer for them (and Kelly!),
Wales *might* make it…doubtful.
Scotland out.
England *might* make it…given luck — so no chance.
Lets just hope that Frank gets picked for Norway.
Can you imagine having more Sheff Utd players on duty than Leeds?
MH 
From:
Date: Thu, 14 Oct 1993 13:38:01 +0100
Subject: Re: Whites on Duty
mark writes:
we saw a lot more of macca over here.
they mentioned he had an excellent game — and from the goals showed the scot goalkeeper could have done much better on two of the italian goals…specially the first one — a flat shot from far out and at an angle too.
according to the newspapers over here Frank had an excellent game and he was furious after loosing 2–0.
Frank had a shot in the bar — he played alone up front— but Norway's U21 team was playing cowardly (?) /took too few chances and thus lost.
They are still on top of the group but are not sure of qualifying.
Well — Frank will have a tough time to get into Norway's world cup squad.
Norway play 4–5-1 and coach Olsen will probably pick only 3 (maybe 4) attackers in his 22-man squad.
Clearly Fjortoft (who has sucked at Swindon, not a single goal yet!) and maybe also Sorloth (who as before mentioned was at a 14-day trial at Leeds and scored in all his test matches) will be picked.
That means that there is 1 single spot available and unless he gets some more first team football for Leeds he will watch USA-94 on the telly (like the rests of us?— i am considering travelling but prices seem very high — at least for the ‘package tours’ with tickets for the games and hotels booked; prices from GBP 1300 over here).
Anyway coach Olsen actually before this game mentioned that some players was knocking on the door for a place — Fjortoft and Sorloth has kind of been out of form recently.
Frank was mentioned as one of the players lining up for the attacker spot — but Olsen chose Mjelde from our local league — top scorer this year in Norway — for the reserve spot after Fjortoft.
Sorloth could not make it because he played for his Turkish club at Sunday and he had to be in Poland at 11AM this monday; and that was not possible.
Coach Olsen (which is a mastermind on football and builds some of his philosphy on a book written by and old english gentleman kicked out by the FA years ago) did not like that fact that Sorloth prioritied (?) his club football — and Sorloth might have weakened his position.
Anyway — Fjortoft put in a nice little goal for Norway last night — so if Frank is to be in contention (?) he will have to beat Dino or Wallace for a place during this winter — which is not —that—probable.
He is (sort of) the same type as Dino and i think Wilko will stay with Dino for quite a while yet and little mr Wally-Wally has been doing his things quite good the last couple of games meethinks.
(jesus — what a stream of words…i should really be doing other things — ohh well:-))
OK — and theres more futba to come — Leeds on SkySport this Sunday; guess i find me a little pub here in Trondheim which showes the game live.
ahh — and besides i will be going to London this autumn too watch Tottenham — Leeds (and on Sunday Newcastle-Scousers which also could be a nice game)
halvard /scandinvian whites (hmm both sweden and norway are through;-))
From:
Date: Thu, 14 Oct 1993 15:37:07–0400 (EDT)
Subject: LAST NIGHT, AND ITS REPURCUSIONS
ENGLAND GAME
One of the guys at work managed to get his sister-in-law to tape US Prime Time mid-afternoon so that we could all watch it on vdeo last night.
Two Englishmen, two Americans and a Dutchman (must be joke about that?).
1.
I thought both full-backs had a good game, particularly with the lively attackers they were up against.
The central defence appeared WOODEN and very much lacking in pace.
Historically, England have been at their best defensively with a solid centre-half, and a more mobile central defender/sweeper type player (e.g. Moore/Charlton, etc).
Therefore why play Pallister and Adams.
They both appear to be good coming forward, but neither has pace and both look clumsy, exaggerated when playing together.
Will someone bring back Des Walker's international form!
2.
Midfield — very disappointing!
Ince is a good player (even if he does play for Utd.).
The same cannot be said for Sharp who has continued to play well below anybody else on the team every game.
His two specualr misses almost had me in tears.
He must be Graham Taylor's new John Barnes!
As an aside, I saw a cartoon yesterday which had to guys in a bar reading the newspaper in the year 2023.
One says: ‘See the England team for tomorrow has been announced’ Other says, ‘Any surprises?’
First one replies ‘No, John Barnes still there!’
Platt was annonimous most of the game, while Palmer, and subsequently Hinton, were well below international class.
3.
Shearer, although an superb young player, was obviosly short of International match fitness.
Merson, against my previous judgement, played better than I though he could!
He was the only dangerous looking player…must be why he was substituted by that other regular England failure, Wright.
4.
Koeman should have been sent off for a deliberate foul on Platt (who actually got 5.9 for the skill in making it look much worse).
5.
Seaman should have saved the first goal, but did make a two world class saves against Berkamp and Rikaard.
Who am I to support in US WC ‘94?(answers on a postcard to…)
ENGLAND MANAGER
Worries on the Wilko front should be real.
There are very few obvious candidates.
My first thoughts were:
1.
Prime purposes for any England Manager are:—
pick team
plan strategy
MOTIVATE PLAYERS
2.
Very few managers who can do this around.
3.
Does it have to be an Englishman?(re: Charlton for Ireland)
4.
Could we benefit, like Beckanbauer — West Germany, from having a wise recent ex-international running the side?
Who would it be?
I guess it will all work out, but I'd be very sad to see Wilkinson go, particularly now when his work is yet unfinished.
Any ideas?
Richard
From:
Date: Fri, 15 Oct 1993 09:26:55 +0100
Subject: Wilko on his way?
Even Radio 1 are tipping him as the favourite!
For this to happen though it will take 3 things:
1)
England to be definitely out of the World Cup
2)
Taylor to resign and them to offer it to Wilko
3)
Wilko to accept.
I think the first two are pretty much certain and i've a feeling he would accept it if he was given the nod.
He's been making himself part of the England scene by acting as spy for some time now as already noted on the list.
It's also a doddle of a post to a certain extent because the next manager automatically qualifies for the European Championship and with all the home support would stand a good chance of doing very well.
England playing Holland at Elland Road with Wilko as manager — what a thought!
Two questions spring to mind.
1)
dare I say it, but did his inability last season to recognize the poor defence we had and his obsession with midfielders imply that maybe he still has a lot to learn?
2)
Who would replace him?
Strachan as player/manager?
Stu
From:
Date: Fri, 15 Oct 93 09:37:17 BST
Subject: Wilko on R4 & new managers
A couple of points:
1)
I heard Wilko on R4 this morning chating to Eleanor about the England manger post /state of the game etc.
He was pretty non commital about taking the England job saying that England were ‘still in the WC & still had a manager and a good one at that’.
When Eleanor said that the job was a poisned chalice he replyed, ‘you drink that one at your peril’!
Sadly, he didn't say ‘I'm not interested’, infact the ‘undertones’ were that he probably is (IMHO).
He said we played far to many domestic games, and that he hoped this disater would be a blessing in disguise.
There were also a load of other plattitudes!
2)
Has anyone noticed how the only 2 ‘British’(what's the collective to include the Republic?) clubs (out of the 5) who has their destiny in their own hands both have formed Leeds player as managers?
This is a point that cannot have escaped those who will be chosing the England/Scotland/N.I. managers.
How about Joe Jordan for Sctotland; Terry Cooper for England; and?????
(I can't think of a N.I.
international who played for Leeds).
Any better suggestions?
Glynn
From:
Date: Fri, 15 Oct 93 10:56:09 BST
Subject: Strachan
Uhmm, I'm not sure I share peoples convictions that Strachan will be a good manager for Leeds…especially as his first managerial job.
History is not on his side wrt to ex-players having success managing Leeds!
Also, don't forget that DOL is potentially a good managerial prospect…maybe a Strach-DOL partnership…that'll be interesting…‘heard the one about the Irishman & the Scotsman managing a footbal team…’:-)
Glynn
From:
Date: Fri, 15 Oct 93 10:23 GMT
Subject: Wilko
I too saw the quote about ‘still in the world cup, still an england manager’ etc.
Im also pretty certain he would accept if offered.
I dont think the defensive ‘problem’ last year was any indication of Wilko's lack of knowledge etc.
In the end of season video (I think) he mentioned that he had recognised a problem at right back VERY early on.
However, good right backs are few and far between — its not easy to just go out and buy one…
Back on topic — I do believe he would make a good manager.
I ca nt see him bowing to public/media pressure and playing donkeys.
He is also a very good judge of a player.
how many Leeds players would be in the England set up do you reckon??
Rocky?:-))
The only silver lining is the fact Strach could step right in.
Maybe the fact that the England post would become available sometime this season was an influence in him not going into mgt this year?
Isnt it f*cking typical tho, that the best 2 managers in our history both leave to manage England!
I worry that Strach might one day be the candidate for Scotland mgr.
Maybe we should go for kevin Hird as mgr:-))
MH
From:
Date: Fri, 15 Oct 93 11:35:01 MET
Subject: What if…
Lads,
Suppose the worst comes to the worst and Wilko becomes the next English manager who would take over at Leeds?
Mark, if you think that Strach was looking that far ahead then we should snap him up immediately, as if he is that much of a thinker then he could make a great manager.
If it wasn't to be Strachan then who?
I say bring back Billy Bremner.
He did a great job first time out (no smilies).
James.
From:
Date: Fri, 15 Oct 93 12:37 GMT
Subject: Strach…
Oh, I dunno.
Revie wasnt too bad:-)
Mmmm…not too sure.
maybe DOL could be used in a coaching role??
I like the idea of strach cos hes a winner (doesnt like losing), has respect from players, has top experience…and has been at Wilko's side throughout the last 3–4 years.
He also seems to share my idea of good football.
The only doubts maybe (or rather unproven areas) are in the financial aspects and can he spot talent?
MH
From:
Date: Fri, 15 Oct 1993 14:12:36 +0100
Subject: YES!!
Ronny Johnsen to Leeds!??
OK — some —REALLY—hot news for the weekend from the fingertips of your norwegian friend.
Ronny Johnsen from Lyn, Oslo may be set for Leeds.
According to norwegian newspaper VG Leeds is very interested in Ronny.
According to VG Leeds is hunting for a new defender and the choice looks to be either Johnsen or Alan McLaren (Hearts).
Johnsen will probably travel to Leeds next week for trials.
That's it from the newspaper.
Yeah — i have not mentioned Ronny before — he has not been a regular in our national team — but he did play against Holland in our 0–0 away draw and he was also the man that headed in the 3–0 goal on wednesday in Norway's humiliation of Poland.
In fact Tore Pedersen (who was linked with Birmingham and Leeds this summer) has kept him (and Roger Nilsen — travelling to Sheff Utd on monday) out of the central defender spot beside Werder Bremen star Bratseth.
But — Johnsen is an excellent player: he has —great—speed (if he make it to Leeds i reckon he will be their fastest player along with Wallace — he might actually be faster than W.), he is technically good, good ‘nuff in the air — but his great force is that he can be used almost everywhere on the field.
He plays central defender at Lyn but also have played some games up front— he has played wide back, midfielder and attacker on our national team.
If anyone have seen pictures from our game against Poland he came on as a substitute for Fjortoft as lone attacker — and he played brilliantly for the 20 minutes he was on.
He scored on a header and also had a great run chasing a pole from 10 meters behind and almost catched him over a 30 m run.
He is indeed an exciting player — also i think he is quite young — 22 or 24 or something like that so he also has a future.
I guess Wilko will try him as a central defender — thus giving us some speed in the back; if he gets a contract he will be a perfect match for David O'Leary IMHO.
If there's any mentioning of him in The Yorkshire Post or something could someone post some excerpts??
(Yeah — and i just called our national football association and called for tickets to USA'94 — no problemo — so i guess i will be travelling with a friend or three…)
ahh — and i hope we keep Wilko — he knows what he is doing — buying Ronny would be a wise move.
halvard /scandinavian whites
From:
Date: Mon, 18 Oct 93 10:02:57 BST
Subject: Result
No mail from anybody else so I'll start!
Ipswich 0 Leeds 0
We din't play particularly well but were unlucky to have a Wetherall goal disallowed (‘cos Deane was offside).
Beeny made a few good saves — a draw was probably the fairest result.
I'd go for Fairclough fo MotM.
Newsome was a donkey again.
Press speculation:-Macca is off to Torino for 750,000.
The News of the World said he has a get out clause in his contract.
I think (and hope) this is bollocks.
We are afer Ronnie Whelan from Liverpool!!
That Norwegian we were tld about last week is definately having a trial.
Bastard rovers next!
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 18 Oct 93 10:40:13 BST
Subject: Ipswich 0 Leeds 0
Apart from the disallowed goal there was a 1st half penalty insident.
I missed it on the radio but the guys from R5 said it was a definate penalty (mind you one of them was Eddie Gray!)
Also, apparently Ndlovu (???) was a Leeds fan as a kid & his favourite player was Eddie Gray…so there!
Anyone who went…how did Rocky do?
And did you think that Wilko should have brought on Batty to give the midfield a bit more ‘bite’(in place of Fairclough?)?
On the Macca front…he wont go to Torino…especially not for a misely 750,000
From:
Date: Mon, 18 Oct 93 10:42:34 BST
Subject: 0–0
Hello all, I didn't go to the Ipswich game, but here are my telly-impressions.
Leeds had much of the mid-field posession.
Ipswich played mainly on the break.
Match statistcs would suggest that Ipswich were on top, but in truth, a draw was a fair result.
Leeds defence looked fairly good, Ipswich did get through a couple of times with some good moves, but Beeny was in fine form and looked confident.
Dorigo had another vey good match.
The midfield drifted in and out.
Rocastle looked willing, but his first touch let him down on occasions (still rusty I suppose).
Speed was man to man marked by John Wark, who won the MOM award on Sky.
Presumably for keeping Speed quiet, whilst managing to get forward a couple of times with Rijkaard-like timing.
Macca looked a class act, some great passing, and seemed to have more time on the ball than anyone else, but he didn't get into the game quite often enough.
Andy Gray said he thought Leeds were missing Batty's work-rate AND his ability as a passer and catalyst in attack.
Well, well the rest of the country are beginning to realise, what Leeds fans have known for three years.
ie Batts is a good footballer as well as a destroyer.
The big problem was the forwards.
Wallace looked great until he got near the goal.
Twice he missed the target, and the third time when through against the keeper, he missed the ball!
I'm afraid Brian Deane was a bit of a liability, he really did nothing all game in the opposition box, apart from straying offside to deny Wetherall a good goal.
In his defence he was trying to get back onside, but Linighan was aware of this and shoved him, to keep him there.
Late on there was an incident in on the edge of the Ipswich penalty area, can't remember who fouled who.
Dorigo's free kick hit the wall.
Not a great performance but a clean sheet away from home is always something worth celebrating.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 18 Oct 93 10:49:27 BST
Subject: RE: Result
Yeah I'd forgotten about that.
Definite handball, possibly deliberate, Linighan certainly controlled the ball as it hit him.
The linesman said it must have been accidental, because Linighan looked so ‘surprised’.
Perhaps Ronnie Koeman was watching and can learn that trick as well.
From:
Date: Mon, 18 Oct 93 11:11:10 MET
Subject: only .75 million?
What only .75 million, it should be more like 7.5 million…
As for Whelan, at .5 million it could be a good bargain but haven't we got enough midfielders already?
I thought we were in the market for backs rather than midfielders?
0–0 wasn't such a good result after all, IMHO.
Ipswich hadn't won in any of their previous 5 games, with us winning our last 5.
The Scum are now 8 points ahead.
We cannot let them get too far ahead as it will become too great a gap to close even if they did happen to fall over their showlaces again.
James.
From:
Date: Mon, 18 Oct 1993 11:13:04 +0100
Subject: Re: Result
mark writes:
yeah to bad — we could have gone second with a win.
if blackburn beat sheff utd tonight we are fifth.
yes — and Wallace had a one on one with the goalie trying to go past him and failed.
also Ipswich handled inside the area but got away with it.
the first half was scrappy both i think the second was quite good — we had most of the play but when ipswich came through they always looked dangerous — allmost all their headers/shots went straight at beaney. beaney was excellent.
Rocky was playing!! and playing quite nice in fact — leeds played in a sort of fortyone-fortyone (4–1-4–1) setup with Fairclough between midfield and the central defenders.
i watched the game at a sports pub here in Trondheim with lots of other Leeds-fans and i think a saw an ipswich shirt or two also;-)— in fact the Scandinavian Whites is the third largest supporter club in Scand. — after Scum and Liverpool.
deane was unlucky to be offside when the goal came — he and Wallace played OK — but neither scored and the commentator on Sky said that Wilko has to be disappointed with the pairs scoring abilities and that Leeds could not let this go on forever — in fact Deane hasn't scored at Elland Road yet.
(groan, groan — you all know what i want;-);-)— with Frank playing 11 games from start my bet is that his goal tally would have exceeded 2 — of course he still misses some qualities — but he knows how to make a goal…as the commentaries said it: ‘He is under-21 and is still learning the game’)
Strandli and Batts were on the bench — Frank got his usual 10 minutes at the end — a good tackle, a nice pass just outside the area, but was also spotted to far away on a break.
10 minutes is really to little time to make an impact.
Batts did not come on.
beeny was my MotM.
I also watched MotD over here on saturday.
The game was Scum-Spurs 2–1; a crappy performance from the angst-ridden Scum (most of their players back from defeats in WQ quliafiers)— but they got a win.
Spurs play their possesion futba which looks good but is not at all dangerous — when they had chances for breaks they just kept passing the ball instead of going for the fast break.
Norwegian coach Egil Olsen was a side-commentary for the match and he called Spurs play ‘cowardly’— Olsen's philosophy is the opposite of the south-american style that Spurs play: when you win the ball at the opponents midfield you should come forward with lots of players at great speed and you should always go for the goal — if you have the oppurtunity you should always try to go past your defender — NOT pass to a player behind you or keep the ball in play for minutes at midfield.
This is sort of the same thing as we did in our Champ year — when we got the ball at midfield we came storming and in fact coach Egil Olsen quite liked the style Leeds played then — when he commented a game last year he was very disappointed with our play.
Anyway Kerslake played for Spurs and he played shit.
almost every he pass he made had an incorrect address — when back at the side he looked somehow better — a good thing to get £500,000 for the guy if plays like that all the time.
at least we got a point — last year i think we lost 4–2…
this has to be bull and 750,000 is much to little…
Ronny Johnsen — nothing more has been said of this in our press.
tough one — and another norwegian on the field: Henning Berg from our national team.
If anyone is interested i could post excerpts from an article sent to rec.sport.soccer which sums up the norwegains playing in Premiership — in fact we have the largest contigent of players from outside the British Isles right now.
halvard
From:
Date: Mon, 18 Oct 1993 10:22 GMT
Subject: RE: Result
Didn't we have a perfectly good penalty appeal disallowed in the first half?
You have got to be joking me.
He seems to be playing really well at the moment and to let him go at this stage would be killing shooting ourselves in the foot.
I go for him, it could be a Strachanesque scale purchase.
He's for sale for 1/2 a million, what a snip.
Rocky was playing and by the sounds of the radio coverage he played well but was substituted towards the end with Strandli coming on to replace him.
Declan
From:
Date: Mon, 18 Oct 1993 14:03:29 +0100
Subject: The Referee's a German
Hello,
Contrary to Stu's reports, I wasn't deported from the Netherlands for looking like E. Cantona!
I actually had a happy week's holiday (Black Wednesday aside) free from the clutches of the Dutch police dragnet.
I came back of my own free will on Friday, and went to the game yesterday.
Report and other comments below.
Ipswich 0 Leeds United 0
First half was pretty dull, just a lot of choppy midfield battling and a few neat touches every now and then.
Shouts for a penalty for Leeds after a handball early on were ignored — a pity, since a goal then would have livened things up a bit.
I was way down the other end, so I didn't see much of it.
Speed got booked for a heavy tackle which prompted the first use of the chant ‘the referee's a German’.
Line-up continued the five at the back formation: Kelly, Wetherall, Newsome, and Dorigo with Fairclough running around in front of them.
Midfield had Rocastle (who?)
MacAllister and Speed, and up front were Deane and Wallace.
Batty was sub, though I don't whether this was due to inadequate recovery from injury or radical selection tactics.
Strandli was the other sub.
Second half was better, though it got off to a poor start with Speed and MacAllister passing the ball away to Ipswich players.
Thereafter, though things were still churning round midfield, there were a few more moves and shots on goal worth shouting about.
Wallace looked threatening up front, and should really have scored on a few occasions.
Wetherall was up at one point and had two shots blocked before coming back for a third and putting the ball in the net.
The celebrations were mighty — the players were all clearly delighted, and us fans went mad too.
I'd been jumping up and down like an eejit for a couple of minutes before the bloke next to me tapped me politely on the shoulder to point out the linesman and his flag.
Then came the second chorus of ‘the referee's a German’, only this time it was much louder.
I saw the goal again on the box this morning, and it seems that Brian Deane was pushed into a marginally offside position.
Interfering with play?
I don't think so.
Interfered with?
Definitely.
Only other major incident was an edge of the area free kick towards the end.
There was great anticipation what with Macca v Wimbledon and Dorigo v Holland in mind, but in the end Dorigo's attempt was blocked and hoofed off upfield.
The last few minutes were possibly the most tense, as both teams made chances for themselves.
Individually I thought most of the team played well and intelligently.
Midfield all played well, including Rocastle.
Did we miss Strach?
Well, yes, it would be hard not to, but it wasn't as bad as some might have said.
Rocastle did do well, but wasn't quite as dynamic as Strach — he'd do some very pretty stuff every now and then, but occasionally hold back a bit where Strach would have gone headlong into attack.
And did we miss Batts?
The thought never struck me during the game, though a few did start shouting for him.
Afterwards I wondered where he might go best in the current formation: the 3 midfielders are all attack-oriented, which Batty isn't, and Fairclough is doing okay in front of the defence.
If ‘front of defence’ equals ‘back of midfield’, then I suppose that's where Bats belongs.
Newsome had a bad start but ended up doing ok, I thought; I think the Newsome-Wetherall partnership will get better with time (a season or two!)
Kelly was excellent at right back, as was Dorigo on the left: once in the first half he stepped in from the left to tidy up the ball from charging Ippo players, strolled over to the right, and set up a counter attack down the flank, all with great ease; he looks great.
Beeny was solid all game, and pulled off one great save midway through the 2nd half.
Up front, Wallace often looked dangerous, but Deano, by and large , is still ill-at-ease.
Strandli came on for Rocky towards the end.
Other points, most of which are trivial
After Nightmare in the Netherlands, it was great for me to be at a happy, good-tempered game where the sun shone brightly and we weren't held back for an hour by ugly policemen with argumentative dogs and bolshie attitudes.
I won't go on about the England game — you know what happened — except to say it was crap being there.
The only reason I didn't get rounded up before the game and incarcerated in a Marine barracks was cos I was in a pub in the Hague downing Guinness and cheering on Ireland (another thankless task).
Trying to get in the ground the right way, I was stopped by a riot policeman's shield and shouted at in Dutch: only the fact that I could reply in Dutch saved a potentially ugly misunderstanding.
Inside the ground, flares were fired into the England sheep pens after both goals by some Dutch klootzak, and coins and a chair or two flung back by some English dickheads.
After the game we were held for exactly one hour, then herded onto to a train which didn't move for 40 minutes.
I finally left the area at 11.50pm, nearly 2 hours after the match ended.
After that, it was back to Delft where I was staying with an Irish mate's Dutch mate and his brother.
Egged on to perform ‘acts of hooliganism’ by these horribly smug Dutch people, I sang ‘Marching on Together’in the deserted Market Place at approx 3am.
The only singing Leeds fan in Delft — sad isn't it.
Thankfully the police were in bed by then (probably with their dogs and/or horses).
Stuart Slater is a tiny bloke (about as big as )
Ippo ground is quite nice really, and it's slap-bang next to the station.
However there's only 2 pubs near it and they were bunged to bursting point.
I settled for a quality pie inside the ground — they were temperature-controlled by a woman who stuck a fancy knitting needle in them all.
Official Ipswich Town Pie Tester, what a job.
(Mebbe Mel could do it for Leeds:-)
Seating areas are dangerous!
Someone literally got carried away towards the end of the game cos he fell over the front of his seat and banged his head.
The First Aid bloke coming to his rescue almost did the same, but was intact enough to lead the dazed lad down the players' tunnel.
That new Brian Deane song is getting sung again, but I still don't know it cos you never realise it's started till they get to the ‘fuck Cantona’ bit.
Anyone else picked it up yet?
And has anyone picked up a copy of The new Square Ball?
If it's out, I hope we'll be in it.
Gav
From:
Date: Mon, 18 Oct 93 14:48:27 BST
Subject: Re: The Referee's a German
(Mebbe Mel could do it for Leeds:-)
Gi's a job, I could do that.
Kev
From:
Date: Mon, 18 Oct 93 15:39:18 BST
Subject: 606
I was wondering if ant of you listen to the R5 606 program on Saturdays?
I listen to it quite often (not this week though) but I thought maybe someone could get on (after we beat Blackburn!!!) and go National about the net (especially if the piece comes out in square ball).
What you think?
One of you travelling intelletual supporters fancy some idle banter with David Mellor on the effectiveness of supporting LUFC via INET?
You never know, he might convince his mate John to subsidize electronic supporters!!!!!
glynn
From:
Date: Mon, 18 Oct 1993 16:37:53 +0100
Subject: RE: 606
Sometimes, yep 
Who the hell are these ‘travelling intellectual supporters’!?
Shurely shome mishtake.
Well Stu does a great Bruce Forsyth impression and appears to be perfecting Jimmy Hill as well, so ply him with beer and he'll have a word with the Chelsea Chopper.
Otherwise, I say get Tim Kennedy on there — you're off to the Blackburn game aren't you Tim?
You can talk about personalised shirts and doing a live rendition of the Cantona ‘Dear Batts’.
We could even get you both on, as if you were both tuned in by chance.
Tim?
Stu?
Heh.
Gav (gone hoarse from shouting at Ippo).
From:
Date: Mon, 18 Oct 1993 16:51:32 +0100
Subject: Re:606
I'll only do it if I'm pissed, and if I'm pissed I'll probably rant at him about toe-sucking and the skinny bird with the big nose.
I could do my world famous Trevor Brooking impression:
‘Triffic’
or
‘Well the ball came across, hit my head, and went in.
Triffic’
But seriously, I know what I'd do if I was HIS manager, and the sooner that the authorities wake up to the fact that THERE IS a leeds united discussion list, a bit of a to-do if you ask me, the better it will be for the game…
AS A WHOLE.
Stu
From:
Date: Mon, 18 Oct 93 17:18:22 BST
Subject: 606
Good idea about 606, I can't do it though I'll be travelling back from the game!
The new TSB is out at the Bastard Rovers match.
Anybody fancy a pint before the match??
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 18 Oct 93 17:38:30 BST
Subject: Re:606
Reminds me of the joke we made up at the time.
England had just lost to Spain.
‘What is the difference between David Mellor and the England team?— David managed to get into the Spanish box.’
We tried to get through and ask him the question on air.
We were going to talk about his subject of the day to put him at ease, and then just come out with it —‘By the way I've got a joke for you Dave…’
Never got through unfortunately, after a month or so it was not topical enough to bother.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 18 Oct 1993 12:28:32–0500
Subject: Player posters
Hi, I do a bit of player poster collection and have missed quite a number of Leeds players from the early 80s to late 80s.
If you have any of the following player's poster (page size, not gaint posters) and is willing to part with them, please let me know.
I can offer a small compensation for the poster(s) + postage.
The players I'm interested in are:
Thanks for your time.
Joo
From:
Date: Tue, 19 Oct 1993 13:50:27 +0100
Subject: news: ronny johnsen and more
hi again —
the latest news on Ronny Johnsen is that he is also wanted at tottenham.
norw. paper Dagbladet today write: ‘R. J is going for a trial at Spurs.
The norw. international is heading for London already on wednesday.
Estimated price is around GBP 400 000.
Tottenham already has norw. national team goalkeeper Erik Thorstvedt in their team’.
well — paper VG today write: ‘RJ is invited to a trial at Erik T.'s english club Tottenham.
The Lyn, Oslo player has already got a similar offer from Leeds.
According to Lyn-boss John Fiskvik it is probable that RJ will postpone his England trip to next week.
‘We are going to have a meeting with all Lyn-players including Ronny today (tuesday)’ Fiskvik says.
If a contract is to be negotiated Lyn will probably demand between GBP 500 000–600 000’
Lyn was relegated from norw. premiership this season after the most dramatic relegation battle for years — they had to beat Brann, Bergen away with at least five goals and also Molde had to loose at home to Tromsoe. well Molde lost 1–0 and could have had a penalty.
Lyn was up 7–1 (!) to Brann away and looked to have saved themselves with three minutes to go — but they relaxed to early and got two late, late goals against them and thus won 7–3, a goal to little and was relegated.
The latest goal to Brann was given on a dubious penalty in overtime and there should probably have been given a free-kick for handling —for—Lyn just before the last Brann goal — the ref admitted this after seeing the whole situation on video-tape.
Anyway Ronny scored a couple of goals in this match and was given 6 out of 6 point in Dagbladet and 9 out of 10 in VG so his form has to be excellent at the moment — i guess he will impress Ardiles and/or Wilko.
IMHO he suits better at Leeds (of course;-])— the Leeds way of play is more in style with our national team than Spurs — but then again Ardiles might need some player up front after Gordon Duris's outburst…
VG also has a small article on Frank Strandli and how he saved Start, Kristiansand from relegation.
Start paid GBP 30 000 for renting Frank this summer to play in 8 matches — but it was a good investment.
He scored 7 in 8 matches and with that was top scorer in Start — without Frank Start would surely have been relegated — i think they just got 1 victory in this autumn games (11 of totally 22 played).
VG has calculated that Frank costed start around GBP 2500 pr hour.
(I guess most of the money went to Leeds — not in Frank's pocket)
Dagbladet had a whole page on the Ipswich-Leeds match yesterday — with header ‘Leeds robbed for a penalty’ saying that after this draw things look set for Scum.
Also a line which went something like this: ‘Wilkinson substituted Frank Strandli with David R. with 8 minutes remaining.
If HW is as smart as he is supposed to be (he is favourite to get the pos. as Englands new manager) he would have let Frank come on much earlier’
Blackburn — Sheff Utd ended 0–0 last night so we are fourth from the top right now.
halvard /scandinavian whites
From:
Date: Tue, 19 Oct 93 15:07:42 BST
Subject: Re: news: ronny johnsen and more
I think this is more to do with Wilko's style than a lack of appreciation of Frankli: he always seems to bring on sub strikers very late in the game.
Happened a lot with Cantona too — the famous Chelsea goal came shortly after Cantona came on in the 8? th minute.
And as someone else pointed out yesterday, he always leaves Deane on no matter how unhappy a game he's been having — against L'pool a brill Wallace came off in the 8? th minute, an unsettled-looking Deane stayed on, and the crowd went bananas at Wilko.
Personally, I'd like to see Deane (or whoever) rested half way through the 2nd half if he's having one of his off days, and Strandli, Whelan or Forrester given a 20-odd minute run out.
But then, I'm just a fan who knows bugger all about managing premiership footie teams.
Gav
From:
Date: Tue, 19 Oct 1993 16:10:05 +0100
Subject: Tix for Sheff Wed?
Hello,
Anyone know where to phone to get Sheffield tickets for our game there on Oct 30th?
I'd rather get Leeds tickets for it of course, but I've a mate over from Norn Irn for a few days (ex Larne and Crusaders player) and he's not a LUFC member.
I could ‘borrow’ someone else's card but the only other members I know round here say they're off too.
Any ideas?
Ta, Gav
From:
Date: Wed, 20 Oct 93 12:33 GMT
Subject: O'Leary Comeback
Just off teletext…
DOL attempts a comeback tonight in Leeds reserves after 3 month layoff.
Be good to see him back I reckon.
Help consolidate on our good run.
MH
From:
Date: Wed, 20 Oct 1993 07:58:30–0500
Subject: volleyer of the ball
I'm interested to know which Leeds player (past or present) is the best volleyer of the ball?
Someone who hits the ball with great accuracy on the volley and with some power too.
Joo
From:
Date: Wed, 20 Oct 1993 08:47:49–0500
Subject: Volley good show (repost)
I would like your opinion on which Leeds player (past or present) is the best volleyer of the ball?
The meaning of ‘volley’ here is: when a ball comes to the player and he hits it first time at the goal before it touches the ground.
Someone who hits the ball with great accuracy on the volley and with some power too.
Thanks to Mark for the clarification.
Joo
From:
Date: Wed, 20 Oct 93 15:03:22 BST
Subject: Re: Volley good show
On a combination of power, accuracy and consistency (ie success rate) I would put Lorimer 1st from players I have seen.
Macca comes second and has the ability to do it with both feet!
Gary Speed and Rod Wallace are both very good at what I would term ‘reflex volleys’ where the ball comes to them quickly or from an awkward angle, but perhaps not so good when they have time to think about it.
Other non-Leeds players who have impressed me are Terry McDermott when with Liverpool in late 70's and Jeremy Goss of Norwich this season.
Of course there are always the one-off wonders, but it's the guys who do it consistently who impress me.
Kev.
From:
Date: Wed, 20 Oct 93 14:12 GMT
Subject: Volley good show
Why??:-))
Ok, lets first get the terms defined.
When I were a lad, a volley meant you hit it before it had touched the ground.
These days the term is used either as the first time you kick the ball AND its not on the ground, or even just that the ball is off the ground.
For the proper (I reckon) 1st definition Macca is pretty good.
Id have to go for Lorimer tho.
He could kick it hard however it came to him…but on the volley…
MH
From:
Date: Wed, 20 Oct 1993 15:15 GMT
Subject: The reserve team
Since DOL is hopefully making a comeback this evening for the reserves it leads me to this question.
What's the general team selection for the reserves at the moment.
Declan
From:
Date: Wed, 20 Oct 1993 13:39:00–0400 (EDT)
Subject: Volleys
No question about it…it must be Lorimer.
Live or on the box, he has consistently demonstrated the art of both full and half volleys.
The one which beat Joe Corrigon at Elland Road in the mid-70s is a classic — coming over his shoulder, with a man on…etc.
Does anyone else remember two famous Billy Bremner volleys?
The one against Celtic (EC Semi-final, 2nd leg, 1970) and the other vs Barcelona (EC Semi-final, 1st leg, 1975).
Richard
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 93 10:08:59 BST
Subject: Volley Gosh!
I agree with ‘everyone’ that Lorimer was probably the ‘best’(my hero still!), but what about Johnny Giles?
I remember him scoring a few stunning goals (eg the one that evetually put Wimbledon out of the FA cup when they were still a non league team — that was a volley wasn't it?) but was he a particuarly good volleyer?
Also,
Bloody funny about MUFC last night wasn't it?
Pitty the French git hand to score off his shin to equalize.
Did anyone see Lee Chapman doing his summary of the game…he appeared to be really trying hard not to laugh!!!
Sadly, I'm a bit of a pessimist & I think MUFC will win in Turkey…still a couple of weeks of good terrace chants on this one no doubt!!
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 93 10:15:13 BST
Subject: Pigs out (was Poll)
Anyone else see Cov v Leeds (0–0) in Sep 91?
It was the only match that didn't get any pictures in the Championship video.
And last Christmas at home v Norwich (0–0) was extremely dull.
Apart from Bowen (?) missing a penalty, the most interesting thing to watch was snow falling.
I saw the last few minutes of the game when I got back from the pub last night and was amazed to hear some commentator say ‘Manchester United haven't lost at home in the European Cup for 37 years’.
So what??
Neither have York City.
(or Scarborough even.)
Gav
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 1993 10:37:28 +0100
Subject: Tim's Poll
Have to think about it but the name that immediately springs to mind for most of them is Russell Grant.
But last night…ah, that was sweet.
Absolutely hilarious.
They're gonna go out to a bunch of no-hopers.
It would have been better if Cuntona hadn't equalised or if Bruce had been sent off for clothes-lining that turk on the half-way line.
But enjoy the humiliation is what I say.
And if they go a goal ahead in Turkey, the home-team are going to kick hell out of them and hopefully side-line most of them until the New Year (and god knows what the crowd will do — have you ever seen Midnight Express?)
Life is good.
stu
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 1993 09:46:46 +0000
Subject: Poll
Here is a poll for all you positive-thinking Leeds fans — who is (from the period you have been White-Watching):
1.
The most clueless defender
2.
The most leaden-footed centre forward
3.
The worst expensive flop
4.
The dullest game attended/seen on TV
5.
Jammiest goal by absolute donkey
6.
Most undersold transfer
7.
Most humiliating defeat
8.
Laziest player
9.
Most eccentric signing by a Leeds manager
This is the sort of thing we all get to talking about when the beer's flowing, or to pass the time when we're 4–0 down at home to Norwich.
Post your answers so we can all have a laugh.
Talking of laughter, last night's 3–3 draw at Old Trafford was a peach.
It had me rolling on the floor to see Schmeichel blowing his top at the scum defence.
All together now (to the tune of Ooh-ah Cantona)‘Pigs out of Europe, I said pigs out of Europe!’
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 93 10:39 GMT
Subject: DOL
I heard this morning on Sky that DOL had had a successful comeback in the reserves.
Lets hope that the rest of the teams in the League realise how crap the Scum are at the back.
Did anyone see the highlights yesterday??
In between excessive laughter I noticed that not only were SCUM CRAP at the back but they got completely pissed on by the Turkish Delights:-)))))
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 93 10:42 GMT
Subject: Poll
Neil Aspin 
Has to be Chappy 
No doubt…
Peter barnes 
I think it was home vs carlisle.
A cold saturday.
0–0 
FOR Leeds??
Did Kevin Hird ever score??:-)
Zat eees peeesing eazy.
Did yeu larke meu sheeneur lerste narte??
Got to be forest at home last year.
Or the 0–5 home vs Arse.
Mark Aizlewood 
Peter Barnes 
Such a shame it wasnt on live.
I wouldnt have been watching (maybe with the sound down), but millions would have seen them be COMPLETELY outclassed.
Good to see all the other English sides doing brilliant tho.
Did you see Bruce's face when they went 2–0 up??
You could see they thought it was so easy:-) This after a complete fluky deflection and an OG.
The reason it wasnt shown live was that ITV probably thought theyd be showing lots of matches from the league phase.
HAHAHAHA.
And everyone in the press was saying how they had won the fucking thing already.
HAHAHAHAHAAHa.
Talking of arseholes — anyone read the Emlyn Hughes thing on Wilko the other day?
MArk
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 93 11:50:08 +0100
Subject: scum in europe (was Re: Tim's Poll)
actually Galatasaray and other turkish teams seem to do well in the european cups from time to time…i do not have the stat's right here (or anywhere else;-))— but i'm quite sure if you check it out you will see that G. have knocked out some other ‘great teams’ before Scum.
yeah — they will be up for a hard re-match. the turkish home crowd is known to be wild…
cantona will not play any more home games at Old Trafford because ‘it does not feel right’ nor will he play more games in Paris ‘because he is not in love with Paris anymore’and thus will not be playing for France for their vital clash with Bulgaria unless ‘le match’is moved to another city…(the first is a joke — the second is true; at least according to norw. papers)
halvard /scandinavian whites
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 93 12:41:31 BST
Subject: Re: Poll
There are probably some players I've forgotten, but I'm gonna have a go without reading anyone else's first.
Neil Firm John Pearson Peter Barnes Every game away to Crystal Palace Brian Greenhoff's volley from the edge of the box past Shilton, I think in 1980–81 season or any goal scored by Kevin Hird.
David Seaman, I suppose.
closely followed by Dennis Irwin, Terry Phelan, Andy Linighan, Scott Sellars Loads of them, Sunderland twice, Chester, Colchester, Bristol City, Watford The worst must be Oxford 4–1 1983–4, and 5–2 1984–5, bcause of the stick I took Also when we lost a home game to Spurs 2–1 in 1978–79, Spurs played half the with 10 men (Miller sent off) and Hoddle in goal because of injury.
Peter Barnes, George MCCluskey Wayne Enthwistle by Jimmy Adamson from Sunderland in a swap with John Hawley.
Peter Barnes when we already had Carl Harris and Arthur Graham.
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 1993 12:59:30 +0100 (BST)
Subject: Re: Poll
OK, here's my 2 peneth…
On Thu, 21 Oct 1993  wrote: The slowest fatest and most passed it was Kenny Burns.
Pearson, as said by someone else, closely followed by chappy.
Peter Barnes, has to be the biggest cock up by any leeds manager ever, and will never be beaten (I hope).
I've never been soooo pissed off at a game than I was at the rangers game at Elland Road.
John Stiles against Wigan in the 1/4 final of the FA cup in 87 (?)
Eddie gray got a team together (most of them have already been mentioned) of excellant youngsters and virtualy every one of them was sold or given away for f*** all.
Also, Sheridan was worth at least twice what we got for him.
The Rangers games.
(this is all depressing me no end!)
And any defeat by the scum.
pppsstttt!(how do you spit with text?)
Pearson.
John Stiles, he was shite.
But what do I know?
Simon.
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 93 13:09:57 MET
Subject: RE:: poll
Where do we start when it comes to some of our not so good years in the second division.
Chappie but I don't think Deane would mind if he inherited his goal strike though.
That wanker Barnes who was supposed to save the club years ago.
My sample space is limited but I think Oldham this year will take a little beating.
Not quite a donkey but Wallaces goal to win the league at Sheff Utd will probably go down as the jammiest ever in my book.
We've had a few from the middle 80's: Phelan, Irwin, Sellars, Linigan, Seaman…
Stoke two years in a row losing at their ground 6–2 the first year and 7–2 the second in the mid-eighties 
I think McAllister can be incredibly lazy at times.
All Leeds signings are relevant in the particular situation:-).
re:: the scum
I think they have most people fooled but boy did the turks show them last evening.
I think and hope that they reach the knockout rounds as it will be an immense distraction to their title ambitions.
By hell what I wouldn't give to see Leeds paste them 3–4 to nothing.
It would be only justice given their current jittery form.
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 1993 13:21:05 +0100
Subject: Turk aggro
Apologies for first effort that shot off into e-mail heaven without any obvious reason.
Obvious song has to be to the old Guantalamera (?) one, which is usually turned into the ‘One Rodney Wallace, there's only one etc.’
It even sounds the same.
Yeah, I got the impression when the TV commentators were going on about the Turks being in Europe for the last 10 years they were just looking for some excuse to explain th scum's ineptitude.
It was a turk supporter he chucked off wasn't it?
Didn't Cloughie get done for doing something similar a few years ago when he chinned the Forest fan who'd run on the pitch (later kissed him but brought out one of the all-time commentators classics from Greavesie when he said ‘It was the first time the shit really had hit the fan’).
Who threw the coin?
Was it scum fans or turks?
Anyway, apparantly they throw a lot worse than that in Turkey so I'm quite looking forward to it.
Stu
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 1993 12:25 GMT
Subject: Dave O'Leary
According to this morning's Irish Times, Dave O'Leary didn't get to play in the reserves and may have to undergo surgery on this achilles after breaking down in training yesterday.
Declan
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 93 12:46 GMT
Subject: DOL
Yep.
Just about to post the same info — from both teletext services.
Ive checked with my other half and she assured me that the info she passed on was from Sky and not made up!
I let her off with just a sound punch to the rib region:-)
Why the fuck didnt he have an operation to start with??
Why wait around 8 weeks, and then have the op?
Thank christ its a free transfer and its ‘only’ the wages we are paying.
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 93 12:55 GMT
Subject: Galatasaray
Just trips off the tongue doesnt it?
Erm, if anyone can dig up info on their record in europe Id liketo see just what ‘big’ sides theyve beaten.
I know they are a regular in europe — but so are cork and wrexham.
I did hear they got to the 1/4 finals (ie won 2 matches) about 4 years ago, but Im sure they would have said last night if they had beaten anyone decent.
Any excuses for Scum.
About the Bruce bodycheck.
Why didnt the player lift his knees up and decapitate the donkey?
Pathetic.
And what would you have done if Schemichal got hold of you and threw you off the pitch like last night?
Number one Id aim a boot at his gonads.
Number 2 Id arrange a nice welcoming committee in turkey for him.
And did you notice the coin/object throwing incident??
It was mentioned briefly, but Id wager nothing was made of this ‘friendly’ gesture by scum fans.
Just like the 2 small riots at Sheff Utd a couple of years back.
Never mind Scum.
you can ‘Always look on the bright side of life’, or even on the runway for ice.
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 93 13:56:58 +0100
Subject: Re: Galatasaray
mark writes:
i pulled this of rec.sport.soccer (see last part of mail)— the post was rather mingled so i have tried to fix it up a little: take it for what it is — a post from memory from a guy somewhere and no mentioning of what year/what cup/ etc. i think the poster has messed up or something — my guess is that the home match is the first mentioned: meaning that G has beaten some respectable teams like PSV, Roma and Frankfurt at home and beating Roma and Frankfurt at aggregate.
so the scumites may face a hard task down in Ankara (?)— lets hope this leads to the kind of league form for Scum that we had after crashing out of Europe last year;-) YES!
also turkish club besiktas just went 2–1 down for Ajax in Amsterdam so i guess the best turkish clubs are not that bad…
latest on Ronny Johnsen is that he is at —Spurs—for a trial together with fellow norwegian international Oyvind Leonhardsen of Rosenborg, Trondheim (where halvard live).
So Leeds might miss a good player — Leonhardsen is more of workhorse the Ronny and ‘Leo’ have tried out before for both Man City and a german club (Borussia i think).
Leo would not have fitted in with Leeds but Ronny might be the defender we want (in some papers they have used the term midfielder on him — he —really—very flexible)
halvard 
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 93 15:56:24 BST
Subject: MUFC
Following last night I think that MUFC are going to be VERY worried about trying to reassert themselves…more importantly, I think that the rest of the Premier league will be saying, ‘well look at that, MUFC wre made to look a bit silly by a group of no-hopers…
I wonder what we can do if we have a go at them…?’
MUFC may find that scoring against teams Id not enough to make them roll over and give up anymore.
They're away to Everton on Saturday…another group of no-hopers with something to prove?
Glynn
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 1993 15:56:26 +0100
Subject: Re: Barnes
Declan,
Simple answer is Yes.
It was made more so by the billing he got as if it was the Second Coming or something and he was going to be a wonder player.
I only saw him a few times and he seemed to wander around in no-man's land half the time doing bugger all.
Occasionally, when he turned it on it was good, but this was rare.
Perhaps someone else who saw him more often can give a fairer description but I've never met a Whites fan who had too many good words for him.
Stu
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 1993 15:26:11 +0000
Subject: Kenny ‘Hulk Hogan’ Burns
A name that has been mentioned as most clueless defender in this poll is our Ken.
A fine player.
Now I don't know if you remember English Whites but Danny Baker once had a caller to 606 who claimed to have been setup for a blind date a few years ago, and when he met the girl in question, one of his mates says ‘Bloody hell she doesn't half look like that player (Kenny) who's in the Blues’(Brum City where he built his stout reputation).
The caller's punchline was ‘the worst thing was, I'm a Villa supporter’.
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 1993 15:37 GMT
Subject: Re: the current questionaire
People keep mentioning this Peter Barnes guy, could someone please let me in on the joke.
Who was/is he?
Where did he come from/go to?
Was he actuall THAT bad?
Declan
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 93 16:38:30 GMT
Subject: Re: Re: the current questionaire
On Thu, 21 Oct 1993 15:37 GMT, wrote:
He was the first big money(950,000) signning by Allan Clark, personally I think Clark just signed him because everybody else was spending absurd amounts money on crap, this was about the time malcolm allison was spending 1 to 2 million quid every other week on unknown bits of shit, so clarke thought lets join in.
I remember that volley though both feet off the ground, it screamed in.
Regards Brian.
From:
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 93 16:49 GMT
Subject: Barnes
Well, I didnt get to see him too often.
The reason he was such a flop was becuase he was sposed to herald the new era at Leeds.
Bought by Allan Clarke for 950,000 (which was a LOT of money back then in the late 70's).
He must have done something useful in about 3 matches.
The rest of the time did fuck all.
Remember he was an England international — played brilliant for West Brom most weeks.
Of course it did herald a new era…in the second division.
He struggled to make the first team when we were in the second, and went on loan to a couple of spanish clubs, then was sold to some crap side for next to nothing.
Well worth a million…
NOT
From:
Date: Fri, 22 Oct 1993 15:45 GMT
Subject: The blackburn game
I see in today's papers that Batty will be back in the team for tomorrow, does this mean that Wilko will drop Fairclough or Newsome or will he let Rocky go back to the bench and play essentially a back 6?
On another subject could someone who is going to the game pick me up a match programme.
I'll obviously re-inburse the postage etc. any takers Mark, Mark, Gavin etc etc
Cheers, Declan
From:
Date: Fri, 22 Oct 93 17:03:40 BST
Subject: Re: The blackburn game
I hope Fairclough plays, the thought of Wetherall and Newsome having to cope with Shearer and Newell/Gallagher on the break scares me.
I think for home games it has to be 4–4-2.
Kev.
From:
Date: Sat, 23 Oct 1993 11:08:44–0500
Subject: Result?
Can someone post score of Blackburn game?
Brief summary would also be appreciated.
Cheers,
Joo
From:
Date: Sun, 24 Oct 93 08:49:22 IST
Subject: Leeds — Blackburn
Heard on the BBC.
Leeds 3 Blackburn 3 (HT 0–1)
McAllister 2 Shearer 3 Newsome
Blackburn were up 2–0 and 3–1.
Leeds last 2 goals were in the last 8 minutes.
McAllister's 1st goal was a penalty, and his 2nd goal which was the equalizer was from a very tight angle.
Man Utd are now 9 points clear (they won 1–0 at Everton and the next four — Arsenal, Norwich, Leeds and Blackburn all drew)
From:
Date: Sun, 24 Oct 93 16:43:30 +0100
Subject: Re: Result?
very short — it's sunday and i'm just here for ten minutes.
3–3 after a tremendous fightback for leeds in the last ten minutes.
we were 3–1 down ut Macca and Newsome got us 1 point.
Shearer knocked in 3 for Blackburn, Macca 2 and Newsome 1 for us.
Scum won 1–0 away and as all the other teams right behind drew — i think Scum is 9 (8?) points ahead just now — not a good thing…
halvard
From:
Date: Mon, 25 Oct 1993 09:28:01 +0000
Subject: Leeds Blackburn (incoherent) Match Report
I got to the Imperial at about half twelve and waited for Mark and co, unfortunately I had told him I would be in a leather and, due to the leather not being available that day I was wearing a lumber jacket!
So I skulked round the pub, had a burger and a pint and after embarrasing myself by asking two likely candidates if they were Mark, I shot off.
Anyway I had got a ticket for the West Stand in the top corner by the Kop, which was a good view, apart from a large pillar which was right in front of the south goal.
Leeds were better right from kickoff and we had two early chances, Deane hitting a post and someone else being saved on the goal-line.
They were knocking the ball around very nicely and Blackburn looked poor.
However it began to be clear that despite our good possession we were short on attacks.
Deane seemed to be nowhere when the telling crosses came in.
Wallace was threatening and on that day he was aggressive and I thought played pretty well overall but he was often fouled by the Blackburn defence.
The referee ignored a blatant handball and several other offences and I was beginning to think it was not our day.
We only got one corner in the entire first half.
In the second half when we went at them we forced plenty of corners but could make nothing of them.
I felt sure the team that won the second division title in 89–90 ‘d have scored from two or three of the pretty decent corner kicks.
Surely Deane is well-practised at set piece play.
Anyway Shearer gets his first goal with the defence.
From here until half time Leeds played shite and it was very worrying.
Rocastle was the only player who was up by the halfway line when we broke away, all too frequently and any long punt by the defence fell to the feet of Blackburn players.
Rocky actually played ok and showed good skill but the team were missing the focal point — Batty.
Speed was anonymous.
The second half came and Shearer gets another goal.
He is one of the finest strikers so I suppose you can't totally blame the defence but by this time I thought we were in for a beating.
Leeds battled fiercely with Whelan playing well up front, holding the ball and putting decent balls in the box a lot (he came on for Rocky at half time) but when we did get back in it it was Deano who was in the box and looking like scoring who got hauled down and the ref points to the spot.
Macca converted this and the relief was tangible.
It was at this point I think Batty came on and it made a f- of a difference.
He was at the root of an outstanding attacking display.
However they got a free kick from one of their lot diving when noone was anywhere near, and Leeds were still beginning to take position when Newell I think takes the kick and Shearer picks it up and scores.
Noone knew what had happened cos noone expected a free kick in the first place let alone expected them to take it like that.
Are they allowed to do that?
Anyway 3–1 down and I'm thinking, bastard, I come all this way and we f-ing lose.
The Blackburn were doing this moslem prayer arm-worship thing going ‘Shearer-Shearer’.
Leeds get stuck in though and in the last few minutes Newsome gets the goal to go 3–2, don't ask me what it was the whole match was so exciting I forgot everything!
Then McAllister gets the equaliser after a team performance of fanatical determination.
Everyone was in there it was like the Stuttgart 4–1 game.
The Kop were all doing the moslem arm-worship thing chanting ‘Newsome-Newsome’ and even waving Newsome's picture in the Kop (he was this week's pinup!)
I would have been killing myself laughing if the team weren't battling away so furiously for a winner and the whole place going mad.
It was brilliant to see the Blackburn end silenced like that.
They were lucky to get their point, especially as they never deserved the third goal.
Anyway I got so carried away that I can't remember the game in detail so this report is crap, all I can remember is the Elland Road wall of noise and the fury of the Leeds attack once Batty was on the pitch.
Well worth 14 quid I'd say, though next time I'll make sure it's a Kop ticket I get.
Oh yeah the Square Ball featured the article about us.
It was good to see a reference to me in a fanzine (however indirect).
Tim
From:
Date: Mon, 25 Oct 93 10:03:17 GMT
Subject: Re: Leeds Blackburn (incoherent) Match Report
Just to try & redress the balance here;-) I watched the goals on MOTD and I must say that Speed did appear to wrestle someone to the ground (def. free kick).
HOWEVER, the ball then rolled 15 yds was stopped by Newell and kicked immediately to Shearer, who hit the ball bloody well and scored (so why didn't he score vs Holland eh?).
Fast free kicks are ok (as along as the ball is stopped I think) what was very illegal was the fact that the free kick was taken from a COMPLETELY different spot to where the foul took place, so the Leeds player were (justifiably) waiting for the ball to be placed where it should have been.
Having said all that, you'd have hoped for tighter marking on the best striker in England when he's already got 2 goals!!
I must also admit that I'd lost faith at this goal!
I was at a wedding & listening to the R5 commetary during the speeches (I don't really like the guy who was getting married…he's an old friend of my wife, so…anyway).
Shearer got number 3 & I thought ‘soddit they've bloody lost’, and turned off the Radio.
Then at about 4:58 I thought maybe I'll just listen to the match report, there may have been a fight back…& what ya know…3–3!!
Also, I see Peter Ndluvou (???) is on the market (one of the reasons Gould resigned).
Anyone think he'd be a good buy!!
From:
Date: Mon, 25 Oct 93 10:04:04 GMT
Subject: Re: Leeds Blackburn (incoherent) Match Report
Tim, You mentioned most of the players,
I assume the starting line-up was 
You said Whelan came on for Rocky, so I assume Wallace then played wide on the right.
Who did Batty replace?
Do you have any comments as to what team should play at Sheff next week, barring injuries.
You obviously think Batty should come in.
Which two centre-backs?
Or all 3 perhaps in the 5–3-2 formation.
Which combination of Rocky, Wallace, Deane and Whelan in right wing and striker positions?
There are obviously loads of permutations.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 25 Oct 93 10:17:38 GMT
Subject: Sat
I too got to the Imperial by 12:30 and asked a few likely candindates were Tim!
A better method of i.d is required.
Good to see the TSB had Gav's article in.
No sign in the program though.
It was an amazing last 15 mins and the crowd fo nearly 38,000 must have been the biggest and noisiest for at least 10 yrs.
The first two Blackburn goals were very sloppy and I think Newsome was to blame.
For the first goal, Newell out jumped him to head towards goal.
Beeny saved but Shearer tapped in the rebound.
For the second, Newsome just watched and let Dean try to to the tackling of Shearer on the back post.
Their third goal was a disgrace, Speed fouled some bloke outside the center circle and Newell immediately took the free kick as the ball was still moving at least 10 yards form the correct place.
Its ok to take quick free kicks (Leeds often do) but surely they have to be somewhere near where the incident happened.
Wallace is a nutter.
A few occassions this year he's had a go at some defender who is twice as big as him.
Maybe he thinks big bad Deane will help if things get too rough!
His booking was unfoortunate though, Le Saux clearly elbowed him.
Macca took the penalty (which wasn't that clear cut) well.
Everybody around me was slagging of Newsome and it was hilarious when he score and the Cop were shouting his name ‘al la Shearer’.
His shot was like a bullet, I wish he could clear his lines like that!
He nearly score later with a header as well!.
I agree with Tim, the last few mins were very confusing and was like a blur, I don't know how Macca's goal went in and still couldn't after watching MotD (or Manchester of the Day as it was called in TSB!).
How can MotD justify showing a 0–0 a 0–1 and a 1–1 (all boring) when there was an exciting 3–3?
Quite a good result, we could be miffed after their 3rd goal, but mid-way through the 2rd half I'd have been exstatic with a draw.
we showed good fighting qualities and are now unbeated in 7.
We are still fourth in the table.
Sheff Wed next, who might be a bit tricky and are sure to turn some team over soon.
NEWSOME IS KING!!!
Declan, I've got you a prog, please send me your address.
From:
Date: Mon, 25 Oct 1993 10:45:54 +0000
Subject: Tim's Garbled Match Ravings
Yeah sorry.
Rocky was on the right, Rodney was on the left, Speed and McAllister were in the middle, Deane was up front and we had Weatherall and Newsome in their nightmare scenario pairing as centre backs.
Speed did a fine job just modelling his Asics sportswear, Kelly played great, Dorigo played really well.
Fairclough played a Batty-esque defensive midfield role as far as I could tell, marking Shearer might have been a better idea, though he did an OK job as it was.
I don't know who went off for Batty, I was just relieved when he did.
As for the free kick well I never saw MOTD so I can't comment, though I can well believe Speed did f- up, he definitely had an off day.
Also while in the club shop I NEARLY did ask if they'd personalise a shirt with MUNICH 58, I was THIS CLOSE…
Tim
From:
Date: Mon, 25 Oct 93 10:53 GMT
Subject: The Free Kick
Ok, from what I saw on Sky Sunday (Not Manc of the Day).
My tuppenth.
Speed fouled their player.
The ball rolls about 10 yards directly across the pitch (to Newall).
He picks up/pushes the ball 2 yrds back towards where the foul was (Speed and other player still just getting up), so its still 8yrd from where the foul was, but now…luckily enough, slap bang centre of the pitch.
He takes a quick kick dead straight towards goal…which shearer runs onto and scores.
That run/shot would have been impossible from anywhere BUT the centre of the pitch (he would have been running across goal and also towards defenders.
So, Leeds sometimes take quick kicks (Strach especially), and I reckonmthey are fine as long as the ref isnt talking to anyone.
BUT the maximum distance from the where the foul was should only be a couple of yards.
If a team took a kick 8 yards forward of the foul theyd be pulled back.
This free kick was (tactically) worse than it being 8 yards forward.
It should not have been allowed.
On Maccas goal…
Andy Gray, on Sky, said that he sits on a panel to decide if a goal is an OG or not…and can then take goals off players.
He said that Maccas goal would be credited as an OG, cos he was trying to pull it back from the byline but it hit sherwood and span in.
Goals should be credited to the person who shoots/kicks the ball unless the deflection is deliberate/avoidable (ie Chappys versus Sheff Utd).
A good ‘test’ is seeing how the defender would feel about being credited for an OG.
What could Sherwood have done?
Why is there a panel to sort this out, but not a panel to sort out crap refereeing decisions????
They dont like the fact we have a midfielder who has scored more goals than most of the top strikers in the league.
:-)
From:
Date: Mon, 25 Oct 1993 10:59:28 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: bits & bobs
I can't realy add much to what has already been said except that I saw the goals on Manc of the day and thought theirs were all sloppy and avoidable.
The fighting spirit we showed to get back in the game was encourageing, perhaps Batts should have played from the start.
I wonder if his absence is the reason we have failed to win the last two games.
From what you fella's have been saying about speeds form, he should be the man to drop.
It sounds like he needs a kick up the arse.
Also, did anyone else see the sunday Mirror? it said that Beeny is interested in playing for Big Jacks Eire.
Apparently his grandmothers Budgie used to be able to say ‘Top of the morning to you!…
Top of the morning to you!
Simon.
From:
Date: Mon, 25 Oct 93 11:08:56 GMT
Subject: Re: Tim's Garbled Match Ravings
Wetherall came off for Batty.
According to the radio, the five at the back set-up was being used up till then.
When Batty came on, Fairclough dropped back into the centre of defence, Bats went midfield.
Presumbly Kev had been on the hotline to Wilko at half time and told him to get back to 4–4-2 asap!
The change seemed to work.
What happened up to the formation up front?
There were three strikers on after half time (and none of them scored!)
Tim, I enjoyed your ‘garbled ravings’.
As usual, stuff I read on the list tells me more about what went on and what it all felt like than the polished drivel in the papers.
From:
Date: Mon, 25 Oct 93 11:35 GMT
Subject: Beeney
Beeney playing for Eire:
I saw the bit in the papers bout this too.
Good idea all round I reckon.
The chances of playing for England are remote…yet for Eire in goal is good, so he'll get some international/world experience (maybe in the World Cup…give us another reason to cheer on you Irish;-)
Also, theres a clause in the sale which means Leeds paying Brighton 100grand if he should ever get an England cap…nothing about an Irish cap:-)))
Comment on R5:
I heard this on my way home (from playing) on Sat afternoon…that the game was the best the commentator had seen.
2 clubs that were not only fighting for European places, but are good enough to win the league, but we obviously need a few slip ups at Old trafford.
Encouraging.
Scum back to their usual tricks, outplayed for 80mins at Everton yet scab a 1–0 win.
That Barlow (Stuart?) who plays for Everton — he ca nt half miss good chances.
In every match Ive seen where he has played hes missed sitters.
Twat.
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 25 Oct 1993 12:23:09 +0000
Subject: All In The Game
On Sunday I went to a car boot sale in Runcorn and what should I see amongst the mangy teddys and oily old spanners but a vintage 60s Leeds Subbuteo team!
Of course I had to buy, a snip at 1 pound.
Could have done without the lip I got from the scouse stallholders though (sample: ‘The League Title cost a fortune in them days…’).
Only problems were that one of them had had been snapped off at the legs and been reglued direct to the base, presumably in an effort to replicate Bremner's short stature, and also in an effort to simulate Albert Johanneson (or was it Gerry??) brown paint had been splurged all over one player, rendering his kit a mucky pink.
A bit of customisation called for here I reckon.
Anyway I have a team of red filth which could pass for the Busby scum so now I can re-enact those battles of yore!
Battle Of Hillsborough ‘65 anyone?
Big Jack
From:
Date: Mon, 25 Oct 93 14:17:46 GMT
Subject: So Far
Well, I must admit I'm happy with the last 6 games.
After only getting 7 points compared to my target of 10 from the first 6 games, the lads have come back with 14 from the next 6.
My target was 13, so we are now 2 points down.
The next 6 games include potentially awkward visits to Spurs and firstly Sheff Wed.
I'll be happy with 11 points from these.
Staying unbeaten would be great.
Let's hope Wednesday don't rediscover their form this week.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 25 Oct 93 14:39:37 GMT
Subject: MOTD
Good question!
There were two games with 6 goals this week.
Us v Roveres got about 1 min…
QPR vs Cov got about 7 mins (and most of them were about the resignation and hardly any football!!)
Interesting that the 3 games featured Manc/Arse/Pool (oh I wonder who the Beeb are licking?????) which is not exactly giving the public exciting soccer.
I mean Arsenal 3 concecutive 0–0 in the league, perhaps the Beeb have decided that the role of late night TV is to send everyone to sleep!
glynn
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 1993 15:42:31 +0100
Subject: David Batty
There is a story currently being developed by the Press Association that David Batty has agreed to go to Blackburn!!!!
A fee of 2.75 million has been quoted.
THIS CAN'T BE TRUE.
Will let everyone know if I hear anymore.
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 1993 15:51:17 +0100
Subject: Batty
Could someone confirm that they have received this message.
According to PA, a fee of 2.75 million has been agreed with Blackburn for David Batty.
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 1993 15:32 GMT
Subject: Dave O'Leary
I see from today's papers that DOL will only need a small operation to remove a blood clout on his achellies.
He will definitely miss next week's game but Wilko is hopeful that he'll have him back for the Chelsea game.
Declan
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 93 15:50:58 GMT
Subject: BATTY HAS GONE
About a year ago came the news that Cantona had been sold to Man Utd.
Now comes the news that David Batty has been sold to Blackburn Rovers for 2.75 Million Pounds.
I can't fucking believe it!
This is not a joke it HAS happened
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 93 16:02 GMT
Subject: Batty being sold: -///////
Extremely fucking bad pissing shitting fucking news.
Im annoyed as you might have guessed.
The Leeds chairman/directors have accepted a bid of 2.75m for Batts from Blackburn.
He is seeing dalglish.
I dunno what role Wilko has in this, but I cannot see how we need money.
I cannot see a decent replacement.
WHAT THE FUCK IS GOING ON???????
Blackburn must be laughing.
Leeds are a soft touch when it comes to transfers.
Fucking sell off your BEST players…yeah, thats what champions do.
Unless we get a WORLD class player…like a younger Gullit, or maybe Ndlove…
Im seriously disillusioned.
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 1993 16:05:12 +0000
Subject: batty
Yes, it's happened.
It was a board level decision.
Club call has just confirmed it.
Bollocks!!!!!!!
Stu
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 93 16:05 GMT
Subject: Batts…fax protest
Ive just decided to make my protest ‘official’.
Im going to fax Leeds and see what the fuck theyre up to.
I suggest we all do likewise.
Fax Number: 0532 706560
Ive never done this before…not even when cuntona went.
Enough is enough.
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 1993 16:07:44 +0000
Subject: More
They said that Dalglish was after Batty for some time but Wilko refused to sell him.
The decision, they say, was a board-room one so god knows what that will mean.
Is Wilko going to stomp out?
They were also hinting that there's more moves to follow.
Stu
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 1993 16:13 GMT
Subject: RE: BATTY HAS GONE
Mark, Where are the smilies in your message.
Please say your joking, you must be.
Whatever about the fat french git leaving Batty going is a major no no.
Next it'll be fucking Strachan followed by Macca and then God forbid Newsome.
Seriously though there can be no way that Wilko let him go not even for 2.75 million.
Declan
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 93 17:19:22 MET
Subject: The hens have come home to roust
Is it time to pay the piper.
The costs of running a club of the size of Leeds is large and the easy way out is to sell the best players.
Though I think 2.75 million isn't a great price for a player of Battys quality.
Who will go next?
McAllister for 1 million?
The directors are demanding their cut, me thinks.
James.
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 93 16:19:32 GMT
Subject: I could even support the scum now!
I'm just in a bloody daze!
I've been wandering round for an hour swearing at everbody and everything.
Unless there is news of a signing for us in the next few days I am seriously think of saying fuck off to Leeds.
Cantona was bad, I remember thinking, never mind it could have been Batty.
But this is the worst possible thing that could have happened.
Do you reckon it is just the money grabbing bastard directors, or Batts pissed off 'cos he was on the bence on Saturday.
The reports on ceefax say that he requested the move.
I hope I wake up soom, this is a nightmare.
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 93 16:19:53 GMT
Subject: Re: Batty
WHAT THE FUCK IS GOING ON????????????
HAS HE ACTUALLY PACKED HIS BAGS??????
OR IS THIS JUST PRESS SPECULATION????
I HOPE HE ISN'T REALLY GOING
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 93 16:21:07 GMT
Subject: Re:Batty
The only thing I can think of to say is:—
FUCK!
Kev.
Oh, and I'm glad I didn't get ‘4 Batty’ put on my shirt.
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 1993 16:27:58 +0000
Subject: Batty Sold
I am furious.
I want to kill someone.
Bastards, how could they?
What is the meaning of this outrage?
Like what else could they do?
Sell Elland Road and buy fucking Hillsborough?
Twats.
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 93 17:28:53 MET
Subject: For roust see roost!!!
From: XSTACY:: JLUNDON ‘James A. Lundon DTN 822–4715 26-Oct-1993 1617’ 26-OCT-1993 16:24:08.81 To: LEEDS CC: JLUNDON Subj: The hens have come home to roust
Is it time to pay the piper.
The costs of running a club of the size of Leeds is large and the easy way out is to sell the best players.
Though I think 2.75 million isn't a great price for a player of Battys quality.
Who will go next?
McAllister for 1 million?
The directors are demanding their cut, me thinks.
James.
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 93 16:38:20 GMT
Subject: Re: Batty being sold: -///////
Ndlove is on the market though isn't he?
Maybe that's the reason…
Wilko wanted Ndlove & the board said ‘You'd can find the money by selling Batty’!!
Still not a very good move.
Dick-head board
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 1993 16:41:36 +0000
Subject: Hillsborough
I assume this means there's going to be one hell of a protest at Hillsborough on saturday.
I'll be there with Gav so we can report back on it.
Radio 5 is giving nothing away whatsoever.
they're talking about Rubgy and that's all.
I'll post news if anything is mentioned on the 5 o'clock news.
‘We've been through it all together, And we've had our ups and downs…’ and money grabbing directors.
Stu
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 1993 16:50 GMT
Subject: What do you fuckin' think the subject is about.
1.
Obviously Daglish has being trying to buy Batt's for a while after failing to sign Keane.
2.
Do we need the money?
What's our current financial position like?
3.
Who can replace Batty for his work rate, aggression, vision etc.?
4.
Hopefully Wilko get the bloody English job now.
5.
Does this mean that Rocky will get regular football now?
6.
There have been renewed rumours recently about Macca going to Italy anybody know anything about this?
Mark I feel the same, extremely pissed off at Wilko.
He seems to like getting rid of the crowd pleasers, look at his history Cantona last year, Vinny a few years back, John Sheridan before that and now Batty.
It's fuckin typical, just when we were on a role, our most important player is out for 6–8 weeks and his next in line is sold.
Declan
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 93 17:00:39 GMT
Subject: Re: Batts…fax protest
I'm not sure whether it's a good thing that everyone does that.
Perhaps one fax protest on behalf of us all.
— On the other hand, I suppose Mark can't speak for everyone without our permission.
The only time I've been quite as pissed off was when we sold Jordan & McQueen.
Although I did phone up to protest about what Brian Clough was at, when he dropped Bremner and Clarke in favour of McGovern and O'Hare.
The worrying thing is that one of the Sunday papers said Leeds may renew their interest in ‘Spit’ junior after Gobber Ferguson had reduced his asking price.
Surely Wilko doesn't think he can get away with replacing Batty with that salivating little pillock.
Kev.
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 1993 17:05:08 +0000
Subject: radio 5
It got a mention.
It's true.
Off home to jump up and down on a picture of Long John Silver.
Stu
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 93 17:06 GMT
Subject: My protest fax
This is the fax I just sent.
PLEASE everyone do likewise if you can…however angry/polite you want to be
Fao: The Manager, Chairman, Directors of Leeds United AFC
If the recent ‘news’ about the sale of Mr Batty is confirmed — I am totally outraged.
What the hell is going on there?
I have ‘spoken’ to at least 10 fellow supporters in the last 10 minutes and EVERYONE is completely astounded.
David Batty is possibly the BEST player to grace a Leeds United shirt for years.
He is certainly the most influential and consistent player I have ever seen.
We should be building a side around him — not giving him away.
CHAMPIONS DO NOT SELL THEIR BEST PLAYERS.
Quite simple.
The decision is incomprehensible, negative and acutely embarassing.
It will be viewed as a turning point, just as the Strachan signing was, only this time in the opposite direction.
I sincerely hope that there is a MAJOR signing imminent — not that I can see any player replacing Mr Batty.
This act is a betrayal to Leeds United supporters everywhere — you seem to have lost sight of the fact that its us supporters who breathe life into Leeds United.
We deserve better than this.
I have never felt moved to register any protest such as this before, and indeed been strongly behind, and confident, of the long term strategy employed at Leeds.
If you wish to avert a major black era in Leeds history I suggest a full and public explanation the least you can do.
I hope to see Mr Ndlove arrive at Leeds.
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 1993 17:07:26 +0000
Subject: Newsome
If they sell Newsome, then that's it, I'm gonna support MUFC.
The lad is pure gold.
Money isn't enough for talent like him.
Tim
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 1993 17:22:03 +0000
Subject: Batty and the board
Well, CEEFAX says the board agreed it and Batty ‘expressed a willingness to talk to Blackburn’.
Being willing to talk after your board agrees to sell you is different to requesting a move.
CEEFAX and ORACLE are still saying (at 17:15) that Batty is ‘set to move’, not that he has moved.
The board have agreed it; maybe Batty hasn't.
That's a long shot though.
Hope for the best, prepare for the worst.
Gav
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 93 17:37:58 GMT
Subject: Re: Batty being sold: -///////
What about Le Tissier or Ruel Fox?
Perhaps a real top class defender, can't think of who may be on the market tho.
— Still not happy.
I can't bear the thought of Batty playing against Leeds.
Still I suppose he's unlikely to score.
But then…
Kev.
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 93 18:49:06 MET
Subject: Another according to club call
From: WELSWS:: CADD 26-OCT-1993 17:52:19.90 To: XSTACY:: JLUNDON CC: Subj: Other
James,
There will also be another ‘leeds International’ going before the end of the week to Spain it was announced on clubcall at the same time as the Batty announcement i think Speed or Mcallister???
Paul
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 93 18:53:11 GMT
According to teletext, he is set to move for 2.7 million, text also says that it is a boardroom decision to sell him, he is currently in talks with Kenny daglesh.
If thats true then looks like howard may be off too.
I always wondered where the money for dean came from, we should have held onto chapman, strenghten our back four, and would have had the money to hold onto Batty.
I have faxed my protest to the board, there's still time for them to change their mind.
From a glut of midfielders, to the bear minimum.
Here comes another 18 years in the wilderness.
Guess how I heard the news, My scum supporting cousin rang me up.
I though it was a windup until I read my email.
Well pissed off, going home, at least I have got tommorrow off so I can sulk at home.
Regards Brian.
From:
Date: Tue, 26 Oct 93 16:17:26 PDT
Subject: Batty…what else
Well, I have been following this mailing list and have yet to post a message, but am sad to see that it is under these circumstances that I post my first…
I can't believe what's going on.
We out here on the west caost of the US (actually a few friends and I — all LUFC supporters) are shattered!
Will someone in the UK please post something on this that is a detailed account of the events of Batty's transfer?
Is it a done deal?
I bloody well hope not.
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 1993 08:50:56 +0000
Subject: Batty's gone
He was with them last night when they played Shrewsbury (not playing).
He was interviewed on Radio 5 this morning and he sounded really pleased.
I wish him the best because it isn't his fault the dickheads wanted to sell him, and he gave us 200 games of total commitment.
That lad is Leeds, and always will be.
Whatever is in store for us now I don't know.
Tim
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 1993 09:34:43 +0000
Subject: Money denies Leeds Batty
I heard Silver on the phone last night and couldn't quite belive my ears.
No, they didn't want to sell Batty.
Yes, they realised how much he meant to the fans.
No, there aren't any immediate plans to buy someone else in.
Yes, Wilkinson did want him to stay.
But Blackburn offered so much money.
No, in the end we just couldn't turn down the money.
We need the money for future contingencies.
Money.
Bollox.
The player off to foreign shores is Frank Strandli — which is a shame in a way cos he's a Leeds fan.
What price the rest of the team?
Gav
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 1993 09:34:09 +0000
Subject: Batty interview
I only caught a bit of it but he said that he turned up for training and was surprised to be called in and told about the deal.
He said he was ‘a bit disappointed’ but looked forward to the challenge.
This does not sound like a player who has requested a transfer.
Also, from the minimal information on CEEFAX I suspect Wilko is as pissed off as the rest of us about it.
It appears to be a board-room decision and not his so let's not get on his back too quick.
If they sell someone else this week to a Spanish or Italian club (I assume it can only be Macca or Rocastle) then they want shooting.
At the beginning of this season Wilko said we had a better side this year than when we won the championship.
What then, is the bloody point of getting rid of half of them?
Don't worry, this is all a super-bid for Gazza…
Stu
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 1993 09:47:21 GMT
Subject: Batty
Just in case anybody hasn't seen it, there is a quote from Wilkinson in this mornings Guardian regarding the Batty sale:
‘From a football point of view I wouldn't be for it [the transfer].
But wider, deeper and larger considerations had to be taken on board and at this stage I don't know if any of the money will be available to me for replacing Batty if he goes.’
Sounds like it definitely wasn't his fault.
If I didn't know better I'd think he was trying to be as diplomatic possible in order to keep himself in line for the England job.
Andy.
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 93 09:57:54 GMT
Subject: RIP
In Memorium
We are sorry to announce the sad demise of Leeds United football club, who died tragically yesterday in unforseen circumstances.
In an heroic act of bravery, Leeds donated a vital organ to another club desperately in need of a new heart (Blackburn Rovers).
Leeds felt they could survive the transplant, but they were sadly misguided by thier advisors.
They had a turbulent career, reaching its peak in the early 70's, but this for followed by almost 2 decades in the wilderness.
Recently though a resurection in thier career had taken place, which makes this loss all the more devestating.
They will be sadly missed.
The funeral will take place on Saturday when Leeds will be buried by 11 men in blue & white.
If you cannot make this, don't worry, as it will be repeated all over the country on a weekly basis.
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 1993 10:17:20 +0000
Subject: The Scum perspective
Here is a message I got from a tame Man U supporter on the subject we are all discussing.
What he says is of interest.
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 93 10:24 GMT
Subject: Clubcall…
Well, Im about 5 quid shorter…but on a day of being sold short — I spose its whats expected.
I too listened to the whole clubcall bulletin.
In suspended belief.
I felt like shouting at Silver to fuck off several times.
Its all about money…but the way he tried to turn it round was sick.
Wilkinson agreed to the move, reluctantly, after a meeting with Silver and Fotherby yesterday morning.
Some of the gems of excuses…
’ sometimes best to sell a player so they can further their career’
’ We did it to give some of the great youngsters a chance’
I kid you not.
He was trying to turn it round and make it sound positive.
And not content to sell one Leeds fan, they are prepared to sell Strandli who is having talks with a spanish club.
The reason we need the money? get this —
‘So we (the board) are in a position to be flexible with any future transfer speculation that Howard requires’
So, were not buying anyone (and they normally say if they are), not even interested in anyone.
We need a ‘positive cach flow’.
So, Mr Silver, what you are saying is that NOW we have money spare (minus a class player…but a minor point).
So, Howard could go and spend some money.
But obviously — if he bought someone wed be in a negative cash flow — so wed still need to sell again afterwards.
He also spouted on about how Batty hadnt played in the last 6 matches, of which we had won 5 and drawn 1.
Actuall it was won 4 and drawn 2.
This was the most pertinent thing he said for me.
I reckoned this is what happened…
Leeds having repeated bids for Batts.
The board wanting to sell him (or someone).
As soon as he is out of the side, and the team continues to play well…they rub their hands and sell him as soon as they can.
Why ca nt they realise for a second that if he had been playing, maybe they would have won all 6 matches and pissed on all of the sides?
Oh well.
I dont think the board have realised what theyre in for.
Chuck an egg for me someone.
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 1993 10:27 GMT
Subject: RE: Money denies Leeds Batty
Where is Frank off to?
If it is him that's off then it not TOO bad,(apolgies to Halvard) at least it's not Macca or Speed (or even Mr Newsome).
Like all these things you have to look at the bright side.
Batty has been missing for the past 5? games.
In that time we had won 3 and drawn 2.
Now with Speed, in the middle of the park, playing are hard tackling role and the 5 man defence that has been played recently then we should be all right.
Lets not get carried away with thoughts of another 18 years in the wilderness.
Don't get me wrong I'm not saying that it was a good idea to sell Batts, on the contrary it was stupid and short sighted by the board but life goes on and if (no when) we beat Wednesday this weekend everyone will be a little happier.
Declan
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 1993 10:48:16 +0000
Subject: Pet Name
I had to rename my white rat.
It was named in honour of our departed hero.
You will be interested to know I have renamed it:
Newsome.
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 93 12:05:18 GMT
Subject: GUESS!
Well like a lot of Leeds fans, I got wrecked last night and then hardly got a wink of sleep.
It is just the worst possible thing to have happened.
I am so disillusioned.
There is obviously going to be some sort of demonstration at the Chelsea game but in what form.
Perhaps every one should go to the ground and not go in.
Or better still all go to wherever Blackburn are playing.
I got my Chelsea ticket through the post and had to be restrained from ripping it up by my girlfriend.
I too have a small furry animal to rename (yep, Newsome is probably a good idea, at least he won't be sold like Macca and Speed look likely to).
I also have a life-size cardboard cut-out of our former no.4.
I thought about posting it to the club as my sign of protest.
Any suggestions.
Is there anybody who lives nearer Leeds that has heard anything about demos. etc?
Is there life after Batty?
I know I have been reduced to a babble of disconnected comments, which don't really say much.
Sorry!
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 93 12:36 GMT
Subject: Silver' latest…
Just read a bit on teletext.
Theres a few more comments from Silver.
He said that ‘Every player has their price, if the offer were 2M Id have rejected it, but as it nudged 3M I felt it was a good deal for Leeds’.
Thats reassuring eh guys.
So, if some italian club comes in for Macca at say 4M (a definate possibility), and/or someone come in for Speed at say 3.5M, well have no fucking team left.
By saying every player has their price he is encouraging offers for all our best players, be they on the transfer list or under contract or not.
So Mr Silver…in other words you are saying Leeds have their price.
As long as we got loads of money its ok to sell all our players and be a rich 4th division side.
Im being extreme here but its such a stupid fucking statement to publicly make.
It shows how good Batts is because normally Dalglish makes one offer — if its rejected he drops out altogether.
From what Silver has said they have been constantly upping their offer.
What we need is some rich director to put silly money into Leeds.
Look at blackburn.
Aside from the money spent before this season (ie Shearer et al) he has spent 3M on warhurst, 2.75 on batts, and is still looking to get flowers 2M+ Thats over 7M spent, and who has left?
Cowans on a free transfer back to Villa.
We have spent 2.75 on Deane, and sold Chapman/Whyte/Kerslake/Shutt(?) /Batty/Strandli.
Also Haddock has had to quit and Sterland looks like a long term crock.
So, there was at least 1.25M raised towards the deane money.
Lets not forget that we havent bought since Cantona…so another 1.2M…
AND the money from season tickets which normally exceeds 2M.
AND weve just signed with new main sponsors…
AND kit sponsors…
AND the 200grand or so from last years league position…
AND crowds are up.
Something doesnt quite add up here guys.
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 93 12:36 GMT
Subject: Silver' latest…
Just read a bit on teletext.
Theres a few more comments from Silver.
He said that ‘Every player has their price, if the offer were 2M Id have rejected it, but as it nudged 3M I felt it was a good deal for Leeds’.
Thats reassuring eh guys.
So, if some italian club comes in for Macca at say 4M (a definate possibility), and/or someone come in for Speed at say 3.5M, well have no fucking team left.
By saying every player has their price he is encouraging offers for all our best players, be they on the transfer list or under contract or not.
So Mr Silver…in other words you are saying Leeds have their price.
As long as we got loads of money its ok to sell all our players and be a rich 4th division side.
Im being extreme here but its such a stupid fucking statement to publicly make.
It shows how good Batts is because normally Dalglish makes one offer — if its rejected he drops out altogether.
From what Silver has said they have been constantly upping their offer.
What we need is some rich director to put silly money into Leeds.
Look at blackburn.
Aside from the money spent before this season (ie Shearer et al) he has spent 3M on warhurst, 2.75 on batts, and is still looking to get flowers 2M+ Thats over 7M spent, and who has left?
Cowans on a free transfer back to Villa.
We have spent 2.75 on Deane, and sold Chapman/Whyte/Kerslake/Shutt(?) /Batty/Strandli.
Also Haddock has had to quit and Sterland looks like a long term crock.
So, there was at least 1.25M raised towards the deane money.
Lets not forget that we havent bought since Cantona…so another 1.2M…
AND the money from season tickets which normally exceeds 2M.
AND weve just signed with new main sponsors…
AND kit sponsors…
AND the 200grand or so from last years league position…
AND crowds are up.
Something doesnt quite add up here guys.
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 1993 13:08:39 +0000
Subject: Where is all the money going?
Well, on the news just now the speculation was that the dosh is needed to pay for the refurbishment of the ground and not for new players.
Didn't we get a bit from the FA or whatever to make it a ground for the European Championships?
What's the point of having a lovely new ground when you have to play the likes of Oxford and Grimsby?
They're hardly going to fill it.
Silver Classics £25 ‘We've strengthened the squad this year with the purchase of Brain Deane, who has yet to flower.’
Stu
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 93 14:11:30 MET
Subject: Image
I have a scanned image of the team with the new east stand behind them that i launch as my backdrop to windows.
I will have to edit it now Kerslake, BATTY and now Strandli
I have a bond and a season ticket for the new east stand.
I'm sure that there was some cash left from the bond scheme with the number of people that subscribed, on top of that we are fourth in the gates league with nearly 38000 on saturday agianst THEM.
It is not as if we NEED the money, just another case of the directors lining their pockets.
Paul Cadd (A very pissed off LEEDS fan):-(:-(:-(
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 93 17:14 GMT
Subject: Batty deal completed
As the subject says…
BBC teletext have said its all done and dusted.
Expect to see lots of pictures of Batts in the blackburn strip tomorrow.
Bollocks.
I hope he breaks his fucking legs.
Ok, he might not have instigated the move, but all he had to do was to reject terms.
Not difficult for fucks sake.
He would have still been picked by Wilko, and we dont need the fucking money to buy someone.
Lets hope Speed gets used to the new role as ball winner, and starts influencing games like he should.
Its all very well scoring, but we need a midfielder or three who are gonna set the tempo.
Macca thank fuck is now doing it consistently.
Speed will have his central role he prefers so theres no excuse now.
Who knows — if he plays really well we could sell him and have 4 million quid in the bank.
Whoopy-fuckin-doo.
Mark (in serious pissed off mode)
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 1993 13:13:55–0500
Subject: on to a new tomorrow
Now that the Batty deal is finally complete, maybe we should look ahead and see whats ahead for us.
Gary Speed now has the opportunity to play in the middle of midfield, I hope that's where Wilko plays him.
Will Speed be our ballwinner as well?
Mark Tinkler is a pretty good ball winner/tackler himself and may get the nod when he recovers from his injury.
I suppose now Rocastle will see a run of games in the 1st team.
How about trying to get Peter Ndlovu (Coventry) and play him on the wings, now that we have some money in the bank?
I suppose we still need a good, solid centre back.
Didn't we inquire about Alan McLaren?
Why is Deane still starting anyway?
Give Whelan a few games and Deane something to think about while he's on the bench.
The following lineup would not be too bad:
I suppose we would have to spend 4 million,(Ndlovu 2.5m, McLaren 1.5m).
Joo
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 1993 13:56:05–0500
Subject: team lineup
Oops, in my last mail I had 12 players in the lineup.
If we have Tinkler in there, then Rocastle could be on the bench.
Joo
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 1993 15:15:07–0500
Subject: Re: on to a new tomorrow
A 12 man team!!
We'd better win with that.
Seriously, can anyone give us news on how Tinkler's recovering, and also on whether Forrester, Sharp, and Bowman (who all played last year) look like getting a game in the near future.
Also, won't the loss of Batty be liekly to give Steve Hodge a place?
He's a ball winner, and given that his average minutes/appearance during his time with Leeds must be about 10, he's knocked in his share of goals.
I'd agree with dropping Deane.
He just doesn't seem to be clicking.
I'd have given his place to Fat Frank, but if he's off to, then maybe Whelan or Forrester could get the starting nod.
Finally, can someone fill me in on Carl Shutt.
He's out on loan right?
Perhaps our Barcelona hero will soon return!
Just my ramblings.
Why the F**k didn't Batts just say NO to Dogleash's terms.
That would have given Silver something to chew on.
I can't believe Wilko is happy with the board going behind his back like that.
Just my $0.02 as they say over here.
John  Rocky Assistant Master
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 1993 17:16:01–0400 (EDT)
Subject: UPI article
LONDON (UPI)— England international soccer midfielder David Batty Wednesday completed his 2.75 million pound ($4.13 million) transfer from Leeds to fellow Premier League club Blackburn after successfully passing medical tests.
In a move which has upset Leeds' manager Howard Wilkinson, Batty said: ‘I had heard that Blackburn were interested but it has all happened so quickly.
‘I was training at Leeds yesterday morning and Mr Wilkinson came and said that Blackburn were in for me and I would have to go.
‘The money aspect at Leeds is nothing to do with me but I could tell Mr Wilkinson was very sorry to see me go.
Batty, who watched Blackburn's disappointing goalless home League Cup draw with third division Shrewsbury Tuesday night, added: ‘I have enjoyed eight good years at Leeds but I can see that Blackburn intend to go places.
They have a lot of good players and are putting a lot of money into their ground.
‘Mr Dalglish knows the job I can do for Blackburn — I presume it will be in midfield.’
Batty only returned to the Leeds side for Saturday's 3–3 draw with Blackburn after missing five games with a broken wrist.
The aggressive midfielder played more than 200 League games for the Yorkshire side and has won 14 England caps.
A disappointed Wilkinson explained: ‘From a football aspect my point of view was that I wouldn't be letting Batty go.
But wider, deeper and longer considerations had to be taken on board.’
Leeds chairman Leslie Silver Wwednesday defended the controversial decision to sell Batty and said: ‘No manager wants to sell his best players but Howard Wilkinson is practical enough to realise that we can't just buy other people's best players — it works the other way round sometimes.
‘We have spent a lot of money on the Elland Road stadium and we have to make sure resources are there for developments on and off the field.
‘Every player has his price.
I would have turned down 2 million ($3 million) but when the bid nudged 3 million ($4.5 million) it became a good deal for us.’
From:
Date: Wed, 27 Oct 93 22:50:02 +0100
Subject: Frank Strandli is also going…
i can just verify that Frank is having talks with a spanish 1 div club (i dont think they have any ‘premier div’ down there — so first is first…)— i guess Frank feels he doesn't get the chance he + me + others thinks he deserves — Dino and Wallace just not delivering goals and Frank never getting more than the 10 last minutes from time to time.
Frank obviously want to travel to the US next year and to be in contention he —has—to play first team football — Frank was cited today as not beeing to impressed with Deano:’ 2 goals in 12 matches in England is not at all impressive; the chances keep coming all the time in games over here’.
So too bad that Wilko would not give the guy a real chance — specially regarding to the stuff that that Wilko spoke when Frank signed.
Well — i wish Frank good luck and i —really—hope he keeps them goals coming down in Spain too give Wilko some sleepless nights…
What a week: Batts and Fat-Frank going in the same week, what the fuck is going on — i guess they need the cash to buy someone — guess we will know who in a couple of weeks…the newly in shape Maradona?
Franco Baresi and Rune Bratseth in central defence? that finnish guy Littmannen at Ajax who scores a couple in every game?
Koeman?
depressed,
Halvard
From:
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 1993 10:07:47 +0000
Subject: Young bucks
Like most of you I suspect, I am totally f-ed off with Leeds United at the moment, but one subject that does cheer me a little is the young players who are our future.
The prog from last Saturdays game detailed some reserve games in which they played.
Mathew Smithard got 1, Mark Ford got two in a 4–0 rout of Darlington in the Northern Intermediate League.
Gary Lynam got the other one.
Paul Pettinger kept the clean sheet.
(2/10) Against Huddersfield (1–1 9/10) and Scunthorpe (won 2–0 16/10) Smithard played well as did Tony Grant who got two and Martin Littlewood who bagged one.
Leeds are second in the NIL, 5 points behind Middlesborough.
All good games going by the reports and super goals to boot.
With a bit of luck on their side these young fellers could make Leeds once again the finest side in Britain, as under the Don.
I'd rather it was with them than buying expensive misfits all the time.
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 1993 10:27:54 GMT
Subject: FA Youth Cup?
Does anybody know how the FA Youth Cup is going?
Has it started yet?
Are we still in it?
Andy.
From:
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 1993 10:37:54 +0000
Subject: Fat Bloke down the pub
That well-known fountain of knowledge — the fat blerk down the pub (I assume every pub has one of these)— seemed to think that there was more to the Batty deal than we are being told.
It struck him that it seemed weird that Leeds rejected continuous bids from Blackburn all through the season and then suddenly, out of the blue, accepted one.
Still, I agree with the list, Batty could have said no.
OK, in the end the board would have told him to sod off, but it would have made him look better.
What he should not have said is that he was pleased to join Blackburn 'cos they were going places, implying he didn't think Leeds were going to have any more success.
If players have that sort of attitude then we won't.
Things to look forward to?
Well, we can hope that the success last season in the FA Youth Cup means that we have an excellent crop of players coming through.
Things to dread?
Wales getting to the World Cup (which I want), Speedo playing a blinder, and Silver issuing another great statement about why we had to sell one of our best players (this time for a bit more I hope).
Stu
From:
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 93 11:42:59 MET
Subject: Does anyone have…
I bought my copy of the Leeds stats and records book (MacDonald/Jarryd) 6/7 years ago.
This book included the 1985/86 season but I didn't buy the updated version which I think was available a year of so back as so much of the information is duplicate.
Can anyone photocopy the last 6/7 season stats and mail them onto me please.
I am a bit in the dark when I try to look up something when the most recent season I have full stats from is over 7 years ago.
The stats include such important things as:
teams played FT HT crowd date scorers team sheet…
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 93 11:07 GMT
Subject: Wilko demands talks with the board.
Wilkinson has demanded ‘clear the air’ talks with the board.
He has denied he is on the verge of quitting —‘Im suprised if people thought I am the sort who takes my bat and ball home if I dont get my way’.
He will be discussing the future of Leeds over the next 5 years or so.
Apparently he is worried that the cash from the sale of Batts would be swallowed up by ground developments.
Silver has tried to ally these fears —
‘There is no cash crisis at Leeds, and there is positively no rift between the board and the manager’
This sounds strangely positive to me.
Wilko seems to be the only person fighting for us.
It looks like a clever move — by publicly questioning the boards intent (by requesting the meeting) he is asking for commitment to the progression of the club.
Aside from the usual assurances the only real way to prove such a commitment is by making cash available.
It also infers (to me) that Wilko IS looking to strenghthen the squad following Battys departure.
I have hope that Ndlove might be on the agenda
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 93 11:21 GMT
Subject: Frank going…
Halvard,
I agree with most of what you say about Frank.
He hasnt been given a real chance — but it is quite a difficult position to get a decent run if you arent 1st choice.
He was another for the future.
A reason cited as to why he was being released was that there are/were potential problems with renewing his work permit.
Maybe if you guys in Norway joined the EC a bit quicker Silver couldnt have used that as an excuse:-)
If, by any chance, you have a way of passing on messages to Frank (via the supporters club maybe)— Im sure all of us wish him the best…and hope to see him back here at Leeds in a few years so he can be 1st choice.
Hes not actually signed yet…so this may be all a bit premature.
impressed
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 93 11:23:06 GMT
Subject: Re: Wilko demands talks with the board.
Perhaps when the kop has been seated over they can rename it the ‘David Batty Memorial End’
It's just like when someone pays for a park bench — they get a little plaque with their name on it, don't they?:-)
Gav
From:
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 93 11:24 GMT
Subject: Jonnsen (sp?)
Halvard — whats the latest on the defender/midfielder you mentioned before who was sposed to have trials at leeds and/or Spurs?
I say this because a few days ago Spurs were linked with a different (Swedish) defender, so may have pulled out any interest.
What sort of fee would he go for?
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 1993 11:53:50 +0000
Subject: Money Money Money
Let's have a realistic attitude: Batty went there for the money.
The only reason I don't call him a c*** is the commitment he showed to Leeds for eight years, through good times and bad.
Lets face it Gascoigne went to Lazio for the money, Batty went to BR for the money and yes Deane went to Leeds for the money.
The only thing you can say is that DB gave us good service and for this we should be grateful.
The board saying they wanted to sell him will have made him think ‘Why not, no point hanging round where I'm not wanted’.
Talk of his absence coinciding with our recent purple patch can't have helped.
But filthy lucre led him to Uncle Kenny's.
I went off him a lot when he made out he was really eager to get to Blackburn and ‘only really wanted to play for one club’, but you can't really blame him for wanting to be filthy rich.
And he can't blame us for singing ‘You're Only Here For The Money etc’ when we travel to Ewood Park.
All in the game.
Give Macca credit, in comparison.
Last season he was getting loads of stick and his contract came up for renewal — when we were in a potential relegation situation.
He re-signed with Leeds.
Blackburn, loads of Iti clubs were queueing up for him.
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 93 22:05:07 JST
Subject: fools and money are soon…
Hello Folks, this is my first time to send a message to the Leeds support list.
Out here in Japan we tend to get info on the football on a wing and prayer so being able to be part of this listing is great for this Leeds supporter.
I was shocked too by Batty's departure especially since I have been watching again and again the Leeds championship video ‘91/'92 in the last few days.
Seeing Batty on the video just showed that he loved playing for Leeds and from what has been said it seems that he had never contemplated leaving the club.
But if the club suddenly asked him to strongly consider taking the Blackburn offer then even if he didn't he probably would never have felt the same again about playing for Leeds,(ie, doubting about management's loyalty to him, etc.)
The hardest thing I suppose will be to see him play against us during the season.
But looking at the whole thing from a higher perspective, it seems to me that the Leeds management may be thinking that we are not going to win the championship this season or at least they are prepared to wait another year to have a go.
I think they are settling for next season hoping that Leeds don't have a terrible season this year.
The reason I say this is that i), there does not appear to be financial problems with the Club and ii), there has been no talk of buying another class player.
As was said ealier in this discussion, championship teams don't sell their class players or they make an effort to hang on to them anyway.
The way Batty was handled strikes me as a sign that the management are not thinking along winning the championship this year but are prepared to bide their time.
Now of course they will say that their goal is to win but unfortunately their actions don't seem to reflect this; no matter the amount of money Leeds needs to keep its class players if it wants to win.
I doubt that anything like this would have happened in the Revie days, that was a time that Leeds were truly considered champions and it was Leeds that would be doing the ‘poaching’ of players as such.
Now Leeds seem a little like a farm, breeding quality players for someone else's team.
Well, that's my 5p's worth.
Still hope that we can challenge Man.
Utd. at the end of the season but with players feeling uncertain about management it will be difficult.
cheers neil
From:
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 93 13:07:53 GMT
Subject: Re: Money Money Money
What would any of us do at work if our bosses decided they no longer valued our services and wanted shot of us to gain in other ways?
I've lost my job when money's been tight, regardless of the good work I did and the commitment I showed.
I just tried my best to get something else for myself.
Batty's doing what any of us would I'd say.
It wasn't his fault he was dumped in shit.
All I reckon we can do is be grateful for the good service, as you say Tim, and get on with what's left — and that is quite a lot.
Who knows, maybe things will turn out better in the end.
True.
However if Silver had opted for getting his 30 pieces as he has done with Batty, Macca would be eating spaghetti as we write.
I really think that first and foremost this one's down to the board.
Gav
From:
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 93 14:36:21 GMT
Subject: Re: Wilko demands talks with the board.
I'm glad to hear that, Wilko has proved during his first 3 years that he is capable of getting the best out of players individually and as a team.
This also involved selling players such as Sheridan, Hendrie and Jones who we knew would all do well for their new clubs.
Batts is just another to add to the list.
The ground now compares favourably with any, and remember every club without a sugar daddy of endless resources has had to make improvements.
I would guess that in the fairly near future, even Jack Walker will decide enough is enough.
15 years ago Blackburn were getting similar gates to Watford and Oxford.
Elton John and even Maxwell pulled out in the end.
I think we ought to be pleased at the money made available in the last 5 years for players.
We have actually been spending net amounts similar to Scum, Scouse and Blackburn over this period.
Remember part of that time we were in div 2 getting only a fraction of the TV and Sponsorship money that Scum and Scouse were getting.
I don't think we ought to go out and make any panic buys.
Let's just sit back and consolidate for a while.
Losing one player does not take a team from being championship contenders to relegation candidates I'm sure he is, but there is no bottomless pit of money, so certain players may end up being sold.
We still have lots of good players.
Realistically the championship was never quite on the agenda this year, but setting up a system that gives us regular qualification for Europe and the occasional cup run/win will be satisfactory IMO.
Kev
From:
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 93 14:45 GMT
Subject: Money…and players
Gav, you speak of the Batts situation as if it were work:-)
With football it SHOULD be more than just money.
What hits home is if batty wanted to leave…fuck me anyone could.
Not a nice feeling.
In the good old days you had lots of career men.
I bet its no coincidence that during our Glory Days we had the same players year in year out.
If *I** were Batty i would never have left.
Its wrong to draw similarities with other situations because here the manager wanted to keep him.
If hed have stayed there would have been no hassles at all.
And with Deane, you are forgetting the big guy turned down a BETTER contract at Sheff Wed to join Leeds.
I hope he can start knocking in a few goals because we need players who want to play for the club.
The only slight justification for Batty going I can see, I realised last night.
Its not the contract/wages necessarily because I hope that Batty would have stayed at Leeds.
Its the signing on fee.
One major transfer can give a player security for life.
it led me to think that players who come through the youth system should be ‘guaranteed’ a huge loyalty bonus after a certain period.
This would avoid them needing to move at some point.
Speed must be thinking to himself right now…all the other players around him would have had one of these one-off payments when they joined Leeds.
Lastly, lets all get behind Macca.
As you said — he got stick in some quarters last year.
He could have easily not renewed his contract, and given our league situation at the time…
At least theres some loyalty left in the game
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 1993 16:09 GMT
Subject: Clubcall
For any Irish fans out there you can now call the club call line from Ireland.
The number is 1550 111 136.
Remember its 58p a minute at peak.
I've just rung and you get the usual b-shit at first then they patch you through to the club-call line in England.
The call lasts about 2 or 2 minutes so get your parents permission first kids.
Declan
From:
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 1993 13:14:26–0500
Subject: Team News
So, after all the kerfuffle, does anyone have any team news for Saturday??
John
From:
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 93 20:15:15 +0100
Subject: Re: Jonnsen (sp?)
actually Ronny Johnsen is even an attacker (as shown in Poland-Norway when he netted as a substitute).
News on Ronny is that he is in fact at Tottenham for the second week now.
He and fellow norwegian international Leonhardsen is training with Spurs and they both played for the Tottenham reserves last night against Arsenal (2–2).
According to norw. papers both did well — specially Johnsen.
Ardiles was not at this game but will attend tonight when they play another game in Spurs colours…
other news on norw.players is that Roger Nilsen of Viking, Stavanger who earlier this week look set to go to Sheff Utd is also really wanted at Aberdeen — he was in fact discussing terms with Bassett&co last night when suddenly Aberdeen called…
Also Tore Pedersen (always in Norway's first-11 the last year) is to play the rest of the season for Oldham at a rental deal — Oldham does not have the cash to buy him.
so all of our best defenders who are not yet on contract will travel to Britain real soon now — Nilsen&Pedersen for sure: Johnsen is not yet offered a contract at Spurs.
these three are all very good defenders as mentioned in previous postings by me and all would have fitted fine at Leeds — but i feel that the jewel of the collection is Johnsen — he has speed and is extremely flexible — and he has not yet signed for Spurs — so he might still be in for a trial at Leeds.
i will post more on Frank's situation later — but i think he is going; funny to think of when Leeds played Ipwich a couple of weeks ago the subs were Frank and Batts — some kind of Omen i guess?
don't think so — i guess Ardiles will watch the game tonight with great interest.
400–500 000 £ i guess.
(1/5 BATT)
halvard /still in double-chock
From:
Date: Thu, 28 Oct 93 21:26:37 GMT
Subject: Team selection
Now that batty has gone, perhaps Steve hodge could be given ago, ago means at least 5 or 6 matches with rocastle on the bench.
As someone said before in his starts for Leeds his goals per match are pretty impressive, and he plays his heart out, not something I can say for Dean.
I watched him against Ipswich on the box, and he does not seem as commited as some of the other players.
He has had over a dozen matches and scored only two goals, so perhaps as Joo said its time for the subs bench (remember Le Tissier on sunday).
A excellent example of his less than 100% commitment was at the Ispwich match when a ball flew across the box and he did not dive in after it.
He may or may not have reached it, but the fact is he did not try where as Chapman would have been flying in there.
As for Ndlove, I don't see where he will fit in, it probably mean either Wallace or Dean moving to the reserves.
A better move, would be to shore up the defence, Ken Monku might move considering Southampton position.
The team stills looks good, and once our best player is back(Strach's) we should be OK.
Regards Brian.
From:
Date: 29 Oct 1993 10:28:36 +0700 (SST)
Subject: Match programme
Hi!
Can anyone/someone help me?
I am looking for a Leeds United match programme…not looking for any particular but I would prefer the most recent or a forthcoming copy.
I will pay for the copy, postage and effort!
I am in Singapore by the way.
I would also like to know if anyone have seen, read or heard of ‘Kick Off’?
I saw a copy in our book shop here recently and it appears that it's the official magazine of Leeds United…or is it?
It was kind of expensive though…
Any replies will be appreciated.
Thanks!
Have a nice day everyone!
Cheers!
— akbar:)
ps: Anyone here living/working/studying in Oxford?
Anyone in Oxford lives near Norham Gardens?
From:
Date: Fri, 29 Oct 1993 09:12:04 +0000
Subject: Kick Off
Akbar,
I've got the first issue which I bought at the away match at the Arse earlier on.
It is the official mag so there isn't any controversial stuff in it but it's handy for player profiles etc.
Stuart
P.S. Norham Gdns is just up the road from me.
Why?
From:
Date: Sat, 30 Oct 93 01:25:57 +0100
Subject: Frank Strandli
hi there fellow ‘sheep’—
Frank looks sure to go to spanish club Albacete.
Albacete is placed 14 out of 20 in the spanish league with a 1–5-2 (w-d-l) record; so it looks like a hard team to beat — i guess they hope for Frank to deliver the stuff he did not get the chance to do at Leeds.
Top of spanish league right now are Barcelona (with famous dutchman Koeman on the team).
‘this is hot (literall speaking)’ said Frank to norw. paper VG. ‘i had hoped to debut last week but i think my debut will be this weekend’.
it was last sunday that frank got the message from HW that he was not included in leeds' future plans.
leeds instead will use 2 mill£-man Brian Deane.
‘deane has scored twice in twelve games.
Not exactly impressing with all the chances which comes to you in the english league’ frank says.
‘but after my talks with Wilkinson there was not much doubt — i have to play to be in line for a world-cup squad place.
spain is an excellent alternative’.
Strandli has 2 1/2 years left of his contract with the whites and will go for around £500 000, He will probably leave next week —if—Albacete will pay the demanded 500K.
well — there is still some kind of hope (NOT! i guess)— but i still can't see why he was not even given at least a whole second-half this season.
he played well in some of the games last year and for the bullshit of ‘not in leeds’ future plans’— i can't believe Wilko have said this after the good-talk he gave Frank last year.
Frank is still just 21 and why a very talented young player can't be in the clubs future plans i can't understand…
Deano looses an opponent and will maybe look even more out-of-it tomorrow.
a nightmare week is still not over — with all this stuff going on i can't see us win tomorrow…
halvard — still major fucked up…
From:
Date: Sun, 31 Oct 93 08:16:34 IST
Subject: Sheffield W — Leeds
According to BBC World Service
Sheffield Wed 3 Leeds 3 (familiar scoreline, that)
Half-Time (2–1)
Waddle scored 1st for them, Fairclough equalized and then they scored again.
Leeds equalized early in 2nd half through Wallace and the went ahead 3–2 from Speed before they equalized.
Man Utd were 1–0 down at home to QPR at 1/2 time but…won 2–1 and are now 11 (!!) points clear.
Arsenal-Norwich…0–0 (surprise) Oh, and Blackburn won 1–0.
Don't know if Batty played…
2 hours until Oz — Argentina…
C'mon you Aussies!