

From:
Date Wed, 1 Dec 1993 09:22:20 +0000
Subject: Roky Erikson
The debate continues…
Firstly we still have plenty of midfielders even if Rocastle goes,(which he won't, because he said in the papers yesterday that he is to stay and fight for a place).
And Whelan is a striker not a midfielder.
Couzens, Smithard, Byrne, Oliver, Wharton and Tinkler are the youth team midfield.
Yes the youngsters got a shot last season with the bad injuries we had.
Last season was the result of complacency among our players and the vengeful attitude of most of the league who thought the scum should have won the it and were getting their revenge for them.
It's a fact, most professional footballers have a fetish for the scum.
Wilko wasn't totally responsible.
And WHO, pray, is the man for the job if not Wilko?
I can only think of Strach, but his lack of experience…?
Anyway sorry to disappoint, but Wilko has turned the England job down.
Maybe we should be asking whether Speed shouldn't be sidelined for a spell, as he is a bit anonymous at times.
Having said that, his aerial ability has been a consistent source of goals.
You don't take off your top scorer.
Rocastle has really messed up by talking to the press.
Wilko was furious about it.
Now that David has decided he wants to stay and fight for his place, he will have made his job all the harder.
Wilko sidelined Cantona like a shot when he started getting uppity.
There's a lot to be said for Wilko's tough attitude too.
You must show the team who's boss.
Tim
From:
Date: Wed, 1 Dec 93 10:07:31 GMT
Subject: Re: Rocky vs Bullwinkle
I can't honestly believe that anyone can question whether or not Wilko should be manager.
I'm sure everyone can criticise one or two of his selection and transfer decisions from the outside, but Chris you cannot argue with his record.
He's built almost 3 different teams in the past 5 years, got us promotion, a league title and we're now in second place, which is where we must finish to be assured of a European place.
So there's no scope to coast at all and not pick the strongest team.
Injuries to Strachan and Sterland rocked the boat last year.
I'm sure valuable pre-season work was delayed in the hope they got fit.
Remember how many goals came from that partnership on the right.
As a result the whole rhythm of the team was destroyed, as were the defensive and mid-field units.
Wilko's error here was to not spot the need earlier for a new full back to be bought to get some pre-season practice in with Strach/Rocky or Wallace.
He learned this lesson this year in giving Kelly his chance pre-season and then sticking with him, even though many observers would have brought Kerslake or Sterland (any news on him?) back.
On selling players, I'm sure he would like to have been able to keep Sheridan, Hendrie, Batty, and Cuntona, as well as keep all the current players and spend smoe millions on defenders.
However Leeds will NEVER be able to compete with scum regarding the size of squad, the only clubs able to do that are Liverpool and Blackburn, until Jack Walker's money runs out.
Indeed it is a credit to Wilko that the board have been confident enough in him to compete at the highest levels in the transfer market.
This would have been unthinkable 5 years ago.
Remember the ground improvements in the past few years too.
I'd like to put forward the argument that it was by trying to accomodate Cuntona, Wallace and Chappie together at the start of last season that made us a soft touch away from home.
Whilst playing attractive football, the stability of the mid-field had gone.
Cantona & Chapman together did not work out and we lost Wallace's abilty to go wide on both sides.
Perhaps Cantona & Wallace would have worked, but Cantona wasn't tough enough to be the front man, as scum found out in Turkey (ha, ha), I'm sure if Hughes had played instead they would still be in the EC.
He has done so well at scum primarily because Hughes is the ideal partner/workhorse for him.
I reckon Wilko spotted this which is part of the reason he sold him.
Mind you Chappie has made us all laugh at times, and Deane looks as limited to me in a different way.
I suppose it's all a question of balance as Mark says.
Wilko is not only reponsible for the success of the team.
He and Strach have transformed the club's image, built a team to win the youth cup, and enabled the ground to be improved.
By the way Batty was merely a promising youngster when Wilko arrived, and I don't think Speed had played for the first team.
The bottom line is that whilst Wilko has made decisions which have upset, even annoyed us, if he were to leave for the England job there is no-one remotely capable of replacing him.
From:
Date: Wed, 1 Dec 1993 10:36:39 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Zico
I read in a Sunday tabloid, that Fat Mel has been told to take a complete rest from football in the hope that his ankle will heal.
(He's had 5 operations now!!).
Apparently, this is the last hope for him.
Do we really need him now, there's no way he's going to be as good as he used to be, and he's probably the size of Mick Quinn now anyway:-)
Sunil
From:
Date: 1 Dec 93 12:26:16 GMT
Subject: Fat Mel
Regarding fat Mel, I think telling him to take a complete rest from football is a euphemism for ‘you're finished!’.
I thought that Wilko giving him the number 2 shirt this season was a positive sign, but I'm starting to think that he did it out of loyalty rather than in expectation of a comeback.
Even if he did recover, I feel that Kelly is a better right back, and in my opinion Pemberton would be the next in line.
Sterland's condition after such a long lay-off, given his condition at ‘peak fitness' (!) would also cause concern.
I'm sad to say it but I think we've seen the last of him, Bless him!
From:
Date: Wed, 1 Dec 93 13:49:52 GMT
Subject: 20 million for leeds
On Teletext there is a report saying that leeds could be taken over by Shiekh Mohammad.
He used to spend millions on race horses and is now looking to spend his money elsewhere!
The directors are denying any knowledge of this and the report originated in the Star so it could be rubbish,
But, if it is true, the good old Sheikh has a bigger purse than Jack Walker!
Mark
p.s only two people seem interested in meeting on saturday.
Any more takers (we can then discuss the venue)
From:
Date: Wed, 1 Dec 93 08:17:07 PST
Subject: Rocky IV
Wilko may make a few weird decisions but his record speaks for itself.
Better the devil you know…
Just think who we could have instead: Taylor, Cloughie, The bloke out of Billy TheFish
Simon
From:
Date: Thu, 2 Dec 93 09:54:12 +0100
Subject: Re: Newcastle-Liverpool
hi — i got your number on saturday at the meet-up before the spurs game.
tried to call you both saturday nite and a couple of times on sunday — but no answer…the spurs game was just OK — but we had a great time at the newcastle game vs. scousers — great atmosphere — we stood among the newcastle supporters (north bank?) and they made hell each time cole put it behind grobbelar…
got a flu over in england though and this is my first day at work for one and a half week…
still alive paul?
halvard
From:
Date: Thu, 2 Dec 93 12:57:18 +0100
Subject: newcastle (travel report — sort of)(Re: Newcastle-Liverpool)
yup.
my mate — a scouser — was quite silent too…
newcastle fans werent: the game started with lots of snow coming in: fans singing
‘im dreaming of a white christmas’— also shouts like ‘souness for sunderland’‘andy cole — he gets the ball — he scores a goal — andy, andy cole’(or something like it)‘theres only one terry butcher’(well not any more — he left sunderland last week)
made the evening quite memorable — i guess sunderland are not too popular up in newcastle ehh? what about leeds — equally hated? actually — to the newcastle fans credit — i was hearing words like ‘that's futballing class’ when liverpool from time to time delivered the goods…ruddock of course got booh's every time he was near the ball…
the result was newcastle 3 — liverpool 0 — all goals from andy cole in the first half — and all very similar — tap in's after getting the ball from the left wing.
cole was good but my man of the match has to be beardsley — cant see why liverpool sold him (souness is a mystery to me)…
also newcastle fans have two HUGE flags which they transport around the ground, everyone lifting the flag around — i think it's the only english club iv'e seen doing that — you see this kind of flagging from time to time around europe (even up here in Trondheim)
the evening before was also — hmm memorable.
me, my mate and paul had a terrible night out after the spurs game: first we were supposed to meet two fellow norw. at a pub (the black lion?) and they never showed up — then we went downtown to the marquee which was empty (8 quid out of the window) and a not the place to go at a saturday nite (no live music, just house — which i quite like — but there has to be some people around)— then standing in queue at ‘the borderline’ for a couple of hours not getting in…and it was bloody cold (hi paul)— the wind just froze my balls of (well nearly)…the meet-up was cozy though — no problems finding the guys (or rather: just look for mr cantona) and time for a couple of pints before and after the game and no problem wearing a leeds outfit at the pub…i was not sporting my leeds away scarf when among the newcastle crowd though;-)
hmm — and the trip back to london after the geordie game was not a happy one — trains arriving a couple of hours late from scotland due to snow or whatever…
no time for shopping this time — just futba and a short stay (the VIP — sunil type…) at the ‘american art in the 20th century’ exhibition to see paintings by my favorite painter edward hopper (hmm im not that high-brow though)— also some stuff by andy warhol and roy lichtenstein to be seen…
my travel agent fixed the tickets — i guess he had some problems as we got standing tickets (ie no seats)…i saw a poster or something mentioning that tickets for newcastles home games vs us and scum will only be available by mail requests (sort of a lottery i guess) with only 2 tickets pr request.
so i guess you could try for the ‘lottery’(send a couple of ones in different names) or try faxing/calling the leeds united ticket office — i guess tickets for our game will be really hard to get items…
halvard
From:
Date: Thu, 2 Dec 93 12:00:26 GMT
Subject:?
Everbody is quiet recently!
anybody know anymore about the Sheikh?
any squad news?
Rocky news?
Anybody else want to meet somewhere on sat?(myself, Gav, steve Walsh and Paul Cadd are interested so far)
Mark (s)
p.s Spawning scum buggers have got Pompey/Posh at home in the next round of the league cup!
From:
Date: Thu, 02 Dec 1993 12:04:28 +0000
Subject: Meet
I'm coming from LS6 that morning with a mate so I'll probably try for the Adelphi for lunch-time.
Otherwise Gav, Charles, myself, plus two others have a provisional meeting of 2.30 outside the club shop.
Stuart
From:
Date: Thu, 2 Dec 93 13:24:04 GMT
Subject: Dosh
Not extactly about Leeds, however, I am getting married soon and need the dosh.
Do you know anybody who wants to buy a PC 
Only 7 months old
Price £2000
and a camera 
All 14 months old apart from 35–135 zoom
Price £1450, Cost to buy here after shopping around £2200
Your prices, add £100 to camera and Pc for anybody else
Got any loaded friends!
A desperately skint Leeds fan
Ps.
Scum fans are getting to cocky, unfortunatly I have a few friends and relatives who have not yet seen the light, They think they are unbeatable at the moment and could do the domestic treble.
I not too bothered that Scum Could get to the league cup final and FA cup final (as long as they lose), I hope they do with several replays along the way.
This hopefully will cause them a fixture congestion around April/May with us hopefully been able to pick up the pieces.
From:
Date: 2 Dec 93 16:50:06 GMT
Subject: Roky Erikson
I think you'll find that Mr Byrne is now in fact playing in America, can't remember who for but I did go to his leaving party over the summer.
Sean
From:
Date: 2 Dec 93 16:58:36 GMT
Subject: newcastle (travel report — sort of)(Re: Newcastle-Liverpoo
And whats more the club payed for the flags to be fireproofed when they realised what a potential fire hazard they were.
The generosity of it…
From:
Date: Fri, 3 Dec 93 10:30:27 GMT
Subject: two things…
1)
Any views on Saturdays match?
Will it be as easy as it looks on paper?
2)
Are messages getting through ok?
I have not recieved ‘out for days!!
Glynn
From:
Date: Fri, 3 Dec 1993 11:20:28 +0000
Subject: Can we turn Man City over?
I don't think anything is as easy as it looks on paper in football.
Especially if Speed is in slumber mode.
It seems like if he is asleep the rest of them have a 90m kip too.
If King Ginger Nut turns it on it could be the total rout it should be.
One thing's for certain, Horton is a bollocks manager who couldn't inspire fish to swim.
It'd be good if the home crowd could sing a bit, if only to keep alive the myth that Leeds create an intimidating atmosphere.
Tim
From:
Date: Fri, 3 Dec 93 12:24:33 GMT
Subject: Re: Can we turn Man City over?
Yeah, I think we can beat City OK.
In fact I'll even be super-optimistic for me and predict a clean sheet with Quinn's injury.
2–0 will be about it, I don't think City will come out much even if they go a goal down.
It could be interesting to see how much trouble Rod Wallace causes Curle and Phelan, who are both very quick.
Kev.
From:
Date: Fri, 3 Dec 93 15:11:16 MET
Subject: Meet
I have not received any mail but IS anyone coming to the Adelphi pub tomorrow??
. I will be in there between 12:30 and 1:00.
Halvard how are you doing, i thought you had got stuck at customs for wearing that zip ‘G’ string.
I got home eventually through the snow, sorry we had a bad night maybe better next time.
How was the security guard???(b*&tard).
I hope to see you soon…
Paul Cadd 
From:
Date: Fri, 3 Dec 1993 14:21:17 +0000
Subject: Newsome gets free transfer
No fear not.
The pride and joy of our defence is not about to depart Elland Road for the scum and cause mass calls for Wilko's immediate resignation.
I refer instead to my pet rat, who I have decided to pass on to a new owner due to our having a cat.
That got you all going didn't it, arf arf.
This message is kind of a test, hopefully it won't bounce for Mike of BNR Canada as previous mail of mine did due to an allegedly dormant flag setting.
Cheers Gav.
Tim
From:
Date: Fri, 3 Dec 93 15:53:14 MET
Subject: Meeting!!
Gav,
It is the first room on the right as you go into the pub from the main front door.
I did not get home till 6:00 am on sunday after the spurs game!!! but that's another story.
Hope you can make the meet…paul
From:
Date: Fri, 3 Dec 93 16:15:28 MET
Subject: anna
Halvard,
Do i know her???;-)
Did you ever see the Whalers again??
(Bob, Bunny and Peter Tosh et al)
Have you been of work for a while then with the dreaded flu??. i hope your little one did not catch it it is a particularly strong virus that is going around at the moment.
I've managed to escape it so far.
Hope it doesn't get to me before i see Gary Glitter next week!!!!!!!(what an old codger i am)
Paul
From:
Date: Fri, 3 Dec 93 16:28:00 GMT
Subject: meet
My mate who is driving me to the match tomorrow says he wants to go straight to the ground so I won't be able to get to the Adelphi.
I'll be in the Imperial though if anybody is going there.
I'll be at the end of the bar near the t.v and fag machine.
I'm short (5'7) and my mate is even shorter (5'3, fat and wears glasses).
I'll be wearing/holding a blue suede jacket.
Lets hope for a convincing win.
Mark S
p.s Rocky is in the squad
From:
Date: Fri, 3 Dec 93 11:19:23 GMT
Subject: Re: two things…
In your letter dated Fri, 3 Dec 93 10:30:27 GMT, you wrote: Who are we playing on Saturday??
The messages are fine.
Chris
From:
Date: 3 Dec 93 14:18:32 GMT
Subject: Famous people
Unfortunately not, the only two that I knew were Al (Byrne) and Kev Daly (Who also played in the youth FA cup final) Because I went to school with them — they were both 2 years below me but Al's brother was in my year and Kev went out with a girl who sat in front of me.
Since then my (now ex-) girlfriend was really good mates with the two of them cos she was in their year (Yes I know I'm a paedophile) so that was how I got to go to their 18th birthday parties and Al's leaving do.
Now only if I knew Jamie Forrester tickets may not be such a problem at times…
Sean
From:
Date: Sat, 4 Dec 93 18:52:19 MET
Subject: Leeds 3–2 Man City
Phew, another close squeeze today with a very lucky 3–2 victory over a luckless City side without their main striker Quinn, whose out for the rest of the season with knee ligament problems.
Leeds took an early 2 goal lead with Wallace and Speed on target from Strachans precise crosses (I am lead to believe).
City came back strongly in the second with two goals in five minutes.
There are still problems with central defence as Wetherall was partly to blame for the goals.
The gods were on Leeds side as Deane pushed home the winner from a goal mouth scramble, with little time left in the game.
With the scum being really lucky getting a draw from a good Norwich side, it seemed on the radio at least that Norwich had at least one decent penalty decision turned down from a spineless and gutless referee.
That's my opinion of course;(.
The commentators, who seemed to be pro United, were taken a little aback that at least three scum players weren't booked (at minimum) for bodychecking and other misc. fouls.
The combination of results means that we are clean in second place (two points more than Newcastle in third) and more importantly two points closer to United.
BTW: Leeds were only 4th favourites this morning to win the league at 20/1.
It seems that they (William Hills) still think that Arsenal and Liverpool are better bets for the league.
That may change a tad as both of these teams lost today:-).
James.
From:
Date: Mon, 6 Dec 1993 09:33:47 +0000
Subject: Crewe Alexandra & other stuff
Crewe Alexandra have drawn Leeds at Elland Road for the 3rd round of the FA Cup.
You'd never believe who the shirt sponsor for Crewe is — my employers, Boldon James.
Leeds shouldn't have too many problems with this Hoddlesque side from the 3rd division.
Their hobby is passing to feet — but in their own penalty area.
I have every expectation that this chocolate team will melt in the glare of a warm Elland Road reception.
Even York City beat 'em at Wembley fer chrissakes.
Anyway I watched Manc Of The Day and Norwich made the scum look like complete turkeys, chasing the ball round while the Canaries ‘Southamptoned’ them for lengthy periods.
The referee allowed the reknowned loony Cantona to hurl a canary to the ground without a caution, amongst many unpunished fouls.
Mad Eric has personalised his scum top by wearing the collar standing up and ironing down the front corners to make it look like a cravat — he now looks like Victorian Dad out of Viz. Berk.
I knew it wouldn't be cut and dried vs Man City so I was pleased with the result.
Deano's confidence must have been boosted getting the winner.
Listening to 606 on Radio 5: a scum rang up complaining about Leeds fans anti scum chanting.
He referred to the Man City game which he must have been listening to on Manc Radio.
Then a Leed rang up saying that he was there and that the particular aviatical chant in question had been initially struck up by the away end, and only joined in by a shameful minority (ahem) of Leeds fans.
Apparently a Spurs fan had complained the previous week's 606 that the Leeds had applauded the removal of Nick Barmby's remains from the pitch at White Hart Lane after a tackle by our Johnny Pemberton.
Aren't we heartless?
Actually Pembo's yellow card for that tackle has been withdrawn by the ref in question — the first time such a thing has happened.
The ref reviewed the decision on video and told the FA he'd ballsed up.
Well done that man in black.
Now will Tinkler do the same?????
Tim
From:
Date: Mon, 6 Dec 93 11:10:32 GMT
Subject: Santa…all I want for crimble is…
Dear Santa, as a well respected manager of the best supported premier league team in England please could you find it in your heart to deliever the following.
1.
Please bring me a new central defender or two, preferably youngs ones who know how to play this footy type game.
The ones I've got at the moment are having a little difficulty in working things out, one doesn't realise that it's not best to try to head the ball back to the goalie when there's a man breathing down the back of his neck, the other hasn't been able to find his brain and the oldest one of the lot is always injured.
2.
Sort my love life with Rocky out, we've had a bit of a tiff at the moment, as a result I've had to drop him from the squad completely and he'll probably go and join the scum where he'll show me up like that poncy french bugger who used to play here.
3.
Make the referees apply the rules of the game when reffing Scum games.
Scumtona should have been sent off — and as for the UEFA pannel banning him for 3/4 games — I think the refs phrase should be, oh Eric we don't know why we love you but we do.
4.
Fix it for someone who doesn't love the Scum to present and commentate on Manc of the Day, Alan Hanson's brilliant but the rest seem to have their noses burried up Alex Fergusons behind or even Eric the Fleds.
5.
Please let my team beat the scum at the pigstye on New Years day, especially with a goal in the last 20 seconds.
This will lead to a decline in form for the scum who will choke and finish second leading to mass sucide in the media especially at the BBC, the Times and the Torygraph.
6.
Deport Peter Schmichael for having an out of date work permit, let Scumtona and Hughes run off to the Cayman Islands for a peaceful life together, Ryans potty training to let him down at home games as well as away, Lee Sharpe to OD on E and think he's playing for the best team in the country.
7.
For my team to win the league and cup.
Yours Sgt. Wilko
From:
Date: Mon, 6 Dec 93 12:56:31 MET
Subject: league table — not such great reading though!
I preface my statement by saying ‘look at what we've beaten to get to second?’.
I did a little analysis on the league table last evening and found out that we've beaten *all* the bottom six and haven't played or beaten anyone in the top nine yet!
This is not good news for Leeds who are coming upto a difficult series of games over the next month.
If Wilko wins the manager of the month for December then I will be truly impressed, otherwise it could be bad news:-(.
I see that Wetherall got MOTM for the game on Saturday from one of the tabloids, so much for me saying he was at fault for the goals.
I think Fairclough was at fault for the second goal — trying to be too smart.
Wilko won't be too happy as I think he would have told them by now it's kick first and ask questions later.
Nice to see that it's 13 without defeat in the league — the longest streak I can remember.
I suppose it nice to criticise when you team keeps winning irrespective, though for how long more I can't say.
Anyone with a report?
Paul C?
James.
From:
Date: Mon, 6 Dec 93 12:07:35 GMT
Subject: Re: Santa…all I want for crimble is…
Dear Sgt. Wilko,
Yo ho ho & festive greetings…
of course you'll be aware that I can't grant you any of your wishes…why do you think I'm always wearing RED & WHITE with a little BLACK trim????
I'm the only nice Manc supporter there is…and of course I'm a fairy tale!
Happy Xmas,
Scumta Claus
From:
Date: Mon, 6 Dec 93 13:01:15 GMT
Subject: Re: league table — not such great reading though!
Look at it the other way…at least we ARE beating the lower teams something a lot of ‘mid-table’ sides fing difficult (as do some top of the table sides at times — remember Scum vs West Ham:)))))))).
ALSO we've only lost 3 and at least one of those was ‘unfortunate’ AND they were all clustered in the same period.
AND at least one club (Wimbledon) were above us when we beat them!
That's the +ve side!!
The down side is that we probably have the toughest Xmas/New Year you could image (excluding Crewe!!).
If we can average 1.5–2 pts between now and 8th January (AND beat Scum) we should still be in there with a shout.
Maybe average 1.5->2 is a tough number of points to get BUT over the 6 games 3 wins (Scum/Hammers/Arse) and the rest draws (QPR/Newc/Norw) is just what we need!!!
(Ever the optimist eh!!)
Glynn
From:
Date: Mon, 6 Dec 93 13:49:38 GMT
Subject: Leeds beat Man Shitty — Utd here we come
Should be looking forward to excellent crimble then when we get to play the likes of Norwich, Arsenil and the Scum.
Somehow I can't see us remaining in the number two position — but fingers crossed scumta will strike down our foes and inspire out team to greater things and we'll go on to win the league.
(Cor blimey gov. must have been at the crimble drink already).
If Wilko wins the manager of the month for December I'll be bloody amazed and needless to say extremely drunk.
Didn't he mess up the header/flick on that allowed Sheron to score the first goal?
Fairclough as I think I've maintained all along is probably better in midfield/ the Batts role where his f**k ups are slightly better hidden.
I seem to remember a couple of his headers back to the goalie going astray last year (including one in that humil iating defeat at Man City, 4–0).
When will he ever learn that the best place for a ball that's been knocked over his head and is bouncing awkwardly near the box is somewhere on the M62 (assuming we're palying at home).
The correspondent in the Times and the Guardian have both criticised his defensive errors.
Didn't we have a similar streak about four/five years ago, i.e. the last year Bremner was in charge — this saw us shoot up the second division before an ignominous defeat against Shrewsbury Town (who?) saw us plummet to mid table yet again.
Well here's to a festive crimble — defeats for the Scum and wins for the whites — especially on New Years day.
Chris
PS Does anyone know if Santa is sponsored by Man Utd?
If so can we get him to wear their natty away strips (NOT) you know the interesting black one (YAWN) or the sickening yellow and green job.
From:
Date: Mon, 6 Dec 93 08:23:09 PST
Subject: Re: Crewe Alexandra & other stuff
Like, don't edit yourself dude!
What WAS the aviatical chant in question?
Simon.
From:
Date: Mon, 6 Dec 1993 16:30:26 +0000
Subject: Reproduced for documentary reasons only
Well, alright then.
‘Who's that lying on the runway Who's that lying in the snow It's Matt Busby and his boys Making such a f***in noise cause they can't get the aeroplane to go’
also there's
‘Always look on the runway for ice de-dooh-de-doo etc.’
Another allegation the scum made was that certain Leeds pubs have a happy hour on the date of the Munich crash (Feb 4th?).
I wouldn't know meself.
Tim
From:
Date: Mon, 6 Dec 93 18:05:27 MET
Subject: Manc fans
Re last few What about those particlarly nasty songs that the scum sing about Don Revie having Motor Neurone disease.
They ought to look in their own back yard first!!!!!
Hypocritical bastards
Paul
From:
Date: Mon, 6 Dec 1993 17:35:16 +0000
Subject: Re: Reproduced for documentary reasons only
etc etc
Actually that wasn't sung by anyone at the game on Saturday.
Nor was the dambusters plus aeroplane imitations one performed, or the runway for ice.
I think the 606 manc was referring to previous occasions.
The Man City lot started up ‘if you hate Man United clap your hands’ which naturally had the place in rapturous applause in no time flat.
Nowt offensive about that, happens all the time everywhere.
And no one pointed out that at the Chelsea game, the programme had a huge 2-page spread entitled ‘Stop the Munich song’ in which Strach, Macca, Speedo, and others suggested that singing this stuff is a dumb thing to do.
The Mancs do get ludicrously self-righteous about it, like they chant only Mary-Whitehouse-approved stuff.
The chants which did catch my ear on sat were that newish Brian Deane one again, but I still haven't heard the beginning, I only know it from the ‘scores off the bar, f**k Cantona’ line — anyone else know it in full?
Also there were cries of ‘Judas’ as David Batty was spotted taking his seat to the right of the kop.
Missing us already?
Gav
From:
Date: Tue, 7 Dec 93 12:16:32 GMT
Subject: Gazza 4 Leeds?
There is a report on CEEFAX that say that Wilko has been approached by Lazio re: the sale of one fat Geordie!
Wilko has said he is interested and is keeping tabs on the situation.
Mark (s)
From:
Date: Tue, 07 Dec 1993 13:10:31 +0000
Subject: Song
I gather from a scouser I know that they also have a song about Heysel and Hillsborough.
All I can add is that it is to the Robin Hood theme.
I assume it's a piss-take of the scum song of the same tune about the welsh git running down the wing (football field wing that is and nothing whatsoever to do with aircraft).
Is anyone going to the Hammers tomorrow?
If so, I'm meeting two girls at a cop-shop on the corner of Green Street and there's a pub next to it called the Wagon & Horses.
I'll be there from 6 onwards.
Has anyone anymore news about Gazza?
Stu
From:
Date: Tue, 7 Dec 93 13:08:09 GMT
Subject: Re: Gazza 4 Leeds?
The papers the other day were saying that Blackburn were the most likely club to land Gazza.
Apparently he's costing Lazio thousands & thousands per match and they want to off load the hefty wage to someone else!!
I suppose buying Gazza would make it even less likely that Rocky would get a game;-(
Glynn
From:
Date: 7 Dec 93 13:01:24 GMT
Subject: GAZZA
This morning the Yorkshire post ran a front page ‘exclusive’ story saying that leeds were involved in negotiations to sign Paul Gascoigne from Lazio.
Honest!
The article included quotes from Leslie Silver and a Lazio ‘source’ stating that negotiations had taken place through an intermediary.
Silver said that he feared that if, as reported, Blackburn became involved, he feared Leeds may be outbid.
I don't know what to make of this story.
The YP is more conservative than the YEP and the tabloids, and has been quite trustworthy regarding Leeds stories in the past.
If there is any truth in this, and it seems quite convincing, somebody would surely have to make way for him.
MacAllister?
He said in 90 Minutes the other week that his dream is to play for a big Italian club.
Perhaps an exchange type deal is on the cards.
Ady Harper 
From:
Date: Tue, 7 Dec 1993 09:16:41–0500
Subject: Match report please!
Aaaah
The English papers haven't arrived in this part of the world this week.
Could someone please post a short match report from Saturday (the only one I saw was very very short).
Also could someone post the team list.
As for Gazza, I for one hope we don't buy him.
Leeds are a team unit, not a bunch of individuals.
If we can't blend Rocky in smoothly, I don't see how we'd manage to blend Gazza without pissing off a number of players.
John
From:
Date: Tue, 7 Dec 93 14:58:43 GMT
Subject: Re: Gazza
Apparently Spurs have first refusal on signing Gazza so I wonder what'll happen there.
Also, I bet Gazza would rather go to Newcastle than anywhere else so I wouldn't rule them out.
I think it's a long shot him signing for Leeds.
I'm another who doesn't really want him here…anyway, Wilko would NEVER have anyone that ‘round’ playing for the club!!
Glynn
From:
Date: 7 Dec 93 16:21:32 GMT
Subject: It's happy hour again
Yeah, right!
Course we do…that's just the sort of thing that the scum would think isn't it.
OK so the occasional (!) taunt may be made at a footy game but it IS a football match after all and not a place for the fainthearted.
I mean how many of you out there actually get pleasure from the deaths that occurred???
Not a great deal as suspected.
What the dumb f**ks should get into their heads is that although we are Leeds fans we are also (on the whole) human.
As for happy hours, I'd say that 50% of pubs in Leeds have a happy hour at least once a day so if you were looking for something to celebrate each and every day then this might come up (along with the anniversary of the death of the guy who drove the stephenson steam train on it's maiden journey, and the all too sad occasion of the 7th anniversary of the cat that lived 4 doors down that was callously knocked over by the no. 40 bus)
Sean.
From:
Date: Tue, 7 Dec 1993 16:32:33 +0000
Subject: Gazza
The tantalising thing about Gazza is his play-anywhereness.
He gets all over the pitch, and I could see him fitting in in all kinds of areas, he used to be good for Spurs even when the defence came under pressure, and he'd tackle back, becoming the ball winner.
He could Batty, he could Strachan, he could McAllister, and a great many other things.
That said his fitness has to be 100% for Wilko to play him at all, and he clearly is liable to get himself sent off.
I'd be happier still if we could land a couple of efficient centre backs.
Tim
From:
Date: Tue, 7 Dec 1993 17:11:01 +0100
Subject: match report
Leeds 3 Manchester City 2
Brian Deane conjured up a Leeds winner with five minutes to spare after crisis club Manchester City had staged a spirited fightback at Elland Road.
City, whose power struggle has dominated the season's headlines, continued to struggle on the pitch where they conceded two goals in the first 22 minutes and have now gone nine Premiership games without a win.
But until Deane's late winner it seemed City were on their way to a precious point after manager Brian Horton made an inspired interval substitution.
He replaced Fitzroy Simpson with former Shrewsbury striker Carl Griffiths who created City's first goal for Mike Sheron in the 54th minute and then scored his first Premier goal six minutes later after a suicidal back headewr by Leeds defender Chris Fairclough.
It was a huge shock for Leeds whose class had stood out in a one sided first half.
They hurried into an 11th minute lead when Gordon Strachan's free kick was turned into the path of Rod Wallace by defender Alan Kernaghan, and Wallace duly collected his eighth goal of the season.
With City struggling to defend at set pieces, Strachan again planted a free kick into the penalty area where David Wetherall released Gary Speed whose left foot shot gave Tony Coton no chance.
Leeds should have gone on to pile up a big score but after Wallace had seen a close-range shot blocked by Coton and Gary McAllister's lob was cleared off the line by Kernaghan, the tide turned.
WILKO: NEVER MIND THE TITLE RACE
Leeds cut the gap on runaway leaders Manchester United to 12 points but manager Howard Wilkinson refused to discuss the title race after his side's 3–2 home win over Manchester City.
Brian Deane's winner with five minutes left killed off City's brave fightback and left Leeds unbeaten in 13 Premiership matches, while Manchester United were held to a draw by Norwich.
But Wilkinson said: ‘I am not interested in Manchester United and gaining or losing points on them at this stage.
It really doesn't concern me.’
Wilkinson described his team's display as ‘a Jekyll and Hyde performance’, adding: ‘You can't give away goals like that.
I said at half time that, if the players didn't make silly errors, the game was all over.
But we dropped our guard, lost concentration and suddenly it was 2–2.’
City boss Brian Horton said: ‘I thought we did enough to deserve a point on our second half display.
‘We gave two stupid free kicks away in the first half and didn't clear them at all.
I had strong words about our defending when we went in at half time.
Leeds: Beeney, Kelly, Dorigo, Sharp, Fairclough, Wetherall, Strachan, Rodney Wal lace (Raymond Wallace 89), Deane, McAllister, Speed.
Subs Not Used: Whelan, Luki c.
Man City: Coton, Phelan, McMahon, Vonk, Curle, Kernaghan (Ingebrigtsen 89), Whit e, Sheron, Simpson (Griffiths 46), Lomas, Mike.
Subs Not Used: Dibble.
Att: 33,821
Cheers.
From:
Date: Tue, 7 Dec 1993 14:30:50–0500
Subject: Kevin Sharp
Thanks for the match report Joanne.
I see Kev Sharp made the line up.
Last year didn't he play at right back?
Where was he playing on Saturday — in the Batty role perhaps?
How long is Pemberton out for?
Having had a jinxed left back position it looks like we now have a jinxed central defender position!
John
From:
Date: Tue, 7 Dec 93 12:53:51 PST
Subject: Grazza
Do we know, or could we speculate on Gazza's asking price?
£5m+???(my poxy US spec SPARCstation won't do a pound sign)
Simon
From:
Date: Wed, 8 Dec 93 10:01:18 +0100
Subject: Re: Grazza
don't know the price.
but bbc's ceefax service last night had a new article saying that grizzly gazza was not for sale and that lazio had contacted several clubs but just at a very premature state.
wilkinson was quoted saying that his impression was the opposite (that gazza was in fact for sale)— i guess it's a matter of lazio officials heating things a little up…
yeah — gazza can be macca, batty and even strachan — and what's more he can be cuntona: as good as our midfield is we could have done with a ‘tales of the unexpected’ -type of player — the player who does things no one thinks of before said player actually does it (im not talking about cuntano's new shirt look…)
if maradona can be fit from snorting coke why cant gazza be fit from too much pint&pizza…hey why don't we buy maradona??
scum won 3–0 last night vs sheff utd away and if west ham beat us tonight they will have an impressive 15 point lead over us…
course it will if you only know how to: £
(press R2 (PrSc) in your compose window — select UK english — select set — and type shift 3 — this is if you are using OpenWindows version 3 and just sets this temporary — but there should be no problem setting up a US keyboard as an english one permanently if you so wish (sort of confusing though))
halvard
From:
Date: Wed, 8 Dec 1993 09:47:54 GMT
Subject: Re: Gazza
I agree Gazza's a brilliant player, who would be an asset for any club, but I really don't think we should be getting too excited about this — how could we possibly afford him?
Before the Batty sale we supposedly had an overdraft of 6m quid, so I can't see us being able to spend 4–5m (or whatever he'd cost) on a new player at the moment.
There was an interesting comment in the Guardian this morning, suggesting that Leslie Silver is only professing an interest in Gazza as a kind of public relations exercise, to try to convince us that he is still ambitious for the club after the Batty business.
After all, we weren't the only ones that were approached ‘in secret’ by Lazio, but we seem to be the ones that made it public.
Agreed.
They'd probably be a lot cheaper too.
Andy K.
From:
Date: Wed, 8 Dec 93 10:56:37 +0100
Subject: stuff and hmm, stuff
some shit from over here:
i saw ‘married with children’ last night and boy does that al bundy character look like sgt wilko…
on one of the first days jostein flo came over to sheffield leeds was on the telly playing live and jostein and some other sheffield utd players was watching.
leeds scored and jostein lept up celebrating leeds' goal…the other sheff utd players were needless to say shocked and silenzed and i guess jostein wont be doing too much of this sort of celebration in the future (he, he).
jostein was back in action last night for sheff utd after a long injury — came on on 2–0 to scum.
also leeds-fan tore pedersen made his debut for oldham last night as a substitute.
pedersen, flo and wembley-scorer kjetil rekdal teams up with the press officer for norways national team at our internationals and have a leeds chat or two.
norways coach egil ‘drillo’ olsen today speak up on our international players who are not in their first teams: ‘come home or be wrecked from the national team’(and thus no USA'94)(this in one of the tabloids over here)— the players mentioned are
Paal Lydersen, Arsenal Jan Age Fjortoft, Swindon Stig Inge Bjornebye, Liverpool Kaare Ingebrigtsen, Man City and of course Frank Strandli, Leeds.
none of these are starters for their teams right now and some are not even on the bench (Lydersen, Strandli).
norw paper Aftenposten last saturday had an article mentioning that Leeds and Albacete still are negotating over Fat-Frank.
The other norw. players in the premiership seem certain of holding their places — players like Halle of Oldham, Thorstvedt (Spurs) and the rest of the pack are having a good spell at the moment; Lars Bohinen of Nott Forest has in fact been nicknamed Super-Lars by the fans…
Norway was of course seeded last in FIFA's set up for the world cup (no surprise as FIFA's seeding is just base on recent world cup's).
another chant i remember from the newcastle fans: when 2–0 up vs Scousers they started with ‘You're worse than San Marino, you're worse than San Marino’…let's hope scum will hear that one in a very near future at St. James Park.
BBC Ceefax last night also reported that Leeds had an £ 500,000 (or some other good figure) positive bottom line for the last financial year (ending in june i suppose)— which make the sale of Batty look somehow strange again…
chaw (american for ciao),
halvard /scandinavian whites
From:
Date: Wed, 8 Dec 93 09:43:54 GMT
Subject: maybe
Maybe the thought of buying Gazza was the reason Wilko wasn't to worried about letting old Batty go…maybe the negotiations have been gong on longer than we know…and maybe (just maybe) Wilko has the tape of Urquart in ‘House of Cards’ and will use it to save the Monarchy in return for the deportation of all French players with silly shirts;-)
From:
Date: Wed, 8 Dec 1993 09:41:33 +0000
Subject: Mystery Scandinavian
I was watching the Granada Sport Preview on Friday night with Elton Welsby, sitting half asleep through all the usual crap about City being in crisis, United going to win everything, etc, when all of a sudden I saw a scandinavian player being interviewed about his being signed to Oldham (I think).
Anyway he immediately started saying how he'd been a Leeds fan since the age of five and how his big ambition was to play for them!
The interview ended shortly and our Elt said something about how perhaps he oughtn't say that sort of thing on the Northwestern TV station…
(Granada TV is based in Manchester if anyone didn't know)
Anyway could one of our Nordic Whites confirm the name of this guy.
It was something like ‘Jonnson’ but as I say I was only half interested until he started mentioning how much he loved Leeds.
I bet it really stuck in the throats of all the Mancs watching.
Tim
From:
Date: Wed, 8 Dec 93 11:20:11 +0100
Subject: Re: Mystery Scandinavian
tore pedersen is the name (see my latest posting about ‘stuff’)
sure first pick in our central defence on the national team along with norways only really world class player rune brathseth of werder bremen.
(rune was in fact the only libero to have no weaknesses in an evalution in a recent number of influental german football magazine kicker: good in the air, fast, great tackler, great understanding and so on, in short : the bundesliga's best libero.
Roma wanted to buy Rune a couple of years ago for about £5 mill — but he said no (!), i guess he have all the money he will ever need…)
tore is not that good — but he is quite fast and will improve oldham's defence.
wilko knows about tore but leeds has shown no interest in him other than saying that they know about this player.
halvard
From:
Date: Wed, 8 Dec 93 11:40:46 MET
Subject: What wrong with a bit of publicity?
Silvers has the right idea.
What's wrong with a bit of shit stirring it is certain to get us some inch space?
People will start talking about Leeds and that can't be all a bad thing.
James.
From:
Date: Wed, 8 Dec 1993 10:51:59 +0000
Subject: Poll results
I know it was ages ago I ran it, but here are the final counts in the poll I ran for most missed ex-Leeds — player:
As you can see it was a three way tie between ‘Judas’ Jordan, Pisshead, and he of the stylish shirtcollar.
Poor old Batts was unable to cash in on the (then) current wave of woe over his departure.
Tim
From:
Date: Wed, 8 Dec 1993 11:04:14 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Gazza
‘Gottle a geer’ Gazza would undoubtedly be a tremendous asset to the team, but after Silvers recent professions of poverty, I tend to agree with the Guardian that this is a ‘We are still a big club’smokescreen.
A couple of other points that make the purchase of Gazza highly unlikely.
1.
According to Bradford's local paper, 3 or four clubs were contacted about Gascoigne including Newcastle.
The pulling power of the local working men's club and Newcastle Brown Ale, will constitute far more than Wilko has to offer.
2.
With Wilko's track record on dealings with very skillful, supposedly temperamental players, can anyone honestly see him being interested in Gazza.
Sheridan and Cantona are the prime examples that spring to mind.
Anyway, is there a vacancy in the reserves midfield for a player of Gascoigne's quality!!
Wilko for England.
PLEASE PLEASE!!!
Cheers Roger G.
From:
Date: Wed, 8 Dec 93 12:48:50 MET
Subject: Not fair
Not fair!
I think Wilko is the best we could have possibly gotten in a manager and people (including me unto recently when I was put right) are ready to forget what he's done for the club.
We are, lest I remind you, winning the Premiership race (less the scum:-)) which isn't a bad thing.
We haven't lost in 13 league games 8 of which are wins.
I took a quick look at my Leeds record book last evening and was shocked to find our longest unbeaten runs in the 80's usually consisted of about 70% draws i.e. 9 unbeaten with only 3 wins.
I think it's a case of what we have, we hold.
I certainly don't want Wilko leaving for the graveyard job which is Englands manager.
What about the more immediate objectives?
West Ham will be a tough nut to crack especially with big Lee in good form at the moment.
We can't give him any free headers around the box or else we'll regret it.
He puts his head in a lot of places other people would fear to put their boot.
I think if we harbour any hopes of eventually overhauling the scum this is a game we have to win.
Our last four away games (Ipswich, Wed., Tottenham, Everton) were drawn with us leading in each of the last three, we need a win to put us back on track!
James.
From:
Date: 8 Dec 93 13:42:34 GMT
Subject: Money, money, money
That only means that our overdraft will be cut from stlg6m to stlg5.5m (or whatever it was) ie. We still need the Batty money for this, and future years accounts.
With a turnover of over stlg13m it's quite a small profit margin for any business to be making but I could still do with tickets being half the price they are.
Sean.
From:
Date: 8 Dec 93 13:46:48 GMT
Subject: More famous people
The Imperial is marked with an X, If you were starting form the shop turn left down Elland Road and keep going straight (uphill) for quite a way before you reach a T junction.
Turn right (steeper uphill) and the pub is on the left at the brow of the hill.
There is usually plenty of places to park near here too.
Not content with knowing a small contingent of the Leeds youth squad I also have to admit that the Imperial was managed by a friend of mines dad until about 18 months ago (A Mr. Barrett — anyone know him?)
From:
Date: Wed, 08 Dec 1993 12:54:45–0400 (EDT)
Subject: Lurking
Hello All!
I've been lurking for a couple of months now and I had a couple thoughts:
1)
Thanks for all the match reports!
Living in the middle of the States means its very difficult to get information on English football.
The match reports are read and appreciated!
2)
Does anyone have an idea at just how much money Leeds has to work with right now?
(Or how much they might be willing to put out these days.)
Thanks.
If you will excuse me I must get back to lurking.
Rich h.
St. Louis, Missouri
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 93 09:29:44 +0100
Subject: west ham score
BBC World Service reception was really bad this morning, but I thought I made out:
West Ham 0 Leeds 1
Well?
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 93 09:42:46 +0100
Subject: re: west ham score
yes — 1–0 away vs west ham last night.
rod wallace scored in the last 10. west ham had a shot in the bar and condintions were terrible according to bbc ceefax last night.
that narrows the distance up to scum to 12 points again.
(2. spot) contenders newcastle (rain), norwich and blackburn did not play last night (canaries vs blacburn postponed due to norwich' e-cup involvement (lost 1–0 away to inter, just could not get the goal they needed even if they dominated).
that may mean that we meet a demoralized norwich team away on saturday —or—that they got boosted by their fine performance — ekoku was back after a long time injury for norwich.
halvard /scand whites
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 1993 09:07:09 GMT0BST
Subject: Gary Speed
I see Speed was replaced by Pemberton at half-time last night.
Is he injured, if so, how badly?
Steve
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 1993 09:20:52 GMT0BST
Subject: songs and stuff
I think the second line of the new song is' Brian Deane, Brian Deane, Fergie's in a sweat', but what our Deano does in the first line to put old Taggart-face in that state is anybody's guess.
Still, whatever it is, it's better than singing pathetic songs glorifying plane crashes…
Steve.
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 93 10:09:51 GMT
Subject: Re: songs and stuff
Well, I suppose it has to be something to do with a net!
Brian Deane, Brian Deane, something something net Brian Deane, Brian Deane, Fergie's in a sweat Scores of the bar F* C*ntana Brian Deane, Brian Deane
So who can be 1st to fill in the missing words!!
ditto 
Glynn
From:
Date: Thu, 09 Dec 1993 10:24:01 +0000
Subject: Sheedy-pup Weshtam!
(Match report)
Excuse the inane subject heading but this is the standard call of the average programme seller outside Upton Park.
Well, whoever said conditions were awful was right.
There was a dreadful swirling wind last night complete with lashing rain that probably put paid to what would have been a very good match (even so it was adequate).
An overall impression was that both teams played well.
West Ham look a good outfit, they pass the ball around well in the midfield but are crap when they get it in the box.
Notable for sheer donkeyness is Trevor Morley (at one point even Chappie was yelling at him to get his arse in gear).
The game probably had a draw written all over it as there wasn't much between the two teams in terms of possession and goal chances (the Hammers probably sneaked the latter).
In the first half Leeds concentrated on attacking down the left wing.
McAllister or Strach would feed it out to Sharp (who was absolutely brill — see below) who would either wait for the overlap from Dorigo or take on Breacker (skinning him most of the time).
As with Man City though, Deane's flick-on's often went in the wrong direction but he had the beating of Potts nearly all the time.
In midfield Strach and Mcallister looked good although Speed was ineffectual (big word!).
West ham had a couple of good shots on goal one of which Beaney tipped over the bar in spectacular fashion.
The second half was better.
Speed was substituted early on and Pemberton came on giving Fairclough a hand (although neither Chapman or Morley tested them for pace — basically because they haven't got any).
Leeds switched tactics slightly and brought Kelly in more and more so that West ham were being skinned on both wings.
Unfortunately the crossing in was poor and our best chances came when Strach, Sharp, or Mcallister ran at the defence (good tackling denied Strachan a certain goal).
Kelly also looked good at taking on the opposition but his final shot was appalling.
The goal was slightly obscured by a post in front of me (in seats that did not have an ‘obstructed view’ according to the tickets!).
I'm not sure who fed the ball through to Wallace but he took the shot brilliantly.
West ham came back strongly winning a few cormers.
But as always, they crossed into the penalty area and Pemberton cleared.
Still, the final whistle was a great relief.
On Sharp: I was impressed with him against Man City but he was excellent last night.
He runs the length of the pitch, tackles hard, and does some good passes (i.e. Batty).
However, he also takes on players (and runs in the right direction), and has excellent ball control.
He is one of those players that when he gets the ball can turn it on and do something magic.
Even the Hammers around me were impressed.
A new star?
Bit early to say of course but it looks very promising.
Couldn't see why Speed was substituted but he wasn't playing well (see previous matches); the West ham ground is looking quite impressive with the building of the new Bobby Moore stand; and Beaney should have been booked for time-wasting (blatant) but the ref let him off.
12 points the gap.
On Staurday when the results went our way the papers were full of the scum ‘slipping’.
They then went and beat Sheff U (big deal), on a night when no-one else played so they temporarily extended the lead to 15 points, and the bookies decided to take no more bets on them.
Can anyone tell me why???????
Stuart
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 93 10:24:55 GMT
Subject: West Ham
A good result for us that…our first double for a while:-)
I managed to listen to commentary on Capital Gold.
The guys there were obviously routing for West Ham BUT were very complementary to Leeds ESPECIALLY Sharp & Wetherall (who won MOTM for his work in keeping Lee quiet).
The impression I got was that Leeds started off REALLY well with a totally dominant mid-field, that West Ham started to make a game of it but that the weather got worse & worse and the game just degenerated.
Highlights on Sportsnight didn't show much.
Sharp possibly should have scored in 1st half.
He was put through with just the keeper to beat who saved well & Shaprt hit the bar from the rebound.
West Ham had a few good shots (bar & post).
Pemberton hit the post from a long way out for Leeds.
Wallaces goal was nice.
Beeny overarm through to Dorigo.
Dorigo ran down inside left 30–40 yards unchallenged, hit a through ball which Wallace ran across from right centre onto.
He took it into the box where the keeper came out & spread well, but Wallace knocked it over him into the right side of the net.
Really clinical.
Steve Coppell was slagging the goal of saying ‘2 passes, 90 yards goal…blah blah…’.
as if Dorigo was WRONG to run into space with the ball.
NO wonder he's out of a job.
Perfect England candidate I'd say!
Glynn
From:
Date: 9 Dec 93 12:04:37 GMT
Subject: Re: songs and stuff
Brian Deane, Brian Deane, something something net Brian Deane, Brian Deane, Fergie's in a sweat Scores of the bar F* C*ntana Brian Deane, Brian Deane
So who can be 1st to fill in the missing words!!
A few suggestions for the first line:
BD, BD, goes fishing with a net
BD, BD, How shit can man U get (I wish!)
BD, BD, Entangled in the net
BD, BD, Someone point out the net
BD, BD, something something net (Original!!)
BD, BD, If he scores I'll win my bet
BD, BD, The greatest player I've met
BD, BD, would score if only let
Time presses on must dash…
Sean
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 1993 12:20:31 +0000
Subject: Brian Deane
Puts it in the net, maybe?
Incidentally was anyone else as f***ed off as me with Radio 5 doing commentary on the red scouse (mid table going nowhere) playing QPR (ditto), and making that the major headlining game instead of Leeds (second in the table) against West Ham (reviving at the moment)?
Even after we won the game they still ended the show with a rerun of the goal that won the Liverpool game!!!
So we did the double over someone for the first time since beating Sheff United in the championship winning game.
Heady stuff.
Now let's give the Canaries a good pasting.
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 93 13:44:59 GMT
Subject: Re: Brian Deane
Yes I'm as f***ed off as you!
I had just assumed that the only possible commentary game was West Ham vs Us. 8thvs9th or 2ndvs10??
Especially after all the hype about 15pt gap you'd have thought that they'd have been looking at the ‘nearest rival trying to close the gap!!’.
From:
Date: 9 Dec 93 13:15:17 GMT
Subject: Place your bets please
I think you'll find that all bookies except Hills have suspended bets on the scum.
Hills are still offering the magnificent odds of 1–7 on, because, according to their spokesperson, Man U have a habit of buggering it all up (Heh, heh, heh — don't we know)
What i want to know is what are the odds that they WILL bugger up.
If anyone is offering decent odds it could be worth a few quid
Ideal scene — Man U bugger up (again) AND I make pots of money out of it!!!
If only everything in life were so reliable…
Sean.
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 1993 14:00:21 +0000
Subject: Deane song suggestions
For the something something how about just
‘charging for the’ or ‘running to the’
or even
‘logging on the’
Spose that can be our Official List Version 8-)
Talking of logging on the net, whatever happened to Tony Dorigo's mum??
She still isn't on the list (as far as I can see).
Yep.
Gav.
From:
Date: 9 Dec 93 13:23:21 GMT
Subject: Deane song
Some more suggestions:
we're 6 million quid in debt.
Has an interesting and exotic pet.
Has a sister called Yvette.
Is a lanky Chapeltown get.
Walks on water without getting wet.
Drives a Vauxhall Chevette.
Ady.
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 93 09:55:03 MET
Subject: Great win IMHO — West Ham 0–1 Leeds
Vincent,
You heard right.
The league isn't dead yet!
Leeds scored through Wallace with 7 minutes to go in an evenly matched game.
Both West Ham and Leeds had good chances to score with Pemberton hitting the post during the second half.
I don't know anything about Wallaces goal even though I heard the match report on the 12:00 A.M. BBC 5 sports news.
He mentioned the goal but I don't remember recounting how it took happened.
If he did I must have been asleep.
14 unbeaten with 9 wins.
Tough nut again on Saturday at Norwich.
I would like to avoid defeat partly as it would avoid the first league double against us in three years and to keep the unbeaten run together.
With the scum playing at high flying Newcastle, a win could possibly move us to within single digit points range of the scum whose fans incidently are becoming more insufferable with every day that passes.
I though when they won the league they were bad but it is getting worse with each passing day.
They need to be taught a lesson!
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 1993 13:08:54 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: New years day scum
Does anyone know if Sky are covering the new years day match against the scum.
Getting hold of tickets for the game is like getting hold of the proverbial rocking horse s**t i.e. a bit difficult.
Even scum season ticket holders can't get any extras (yes I do know some, and yes I have asked them about tickets).
There has been some talk of screening the game at Elland Road, but i'd prefer to recover from the previous nights over indulgence down at the boozer, rather than in the West Stand.
Any info anybody.
Cheers Roger G
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 1993 09:30:39–0500
Subject: Line-up
Can someone post the line-up from the West Ham game, please?
I think 1–0 against West Ham is a good result.
They've had some good results themselves recently (thanks to Chappie), and we did well to avoid dropping points.
Rod Wallace seems to be in his best spell of scoring since he came to Leeds.
Any comments from those who've seen him in action?
John
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 1993 14:26:39 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: West Ham
Some of you may be pissed off that the game wasn't on R5, but you can't be as pissed off as me.
I made a last minute decision to go to this game.
We had to stand in the pissing down rain, with the cockney scum, and whats more I could only see one goal, and not even the goal that we scored in.
I personally think Upton Park is a complete shit hole (for standing anyway).
What's more, I got back home late, and missed most of the match on Sportsnight.
Well pissed off!!!!, but at least we won:-)
Sunil
BTW hasn't the Norwich game been moved to Monday for SKY?
From:
Date: 9 Dec 93 13:50:28 GMT
Subject: Help (Diverse)
OK this concerns Leeds-united in as much as I'm going to write in my CV that I'm a fan.
I need to do a CV for tomorrow and basically haven't a clue about structure or content.
I guess they'll want to know about schools, qualifications etc but is there a particular order in which these should be presented??
A brief structural guide is all I'm after…and then my tutor won't kill me and give me bad references for being a lazy git (which I admittedly am)(This was supposed to be in last july!!!)
All suggestions greatfully received
I'll just stick in something about footy to make it slightly relevant:
Did anyone go to the screening of the west ham game at elland rd last night?
From what I could gather they were showing in in the area where the new ticket office is, as opposed to a bit screen on the pitch facing the east stand as they propose for the scum game (And they're getting a beer license for this too!!!!!).
Twas not the best night for standing around in the cold wind and rain (OK so it's undercover, but the wind don't half blow through there) watching telly (and paying a fiver for the priviledge of doing so)
It seems yonks since leeds were last on TV, the pleasure of going down the pub and getting tanked whilst being generally rowdy and watching the footy is a joy to behold, second only to actually going to the game itself…not long to go now…
Sean
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 1993 15:05:48 +0000
Subject: Jon Newsome Song
(Robin Hood tune)
Jon Newsome Jon Newsome
In the Leeds defence
Jon Newsome Jon Newsome
Not worth twentypence
Goes for the ball
Scores an own goal
Jon Newsome Jon Newsome
(c) Tim K 1993
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 1993 15:29:50 GMT
Subject: Norwich game — when is it?
I thought it was Sunday?
Can anyone confirm this?
Andy K.
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 1993 15:33:02 GMT
Subject: Re: Line-up
I think it was:
Pemberton came on as sub for Speed (ankle injury)
Andy K.
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 93 15:37:50 GMT
Subject: Re: Jon Newsome Song
Neato.
It's reminded me of something.
What is the fastest goal in the premier league so far this season?
After just 54 seconds?
Yep — that scintillating Jon Newsome goal for the Arse, against Leeds, on 24th August.
If this is still the case next May he apparently wins a Swiss watch from The Sun in honour of the acheivement!
Gav
From:
Date: 9 Dec 93 14:55:52 GMT
Subject: Cuando est??
Just a little point of interest, how many people are on this thing nowadays?
I've only been on since I read that thing in the square ball, and I suppose loads must have done the same as me and jumped on the bandwagon.
Sean
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 93 16:16:13 GMT
Subject: USA READERS
USA READERS
I've just heard that the ‘irish channel’ will be showing the Arsenal vs Leeds match on December 18th
Also they'll show Scum vs Newc on the 11th.
You probably all knew this…but just in case I thought I'd let you know.
Glynn
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 1993 16:03:08 GMT
Subject: Re: Norwich game — when is it?
I bloody well hope it's on Monday night cos I've just arranged my entire work schedule around it.
If anyones around leeds at the time the two pubs I would suggest going to to watch it are The Pack horse in town (where they put it on in a private room upstairs for our convenience) or the Fav up near the Uni where they have about 20 screens and away fans get regularly beat up!!!!
I'll probably be in the latter being short if anyones on the lookout.
Sean
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 93 16:28:19 GMT
Subject: Re: Cuando est??
Wow — that's a first!
Last time I asked who'd come on from reading TSB, no one replied.
Loads?
Dunno.
I think most people heard about it from r.s.s., but I hope some have come on from TSB.
Anyway, there are 98 people on now (there are more names than that on the list cos some people are on twice for various reasons).
You can see the list of members by sending a message to  which says REVIEW LEEDS-UNITED.
I was going to make a song and dance when we got the 100th subscriber, but 98's near enough.
Less than 6 months ago there were approx half a dozen people each using makeshift alias lists; now there's 100 of us world-wide, literally.
Japan, New Zealand, Oz, US, the lot.
Even Bradford.
Good eh?
Did we ever get a mention in the programme?
Mark S. sent them summat, but I've not seen us there yet.
Maybe we should try again on that one.
Gav
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 1993 17:15:37 GMT
Subject: On and on
Loads?
Dunno.
I think most people heard about it from r.s.s., but I hope some have come on from TSB.
You may be surprised, I know of at least 4 people that have only joined since the article was in TSB.
What's r.s.s. anyways???
Bradford — cultural (& curry capital of england)
Just think — the days when Leeds vs Bradford used to be the big game of the season only a few years back (One of which was my first leeds game!!)
Sean.
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 1993 15:46:09 GMT
Subject: Line-up
Can someone post the line-up from the West Ham game, please?
Beats me why you would want to know though…unless you're a secret hammers fan!
Sean
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 93 09:43:54 PST
Subject: Re: On and on
r.s.s is rec.sport.soccer newsgroup on the net use the rn command and g rec.sport.soccer and embark on an 8 month debate on why Pele is better than Maradona.
Usually it's a complete load of crap, with one or two interesting (to me!:-)) postings in the several hundred that appear every day.
I think it's about to fragment into different groups for english football, internationals etc…which would be better.
Simon
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 93 18:40:05 MET
Subject: Christ don't remind me!
I still remember those balmy (not!) days when we used to go to Bradford and Carlisle and be happy coming home with a draw.
Those *were* the days.
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 9 Dec 1993 18:44:24 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: TSB
With all this talk about TSB, I was wondering if anyone could help me out.
I want to subscribe to TSB, but I've only got ancient copies of it, and don't know how much it costs to subscribe thesedays, what the address is and who to make the cheque out to and all that.
First to tell me wins a signed photo of Jon Newsome:-)
Sunil
PS yes it was a joke about the photo,(just incase anyone is mad enough to claim it).
From:
Date: Fri, 10 Dec 1993 08:37:27 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Norwich game — when is it?
On Thu, 9 Dec 1993, wrote:
Definitely Monday
Roger G
From:
Date: Fri, 10 Dec 1993 08:15:29 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Line-up
On Thu, 9 Dec 1993, wrote:
Knee ligament injury according to my evening paper.
Possibly a convenient excuse to get him out of the team, the way he's playing at the moment?
Roger G 
From:
Date: Fri, 10 Dec 93 13:04:29 GMT
Subject: Re: Christ don't remind me!
In your letter dated Thu, 9 Dec 93 18:40:05 MET, you wrote: Twas my first home game, Leeds vs Bradford one Wednesday evening, I can still remember the electric atmosphere at the ground.
The crowd were going absolutely mad and the noise was amazing, I believe although I can't be too sure that there was a song about the Bradford fire at Valley parade which was quite sick.
The game was excellent — the only problem being we just managed to draw 3–3 — ahh well those were the days (NOT!).
No the days were playing Shrewsbury Town at home — going in 2–0 down at half time — getting back to 2–2, hitting the f**king post and then conceeding a goal in the last 5 minutes.
Those were the days when you felt like wrapping your car round a bloody tree.
Chris
From:
Date: Fri, 10 Dec 1993 08:00:19–0600
Subject: team news?
Any news on the team to play at Norwich tomorrow?
With Speed out, does Rocastle get to start?
Joo
From:
Date: Fri, 10 Dec 93 15:42:15 +0100
Subject: sorReE: nO team news?!
the game is on monday…broadcasted live over here in europe by SkySport. which means that halvard will leave home heading for a pub with SkySport and probably a pint or five (depends on the result)…
probably, maybe, maybe not.
maybe Howard ‘Al Bundy’ Wilkinson will feature the young favorite of the group Jon ‘the gruesome’Newsome in a leading role in this TV-drama (NOT! i guess…)
lets hope scum go down for the geordies tomorrow (match of the day in norway)!(hmm — my futba-english justs keeps improving doesn't it;-])
marching on together,
halvard
From:
Date: Fri, 10 Dec 1993 14:35:48 GMT
Subject: Bradford game
Yeh, I remember that game, I was there too, standing in the Kop.
A great game for the neutral fan, but infuriating for the rest of us.
I've never seen two sides defend so ineptly in all my life.
I also remember being extremely ashamed at some of the racist chants the Leeds fans were coming out with that night.
At least we seem to have got rid of that sort of thing now.
Andy K.
From:
Date: Fri, 10 Dec 93 13:11:08 GMT
Subject: Roll up Roll up
I hope so — the thought of the scum winning the league two years running makes my blood curdle.
Besides even if they didn't win it again for the next two million years we'd never hear the end of it.
I haven't seen anything — what are the odds on Leeds winning?
Don't forget Leeds winning instead — the best scenario would be Leeds winning on goal difference by scoring in the last minute.
Chris
From:
Date: Fri, 10 Dec 1993 20:11:14 GMT0BST
Subject: famous friends-not!
If there was one (albeit very small) consolation about the sale of Dave Batty, it was that it finally did away with an important inferiority complex of mine — was I the only person in West Yorkshire not to be best mates with the man??
Everywhere you went, whenever you met a Leeds fan, he/she was sure to be best mates with our old hero.
Some of these stories were undoubtedly true — I definitely knew some lads who played in the same city of Leeds schoolboys team as him, etc.
But there was certainly a lot of crap talked about him as well.
You'd travel down to the game on a Saturday, and if you met a Leeds fan at the train station, you could be sure that they were the best mate he'd ever had, and they'd tell you all the latest gossip that he'd told them the last time they were out for a few pints.
The best story was a couple of years ago — the season we won the title.
I have a couple of mates who are Forest fans, and I got them tickets for the first game of the season.
When I met them after the game and asked them what they thought, they said the highlight was listening to the girl behind them telling her mate that if Batty didn't start playing better then she'd have to start denying him sex!!!
So I can honestly say that I've never known anyone who's ever played for Leeds.
What about everyone else — ever been a mate, colleague, love-child of anyone who's ever played for us?
Mind you, I was in a pub in Manchester a few months ago when Eric Le Prat walked in, but that's a different story…
Steve.
From:
Date: Sun, 12 Dec 1993 16:00:25 GMT
Subject: Rocky the owl
Going by todays tabloids (So it must be true!!)
Rocky is to be rescued by Sheffield wednesday for stlg1.8m.
Mere speculation or is there an element of truth about one of their stories for once????
Sean (Being really sad and coming in to the library on a sunday to do some work)
From:
Date: Sun, 12 Dec 1993 16:09:03 GMT
Subject: famous friends-not!
So I can honestly say that I've never known anyone who's ever played for Leeds.
What about everyone else — ever been a mate, colleague, love-child of anyone who's ever played for us?
Mind you, I was in a pub in Manchester a few months ago when Eric Le Prat walked in, but that's a different story…
As I've mentioned/bragged/gloated previously I know two of the leeds youth team who won the Youth FA Cup final against the scum earlier this year at ellamd rd (And my first venture into Mt.
East Stand) Neither of them are now at leeds, one is playing in the USA and the other is dossing around for a year (so he says) before trying to get in with a lower division club.
I did see gordon in town a few weeks ago though if that counts for anything…
All I can say about the cuntona incident is why is he still walking?
Nothing against him (MUCH!) but if a brawl had developed and he (Accidently) got his legs broken I would have been full of sorrow (NOT!)
Good to see that they dropped 2 more points yesterday…if we can get a win tomorrow it will put them in a more realistic range, even though kevin keegan said in todays papers that Leeds didn't stand a chance of catching the scum!
I used to like him too…
Sean
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 93 10:00:59 GMT
Subject: Re: Sheedy-pup Weshtam!
(Match report)
No, I could never work that out.
Even if it gets to the stage where they are bound to win it, the bookies could just reduce the odds to something like 1–100 on.
That way, any bets taken could be put in a bank or something and earn more than enough interest to pay out the sad scum twat who made the bet.
I know a bookie so I'll ask him about it.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 1993 10:20:27 +0100
Subject: Rocky/Tonight
The bit about Rocky going to Wednesday was in the News of the Screws.
I didn't actually read it, but a friend of mine quoted the figure of 1 million.
Either way, if it's true, then we will lose close on a million on the overall deal.
However, having said that, CEEFAX reckoned that Speed and Pemberton are out for tonight and state that Rocky and Hodges should get a look in.
I assume Fairclough will drop back and one of the two will fill his role (I'd vote for Rocky with Hodge on the bench).
Question for people in the Leeds area.
After the Man City match we walked back to the Adelphi but it was shut.
A Sam Smith's pub opposite was open but strangely not full of victorious Leeds fans.
Could someone confirm our worst fears? we had a very hurried pint and then ‘made our excuses and left’.
Stuart
P.S. I don't know anyone famous from Leeds but I did know Mervyn Day when he played for West Ham.
Does that count?
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 1993 10:21:01 GMT0BST
Subject: Sports personality of the year
Was anyone else as terrified as me at the prospect of the Scum getting the team of the year award last night?
It goes without saying that they don't deserve it, but considering how much the Beeb fall over themselves to shower praise on them, I thought it was a certainty.
While I'm not a rugby union man myself, I've never been so pleased to see Will Carling and the boys get an award.
Mind you, I can't remember Leeds getting the same kind of coverage a year ago that the Scum got last night.
Strange, that…
Steve.
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 93 10:30:16 GMT
Subject: Re: Sports personality of the year
I think we can also thank Ga-lata-saray, Galatasaray.
(He He He).
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 93 11:55:26 MET
Subject: flashback!
I had a flashback on Saturday listening to the build up to the Newcastle-scum game when the commentator described the third goal (I think) of the scum's against Sheff.
Utd. the previous Wednesday.
It was described thus (does it ring any bells?):
two passes…ninety yards…nine seconds…defence splitting…shot off the post…goal…
Hint: Remember the report of the West Ham game someone posted to the conference?
It was described as a goal which epitomises the best that the scum are at the moment?
While, when Leeds scores a similar (except better effort) bollex head (Coppell) describes it as a lucky passage of play and not from a great footie team.
James.
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 93 11:29:41 GMT
Subject: Re: flashback!
You see when Scum play passes like that it's ‘running into space & playing through the channels’.
Wheras when the rest of the league do it its called ‘hitting a long ball for the target man’.
That's because Scum have taken football to another level of skill (how do you show sarcarsm in e-mail??).
Yeah…but fortunately Steve ‘my teams play passing football (not!)’
Coppell will be out of management for at least 2 years (unless he's offered the England job!!)
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 1993 12:10:36 +0100
Subject: LIKE A VIRGIN
This is my first letter to this magnificent mailing networky thing (except it is'nt really because i had one sent back the other day, but thats another story) This is also going to be my last for a while as I'm going back home to newcastle tomorrow.
(If you noticed, the ‘N’ in newcastle was not a capital because the scabby ba****ds dont deserve it.
If anyone else lives there they'll know what I mean) My intense dislike for them grows day by day, just like my overdraught.
Anyway I'm straying.
Back to the point.
Someone mentioned the Golden Olden days of Bradford & Co.
My first memories of a Leeds match were standing on a soapbox with my dad, when we scored a goal.
The good old pre-Taylor Report surge occured, I was flung about fifteen foot in the air, the soap box splintered, my dad acrobatically caught me in his teeth, and this big evil looking bloke got a nail in his leg from the now flattened soapbox.It was better than staying up late to watch an American Werewolf in London.The rest is history, and I've been going ever since.
(Apart from the last 2 bleak and miserable years, where I've only managed to get to about 10 games because of my new secret life as a student.)
And yes that includes the Championship year, just in case any of you smug b*****ds realised.
It's bad enough for me, imagine living abroad.
Nah let's not!
Leeds 2 Leicester 1 — This is probably the most memorable game I've ever been to.
Forget 91–92, I saw grown men reduced to tears of joy that day.
1–0 up and cruising, macca let's rip with a thunderbolt.
Rumours of both Newcastle and Sheffield winning 10–0 are rife.
Macca lets rip with another beast, merv dives to his left and miracuously the score remains 1–1.
5 minutes left LEEDS apply the pressure, the ball rebounds to Strachan at the edge of the area, the ball flies in the top corner and I've never felt as much relief around Elland road.The rest is history.
Then again though i did miss most of the games in 91–92, so maybe I'm biased.
Finally I for one wouldnt be too bothered if Howard left.What he has done for the club will always be remembered, but no one man is bigger than the club (apart from maybe Don), and I have it from a very good source that if Howard leaves the club, Leeds will soon run into 15 million quid.Is he worth that much?
I personally dont think so.
I was going to finish there without saying any more because i cant be arsed writing, but basically there is a rich business man who has remained in the background because he dislikes Howard.Once Howard leaves, the money should come rolling in, or so the story goes.
This is supposedly a well known fact in certain circles.I heard it from a segment of this circle.
What an exclusive!
I'm gonna finish here.
This letter has taken me ages, i'm off for some food.
Here's hoping for a Merry Christmas.
MAGI (Nickname).
I thought I might as well get personal.
P.S If this letter doesnt get there I'm gonna give up, so if it does will someone acknowledge it so I know it has'nt been a waste of time.
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 93 12:27:10 GMT
Subject: Calling Declan + Steve
Declan, could you send me your address I've got some more programmes to send.
Steve Walsh could you get in touch again re saturday?
Sorry everybody else!
I have still not managed to get to a meet!
Any body interested for the Arse game?
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 93 12:20:59 GMT
Subject:?
I have been in Paris for 4 days and just got back to read the 100 messages from the list!
The game vs Norwich is on Sky at 8 tonight.
Speeds injury looks quite serious, Wilko says he doesn't know when he will be fit.
I've been thinking about Wilko's choice of subs (as well as the starters) he seems to pick players for the bench one week and then not in the squad for the next (e.g Strandli, Forrester, Ray Wallace) Hopefully he will play Rocky tonight.
Ray Wallace, if playing well would be good cover as he can play midfield or right back.
If Kelly got injured, he could play there, if Dorigo got injured he could play in midfield and have Sharp as left back.
He could play midfield if any other midfielders had to be taken off and if his bro' or Deano were in trouble he could play right back with Kelly up front.
We would only need cover for centre-half and of course we have big — bad — jon for that!
Why can't Leeds loan Strandli out (back to IK Start).
That way he will be playing 1st team footbal and still belong to us.
We did this over the summer.
I used to be close mates with The head chef of the goal-line restaurant.
He has some good tales.
EG Vinnie throwing a scotch egg at him and Bobby Davison getting pissed and falling asleep in the restaureant only to wake up with flu and miss loads of games (the papers said it was a recurrance of his knee injury)!
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 93 12:34:47 GMT
Subject: Batts child abuse
In your letter dated Fri, 10 Dec 1993 20:11:14 GMT0BST, you wrote:
Well to jump on the bandwagon I used to go to the same school as Batts and although he's a couple of years older than I am one of my friends sisters used to beat him up.
I know it's a bit of tenuous link but there we are — other than that I've no great claims to knowing any Leeds players
Cheers Chris
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 93 12:58:50 GMT
Subject: Re:?
Speed missing maybe isn't that big a problem (!).
I mean, Sharp's playing well wide left; move Macca inside him; and Rocky inside Strachan should be a pretty good mid-filed line up.
The bigger problem is Pembers.
IMHO he's really helped make the back division look much better (by our standards anyway;-)) and him out *could* leave a big hole back there.
I suggested this a while ago.
The only reasons I can think of are 1) trying to scare Deano into scoring (!); and 2) work permits.
glynn
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 1993 13:08:05 GMT
Subject: Straight or bent?
Having been at the game with magi, once we had finished the joyous celebrations (The following christmas:-)) we were talking about the killer goal from strach.
He maintains that it went straight as i die, whereas I think that it curled and dipped (not to any great extent) into the top right corner.
Can anyone confirm this???
Sean
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 1993 14:31:41 +0100
Subject:
What time is the Norwich — Leeds match being played.
Thanks in advance
Mads
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 93 14:57:38 MET
Subject: Newcastle new favourites for second!
I see that Newcastle are now favourites (3/1) to finish second, I presume to the scum.
Where are Leeds in this equation?
It's seems to be that Leeds are still a good bet to finish second at 4/1+.
James.
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 93 15:10:28 +0100
Subject: Re:?
1)
agree
2)
this is not an issue anymore.
from the first of 1 january 1994 a treaty between the EC and EFTA open up the previous regulations for work permits between the countries of the EC (or maybe EEC?— eg Great Britain, Spain, Germany + 10 and EFTA (Norway, Sweden, Switzerland + a couple of others).
the first players to take advantage of this is alf inge haaland who will join nottingham forest and ole bjorn sundgot who will join oldham.
both players have agreed their personal terms long ago and at least haaland will travel to england to join forest on new years day.none of these two players would have had a chance under the old rules for work permits — both are under-21's for norway and both have not been playing for norways world cup team.
haaland is a central defender and sundgot is an attacker; both talented — though i value fat-frank far higher than sundgot. so two vikings at forest and three (!) at oldham — so norway's tally just keeps growing as the biggest contigent of non-english players — which is quite amazing — for years we had just the odd-player like aage hareide (man city and norwich), einar aass (nott forest — i imagine his english team-mates had some fun with his name:-]) and erik the viking at spurs but nowadays you need a computer to have control…
anyway frank —is—wanted by Start on a new rental deal this spring so that might be an option for him — for his sake i hope the deal with albacete will come through — for my own and leeds i hope he will still stay at leeds — he is a great talent and clearly is a man for the future.
is frank in fact playing for the reserves or is he totally ‘put in the freezer’?
well just six hours to go to that vital clash vs the canaries — i predict a 2–1 win for us and scum getting shaky and cantona leaving an monkeys growing out of my butt and…
halvard 
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 1993 14:07:05 +0000
Subject: Cantona
On the subject of that Cantona deal last season.
I was reading a scum book at the weekend and in it Fergie was saying how Martin Edwards had cut Leeds down to 1 million for Eric the Fled by saying they only got him for 800k.
Fergie says he blurted out ‘that's a steal’ when Edwards told him.
If the rumour I heard, that privately the deal was 1.8 million, was true then why do they have to go about making Leeds sound stupid in their propaganda.
It just makes you hate them even more.
Howard never says stuff against them.
If what he says in the scum book is true then how could we let that happen, surely Blackburn could have been squeezed for a goodly 3 squiddlys.
Makes you sick don't it.
What REALLY pissed me off though was Girly Perm Keegan saying he could understand Leeds selling Le Turd because ‘he had too much class for them to handle’.
Six months in the top flight and he thinks he's f***ing Brian Sewell to the football world.
What a c***.
Tim
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 1993 15:04:28 +0000
Subject: Leeds Utd on the WWW?
Hi,
I was thinking of sticking some pages on the World Wide Web for this great team and was wondering if anyone has done this already.
If not what information would be useful.
A few ideas I thought of are:
The squad
list of scorers
match reports
league table
list of fixtures, results to date etc etc
Oh and not forgetting a **** the scum page — popular songs & phrases.
Its just an idea — mail me or the group with any suggestions.
Ade
internet: X.400: G=adrian; S=thomson; O=nexor; PRMD=nexor; ADMD=cwmail; C=gb
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 1993 08:58:49–0600
Subject: Canaries at home
Fact: Norwich's record at home thus far is 2 wins, 3 drawn, 2 losses.
They have only scored 3 and let in 4 at home.
So can we do the job tonight?
Won't be easy but I predict a 3–2 win.
Joo
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 93 15:19:38 GMT
Subject: Re: Cantona
Well, I'm glad to see more & more people are realising that Keegan is a complete twat!
Like he handles his team so well his top striker pisses off home the day of a cup match & they get knocked out — that's what I call top quality management!!!
Newcastle are a team that are pushing Scum close as ‘bastards I most hope get demoted to division 3 & loose a play off final to Scarborough’.
This is mainly because of Keegan (but partly 'cos my wife's family are Geordies) as I actually have a lot of time for the individual players (Beardsley/Cole/ Sellars especially).
It really makes me sick.
All you ever hear is how great football teams like Newcastle/Chelsea/West Ham/Liverpool/Scum have always played (even Wolves got a mention somewhere the other day), & how they always stick to thier principles.
I don't mind Chelsea/West Ham getting a bit of praise as they have managers who appear to be ‘good lads’ & making the best of the resourses thay have.
But f***ing Newcastle…we didn't get this much parise our first season back…and I think we were doing as well as they are.
grumble grumble…bloody conspiracy theories…grumble…all trying to get Leeds grumble.
Anyway, on a brighter note…apparently the Arsenal mailing list are pissed off by the Scum mailing list for slagging them off.
An Arsenal friend of mine admitted that all he wanted at the moment was for Leeds to catch Scum.
So the whole country is starting to term against them.
HAHAHAHAHAHAHAHA!!
Glynn (ranting on an on)
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 93 15:14:31 GMT
Subject: Villa Match
Does anybody know when you can apply for tickets for the Villa game on Jan 3rd.
I assume this will be an afternoon kick-off as it is a bank holiday?
I will use the fax method to get ticks.
Is the kop season ticket/, members only as that would be my preference?
I assume kop tickets will be harder to come by.
As i want to be certain of something, I need to know the prime time to apply, to be sure of getting something I suppose.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 93 15:40:05 GMT
Subject: Re: Cantona
I agree, he's been a right arsehole this weekend, with that plus the fact that he singled out Leeds as being the team without a hope of catching scum.
Even the bookies think Newcastle will finish 2nd so he's fooled them too.
Newcastle were actually shorter odds than Leeds at the start of the season, which was equally ridiculous.
He's always had an anti-Leeds stance so whatever he says is going to be biased.
He probably thinks Scott Sellars had too much class for Leeds too.
As for Cantona.
One day the rest of the world will catch on that he is not that good, and that Mark Hughes makes him.
If he had gone to anywhere but scum, he would have been off-loaded by now.
When the going gets tough he will be the first to get dropped.
Remember Gordon Hill?
I am happy that Deane + Wallace make a better combination than with Cuntona alongside either one of them.
I also think McClair is a better player than Cantona, but whilst Gobber keeps selecting Cuntona, Sharpe and occasionally Robson, there is a chance they may be caught.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 1993 15:57:35 GMT
Subject: Lee Sharpe
If I can just join in the Scum-bashing here, am I the only person that thinks Sharpe is the most over-rated piece of crap ever to have pulled on a red shirt (and they've had quite a few)?
A few years ago he was pretty effective I'll admit, but that was almost entirely down to his pace, which he seems to have completely lost since his lengthy ‘injury’.
He has virtually no ball skills whatsoever, and has been completely anonymous every time he's played for England.
Hopefully the next England manager will realise this and consign him to the scrap-heap as Taylor should have done years ago.
Andy K.
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 93 08:20:35 PST
Subject: Re: LIKE A VIRGIN
Wow!
Where's Rocky getting the 15 mill from?;-)
Sim0n
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 1993 17:12:43 GMT
Subject: Lee Sharpe
Thats what yuppie flu does to you then is it?
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 1993 17:16:52 GMT
Subject: Newcastle new favourites for second!
On saturday night on Manc of the day it said that leeds were still at 3–1…
I suppose a lot depends on the next few games though
Sean
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 1993 12:25:28–0500 (EST)
Subject: S.C.U.M
All this talk about scum reminded me that over here(Montreal) scum is an acronym for a um er feminist group called the Society for Cutting Up Men…they are a nice bunch of girls and would probably be Man U fans if they watched football.
I really appreciate the game reports and the early results posting…thanks.
The discussions about the pre game meets in Tetley pubs just make me homesick, The discussions about the pre game meets in Tetley pubs just make me homesick, luoops Labatt Blue just doesn't quite do it.
From:
Date: Mon, 13 Dec 1993 16:57:40–0500
Subject: Drat! £?!
Just heard on the World Service that Leeds lost 2–1 at Norwich.
Sutton scored first in the 1st half.
Wallace equalized in the second, but Ekuku (sp?) got the winner.
So scum are now 13 points ahead, and our 14 match unbeaten run goes up in smoke.
*&!!? £$!
Lets hope we can get back on track by smacking Arsenal on Saturday.
Does anyone have any team news, or a match report?
John
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Dec 93 09:34:06 GMT
Subject: Re: Drat! £?!
Yeah, I didn't get to watch it even on Sky.
Radio 5 commentary said it was a very good game.
Leeds started well but Norwich shaded the first-half scoring 2 mins before half-time.
Just before this Wallace was put right through and wrongly given offside, in what the commentary team agreed was the worst linesman decision this season.
Leeds also had the ball in the net with the last kick of the first half but it was disallowed for no apparent reason.
Anyone know why?
Leeds totally dominated the second half creating many chances before equalising after 22 mins.
We then had quite a few chances before Norwich scored on a rare break with 11 mins left.
From the commentary it sounded as though Leeds did not really look like getting a 2nd equaliser.
Martin O'Neill summarising was amazingly impartial, as he is a ex-Norwich player.
He said Leeds deserved to win having had created many more chances.
It sounded as though Wallace and Deane were the chief culprits.
I laughed when he told the linesman that he'd had a ‘mare.
Rocky was interviewed at half-time, he gave the impression that he was unhappy about not being in the team, but there was no rift with Wilko.
He also said that he was settled in Leeds and intimated that he would see out the remaining 2 years of his contract.
He also said that he thought he and Strach could play in the same team.
Oh well, I suppose the run had to come to and end.
Perhaps the luck had been going our way recently.
I'll trade last night's mis-fortune for the the run of the ball in the next 3 or 4 games:-) Although of course life does not work that way 8–| Kev.
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Dec 1993 09:37:37 +0000
Subject: Team Of The Year
The Sportswriters’ Team Of The Year Award went to the Ladies England Cricket Team.
Perfectly good choice I'd have thought.
Didn't you?
Brian McClair
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Dec 1993 10:25:23 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Gobber
Did anyone else see on teletext last night, that gobber Fergie was voted best manger in the world? admittedly by some shitty magazine, but how anyone could think that he's a good manager is beyond me.
He's not even fit to wipe Wilkos arse!!
Whats more, the scum were voted 6th best team in the world!!!
Anyone else see the game last night?, how we didn't win 3 or 4–1, I'll never know.
So many chances, and just the one goal.
I thought we missed Speed a bit, Hodge didn't have a great game, he should have played Rocky, but then I guess I'm not the only one who thinks that:-)
Sunil
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Dec 1993 10:33:22 GMT
Subject: Line-up
The team was the same as for the West Ham game, except Hodge played instead of the injured Speed.
i.e. Beeney, Kelly, Fairclough, Wetherall, Dorigo, Sharpe, Hodge, McAllister, Strachan, Wallace, Deane.
— subs were Newsome, Whelan (who came on for Sharpe towards the end) and Lukic
Andy K.
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Dec 93 10:50:00 GMT
Subject: Rocky & Norwich
Well, as far as I can see the only good bit about last night was the interview on R5 with Rocky!!
Listening to the R5 commentary I didn't think that we played that well (better than Norwich…but they were at home & they're shit there usually!).
Listening to the radio the only way you can get an idea of how individuals are doing is to see how often they are mentioned.
Three names were remarkably absent i.e. Strachan (a bit absent) Deane (a bit more absent) & Hodge (quite a lot absent).
Now, I'm not saying Wilko should drop these players (actually I am about to say that but only for Hodge!) only that they didn't *sound* to play well!!
Rocky sounded *desperate* to get inany the side…so Wilko play him vs his old side (drop Hodge) and get Pembers fit and I bet we win 3–1 on Saturday.
Glynn
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Dec 1993 11:23:49 GMT
Subject: Which one were you!
Ok roger I was at the Fav and I guess you were but there were two guys fitting your description (I never knew that sheepskins were so popular!)
Which one were you??
(X1 OR X2?)
Due to being hideosly shy and a little worse for the drink I didn't want to go up to some complete stranger and act like I knew him.
Maybe you were neither of these but in the pocey extension to the left as you go in where all the posers and knobs hang out (even though it's got a really good 6ft TV there)…
Better luck next time!!!!!
Just in case you were really observant I'm the 20yr old (looks about 15/16) who had the jeans and dark blue denim shirt on (V.sexy!)
Sean
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Dec 93 12:45:14 MET
Subject: What's this lonely hearts?
The next time use the password *Internet*!
Only the priveleged few will know what you're talking about:-).
Sean, you couldn't have been that shit-faced that you couldn't go upto the Roger and ask him whether he was Roger or not?
It happens to me every day when people come upto me and ask me whether I'm Clint Eastwood or not.
I say I am, and then ask them to make my day:-).
I will post my comments on the game later, which I saw in my local on Sky.
James.
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Dec 93 11:53:18 GMT
Subject: Re: Budgies beat Leeds — Aggghhhhhhh!!!!!
The phrase ‘calm down’ appears appropriate;-).
We now have the most difficult phase of the campaign coming up and I'm confident that Wilko' will steer us through it as successfully as possible!
(God I sound like a middle-manager!)
Glynn
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Dec 93 11:42:39 GMT
Subject: Budgies beat Leeds — Aggghhhhhhh!!!!!
Well another inspired team selection from Wilko has left us 13 points behind the scum, picking Hodge in what must be just about his first outing this year over Rocky resulted in a rather insiped performance from the midfield.
Is Wilko trying to prove a point or does he just want rid of Rocky???
I suppose the winning streak had to come to an end sometime and really it's better now when we can do something about it than at crimble when it'll be more difficult to start shifting the team around in the more hectic fixture list.
However doesn't this expose how vunerable we still are at the back — Norwich virtually snatching the match with the only opportunities they had and Leeds failing once again up front.
Please for god's sake stop playing Fairclough at the back — the defence is a shambles when he's there — quite honestly I'm getting pretty pissed off with Wilko — i know we've had a long unbeaten run and we're still second and he's won us the championship etc etc and this is defenitely over reaction to last night but get rid of the fucking bastard and find us someone who'll pick teams that can beat the Norwich's and Man Utd7s of the league or we'll be perenial mid table finishers.
Aggggggggggghhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh!!!!!!!!!!!!!
WILKO OUT!!!!!!!!
Chris
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Dec 1993 12:01:38 +0000
Subject: oh arr, down the bar
Well, I had a splendid night out at the Norwich game last night.
Even though it's hundreds of miles from anywhere and I didn't get home till 3am, even though it was pissing down and freezing cold, and even though we lost, I still enjoyed meself.
I can't remember enough detail to produce a coherent report, but the upshot of it is a win for Leeds would have been a fair result, and a draw less fair.
A loss was loopy.
The first half was evenish, but the second half was a whole load of Leeds pressure, with counter-attacks from Norwich.
It turned out a cracking match, one of the best for combined action and atmosphere I've seen this season.
There were at minimum 3 or 4 instances where a Leeds goal looked certain, and a hatful of other chances besides.
Rik Mayell in goal saved Norwich's bacon in the second half, no doubt about it.
Man of the match.
It was getting on for Tony-Coton-at-Man-City-last-august standards.
Leeds' disallowed first half goal, just after the canaries' one, looked good to me but I was at the other end of the pitch peering through the floodlit rainstorm.
I was watching Sky replays of the incident over tea and snickers at half time, and heard the pundits blathering about a handball by Rod Wallace which they could clearly see happening, but I couldn't.
Goal disallowed; chalk it up to more dodgy decisions.
Wallace really is on a good run at the moment.
He looks dangerous every time he gets the ball.
Gary Kelly continues to impress too, though he missed probably the best chance of the night — he broke out in the middle of the pitch, was charging down with only Rik to beat when he nudged the ball just too far at the moment he should have shot past him.
Another let off.
The crowds were in good form as well.
Ritual Norwich-baiting included ‘One Denis Bergkamp, there's only one Denis Bergkamp’, ‘Oh arr, oh arr oh arr oh arr’(highlighting the local agricultural connection), and ‘Inter, inter Milan’(Tune skip to the loo).
The attendance was a measley 16,500 which prompted the song ‘Is that all you bring at home?’
The infamous ‘Who's that lying on the runway’ got an airing from some as well, and was followed by a quieter chorus of ‘One David Mellor, there's only…’
The second line of the Deane song is indeed ‘fergie's in a sweat’, but the first line remains a mystery.
Other talking points were Paul Cadd's clapped-out car and slow driving, and him nearly feeling the Hand of Plod when he rather loudly called Rik Mayell a ******* **** after he was announced man of the match: the local constable was ideally placed (on the touchline, two yards away) and had a real nik-nik look in his eye.
Somehow we escaped and made for the Wig and Dickle and suitable refreshments.
So we lost, but went down fighting, and had a good night out an all.
Which makes it all okay, I guess.
What is this team Munchister Untied?
Gav
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Dec 1993 12:21:09 GMT
Subject: Me
Is anybody getting this?
Please tell me if so, because the last two messages I've sent don't seem to have arrived.
From:
Date: Tue, 14 Dec 93 13:03:13 GMT
Subject: scum over Xmas
You may (or may not) be interested to see what fixtures the scum have over the festive season.
I'm sure you all know our comparable fixtures, so you can draw your own conclusions about the liklihood of us closing the gap between now & the FA cup 3rd round!!
Actually, with the exception of Oldham, and 4 home and only 2 away matches, this looks quite a tricky fixture list for them.
It only takes a couple od slip-ups (including vs US) and that gap may look at little more realistic.
New Years day is looking VERY important at the mo' though!
Glynn