

Editorial
Few women artists have ever become household names.
Georgia O'Keeffe is perhaps one of the few.
Her haunting landscapes of the American south west, her large evocative flower paintings and her early Modernist cityscapes, inspired by the New York skyline of the 1920s, brought her fame in her own time.
Through her relationship with photographer and gallery owner, Alfred Steiglitz, she entered his fashionable artistic circle, becoming something of a celebrity in the New York art scene in the twenties.
But if today Georgia O'Keeffe is one of the few women to have been admitted to the art historical canon under the banner of ‘greatness’, in her day she never won the critical acclaim she sought.
Never was she seen alongside her contemporaries, judged only as an artist, irrespective of her sex.
It would seem that American critics writing in the 1920s and 1930s constructed a specific category when analysing the work of O'Keefe, As Whitney Chadwick stated: ‘hailed as the epitome of emancipated womanhood, she was accorded star status, but only at the top of a female class.
The biological fact of her femininity took precedence over serious critical evaluations of her work.
At the time when radical feminists were advocating ‘androgyny’, and designers like Coco Chanel were ‘masculinising’ women's fashions, the art world countered by presenting a woman who was ‘emancipated’but ‘feminine’and in a class by herself.’
Georgia O'Keeffe became tarnished with an idealogy of sexual difference at a time when this was anathema to a liberated woman.
This was, after all, the time of the popularisation of the writings of Freud and Freudian interpretations began to appear in all the appreciations of O'Keeffe's work.
She felt constrained creatively by the reactions of the critics, even making conscious interventions to redress their interpretations.
Barbara Buhler Lynes's essay, ‘the Language of Criticism’, in this issue of WAM is a thought-provoking, informative article which examines the way Georgia O'Keeffe set out to persuade the critics to define her and her art on her own terms in the latter half of the 1920s.
The fact that O'Keeffe was so well-known in her time makes it even more astonishing that we have had to wait until 1993 for the first major European show of her work.
But, although her work is exhibited widely in the States today, she was only really ‘rediscovered’ there in 1970 with the retrospective exhibition at the Whitney.
Nevertheless, Georgia O'Keeffe has a very special place in the history of American art.
Had it not been for the critical response to her work at the time, she might now be recorded differently in our history books.
As it is we search for interpretations of early Modernism in her work.
This is one aspect that art historian and critic Deborah Cherry will be taking up in the next issue.
Deanna Petherbridge's controversial ‘re-hand’ of the Hayward Gallery's Gravity and Grace sculpture show begins a series in which we will be looking at mainstream exhibitions, exhibitions which often exclude women.
We will be asking not just ‘who are the women who should have been there’, but also ‘what are the theoretical and conceptual models at work?’.
The Language of Criticism
The first major European show in the work of Georgia O'Keeffe opens on London's South Bank in April.
Barbara Buhler looks back at the effect of criticism on Georgia O'Keeffe's art in the 1920s
A notable change occurred in the criticism of Georgia O'Keeffe's art in the early years of her career.
At the beginning of the 1920s critics characterised her work almost exclusively as the highly personalised, emotional expression of a sexually obsessed woman.
During the second half of the decade, however, this perception began to be challenged by commentary that pointed out controlled, intellectual qualities in her work and, thus, described it using terms traditionally applied to the art of men.
In this article, I will demonstrate that O'Keeffe herself was instrumental in inspiring this new voice in the criticism; that in response to the reviews she received on the occasion of her first major exhibition in New York in 1923, she set about to persuade critics to define her and her art on her won terms.
O'Keeffe's 1923 show was the first of what could be annual exhibitions of her work in that decade staged by Alfred Steiglitz, her husband to be.
It featured more than 100 works, some made as early as 1915, and was introduced, in part, by an essay O'Keeffe wrote for the exhibition brochure Stieglitz had prepared.
In this she discussed aspects of herself and of her art:
I grew up pretty much as everybody else grows up and one day seven years ago I found myself saying to myself — I can't live where I want to — I can't go where I want to — I can't do what I want to — I can't even day what I want to.
School, and things that painters have taught me, even keep me from painting as I want to.
I decided I was a very stupid fool not to at least paint as I wanted to and say what I wanted to when I painted as that seemed to be the only thing I could do that didn't concern anybody but myself — that was nobody's business but my own.
So these paintings and drawings happened and many others that are not here.
I found that I could say things with colour and shapes that I couldn't day in any other way — things that I had no words for.
Some of the wise men say it is not painting, some of them say it is.
Art of not art — they disagree.
1 
O'Keeffe made it clear that she defined her art strictly as self-expression and indicated that she had first begun her formal training at the Art Institute of Chicago.
In October of that year, while she was teaching in Columbia, South Carolina, she had realised that her work to that point expressed what her teachers or her friends expected it to; and she determined, then, that she should allow it to express what she was feeling.
2 In an effort to achieve this, she began a series of charcoal drawings on inexpensive white paper, which make it clear that what she was feeling could not be expressed with traditional, representational imagery.
Although subsequently in the 1910s and early 1920s, she furthered her experiments with abstraction in watercolour and oil, examples of which include the ‘Evening Star’ series (1917) and ‘Blue and Green Music’(1919), she also made paintings that were decidedly realistic in character, like ‘Plums’(1920), or semi-abstract, like ‘Light Coming on the Plains II’(1917).
When confronted with the large body of unknown work they saw in 1923 (the brochure stated that ninety pieces on display had never been shown before), critics were obviously perplexed, and they sought its meaning, especially the meaning of O'Keeffe's abstractions, in the fact that the artist was a moan.
They interpreted her expression from the perspective of traditional notions about women — that they were more closely linked to the natural world than men and that their bodies were the source of their creativity.
But, in addition, they implied that O'Keeffe's work was a revelation of female sexuality.
Such ideas, however, were not based entirely on the critics' response to what was on display; rather, they derived from opinions about O'Keeffe and her art that had been formulated by Stieglitz and his circle of friends and published before 1923.
In January 1916, six months before he met O'Keeffe,3 Stieglitz saw examples of the charcoal drawings she had made the previous autumn and exclaimed: ‘Why they're genuinely fine things — You say a woman did these — She's an unusual woman — She's broad-minded, she's bigger than most women, but she's got the sensitive emotion — I'd know she was a woman — Look at that line.’
4 Stieglitz immediately revealed that he comprehended the drawings in terms of qualities that he associated with a woman, but he also believed (or came to believe) that their imagery described a very specific dimension of O'Keeffe's femaleness — her sexual nature.
For it was precisely this idea that he promoted when he exhibited the drawings at his Gallery 291, beginning in late May 1916, and when he wrote about them in an issue of Camera Work the following October.
5 In 1919, the year after O'Keeffe and Stieglitz began living together in New York, Stieglitz wrote a brief essay, ‘Woman in Art’, in which he restated his belief in the sexual dimensions of O'Keeffe's imagery and which, though not published at the time, he apparently circulated among the members of his circle.
6 
Two years later, he again made his ideas about O'Keeffe evident in an exhibition of his photographs at the Anderson Galleries in February 1921.
He had been photographing O'Keeffe for over five years, and among the 45 prints of her he displayed were extraordinarily candid images of her body, as well as images in which she gestured provocatively, her arms and hands echoing the arrangement of forms in her abstractions, which served as backgrounds.
In one photograph, which featured the juxtaposition of two O'Keeffe works, rather than O'Keeffe herself, Stieglitz confirmed what he believed was the meaning of her art.
By placing a small phallus-shaped sculpture in front of the large void in ‘Music — Pink and Blue 1″ (1919), he equated the meaning of her abstract forms with her sexuality.
Painter Marsden Hartley and critic Paul Rosenfield, two of Stieglitz's close friends, were strongly influenced by his conception of O'Keefe and her work, and they extended the influence of his ideas in essays about O'Keeffe's art that were published before her 1923 show.
7 ‘With Georgia O'Keeffe’, Hartley wrote in 1921, ‘one takes a far jump into volcanic crateral ethers, and sees the world of a woman turned inside out.’
Almost as if he were describing a Stieglitz photograph of her, he characterised O'Keeffe as ‘gaping with deep open eyes and fixed mouth at the rather trivial world of living people’ and called her art ‘unqualified nakedness of statement.’
he pointed out that it had been made by a woman who met life unafraid: ‘Georgia O'Keeffe has had her feet scorched in the laval effusiveness of terrible experience; she has walked on fire and listened to the hissing vapours round her person…
[Her]pictures are probably as living and shameless private documents as exist.’
8 
In ‘Woman in Art,’ Stieglitz had written: ‘Woman feels the world differently than man feels it…
The woman receives the world through her womb.
That is the seat of her deepest feeling.
9 Paraphrasing that passage, Rosenfield stated in a 1921 essay, ‘American Painting,’ that O'Keeffe's work ‘registered the manner of perception anchored in the constitution of the woman.
The organs that differentiate the sex speak.
Women…always feel, when they feel strongly, through the womb’.
Furthermore, in a discussion filled with oblique references to the O'Keeffe that Stieglitz had revealed in his photographs of her, he made it clear that he agreed with Stieglitz that O'Keeffe's paintings were revelations of the female sexual nature:
Alfred Stieglitz ‘Georgia O'Keeffe: A Portrait’ 1918, Gelatin Silver photograph
Georgia O'Keeffe ‘Little House with Flagpole’ 1925, oil on canvas
The pure, now flaming, now icy colours of this painter, reveal the woman polarising herself, accepting fully the nature long denied, spiritualising her sex.
Her art is gloriously female.
Her great painful and ecstatic climaxes make us at last to know something the man has always wanted to know…
All is ecstasy here, ecstasy of pain as well as ecstasy of fulfilment…
It is a sort of new language her paint speaks…
She leaves us breast to breast with the fluent unformed electric nature of things…
But, whatever it is that her flooding liquid pigment does, one thing it always seems to be bringing about in the beholder.
It seems to be leading him always further and further into the truth of a woman's life…
For here there appears to be nothing that cannot be transfused utterly with spirit, with high feeling, with fierce clean passion.
The entire body is seen noble and divine through love…
Here speaks what women have dimly felt and uncertainly expressed.
10 
Critics who wrote reviews of the 1923 exhibition were deeply influenced by what was implied in these essays.
Almost half quoted Hartley,11 and others made correlations between O'Keeffe's art and her body that specifically reflected an awareness of Rosenfeld's ideas.
12 Hartley's essay was available to them in the exhibition brochure, where Stieglitz had reprinted it, and a second commentary about O'Keeffe by Rosenfeld had appeared in Vanity Fair the previous october.
That article, which was to be a preview of the 1923 show, essentially elaborated Rosenfeld's remarks about O'Keeffe in ‘American painting’.
But in it, he reached new limits in describing the relationship between her and her work.
For example, he noted: ‘There are certain of these streaks of pigment which appear licked on with the point of the tongue.’
13 
O'Keeffe's immediate reaction to the criticism generated by the 1923 show is not known, but it is clear from a letter she wrote to Mitchell Kennerley of the Anderson Gallery in the autumn of 1922, soon after Rosenfeld's second article appeared, that she had objected from the beginning to Hartley's and Rosenfeld's assessments of her and her art: ‘You see Rosenfeld's articles have embarrassed me —[and]I wanted to lose the one for the Hartley book when I had the only copy of it to read — so it couldn't be in the book.’
14 But when their ideas about her dominated the reviews of her 1923 show, O'Keeffe decided to do something about it.
In the excerpts from those reviews that Stieglitz reprinted in the catalogue of her show the following year, he had removed any references they contained to Hartley's and Rosenfeld's essays — obviously in response to a request from O'Keeffe to do so.
In addition to, O'Keeffe's statement for the catalogue made the purpose of the exhibition clear: it was intended to ‘clarify some of the issues written by the critics and spoken about by other people’ the year before,.
15 She had good reason to suspect that it would, for long before the 1924 show opened, she had decided to try to convince the critics to change their ideas about her work by changing the nature of what she exhibited.
As she revealed to writer Sherwood Anderson, she had made a conscious decision to limit the type of image she believed had been most susceptible to critical misreadings in 1923:
My work this year is very much on the ground — there will be only two abstract things — or three at the most — all the rest is objective — as objective as I can make it…
I suppose the reason I got down to an effort to be objective is that I didn't like the interpretations of my other things — so here I am with an array of alligator pears — about ten of them — calla lilies — four or six — leaves — summer green ones — ranging through yellow to the dark sombre blackish purplish red — eight or ten — horrid yellow sunflowers — two new red cannas — some white birches with yellow leaves — only two that I have no name for and I don't know where they come from.
16 
Although O'Keeffe did not abandon abstractionism after 1923, there is no question that she limited her experimentation with it, and she never again worked as expressively or freely with it as she had in the formative years of her career.
17 The forms in ‘Abstraction’(1926)‘Abstraction, Blue’(1927) and ‘Pink Abstraction’(1929), for example, are decidedly less spontaneous and evocative than those in her earlier, more impulsive and imaginative abstractions, like ‘Special No 9’(1915) and ‘Blue and Green Music’(1919).
In fact, in her continuing ‘effort to be objective’, O'Keeffe based more and more of her imagery on observable forms in nature, and she represented them as exactly and precisely as she could.
Thus, in many post–1923 paintings there is a heightened realism that borders on the photographic, as is evident in the large-format flower paintings she began to making in 1924. 18 By so changing the apparent concerns of her art, O'Keeffe intended to end criticism that centered speculations about the meaning of her imagery around the fact that she was a woman artist expressing emotions that had not visual precedents — which was, of course, the way Stieglitz had promoted her from the beginning.
This remarkable effort soon caught the critics' attention.
In a review of ‘Seven Americans’, a group show that Stieglitz organised at the Anderson Galleries in 1925 (in which examples of O'Keeffe's enlarged flower paintings were first seen), critic Margaret Breuning wrote:
Georgia O'Keeffe (sic ), who exhibited very worthwhile things last year, shows a few good flower studies, notably a fine one of calla lilies, but the rest of her show might be termed a flop both in colour and design.
She always paints well, but her colour is sickly in many instances here, and her choice of subjects not attractive; to say the least, there was something decidedly unpleasant about them to me, they seemed clinical.
19 
Breuning was not alone in noting the ‘clinical’ character of O'Keeffe's  work at mid-decade.
A critic for the Art News responded to her 1926 exhibition by stating:
Her most seeming abstract pictures are only by elimination abstract.
They are not only based on nature, they copy nature, line almost for line.
It never seemed to occur to O'Keefe to draw on her store house of accumulated memories…
Willingly or unwillingly, she had bound herself down to a copy book with a fidelity that approaches, and this particularly in her most abstract canvases, the photographic…
Let her cast aside her copy book,[and]draw on the memories that must be crowding her mind…20 
The increasingly objectivity and precision of O'Keeffe's imagery also made a strong impression on critic henry McBride, though he interpreted them in a surprising way.
Responding to the work in her 1927 show, he noted: ‘The work is more frankly decorative than it used to be…
The painting is intellectual rather than emotional, though, cool as it is, it unquestionably stirs certain natures almost to the fainting point.’
As he explained: ‘It is not emotional work because the processes are concealed.
The tones melt smoothly into each other as though satin rather than rough canvas were the base.
Emotion would not permit such plodding precision.’
21 
The word intellectual had been applied twice to O'Keeffe or her work in earlier criticism, but not without qualification.
In a 1922 article in the New York Sun , O'Keeffe had been described as ‘intellectual and introspective,’ but her work had been described quite differently: ‘Certainly the most unusual, and perhaps the most characteristic of Miss O'Keeffe's paintings are those which express simply what she feels — a mood perhaps, or a spiritual experience.
Entirely subjective, their appeal is hardly to the conscious mind, but rather, like music, to the subconscious.’
22 And in his review of O'Keeffe's 1924 show, critic Virgil Barker had maintained that O'Keeffe's emotions were balanced by her intellect: ‘Miss O'Keeffe's pictures embody intelligent passionateness.’23 But from the beginning, most critics had responded to her art (and continued to do so) primarily in agreement with the position maintained by the Stieglitz circle, a position restated without equivocation by Rosenfeld in 1924, when he wrote that O'Keeffe was ‘one who shows no traces of intellectualisation and has a mind born of profoundest feeling.’
24 Thus, by maintaining in 1927 that O'Keeffe's art was not emotional, McBride was the first to offer a direct and unqualified challenge to the Stieglitz-generated idea that had dominated the earlier criticism.
And his conclusion in this regard was remarkable:
Miss O'Keeffe (sic ), is rather French, for though Proust, Paul Morand and Jean Cocteau had done all they can do to break the old forms, and ‘French’ may come to mean something else in the future; at present it means planning the work out in one's mind completely before beginning upon it.
Readers who care to go into this subject more deeply are recommended to read the dialogues of Diderot. 25 
O'Keeffe had become an extraordinary technician by the mid-1920s.
Moreover, she thought a great deal about what she was going to do long before she began working, and it had become possible for her to execute a painting with great precision.
For example, she described how she had gone about painting ‘The Shelton with Sunspots’(1926) which was exhibited in 1927: ‘I don't start until I'm almost entirely clear.
It's a waste of time and paint.
I've wasted a lot of canvas…
With that Shelton…
I started at one corner and I went right across and came off at the other corner, and I didn't go back.
For me (that was pretty unusual)…
I was amazed I could do it’.
26 
Although this feat was probably know to McBride, he most likely was responding to the increasing image control evident in a painting like ‘The Shelton with Sunspots’ as a radical departure from the work he had encountered when he first began to review her exhibitions in 1923.
His response to this development in O'Keeffe's art was the first positive assessment of the result of the effort she had made to have her intentions as an artist redefined.
The following year, in her review of O'Keeffe's 1928 exhibition, critic Marya Mannes refused to accept the idea that O'Keefe's work was, foremost an expression of the feelings and desires of a woman.
She wrote: ‘let us once and for all dismiss this talk of ‘a woman's painting’ and ‘a man's painting’.
Any good creative thing is neither aggressively virile nor aggressively feminine; it is a fusion of the best of both…
Therefore, if we are to exalt the work of Georgia O'Keeffe, let us not exalt it because it seems to be a rare psychic perception of the world peculiar to a woman, but because it is good painting.’
However, Mannes, unlike McBride, did not view the increasing formality in O'Keeffe's work favourably:
If there is one quality her painting lacks more than anything, it is pain, pumping blood — that kinship with the earth that even the greatest ecstasies must keep to sustain their flight…
Miss O'Keeffe's work suggests to me that kind of passionate mysticism that clouds the seeing eye with visions false to it, like some sweet drug.
It is always a question whether the flowers in an opium dream are more beautiful than the flowers in the field; or the Garden of Eden than the first protoplasm. but all this leads nowhere — people will either like the painting of Georgia O'Keeffe or dislike it.
This particular paragraph is written by one who realises its frequent, unprecedented beauty, but is somehow repelled by the bodilessness of it.
27 
Although clearly based on what was observable in her work, the conception of O'Keeffe's art that critics like Mannes and McBride infused into the criticism of the late 1920s did little to lessen the appeal of the Stieglitz-generated ideas they contradicted.
In fact, those ideas continued to be strengthened throughout the 1920s in essays written by Stieglitz associates, such as Oscar Bluemner, Louis Kalonyme, and Lewis Mumford.
But the fact that several critics began to challenge them as early as 1924 demonstrates that the campaign she had initiated in 1923 met with some success.
O'Keeffe's delight in even her partial success was expressed by her response to McBride's 1927 review:
I like what you print about me — and am amused and as usual don't understand what it is all about even if you do say I am intellectual…
I am particularly amused and pleased to have the emotional faucet turned off — no matter what other one you turn on.
It is grand.
And all the ladies who like my things will think they are becoming intellectual — It's wonderful…
And the men will think them much safer if my method is French.
28 
The word ‘intellectual’, of course, has been a traditionally associated with the nature of men as the word ‘emotional’ had been associated with the nature of women.
And furthermnore, as O'Keeffe continued the direction she had set for her art in 1923, various critics accentuated their assessments of her work with words such as‘courageous’, ‘imaginative’, ‘introspective’, and ‘original’— all having traditionally ‘masculine’ connotations.
Thus, by increasingly objectifying, depersonalising, and in turn, defeminising her art in the second half of the decade, O'Keeffe moved closer to what she wanted: to be recognised as an artist, rather than as a woman artist — a term that, when applied to her, has specific erotic implications she could not tolerate.
If O'Keeffe had been able to ignore the criticism of her art that Stieglitz's ideas initiated, she might not have felt compelled to limit her experimentation with abstraction in the early 1920s.
Although her decision to do so did not ultimately affect her position as one of this country's most important early modernists, it is my contention that it had a profound effect on the development of her art in the 1920s and, possibly, for the rest of her life.
As she increasingly mover her imagery towards precisely controlled representationalism, away from the apparent spontaneity that distinguished her non-representational work of the 1910s and early 1920s, she denied much of the sustained expressiveness and inventiveness that had made her formative work singular among that of her American contemporaries.
Had she chosen to continue her experimentation and non-repre  sentational imagery, rather than suppressing it in her efforts to redirect the criticism, her contribution to the history of abstractionism in America might have been even more significant.
Georgia O'Keeffe ‘Brown and Tan Leaves’ 1928, oil on canvas
The Living Dead
Museums are desperately trying to shed their dusty image, Tag Gronberg sheds light on the V&A's new look at life this century
Over the last ten years or so, museums and galleries have increasingly become the subject of intense scrutiny and debate.
This is partly the result of government policies aimed at reducing public funding in favour of increased private sponsorship.
Nowadays museums must sell themselves on the market in order to attract not only the audiences but also sponsors and benefactors.
Never has it been so important for museums to prove themselves popular .
Victorian paternalism and welfare state democracy have been replaced by Tory populism.
Museums such as the Victoria & Albert have responded to these pressures by experimenting with a variety of fund-raising schemes: commercial sponsorship of exhibitions and galleries, the establishment of ‘friends’ and — perhaps most controversially — the implementation of entrance charges.
Whereas the Natural History Museum (the V&A's neighbour on the other side of Exhibition Road) attempts to justify admissions charges through an energetic advertising and marketing campaign promoting the idea of the museum visit as an entertaining-cum-educational day out for the whole family, the ‘national Museum of Art and Design’ must work to counteract the potential elitism implicit in its status as an institution of cultural as opposed to‘natural’history.
In the strategies formulated to popularise the V&A, design has played an important role.
Under the directorship of Sir Roy Strong, for example, the V&A not only mounted the well-attended exhibition of luxury artefacts by Fabergé, it also offered house space to Sir Terence Conran's Boilerhouse project, a museum within a museum for the exhibition of contemporary consumer and industrial product design.
Siting the Boilerhouse at the V&A (between 1982 and 1987) was a bold attempt to revamp the museum's image as an old-fashioned and intimidating palace of culture while at the same time implying a continuity or purpose: one of the first Boilerhouse exhibitions was on the subject of ‘taste’, a neat dovetailing of 19th century didactic aims for the museum with the concerns of 1980s' retailing.
To some extent, the Boilerhouse succeeded in attracting new audiences to the V&A; at the same time its five-year relationship with an important national museum attracted invaluable coverage and prestige for the privately funded Design Museum which was the successor to the Conran Boilerhouse.
Initially, the establishment (in 1989) of an entire museum devoted to 10th century design seemed to constitute a threat to the status of the V&A as an up-to-date institution.
But the Design Museum, officially opened and enthusiastically supported by margaret Thatcher, now faces an uphill struggle against the effects of the recession.
Its potentially attractive location, diagonally across the Thames from Tower Bridge (symbolic bastion of ‘Victorian values’) and within sight of Canary Warf (the monumental flagship of Thatcherite free-enterprise), rather alarmingly underscores the financially precarious position of the museum.
The new 20th Century Gallery at the V&A is in many ways symptomatic of the changes in British culture over the last decade.
The gallery, opened in October 1992, is presented (as was the Boilerhouse) as indebted to private sponsorship; on this occasion however financial backing comes not from the enlightened entrepreneur but from the ‘Friends of the V&A who are credited with have donated £75,000 to the project.
Since its inception the Design Museum has been criticised for the way its exhibits fail to distinguish themselves from department store displays; to some extent the museum has tried to work analytically with this analogy — its inaugural exhibition, for example, was aimed at exploring the relationships between ‘commerce and culture’.
Whereas a visit to the Design Museum can feel disconcertingly like an excursion to Covent Garden (window-shopping interspersed with sups of cappuccino), the V&A's 20th Century Gallery opened in a period where consumerism has become an even more problematic model for museological display.
The 20th Century Gallery adopts a more studious guise.
Gone are the days when the V&A Museum brashly marketed itself as ‘an ace caf with a museum attached’; the new gallery invites the visitor to take respite in the soon-to-be-expanded ‘information centre’.
Installation shot of The 20th Century Gallery at the V&A
The 20th Century Gallery constitutes a validation not only of the designed object as museum exhibit but also of design history.
Or perhaps more accurately, the designed object is validated as museum display through the discourse of design history.
The new gallery is affiliated to design history both geographically and intellectually in that the V&A houses the joint V&A/Royal College of Art  MA course in the History of Design.
In this sense the new gallery forms a clear extension of the museum's didactic role.
The gallery deploys different systems of organisation from those adopted by the Design Museum; exhibits are proposed less as objects of desire than as object lessons.
There is a great deal to look at (and read) as one moves through the gallery.
Any tendency to succumb to aimless browsing is circumvented by a plethora of informative — and often fascinating —display labels.
A series of thematic issues is put into play against a basically chronological sequence of exhibits demarcating the period from 1900 to the present.
Although these themes are introduced sequentially, it is proposed that they are relevant for all periods of 10th century design: ‘paradoxes of a machine age’, ‘sources of inspiration’, ‘internationalism’, ‘graphics for communication’, ‘mass consumption’, ‘form follows function?’ and ‘values in making’.
The objects themselves are arranged n telling juxtapositions — a kind of museological montage technique which aims less to ‘reveal’ a single explanation than to stimulate speculation, enquiry and even free association.
The exhibition cases are densely packed and the displays provocatively juxtapose objects of different media and status (advertising next to fine art, for example).
The 20th Century Gallery represents an intelligent form of revisionist design history.
The displays include not only product design but also the decorative arts and crafts, stimulating questions as to how these different areas are defined, distinguished and interrelated; issues are raised not only in terms of production but also concerning the impact and significance of consumption in the design process.
Considerable care has been taken to void the production of an orthodoxy — any one ‘correct’ history of design.
An introductory placard, for example, tries to distance the gallery from a transcendent notion of history by stressing that exhibits are the product of selection and choice, and therefore representative of the organisors' views.
This curatorial self-consciousness is not only symptomatic of current museological debates but also evidence of the fact that exhibition and gallery display is not solely the concern of the museum professional.
The gallery's final display, ‘Design Now’, is positioned as the climax of the preceding chronological sequence.
The equivalent of the Design Museum's ‘Review’ section.
‘Design Now’ takes the form of changing contemporary displays; currently there is an exhibition of the Catalan designer Javier Mariscal.
In addition, the ‘Design Now’ room can be used for temporary exhibitions selected (we are informed), not only by V&A staff but also by industrialists, critics, visitors, and makers — by individuals ‘with distinctive views about design’.
this prompted me to speculate not so much on what might be deployed in order to ask different questions from those addressed in the previous galleries.
A label such as‘Design Now’ can imply that we are all in agreement as to what constitutes ‘design’.
The interesting thing however about the endlessly recycled question ‘what is design?’ is not so much the answer as the question itself.
‘Design’ demarcates not a singular concept but a number of sometimes conflicting definitions.
How might a museum display promote the study of ‘design’ on the basis that this is a culturally produced and contested term?
In what ways could such a display explore what (and whose) interests are at stake in the production and circulation of different definitions of design today?
Another question concerning display arises in connection with the following caption: ‘otherness was a significant element in the style now labelled Art Deco’.
From this the reader might construe now labelled Art Deco’.
From this the reader might construe ‘otherness’ as one more ‘influence’or ‘source’.
But ‘otherness’ has now been extensively theorised in terms of complex processes relevant to the construction of racial, class and gendered identities.
Perhaps such abbreviations of thought are inevitable in the limited space available for text on a display label.
My question however concerns not accuracy in labelling but rather the means whereby an exhibit of objects might draw on theories of ‘otherness’ in order to explore the role of design in the production of identity.
The V&A, we are told, set aside 50 per cent of its objects are required within a few years of their manufacture.
What gets collects?
And why?
How is it displayed?
Museums of design or decorative arts validate their collections in different terms.
The brochure produced by the Musée de Arts Décoratifs in Paris, for example, invokes not design history but nostalgia: ‘The decorative arts museum plays the role of the background memory of the family’[sic].
But the discourses of memory are as much about history as the discipline of design history.
The form in which ‘memories’ are preserved and venerated is highly revealing: the ‘memoire’implies something quite different from the ‘oral history’.
There are certain forms of display — such as toys and period interiors — which are particularly evocative of nostalgia.
These can be categorised as design but more often end up in local history museums or museums of childhood which occupy a lower status in the museum hierarchy.
an exhibition structured around concepts of ‘memory’ in the context of the 20th Century Gallery might raise some interesting questions about processes of selection by addressing not only what museum collections enable us to ‘remember’but also the ways in which they facilitate ‘forgetting’.
Billed as ‘the most comprehensive display in Britain of the vast range of designed consumer and household products made in this century’, the 20th Century Gallery is an elegantly preserved and rich collection which will no doubt be extensively used by a variety of audiences.
It is less, however, as an authoritative survey of 20th century design than as the opportunity to counter the notion of a monolithic and omniscient museological history that this new gallery represents a tantalising prospect for the future.
As attested by the now considerable literature on museology, debates concerning strategies of display and the production of history have as much to do with empowerment outside as inside the museum.
Tag Gronberg teaches history of art and design at Birkbeck College, University of London
A Stitch Out Of Time
Four years ago The Subversive Stitch explored the relationship between women and the textile media.
The exhibition became a milestone in feminist analysis of contemporary culture.
Pennina Barnett fast forwards to a touring exhibition courtesy of the Crafts Council
Many women in the visual arts feel an ambivalence towards textiles: they may respect the skill associated with sewing and embroidery, and enjoy its qualities of colour and texture, but they are also aware of its image as a painstaking feminine craft of low status and strong domestic association.
The contradictory faces of embroidery have been comprehensively discussed by Rozsika Parker, in her book The Subversive Stitch .
The broke new ground in its analysis of the history of embroidery, arguing that embroidery became both a means of educating women into the feminine ideal,and a weapon of resistance to the painful constraints of femininity — a source of both pleasurable creativity and oppression.
1 
This dichotomy is embedded into the language of textiles: for ‘embroider’ is not only to ‘make splendid’, but also ‘to besmear with dirt or blood’; ‘stitch’not only ‘to fasten together…by sewing’, but also ‘a sharp sudden local pain’.
2 The current Craft Council exhibition,Put of the Frame , brought to mind this ambivalence; it also stirred memories of an earlier exhibition…
Out of the Frame: Historical and Contemporary Embroidery was the state-of-the-art exhibition showcasing the work of 56 contemporary embroiderers.
It claimed a transformation in the status of embroidery over the last 30 years, from ‘genteel craft for women’ to the Art of an ‘avant-garde’on ‘the cutting edge’with ‘a new spirit of self-expression and innovation’.
3 It was selected by three established embroiderers, Polly Binns, Hannah Frew Patterson MBE, and Audrey Walker,(with Linda Theophilus, from the Crafts Council), and included examples of 17th–19th century embroidery alongside a survey of key 20th century developments.
The Subversive Stitch was the umbrella title for two large touring exhibitions:Embroidery in Women's Lives 1300–1900 , and Women and Textiles Today , at manchester's Whitworth Art Gallery and Cornerhouse, respectively.
Shown concurrently, and devised to complement each other, both were informed by Rozsika parker's work: the historical exhibition with its insistence on a social context for embroidery in which class and gender are central; the contemporary exhibition for the questions it attempted to pose about the relationship between women, textiles, and femininity, and, implicitly, the hierarchical and gendered value system of the visual arts.
It included the work of 30 contemporary women artists/craftswomen — from embroidery/stitch to photography, mixed media and installation — work selected for its visual impact and critical content.
How to think about these two exhibitions, separated by time and place?
Do they re-enact the dichotomy within embroidery/stitch: constraint v pleasure; content/form; message/medium; discourse v decoration; exploration/elevation; angst/celebration…
Embroidery and its other?
At the Crafts Council: unproblematic and free from pre-occupation; at Cornerhouse: alienated and in crisis; discrete entities or mirror images?
Both exhibitions claim subversion.
The Subversive Stitch sought to disturb stereotypical ideas about women and their art practice;Out of the Frame to break with the established order, through the use of unorthodox materials, private symbolism, boild styles, and large scale works.
4 In different ways, both explore boundaries and attempt to expand current ideas of what embroidery/stitch/textiles might be.
In her essay ‘Sculpture in the Expanded Field’,5 art historian Rosalind Krauss explored ideas about categories in ways that might be useful to this discussion about textiles: ‘over the last 10 years rather surprising things have come to be called sculpture: narrow corridors with TV monitors at the ends, large photographs documenting country hikes…categories like sculpture and painting have been kneaded and stretched and twisted in an extraordinary demonstration of elasticity, and display of the way in which a cultural term can be extended to include just about anything’.
She continues: ‘the category has now bee forced to cover such a heterogeneity that it is, itself, in danger of collapsing.
And so we stare at the pit in the earth and think we both do and don't know what sculpture is’.
Hilary Bower ‘Vessels with Lizards and Serpents l.ll.lll’ Felt, paper, straw, thread, paint, wax, wire, and cane Photo: Alfred Barnes
But Krauss suggests that we know very well what sculpture is: it is a historically bounded category, with its own set of rules, which are not open to very much change: its internal logic is that of the monument, a commemorative representation, which  sits in a particular place and ‘speaks in a symbolic tongue about the meaning or use of that place’.
Furthermore ‘sculptures are normally figurative and vertical, their pedestals are an important part of the structure since they mediate between actual site and representational sign’.
In the late 19th century, however, the ‘logic’ of sculpture begins to fail, as ‘one enters modernism…’and the monument becomes pure abstraction, pure marker, placeless and largely self-referential: ‘the sculpture reaches downward to absorb the pedestal into itself and away from actual place; and through the representation of its own materials or the process of its construction…depicts its own autonomy’.
Might the relationship of pedestal to sculpture be analogous to that of frame to embroidery?
If the pedestal stands for fixity and place, what does the frame represent? does embroidery/stitch, void of the frame, also become a malleable term, extended to include ‘just about anything’, autonomous and self-referential?
The frame can be viewed in a number of ways.
As a working device: the structure across which fabric is stretched taut in order to be stitched — a means to an end; or, within the pictorial tradition, an encasing or containing structure which defines the edges of the work; or, less literally, an ‘established order or system’— the logic of embroidery, with its own rules and conventions.
The logic of embroidery/stitch, as a historically bounded category, might tell us, for instance, that it is a decorative/representational/ultilarian/ceremonial form; it employs particular materials, which are soft (cloth, thread); it employs particular techniques (stitch); and should display evidence of skill.
It might also be argued that as an activity and form of visual culture, it is class, gender and culturally specific.
6 
How then to conceptualise works such as Polly Binns' minimalist and rather beautiful series ‘Overstrand to Side Strand’(1992), white linen squares, slit, painted and stitched; Beverley Clark's untitled construction with its large wood-stained pieces of canvas threaded onto nylon, like the beads of a child's necklace; or Sally Freshwater's snaking folds of linen held taut with rods, expanding across one wall of the Crafts Council gallery.
As with 20th century sculpture, the ‘logic’ begins to fail, as here too ‘one enters modernism’, with its focus on process as subject; material as content; medium as message.
But they are not representative.
Most of the works exhibited and Out of the Frame remains safely within it, both conceptually and literally.
Sometimes they transgress a little, in their irreverant use of materials,— as in Hazel Bruce's mosaic-like ‘Pavement Fragment I’, with its burned, layered and cut silk and paper — and function may have been jettisoned, but the decorative and iconographic nature of traditional embroidery remains: flowers and gardens (often rather sugary) and figuration (with ‘naive’ and awkward drawing).
Audrey Walker ‘Life is just a Little Bowl of Cherries’ 1982
Rozsika Parker, referring to historical embroidery, suggests that: ‘What women depicted in thread became determined by notions of femininity, and the resulting femininity of embroidery defined and constructed its practitioners in its own image’.
7 Thus, women and the kid of work they did became regarded as synonymous — collapsing ‘embroidery’ with ‘femininity’and nature.
Surprisingly perhaps, two of those working closest to that tradition, seem to me to do so with the utmost integrity: the small densely-stitched bird and animal embroideries of Jane Poulton and the tiny appliqued images of Janet Bolton reveal immense pleasure in their use of thread, textile and colour.
The idea of an ‘expanded field’ of embroidery/stitch in Out of the Frame (with some exceptions) does not seem to hold.
Another selection of work, or even a revised version of this one, might make a more plausible case.
but bringing a group of works together, an exhibition, in itself, acts as a frame or structure for a set of ideas.
what is the logic of this exhibition, with its sections on the contemporary (the largest), recent, and historical?
The historical, included a number of 17th–19th century items from the Embroiderers' Guild collection, which were displayed alongside specific contemporary works.
Near Lynn Setterington's ‘Whitework Quilt’, for example, was an 18th century gentleman's waistcoat, also whitework.
The texts at the beginning of the exhibition explained that the purpose of these juxtapositions was to ‘reflect the long established practice of studying old work for instruction’.
In fact, Lynn Setterington's quilt, with its motifs sketched in tiny running stitches appeared to have more in common with the Bangladeshi Kantha tradition, or Northumbrian quilts, than the clothes of the British aristocracy.
Out of the Frame claims to show the work of avant-garde embroiderers, unconcerned with tradition.
Yet not only does it summon up that tradition, it physically presents it.
The problem is that history sometimes comes off better.
Rosalind Krauss throws light on this strategy.
She suggests that although the stretching of categories: ‘is performed in the name of vanguard aesthetics — the ideology of the new — its covert message is historicism .
The new is made comfortable by being made familiar since it is seen as having evolved from the forms of the past.’
here, the avant-garde of embroidery is ‘found a history’.
8 
However, this work is contextualised not only in terms of a historical past (pre 20th century), but a recent one.
This ‘begins’, with May Morris, daughter of William, who, on taking over the embroidery department of her father's firm Morris and Co in 1885, breaks with tradition.
Not only does she execute embroideries, but designs them too — thereby encroaching on what had formerly been a male preserve.
Her aunt, Jane Burden, becomes chief instructress at The Royal School of Needlework, from which the Embroiderer's Guild later evolves.
And in the Glasgow of 1894, Jessie Newbery begins teaching embroidery as an expressive art form in its own right, using plain and inexpensive materials — the first introduction of embroidery within an Art School.
In a sense the exhibition starts where the Whitworth's ended, around 1900.
It covers similar material, ‘in synopsis’, via items in small display cases accompanied by text.
But, unlike its predecessor, both these and the earlier historical items are given little social or economic context.
More difficult, is the construction of history as it comes closer to the present.
As with other areas of craft practice, 20th century developments in British embroidery have not been well documented.
Out of the Frame makes an important contribution here.
It takes us from the 19th century through to the 1930s and 1940s and the pioneering work of a number of embroiderers, in particular Constance Howard, who in 1951 was invited to make a large-scale work for the Festival of Britain.
From her early work at Goldsmiths' College in London, an important line of equally pioneering embroiderers emerge: Christine Risley, Anne Morrell,(now Professor of Embroidery at the former manchester Polytechnic); Eirian Short; and Audrey Walker (former head of Textiles at Goldsmiths').
Interestingly, almost a third of those exhibiting in the contemporary section, have either studied or taught at Goldsmiths' College.
Sally Freshwater ‘There and back again’ 1992 machine stitched linen and GRP rod Photo: Crafts Council/Ed Barber
The contemporary section of The Subversive Stitch exhibition, also included a high percentage of Goldsmiths' graduates, of both textiles and fine art.
This work upset some textile practitioners: at one venue, an entry in the visitors' book invited viewers to the nearby art college to see ‘real textiles’— a sign that the exhibition has gone beyond the ‘logic’ of textiles.
Perhaps its subtitle, ‘Women and Textiles Today’, produced false expectations.
For the exhibition focused on ideas about textiles/women/femininity rather than textiles itself, with some of the exhibitors clearly locating their work within fine art practices.
Where, then, did and do the remainder, the ‘others’ fit:—‘on the edge’; in some buffer zone between categories; or in a hybrid form, grappling both to make a space and to find a name: Fibre Art — Who Are you?’talks of this hybrid form as an ‘undecidable’(Derrida), ‘something that seems to belong to one genre, but overshoots its borders and seems no less at home in another…
Belongs to both, we might say, by not belonging to either’.
Shifting to and fro, it is an ‘indeterminate’, ‘marking out the site of dispute and disagreement’.
8 Perhaps this offers a useful framework to think about the work that has been produced over the last quarter of a century.
For the 1970s and 1980s generations of graduate embroiderers, a recent history and a widened definition of embroidery/stitch now exists.
Linda Theophilus, in her catalogue introduction, suggests that this generation is able to reclaim the title ‘embroiderer’ with confidence, rather than slip embarrassedly into ‘textile artist’.
Ironically, one graduate of the 1980s remarks, in the same publication, that she finds the idea of being called an embroiderer quite amusing because it conjures up images of the edges of tablecloths’.
I suggested earlier that both exhibitions claimed to subvert; that The Subversive Stitch at Cornerhouse sought to do this through content, while Out of the Frame focused on materials and techniques.
I have also argued that much of the work in Out of the Frame , actually remains within it, both literally and metaphorically.
So it was strange to realise that the image I found most subversive in this exhibition remains firmly within the logic of embroidery.
It uses conventional techniques and materials; is based on traditional imagery; and sits behind a glass frame.
It was made not by one of the ‘new generation’ but by one of the ‘pioneers’.
In ‘Life is Just a Little Bowl of Cherries’(1982), Audrey Walker recycles a tray cloth worked by her mother in the 130s, embroidering over it a classic still life motif: a bowl of cherries.
The densely stitched image has a sketched, animated quality.
it sits off-centre with an odd perspective, as if seen from above.
The stalks cut across the rim of the bowl.
A small bunch of fruit falls towards the cloth.
Red, ripe, and unruly, it transgresses the white space of domestic order.
The crocheted edging of the cloth attempts to frame, but only at one corner: within it the title, take from a popular song of the 1930s, is stitched in red.
Audrey Walker talks of ‘Cherries’ as a light-hearted piece, a small tribute to her mother, whose work she was previously rejected and undervalued.
But this belies its complexity: the piece works across time and across the boundaries of gallery and home, of art and craft.
It speaks of joint authorship, and of memory.
And it contains the tension of pleasure and constraint, so resonant in the history of embroidery.
Interview
A Tale of Two Women
Unlike the work of finance or even the public sector, women have been influential in the presentation of the visual arts in Britain for some time, Sally Townsend talks to Annely Juda and Angela Flowers, two women who started in the gallery business with young children, whose lives came together briefly when they ran galleries next door to each other, two women who, together with their sons, help to shape work on show in central London
Annely Juda
How did you come to the art scene in pre-war Britain?
I arrived here in 1937 for the coronation of the late king, and I stayed.
I started doing fashion design at the Ryman School, a famous school in Berlin which had emigrated here.
After that I married and the war broke out.
During the war I worked for the women's voluntary service and shortly afterwards I went abroad for a few years, returning in the late 1940s, divorced with three children.
I spent two years helping a friend catalogue her husband's art collection which was hard because he was a very difficult person.
And then I met someone from the Kaplan galleries which showed thinking bishops in their robes such as you see in the windows of the galleries in St James'/ The gallery had just taken on a new director and were proposing to show modern art — people like Tinguely and Marcelle Cahn who at that time weren't known.
They asked if I would like to be gallery secretary.
I replied that I didn't think I would be a very good secretary but that one day I would like to run my own gallery.
‘You'll never get that’ was the response that I got, ‘You had better start with us’.
I knew it wouldn't hurt me to see how a gallery really functions, so I took the job.
How did you start your first gallery?
Being in a gallery as a secretary, I eventually met someone who wanted to start a gallery with me.
But, because she knew nothing of the business, I insisted that she let me handle things.
She agreed and we started the Mulch Gallery together in 1960 in South Molton Street.
We were next door to Gimpel Fils which was, at that time, probably the most important gallery in London.
The mayor Gallery was also there and both Freddy Mayor and Charles Gimpel gave me enormous support.
What sort of work did you start by showing?
There was a Situation exhibition in the early 1960s which Laurence Alloway organised.
A lot of the young painters here started painting very big works because that was the fashion coming from the States.
I began to show the work of these young painters — Robin Dennys, Bernard Cohen, Bill Turnbull.
We never sold anything of course but it gave me a sort of status plus it was a very interesting time to be around the art world.
In the 1960s were the London galleries based around South Molton Street?
Yes, apart from Victor Waddington, Leslie's father.
He was already in Cork St.
What was your early experience of running a gallery like?
Well, difficulties began to emerge in my relationship with my colleague early on.
She did not keep in the background but sat in the gallery every day with her poodle.
Also, she wasn't liked by people, business associates and artists, which made my life very difficult.
Fortunately, it wasn't long before I was approached by other people to set up a new gallery.
No-one could understand why I was working with such an impossible lady.
By this time, however, my gallery experience had taught me that you need money to start up properly, much more money than I had originally thought.
I knew by now that you couldn't run a gallery without the essential combination of new work and stock.
The people behind the new gallery were Americans.
They made big promises but, in the end, they let me down and I was forced to show mainly younger artists, which is always interesting but financially disastrous.
I always knew that you had to have the important artists around too.
Annely and David Juda
At that time were you only showing abstract works?
I was only ever interested in abstract art.
Abstraction engages your imagination, whereas figurative art is just there for you to see and appreciate.
It was in the mid-1960s that you set up your first gallery.
It was called the hamilton Galleries and it was situated in Georges St (its now Sothebys) opposite to Erica Brausen of Hanover Gallery (who died just recently).
We had very large rooms, a wonderful space, and we were quite successful.
But, in the end, the Americans lost interest.
They closed it in 1967.
Had you had enough by then?
My children egged me on.
They said, ‘you can't stop now’.
I happened to be looking for somewhere to mount a small African sculpture I had bought and came upon De Biasi in Tottenham Mews just off Tottenham Court Toad.
Whilst there, I ask if they had a spare room, and they did have one upstairs which was very cheap.
That was the start of Annely Juda Fine Art in 1968.
My son joined me later that year.
We held a lot of successful exhibitions and gradually we took over room after room in Tottenham mews until, finally, we occupied almost all the house.
We were there 22 years.
It must have been hard bringing up three children on your own whilst leading such an insecure existence, opening up and closing down galleries?
Well, fortunately we had someone who kept everything going at home…a nanny who stayed.
At the time when you started your first gallery was it unusual for a woman to be in charge?
No, there was Erica Brausen, Mrs Lessore who ran the Beaux Arts Gallery, a very interesting place, and also Miss Browse at Roland Browse and Delbanco.
Even then there were a lot of women in the gallery business, though not as many as today.
The most important figure was probably Erica Brausen who started showing Giacommetti, bacon etc.
When you eventually had your own gallery, did you start by showing Constructivist Art?
No.
I showed all big names from Giacommetti to Sali.
It was only when I bought a collection of 12 Nalevich drawings and documents that I began to think about a constructivist show.
Since 12 drawings don't make a show, I borrowed the title The Non-Objective World , from Malevich and set about preparing for an exhibition of lesser-known artists of the early period (1914–24).
This show was a great public success, though far from a business success.
I decided to follow The Non-objective World theme through and the second show concentrated on the years 1924–39.
Both exhibitions travelled, the first to Paris and the second to Paris and Milan.
Then we did a show 1935–55 in which we included the first Americans and quite a few British artists, since they were fairly late going into constructivism.
Meanwhile, in this country, it had become accepted that having a big summer show was the norm, so we did one on abstraction followed by one on configuration.
We began producing the big catalogues to go with the shows.
Did you travel to the Soviet Union to unearth these works?
No.
They were mostly things that had already reached the west.
Do you find that your shows get a warmer reception in Europe?
Is the British market more obsessed with fashions?
The British were always very suspicious of abstract art and, deep down, it is still there.
In this country we are always happiest with figurative art.
You are still putting on The Non-objective World shows, aren't you?
Yes.
I've just done a show a touring show, for the Arts Council which opened recently in Kendel having been in Cambridge, Swansea and Liverpool.
But, it's rather dad that it will neither visit London nor the big towns.
Maybe the London art scene is too obsessed with ‘the new’, the faddish.
That's certainly true.
Look at Damien Hirst, he's everywhere.
There are very few of those artists of the 1980s whom I think will have any standing in a few years.
If I take on an artist, for example, I need to think they will have a future.
So, when Fisher Fine Art closed down, they asked us to take on some of the artists and we decided to try out Gwen Hardie whom I think is promising.
I have to think that because, with limited space, I have to want to give all of the artists a chance to show as often as possible.
You moved to Sering Street, just off Bond St, at the height recession.
How has your new location affected the gallery?
All of the artists get fewer shows because we have just one reduced space.
Really, we moved just before the recession took hold, otherwise we couldn't have done it.
But, being this near to the centre of town, has affected us much more than I would have thought.
I always believed that if someone wanted to see a show they would have come to Tottenhan Mews.
But many, more people visit us here.
Do you have many women artists on your books?
We have Prunella Clough who has been so neglected.
Then there is Edwina Leapman, Christine Hatt, Gloria Friedmann, Catherine lee…
I have always had women artists but I've never made a point of it.
Do you think that gender provides any clues to looking at art?
Yes.
A woman's work is slightly different to a man's work.
Most women artists just like to think of themselves as artists and we've never made a point of an artist being a woman.
Maybe it has become much more important for a younger generation of women artists?
Yes.
Because probably they'll try any angle to get interest.
The competition is so fierce these days.
But, to you as a dealer, is gender a relevant question when considering an artist.
No.
It's only good or bad.
Angela Flowers
What made you decide to start a gallery?
it was decided for me.
My parents were collectors of contemporary art and their first holiday after the war was spent in St Ives visiting artists like Barbara Hepworth, Terry Frost and Denis Mitchell.
It was a very exciting time and we (my then husband, Adrian, and I) followed my parents to Cornwall.
Adrian's a very good photographer and we soon established a reciprocal relationship whereby he photographed the artists' work for which he was paid in kind.
We started accumulating works of art and people just assumed I was in the business.
I had no intention to going into the art business and although I had done ‘extra art’ at school, I sully intended going on the stage.
But an architect friend offered me premises in Portland Mews, funnily enough just around the corner from our new gallery.
This was the summer of 1969 and it fired me into action.
I approached several people for money to back the project.
Len Deighton, an old friend offered to put up £2,000 if I could find three other backers.
I couldn't, so I had to let the premises go.
But, a few months later, when the second floor of the Artists International Association (AIA) building was vacant, I decided to make a start with a gallery even though there was only 18 months of the lease to run.
They told me not to bother doing the premises up since it was only for such a short time.
But of course I did.
Angela Flowers at the AIA (which they insisted I called it) opened to quite a lot of critical acclaim which really annoyed the association.
They insisted that any artist I showed by a member and be approved by their committee.
They also insisted that I sue their front door — and not my own — so that people had to go through their gallery.
This set me up so that, when the lease expired, I found backers to move one.
I was trying to pick up youngish artists who had had some recognition like Patrick Hughes.
One of my most memorable experiences at this time was an outing organised by the magazine Studio International in october 1969 in which we toured the artists studios of the East End.
I saw quite a few artists whom I wanted to represent on the trip.
I also went up to the John Moores exhibition that year.
It was there that I picked up Tom Phillips, an artist who was just beginning to be sought after.
You were determined to represent the younger British artists?
Yes.
And I have kept to that, although one or two of them have stayed with me and are therefore not so young any more.
But the recession hit us badly.
In the middle of the 1970s we held gallery openings at breakfast-time in order to get the light.
It was the miner's strike, the time of power cuts, and the bills were piling up.
I decided to sit out the recession by selling the remaining 16 years on my lease and moving home to Crouch End in North London.
Angela and Matthew Flowers Photo: Frank Herrmann
At what point did things start to look up?
I went to an opening at Annely Juda's in 1978 and noticed that the downstairs looked empty.
The next day I phones her to ask if she minded having us there.
She said ‘no’ and we got it.
We stayed there for eight years.
It must have helped both of you to have two galleries on one site?
Yes.
I always wanted to have gallery openings on the same day but Annely Juda didn't.
She thought we had the riff raff at our openings but she attracted just a much riff raff.
In the boom years of the 1980s, with the revival in the art market, you had a secure stable of artists.
Who were the newer artists who you wanted to see through?
Matthew, my son, had been working in the gallery on Saturdays since he was 14, and was now seriously interested in the business.
He brought in Amanda Faulkner.
Then John Keane came along, the only artist I've ever taken on from seeing slides.
We started doing different kinds of shows like ‘Artist of the Day’ which introduced the gallery to a completely new range of young artists.
We also started ‘Small is Beautiful’ for the Christmas period.
Both of these fulfilled my idea of bringing forward the ‘unknowns’.
you chose to go ‘public’ as a gallery when you moved, as Flowers East, to Hackney in East London.
Now you have directors, shareholders etc.
Yes.
And board meetings.
In fact we have just had another issue of shares.
Sometimes that side of the business frightens me.
However, we've never had enough capital to develop in any other way.
A gallery like Annely Juda's is not even a limited company; that's the difference between us.
If you have a lot of dead artists on you books you function quite differently — Leslie Waddington only needs to seel one Picasso and he's paid the rent.
Why did you choose to move out-of-town in 1988?
Purely for reasons of space.
We knew the rents were going up in Tottenham mews and we couldn't find any good, affordable space in town.
Annely Juda said at the time that she would have to be carried out of the building rather than leave.
it's interesting that she didn't, that she even had to go.
But the East End is well known for its cultural community.
Maureen Paley was there, Matts Gallery and, of course, the Whitechapel.
Flowers East really took off and today people often combine a visit to us with a trip to the Whitechapel and lunch at the famous Jewish restaurant, Blooms.
How did you see yourself expanding into this new space?
By simply developing along the lines we had already established with the lesser known young contemporaries.
It was wonderful because so many people came down to Hackney which is not the easiest place to get to.
We started holding openings on the weekends.
People dressed differently and brought their kids.
Eventually, they got so noisy that we reverted to weekday openings.
Our opening nights are now Thursdays but they're full of kids now.
Very few people find it impossible to get to Flowers East.
Brian Sewell is one of the few who still can't find it and we're very glad he can't.
At the height of the current recession, you've now opened new premises in town.
We wouldn't have chosen to move back into town at this time, but having been offered such a good space, we didn't want to turn it down.
We see the two galleries co-existing happily.
Some of our artists actually find the space of Flowers East too imposing.
you are associated, rightly or wrongly, with figurative art.
Dows this reflect you personal preference?
I certainly don't prefer the figurative though I may have lent this way at one time.
My real preference is for Surrealist work, though watered down a bit.
So, I've always liked Boyd & Evans whom I've thought of a photo-surrealists, though they aren't any longer.
Really I prefer abstract art, but it's more difficult to sell.
When you look at an artists work are you aware of what will sell?
I've got to absolutely love the work then I can try to male others see why.
Nothing puts me off more than an artist coming to me and telling me that their work sells well.
Do you see any significant directions in the work by younger artists that you see?
I can tell when they have come from Goldsmiths'.
You are not drawn to that sort of work?
I try not to let it put me off too much.
you seem to show a fair number of women, especially when compared with other galleries.
Do you think women feel that they can approach you more easily than they would a male director?
I don't really understand why so many galleries seem to be closed to women, but it doesn't make any difference to me whether an artist is male or female.
We do show a lot of strong women artists — Nicola Hicks, Amanda Faulkner, Carole Hodgson, Glenys Barton, Lucy Jones — so maybe they do find it slightly easier to approach me.
I do however think I have been able to help with the emotional problems of the artists here, especially the big dilemma of whether to have kids or not.
It's such a good thing that I always recommend it.
But, when I was asked to go on a demonstration years ago, I didn't because I just don't see gender as a problem.
I've just realised that as we talk, we are hanging our show on the miners and that there is not one image by a woman.
Fay Godwin unfortunately prefers the fields.)
there have been a number of women heads of galleries.
Have you found the art world to be completely accepting of you as a woman?
I've never had any problems whatsoever.
I mean, I'm now chairman of a PLC…
Liquorice Allsorts
Deanne Petherbridge on Johnny Thompson and the Tablets of Phallocratic History
For some time, I have been kneading and reshaping a deeply discomforting, if homely adage: If you're not successful in this world you won't be successful in the next.
In its art-world application it goes like this: women artists (like men) are sustained by the romantic fallacy — positively Pharaonic in its vision of the after-life — that present neglect could well be followed by posthumous frame.
However, an awareness of the immensity of the art-cities of the dead, the archival mounds of texts, files, artefacts, art works, videos, tapes, should put us wise to the horrible truth that if we are not on record now there's little hope of any but the most persistent archaeologising feminist noticing the omission in the future.
These gloomy thoughts have kept coming back to me in the last few days in the national Art Library at the Victoria & Albert Museum, collecting reference material on all those women artists who should have been included in Gravity and Grace: the Changing Condition of Sculpture 1965–1975 at the Hayward Gallery.
And discovering that before 1971, women artists were pretty well invisible.
I also discovered something else.
That of the 20 artists in Gravity and Grace , 17 (including Eva Hesse — then, as now, the only woman) appeared in Art Povera: Conceptual, Actual or Impossible Art ? edited by German Celant in 1969.
And not only the same artists; many of the same works.
Thompson's only additions to the tablets of unchanging phallocratic history are Barry Flanagan — an obvious inclusion — and Panamarenko and Broodthaers, visitors from other planets.
Gravity and Grace: The Changing Condition of Sculpture Hayward Gallery London, 21 January–14 March
The exhibition therefore is nothing more than a rerun of Celant's European power-broking of the lat 1960s, a European and specifically a Milanese challenge to America's claim to the avant-garde which nevertheless included many successful (male) American artists of the period.
Celant didn't attempt to theorise the notion of Arte povera .
In a series of clumsily transalted catch-all statements he declared,Arte Povera ‘does not aspire to be a unique definition of works of art’.
‘It reflects the changes, limits, precariousness and instability of artistic work.’
1 
Bruce Nauman ‘Double steel cage piece’ 1974 steel Photo: Martin Mayer
Jon Thompson's exhibition at the Hayward repeats the liquorice allsorts nature of Celant's compendium, except that he proposes that the work is ‘sculpture’ and refers to a ‘new type of imagery’in the single contextual panel in the exhibition.
The glaring difficulties of attaching an imagistic label to  minimalist/formal of conceptual artists such as Serra, Anselmo, Sonnier, Nauman, Morris and Long are ignored.
And, but not problematising the difference between these practices and that of Pennone, Pistoletto, Beuys, Hess and Merz and by relying heavily on Rosalind Krauss in the catalogue, Thompson proposes no new insights on the period.
He also takes special care not to interpret any of the works in the exhibition; not even citing them in the catalogue essay.
On the one had he notes: ‘By 1967, the definition of the sculptural object had already been expanded to include photographs and film, video (sic) and performance work, propositions and declarations, informal scatterings, imaginary sites and specified geographical locations, maps, books and audio-discs’.
On the other hand, he asserts, via a peek at Umberto Eco's La Struttura Assente (1968) that ‘the focus of aesthetic practice moved…dramatically in favour of sculpture as the predominant fine art practice’.
2 
Thompson makes no reference to Lucy Lippard's Six Years: The dematerialisation of the Art object from 1966 to 1972 , an invaluable, if monomaniacal archival resource which covers the same area and period.
‘Eccentric Abstraction’, ‘Anti Form’, ‘process Art’, ‘Anti-illusionism’…did come about partly as a reaction against the industrialised geometry and sheer bulk of much minimal art.’
She writes in the foreword: ‘However…
I would like this book to reflect (the) gradual de-emphasis of sculptural concerns’.
3 In an earlier article, ‘The Dematerialisation of Art’ which she wrote with John Chandler in 1968, she had also stressed: ‘As more and more work is designed in the studio, but executed elsewhere by professional craftsmen, as the object becomes merely the end product, a number of artists are losing interest in the physical evolution of the work of art’.
4 
Many women artists in the 1960s and 1970s were strongly identified with minimalist painting; Mary Martin no doubt offered a strong role model.
In my recent researches into drawing in the United States in the Museum of Modern Art in New York and in the National Gallery in Washington, I discovered a large resource of minimalist works on paper by women (whether this is due to the collector/donor's taste or is a real reflection of the state of practice is difficult to determine.)
This work was very close to British work of, for example, Edwina Leapman or Sarah kent.
I was tempted when examining these drawings to propose a hypothesis that some of these artists had been attracted to formalism and minimalism because of its supposed neutrality; the absent author was, after all, without gender.
Perhaps this absence also informed kinetic sculpture and work related to new technologies, such as the early works by Liliane Lijn (she had made specifically feminist work since then) and systems and constructivist work.
My trawl of invisibility in the Art Index has confirmed that until women became identified with feminism in the early 1970s they were as neutralised as their practice.
Lucy Lippard wrote about Eva Hesse in 1976: ‘Hesse died just before the women's movement gained a broad impact on the art world and she considered herself one of the unusual ones, almost a freak, since there were so few women artists at all visible at that time’5 
When eight artists relied to: ‘Why have there been no great women artists?’ in Art News in January 1971 (including Elaine de Kooning, Rosemarie Castoro, Lynda Benglis, Sleanor Antin) the cat was out of the bag in the United States.
The suddenly rendered-visible women who attracted attention were working with anti-sculptural, anti-formal, alternative strategies and were mobilised around the hyperactive Lucy Lippard (who, until then, had been very partial to male artists in her exhibition projects and writings).
6 Griselda Pollock in Vision and difference draws attention to a conference paper by Nicole Dubreuil Blondin who ‘addressed the antipathy between modernism and feminism and analysing Lucy Lippard's trajectory as a critic’.
7 
On 29th April, 1971 the Guerilla Art Action Group sent letters to Nixon, Agnew, and Kissinger exhorting them to ‘Eat What You Kill’, and providing the market prices of brains, tongues, blood and heads.
Jennifer Bartlett was reading and ‘exhibiting’ poetry in 1970: ‘Cleopatra's brother said to her…men spill blood on continents, women bleed on rags’.
Mierle Laderman Ukele proposed an exhibition about maintenance called Care in 1969: ‘After the revolution who's going to pick up the garbage on Monday morning?’
‘Conceptual and Process Art…claim pure development and change, yet employ almost purely maintenance processes.
Maintenance is a drag : it takes all the fucking time’8 
Woman artists showed an overwhelming interest in the strategies of mapping — presumably a metonymic fascination with mapping difference.
Nancy Graves was working in the 1970s on ‘ocean Floor, Weather, Moon and mars’ and the ‘Antartica’mapping series (now in the National Gallery, Washington); Vera Frankel was mapping time in ‘nap with Gates’and ‘The Knowles Window’in 1973;9 Adrian Piper in 1969 had produced booklets of her mapping activities; Alice Aycock used her master's thesis 1971 (researched under Robert Morris) as the basis of a work about network systems.
Even Yoko Ono (noticeably absent from Gravity and Grace , who had been installing contraceptives on plinths and wrapping chairs in London in the 1960s, repeated a 1962 happening in Kynaston McShine's Information exhibition at MOMA in 1970: ‘Draw an imaginary map…
When you reach the goal, ask the name of the city and give flowers to the first person you meet.’
10 A similar notion of conceptually linking disparate activities with real space, inspired the series of ‘Street Works’(1969 and 1970) in New York.
Women, in the main, were not making sculpture.
They were outside the gallery making statements.
I have listed the activities of American women artists at some length, because in spite of Thompson's claims to the revolutionary nature of Arte Povera and European hegemony, artists in Britain in the 1970s were focused on America.
(Admittedly the exhibition When Attitudes Become Form was organised by Harald Szeeman in 1969 for the Bern Kunsthalle, but when it cam to the ICA [again with Hesse in a crowd of men]the catalogue was re-written by Charles Harrison.)11 Woman artists here were energised by activities and writings from the States, and it is not insignificant that Susan Hiller, and the influential Mary Kelly, came to this country from America.
Jon Thompson hasn't done any investigative homework in accepting Celant's list of artists and repeating the familiar texts.
By the historical designation of this alternative practice as ‘sculpture’, when intentions were anti-sculptural, he manages to exclude women a second time over.
Considering that this was just the period when women were making history , Thompson has got it very wrong indeed.
He might be legitimising Goldsmiths' current practice (in which, ironically, women are very active participants) and he might be pandering to a new Europeanisation…but the notion that Arte povera , in this limited manifestation, is ‘representative of a crucial revolutionary moment — even of the last possible revolutionary moment’ is a load of cobblers.
Colour Codes
Emma Anderson watches Roxy Walsh blush
Roxy Walsh from the series ‘Not Waving by Drowning’
Along with Maggie Hambling, Paula Rego and Mali Morris, Roxy Walsh has been ranked as one of Britain's top ten women artists by Sister Wendy Beckett.
This curious list, published in the Guardian last November, perhaps said more about Sister Wendy's concern for poetic painterliness than about the state of women's creativity, yet is does highlight the growing regard in which Roxy Walsh's work is held.
Manchester-based Roxy Walsh is currently showing new work at two venues in the city: with a solo show,Blush , at Cornerhouse and a selection on small works at the Design Centre.
Blush , the title chosen by the artist, suits her work well.
It describes a physical expression of emotions: we blush when out emotional and physical states collide, implying a loss of control, a betrayal of inner feelings, our inability to disguise the truth.
It also evokes hidden beauty, recalling Thomas Gray's flowers ‘…born to blush unseen’.
Unlike many young painters, Roxy Walsh has established her reputation through work which is not bound to a particular style, technique or concern.
It cannot be easily defined except for a willingness to experiment and change direction, a confidence, perhaps, in hesitancy.
what is readily identifiable is her responsiveness to the psychological resonance of colour: using a high-key palette of glowing translucent reds, oranges, yellows, or low-key opaque greys, greens and blues.
Again, in contrast to the fascination of some artists with scouring, scraping or generally savaging paint and canvas, Roxy Walsh treats her materials sensitively: caressing and nurturing until they blossom.
Moving from gardening to a musical metaphor, the poetic, sensuous qualities of her paintings suggest they could be experienced, like percussion instruments, through vibrations on the skin or in the bones.
They are neither defiant nor challenging but rather seem to invite dialogue and engagement with the viewer.
These gentle domestic works have much in common with paintings by Winifred Nicholson, Christopher Wood and Frances Hodgkins, through which runs the thread of nature mediated by the imagination.
In addition to links with this tradition in British landscape art, there are definite hints of the Seven and Five Society and, occasionally, Unit One.
There is a strong sense of the dry, chalky earth of Paul Nash's late landscapes in the painting, ‘Two Trees, Dorset’, for instance.
Winifred Nicholson ranked light before colour and colour before form.
Roxy Walsh, however, treats colour before line and line before form.
her compositions are spun from the rhythmical flowing brushwork: this can occasionally veer towards the mannered or illustrational, such as the lines weaving around a central bulbous form in ‘Conch’.
The influence of Nicholson, in particular her abstract works of the 1930s, can be sensed in the large canvas ‘Circles and Stones’.
In this remarkable painting of great simplicity, a deep opaque orange forms the four discs, and then the same translucent colour is brushed in circling movements around two grey stones, which weigh down the composition.
Blush Roxy Walsh Cornerhouse & The Design Centre manchester 10 January–12 March
A series of small works on panel of Chesil Bank, Dorset, share Nicholson's sensibility to place: very localised, they seem to respond emotionally to the landscape and convey the artist's pleasure at being there.
They capture its peculiar qualities of light, experimenting with the neutral tonalities and opacity of simple arrangements of bleached pebbles and shells.
There are, however, recurrent ideas in Walsh's new work: the interrelationships between the seen and unseen, inside and out, above and under ground, are explored through a repertoire of organic forms.
The compositions often focus on a single tree, placed in the foreground, usually off centre, the pattern of its branches mirroring the network of roots below.
‘Pale Tree’ is an ethereal study against a white cloudy background, ‘Tree (on black)’is a solid form, stronger and more defined, like a factory chimney.
There is never any sense of working from direct observation of nature.
Instead, nature is used symbolically and metaphorically.
Tongues in Trees Roxy Walsh Tricycle Gallery London 13 April–15 May
Burgeoning nature symbolises the creative process: in ‘Out of Egypt’, for instance, branches bending towards the ground create an almost complete circle of growth and nurture.
The nurturing relationship between foetus and mother is compared with that between the branches and roots of a tree.
The artist  slips easily between human experience and the organic as seen in the works ‘Placenta Tree’ and ‘Split’.
In the latter painting we stare straight into the ventricles of a human heart, the veins spreading out like branches.
The ‘Narcissus Baby’ series are the strongest, if the most difficult, works to place.
They treat the baby as an organic shape, without any trace of sentimentality.
A tiny anonymous figure is represented, in isolation against a background of vivid colours, as a self-willed individual, kneeling, crawling, sleeping or learning to see its reflection in a pool.
Further dream-like correspondences can be found in the wonderful series ‘MCB Colours 1–4’ which consists of four works on panel in which Walsh scrapes notes and messages into the rich indigo oil paint, from french grammar, multiplication tables and music notation to nursery rhymes.
They attempt to capture the collision of present and past, thought processes which juxtapose all sorts of childhood memories and significances with an adult self awareness.
Emma Anderson is Senior Keeper at harris Museum & Art Gallery, Preston.
Framing Families
Val Williams on Katrina Lithgow's intrusive images
Picturing the nude is common enough in women's photography.
As self portraiture, in the work of women like Helen Chadwick and Jo Spence, it makes certain specific statements about women's sexuality and self image.
In, for example, Bettina Rheims', eerie hotel studies, it explores the possibilities of pornography.
Scattered across feminist iconography, it makes points about women's issues which are usually clear and concise.
In Katrina Lithgow's family studies, recently shown at The Photographers Gallery and now touring, it has a more troubling and ambivalent intent.
these large-scale colour photographs, made while Lithgow was a student in the pioneering photography school at West Surrey College of Art, have the gravitas of old masters, highly posted and unrelentingly severe studies of women and their children.
Though photographed with consent, Lithgow's portraits are voyeuristic, stressed, highly anxious.
They are feminist studies with the correctness of feminism subtly removed, leaving their subject vulnerable, unclothed in a fully dressed world.
When photographers enter the family, they are entering a secret world, its complicated and often coded language understood only by those whose invention it is.
Katrina Lithgow's work is aware of those codes, their complications, their customised nature.
her case is cool, almost unaffected by the vulnerabilities of her subjects.
It is in photo series like this one that photography's real powers of intrusion and finally of revelation are uncovered.
The Nakedness of the bodies, in these particular photographs become codicils to the real event, which, of course is the unveiling of family structures, the strange collisions between the physical and the emotional, positioned within the highly charged arena of family life.
There are times when photography by women becomes women's photography, a close bonding of consciousness, an awareness, not of feminist issues, but of a precise and finite condition of being.
Katrina Lithgow's work shows, often painfully, this encounter between the perceived and the real.
Lithgow's photography is perhaps a logical progression from the enquiring self portraiture of Jo Spense in the mid 1980s.
Abandoning the need to show the self, it uses documentary to do the things which documentary does best, to detail and report, but carries with it too a wealth of fantastical imagining which has, over the last decade, made women's photography so strong and be severe.
Val Williams is a critic.
Katrina Lithgow ‘Sarah and Max’, London 1992 and, below ‘Liz, nine months pregnant’ 1991
Further dream-like correspondences can be found in the wonderful series ‘MCB Colours 1–4’ which consists of four works on panel in which Walsh scrapes notes and messages into the rich indigo oil paint, from french grammar, multiplication tables and music notation to nursery rhymes.
They attempt to capture the collision of present and past, thought processes which juxtapose all sorts of childhood memories and significances with an adult self awareness.
Emma Anderson is Senior Keeper at Harris Museum & Art Gallery, Preston.
The X-ray of the Soul
From war zones to fish quays, Jo Stanley uncovers the photos of Olive Edis
Olice Edis (1876–1955) accidentally became known to me, a feminist historian, through London's Imperial War Museum.
Two years ago, stretching my neck after hours of looking at archives, I opened the museum's journal and in amongst those male stories found a young smiling woman with a camera.
She had a startlingly dashing necklace and wore some sort of a uniform cap in a jaunty way.
What was she doing there?
She was a woman photographer, who had taken pictures of that patriarchal World War One world out in France and Flanders.
Going out to the battlefields, Olid Edis wanted some mark of her identity and so got a badge ‘NWM’ which she put on a cap.
People asked her, significantly in that suffragette period, if the initials stood for New Women's Movement.
In fact they stood for National War Museum.
Edis was, I learned, the only woman photographer commissioned to take pictures of the Western Front battlefields (of women specifically), though other women who were out there anyway (like Elsie Knocker and Mairi Chisholm) took pictures of themselves and their lives out there.
Edis travelled 2,000 miles in 1919, taking — as recommended — a grand dress for formal dinners and one large field camera capable of taking 10″ × 8″ pictures, with a 7″ × 5″ camera for backup, a little folding Kodak and enough glass plates to produce the 200 plates agreed with the war museum.
The pictures she brought back range from women cleaning the (male) officers' silver, to recreation room friendships over teas, to women drivers by their mud-spattered vehicles.
Val Williams points out that the busy and accomplished women Edis portrays ‘seem to function forever in an organised unflurried context…her control of light and shade invests interiors with a luminosity which sometimes serves almost to sanctify the participants in her photographs’.
1 
Perhaps this is to be expected, as Edis was already skilled as a studio photographer.
Also, the military hostilities had ended by then; less tension was visible.
And like many records of war, images of the anger, humiliation, privilege and resistance experienced by the fighters are not in the picture.
We usually only have access to such details from oral testimony and written accounts which is why the apparent disappearance of Edis's long-preserved diary of the trip is such a loss — though of course as a visitor being escorted round military sites by officials, there might be a limit to the unofficial stories she could have glimpsed.
Edis's pictures — and that world — can be seen in Working of Victory: Images of Women in the First World War .
2 
The following year, 1920, Edis went off to Canada, as guest of Canadian Pacific Railways, to photograph life there for four months.
‘For this purpose a special railway carriage complete with darkroom, bedrooms, dining room, kitchen and ‘real coal fires’ was put at her disposal’.
3 The subjects she shot included mountainous scenery, wildlife and Canadian Indians — who didn't take very kindly to her intrusions.
So what is the interest in Olive Edis now? j Simply that the small Norfolk town where she first set up in studio portraiture (with her sister) is just discovering the significance of the local photographer, Mrs Galsworthy from South Street, aka Olive Edis.
A year ago, Norfolk Library's local history department told me they had nothing about Edis — perhaps the most important woman photographer in East Anglia.
But now Sheringham Museum, on the north Norfolk coast, has just mounted an exhibition about her life and work, revealing the extent to which Olive Galsworthy Edis was a pioneer, almost a heroine.
It is apparently only the second exhibition on her life and work.
Part of the reason she's been relatively unknown there is that she was not a public figure.
The town had another local photographer, Harry Hodges Tansley.
People knew of him because he took the pictures of more collective Sheringham life — weddings, school celebrations.
Edis was there in the holiday season, but lived at 32 Ladbroke Square, West London too.
And she did individual pictures, not social ones.
Her portraits are largely of summer visitors, but some are of the seafarers who live all year round at Sheringham and have done so for generations.
her photographs of fishermen show lined characters in ganseys ‘latter-Day Cox’ and ‘Old Charlie’by the lifeboat and fishing boats on the beach.
Her assistant Cyril Nunn says, ‘She always said she would be remembered by her pictures of them and not all the portraits of the society people’.
And Edis didn't stop at photography.
She also oil painted on top of some pictures of fishermen.
These now hang, in grand gold frames, in the local council chamber.
It was through portraiture that she, like many women, earned her living.
‘The studio portraiture movement, flourishing in Britain from the second half of the 19th century until early 1960s, channelled many women into photography as a professional occupation…’ says Val Williams.
‘Women of middle class origins who found themselves at the beginning of their working lives unequipped to promote themselves within occupations which traditionally demanded either precise qualifications or highly developed aptitude’.
4 
Women's Employment in 1924 recommended ‘provincial towns and seaside places provide the best opening for starting a studio; in large towns the competition is much greater’.
So Edis, in selecting Sheringham with all its Edwardian houses specially built for summer seasons, its wide sandy beaches, cliff walks, fishing quays and closeness to Sandringham, was part of this pattern.
And then there was the winter business in London.
Some of Edis's sitters included campaigner Henrietta Barnet; the prime Minister's wife margaret Lloyd George; radical play-wright George Bernard Shaw and royalty.
Olive Edis saw portraiture as an art and worked on her belief that ‘the photograph…should be the X-ray of the soul.
One is not truly a photographer unless one's work shows what is inside the sitter as well as what is outside’ as she told the US Evening World daily magazine in 1920. 5 
As one of the founding foremothers of photography, Edis's start was aided by her class position in a milieu largely of men — with honourable exceptions like Alice Hughes (c1860–c1945).
Like Hughes (the daughter of a successful Academician who painted court portraits) Olive Edis has confidence and connections.
Growing up in Wimpole Street, London, her father Arthur Wellesley Edis was a Professor of Gynaecology and writer of several books on women's health.
her solicitor husband Edwin was a cousin of writer John Galsworthy.
‘She certainly had no hesitation in approaching potential subjects, asking if they would sit for her and, in this respect, her family connections must have been invaluable.
She would send them examples of her work and, in her early days, a free photograph as an inducement to accept her invitation’ the exhibition booklet explains.
Olive Edis Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps camp No 4, Rouen, a general view of the Nissen Huts, March 1919
Olive Edis is significant technically because she refused to use artificial light, was one of the first to use early colour photography (Autochrome) and cinematography — movies.
‘We congratulate Miss Edis on being one of the pioneers in this country’ said the journal The Amateur Photographer and Photography 1992 , without referring to her sex and to the number of women cinematographers there actually were in this period.
These early movies are now lost, but her illustrated day book and many photographs remain — an important part of the record of women working all over Britain at the start of commercial photography.
This record is slowly starting to build up, and will be augmented, I hope, by the National Life Story Collection's new initiative to tape record photographers from all round the country, as part of the National Sound Archive's audio history of Britain.
Jo Stanley is a writer and feminist historian, currently working on women pirates.
An Audience unto Herself
Jyll Bradley profiles Zarina Bhimji
Zarina Bhimji was born in Uganda in 1963.
In 1974, two years after civil war erupted, she and her family came to settle in Britain.
she has been in numerous exhibitions since graduating from Goldsmiths' College and the Salde School of Art.
1992 saw her first solo show, I Will Always be Here, commissioned by the Ikon Gallery, Birmingham.
She is artist in residence at Kettles Yeard, Cambridge
Zarina Bhimji installation
Etiolate; to make plant pale by excluding light.
‘I had this notion (on coming to Britain) that if my family did not get any sunlight they would vanish!’1 
Zarina Bhimji often discusses the development of her work in relation to the growth of plants and, more specifically, the action of sunlight on chlorophyll — known as photosynthesis.
This metaphor is a strong one to use in photography, a medium which is particularly self-conscious of its every stage in process.
From that revelatory moment when the box of white paper is opened until the moment of exposure the exchange of light onto receptive surface has begun.
the first piece of Bhimji's work I saw was at her degree show at Goldsmiths' College in 1987.
The piece was entitled ‘For the white Feminist (in response to the F-Stop exhibition)’ and was a series of photo-pieces read from left to right.
The first image was of a small bowl turned on it's side with the words —‘the image opens’.
The use of ‘opens’ was a paradoxical one as it seemed to address the unacknowledged absence of black women in white feminist discourses which encouraged women to re-see, re-read and re-invent lives and histories.
Bhimji was using the ‘new’ language of sight to discuss that which was silenced.
‘For the White Feminist’ addressed this in subtle ways — the upsetting of a bowl, a foot penetrating the frame of a tray.
Silences were small and significant, large and echoing.
Perhaps, most significantly, ‘For the White Feminist’ disavowed the ‘whiteness’of photographic paper, sealed in its container, waiting for an image —‘colour’had been literally introduced by a process of washing and dying the paper a copper colour.
Bhimji had used art document paper, a more fragile and flexible photographic paper, suggesting qualities of skin with a rough surface and large open ‘pores’.
The paper also seemed to be adopting the use of skin: a site where pleasure and pain are felt and negotiated, a protection from ‘alien’ matter, a ‘keeper’of temperature.
I will Always Be Here Zarina Bhimji The Black Art Gallery London 26 January–13 March
In a later work, ‘She Loved to Breathe — Pure Silence’, 1987 (First shown in the Devil's Feast , Chelsea School of Art) spices lie beneath the suspended images as though a crystallisation of the colours used in the images above: a dead bird lies beside an embroidered shoe, or on its own, under fragile netting.
On the reserve, sandwiched between perspex, are plastic gloves of the type worn by investigative immigration officers to test the virginity of incoming South Asian women.
The images together speak of the losses within language incurred through the passages of migration — losses accrued through violation, silence and often subtlety.
here the spices seem to relate to later photographs Bhimji has recently tried to take of dust in her home: that which is left after natural or unwanted exfoliation be it of ‘culture’, ‘home’ or bodily ‘innocence’.
A shedding of the tiniest particles of ourselves — skin and hair, threads from our clothing — but nonetheless proof that  whilst the pain of loss persists, growth is equally cyclical and persistent.
‘Live for Sharam, Die for Izzat’ 1989 2 (from the show Intimate distance , commissioned by The Photographers Gallery, London) directly precedes ‘I Will always Be Here’.
Images of a naked young man, suspended, with cut hair scattered on his body co-exists with text framed on the wall.
The text speaks of two parallel events: the ritualistic preparation of the body of young South Asian woman for marriage and of the memories of childhood sexual abuse, the effect on her body.
Questions of colonialism and invasion are interwoven with a personalised pain coming from a different direction: a child's body being invaded and infringed by an adult.
In order to make sense of a self that has ‘survived’ both discourses of colonialism it would seem that Bhimji's strategy has been one of intense resourcefulness, gathering in herself and her experiences.
For example, her most recent work involves a positive distancing — intimate objects as though shaken from the photographs appear in glass shoe boxes ready for inspection or classification.
it is, therefore, no wonder that in the exhibition catalogue both the preface and introduction include long lists of her research activities and objects used in the show.
3 In a very recent photograph I became aware of a shifting in the function of the photographic paper —‘skin’ had become the object of the image — an undulating swathe of black rubber littered with bright crimson tulip petals, as though gashes in the fabric.
The image was both opulent and terrifying.
Standing aside can allow a choice of entry and retreat as desired.
By creating such a distance Zarina Bhimji can become her own audience.
Off Target
Fiona Byrne-Sutton on Niki de Saint Phalle's art through the barrel of a gun
Niki de Saint Phalle McLellan Galleries Glasgow 23 January-4 April
The first retrospective of work by Niki de Saint Phalle, aged 63, to reach the UK is an exhilarating revelation.
On tour from Bonn's new Kunst- und Ausstellunghalle der Bundesrepublik Deutschland, it is curated by the Director Pontus Hulten.
Niki de Saint Phalle with ‘Cécile’ c1964
For those too young to remember the 1960s, Niki de Saint Phalle's name conjures up wacky and colourful Nanas (French slang for woman), whose harmlessness is matched only by their price tag and Partisian chic, neatly caricatured by a tacky perfume  she put her name to in 1982.
However, the uncompromising early work still shocks and knocks you about and one must go back to the beginning when the young artist and her Nanas were very angry indeed.
French-born Niki de Saint Phalle received an upper-class American upbringing.
At 19 she was married to an affluent US writer Harry Mathews and she modelled on the cover of Vogue and Life magazines.
Two children were born within years.
However, the contradiction between her need for independence and her life proved intolerable and she had a nervous breakdown in 1953.
It was at this time that she started painting seriously.
‘Saint Sebastian or Portrait of my Lover’(1963) marked a turning point.
Angry with her emotional dependence on her lover, she glued a dart board onto black painted wood so it became a head for her lover's shirt pasted on below, threw the darts at the target and left him.
By then she and her husband were living in Paris.
Jean Tinguely (her future husband) and Daniel Spoerri included the relief in a New Realist show.
‘On finding she had become hooked like a drug addict, she gave up the shoot-out paintings and moved into a more feminine world to explore female stereotypes’
Themes re-appear throughout the artist's work, childbirth; the monster and man and woman.
Different phases, the assemblages, the shooting paintings, the altars of brides and monsters, the Nanas , monumental sculptures and skinnies or lamps, mirror change in her own life.
She writes: ‘As always I solve my problems through metamorphosis’.
At the New Realists show people became part of her sculpture by throwing darts.
A white plaster relief by another artist hung close by and she imagined it bleeding — wounded.
what more if here was paint in plastic bags behind the plaster?
Later she incorporated cans of spray paint which made extraordinary effects when shot.
Of her shoot-out paintings she writes: ‘It was not only exciting and sexy , but tragic as though one were witnessing a birth and a death at the same moment.
it was a mysterious event that captivated anyone who shot’.
The French Algerian and Congo wars were in full swing; performance art did not yet exist but she incorporated tear gas for the grand finale of her shooting performances.
Two memorable works from 1962 are ‘Autel du chat Mort’ and ‘Galerie de France’.
Doors are joined to make a predella-like altarpiece.
Stuffed animals: a cat, bats, stoats, plastic toys, dolls limbs, crucifixes and guns are attached.
In the first piece these are drenched with red and black paint from the spray paint cans.
The second piece is painted with bronze and gold leaf.
The initials of a French rightwing anti-algerian group are inscribed in the base: OAS.
Who was the victim in the painting?
Daddy?
All men?
Or her?
Was the shooting at the violent times?
She notes: ‘This was before the women's liberation movement and was very scandalous’.
Two years later, on finding she had become hooked like a drug addict, she gave up the shoot-out paintings and moved into a more feminine world to explore female stereotypes.
Childhood pushed her still.
Her banker father had lost his fortune in the 1930 stock exchange crash.
At three months she was sent to her grandparents in France for three years.
She writes: ‘Mother, mother…why did you leave me?
Every woman became you.
Maman.
Maman .’
The Nanas are huge fertile devouring fields; cowboys and Indians fight over a breast while plastic flowers grow on the other in a paradigm of the good breast and the bad breast.
The most famous Nana is ‘Hon’, 1966 (Swedish for she) who reclined on her back 90ft long, 18ft high and 27ft wide.
The public entered via her sex.
A driving force for Saint Phalle is the need to compete victoriously with men, hence the monumental (and curvaceous) Tarot garden she started in Tuscany in 1980 to outdo Faudi.
‘The High Priestess’ was her home for 10 years.
‘A breast.
I would sleep in a breast’.
She continued: ‘My kitchen would be in the other…what a luxury to be in my mother and able to look outside…!
Mother.
I conquered the world for you…
I'm a fighter.
What would I have done with a mother who smothered me in love?’
The final cost of the garden was $5 million, almost entirely financed by herself through the sale of those deceptively decorated polyester sculptures, perfume and furniture.
The paradoxes in Niki de Saint Phalle's work make is simultaneously acceptable to the male art historian, the feminist and the general public.
Her emotional journey is that of many women artists: ‘I would be faced with the enormous problem of re-inventing myself!’
It will be interesting to see how the exhibition influences Scottish women art students.
Saint Phalle's untheoretical understanding of the female body is problematic today but the work is so upfront that criticism becomes mealy mouthed.
Niki de St Phalle's exuberant Nanas charge you with energy.
Fiona Byrne-Sutton is an artist and journalist 
Gesso's Coming to Diner?
Susan Y Dyer visits Susan Rothenberg's slaughterhouse
Susan Rothenberg ‘Pontiac’, 1979 Acrylic and flashe on canvas
Susan Rothenberg Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden Washington DC 10 February–9 May
What is it that we carry away with us when we leave a gallery that creates a desire in us to paint, to draw or simply to doodle on a page.
We look at the work of a minimalist and think to ourselves that she too could paint like that.
For many of us, our efforts fail us and we resign ourselves to our limitations.
As a young child, susan Rothenberg frequented her neighbourhood gallery, the Allbright Knox in Buffalo, New York, leaving with a knowledge that she would someday express herself in charcoal and pencil, gesso and paint.
A current travelling retrospective which opened in her home town gallery and was organised by the gallery's chief curator, Michael Aupling, includes 80 works on paper and canvas, documenting the artist's process from sketch to oils over the past 18 years (1974–1992).
It was a crooked line on an unstretched piece of canvas, drawn, partially erased and then redrawn, which evolved for Rothenberg, into the silhouette of a horse, an encasement for human presence, a grid which would eventually be, in slaughterhouse terms, drawn and quartered.
Later, in the metamorphosis of this equestrian form, Rothenberg reached into the psychological and physical construction of her charcoaled image and pulled out a single bone.
This solitary bone, angularly placed in the foreground of her painting, cancels out the horse's figure.
The icon serves as both fragment and entirety.
It is one stroke of the brush or a single measured cube and it is the whole painting and the completed grid.
While denoting its reference, Rothenbery's bleached fossil destabilises the formalities of this construction.
Rothenberg's horse paintings (1974–1979) were drawn from ‘psychic energy made eminent’.
Her process of working through this human-sized form included its physical dismemberment on canvas (‘Squeeze’, 1978–79) as the image of the horse began to ‘leave (her) consciousness’.
Finally, two paintings, both listed as ‘Untitled’(1979), in the exhibition, are death-like with the horse figure hanging vertical or slumped in a corner against a field of greys.
Early in her career, Rothenberg worked as an assistant to Joan Jonas, a performance artist.
Along with other women performance artists in the early 1970s, as well as those in the 1990s, Jonas' work is based on autobiographical material and narrative.
Rothenberg's involvement in this powerful feminist art form has been perpetuated through her belief that the act of painting is ‘an extension of the performing body’.
After her move from New York to New Mexico a few years ago, Rothenberg became neighbours with another aritst who has strongly influenced her career, Agnes martin.
In 1968, ‘Martin's Bones Number 2’,(1961) a canvas of two side-by-side columns of 10 rectangular shapes was included in the exhibition,The Art of the Real , at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
Other works of Martin's consist of pencilled grids drawn across the canvas, row after row, each slightly skewed, ‘aimed at a balance between the individuality of the mark and the impersonality of the structure.’
1 Ten years after MOMA's Real , the landmark exhibition at the Whitney Museum of Modern Art in New York,New Image Paintings , included Rothenberg's images of the horse, gaining her international recognition.
It has been female and male peers who have most affected Rosenberg's work rather than women artists of the past like Rosa Boneheur.
In an attempt to assess the differences in work by Women as contrasted to that by men, Rothenberg stated in an interview with Aupling, that ‘if there was one factor that I think women artists allow for better than men, it is the rendering of the world, truely I think, as more various.
men often try to impose coherence on that condition.’
In the 1980s, Rothenberg explored the human form, which had been dismissed by early minimalists as having no new means of expression.
During a period of extreme emotional distress, the ending of her first marriage, she became interested in the work of Philip Guston. these paintings ‘Beggar’(1982), along with Guston's later work, are included in a period of art referred to as ‘Bad Paintings’.
‘The Wild Ones’ or the ‘Transavantgarde’.
the title ‘Transavantgarde’ is representative of the artists' intention to transcend the ‘old Modern movement’as well as what they perceived as tralatitious concepts of avant-gardism. 2 
Rothenberg's recent marriage to artist Bruce Nauman led to her relocation from New York City to New Mexico.
Describing the lighting in New Mexico as red, violent, highly exposed, unusual and unexpected, Rothenberg's work has been deeply affected by the move.
Changing from acrylics to oils and substituting a palette knife for a pencil, Rothenberg maintains her curiosity in the crooked line, the partial form and the affects of colour on a flat place.
Her contemporary works are energetic, vibrant in colour and convey to the viewer the simultaneous simplicity and complexity so compelling in her early horse paintings.
It is these images which have gained Rothenberg renewed critical interest.
Susan Y Dyer is an artist and writer 
News from the Women Artists Slide Library
The Womens Artist Slide Library is pleased to announce that it has succeeded in retaining its Arts Council funding for the publication of Women's Art Magazine and has been offered financial assistance towards the running of the organisation over the next year.
After start-up funds from the Gulbenkian to employ our data-base operator, we have now received some funds from the Baring Foundation to assist us in this major task.
Yet we still need to raise more money this year to build our unique collection and develop the networking side of the organisation.
This year we will be launching the Women's Artists Slide Library under the new name of Women's Art Library: we will be planning a suitable summer celebration.
Despite our own success in funding, we are now concerned that FAN has taken a 100 per cent cut in its financial support from the Arts Council.
In the past, many of us at WASL have worked closely with FAN which has always operated in an entirely different way from ourselves, offering another important voice for women in the arts.
I would like to urge readers, supporters and members to offer support to FAN before it is too late.
Write your letters to: Marjorie Allthorpe-Guyton, Director of Visual Arts, Arts Council, 14 Great Peter Street, London SW1P 3NQ sending a copy of your letter to FAN at Unit 26, 30–38 Dock Street, Leeds LS10 1JF.
‘Beyond the Boundaries’ was the 21st annual national conference held by the Women's Caucus for Art in Seattle, US.
Attending this event was an inspiring, if exhausting, experience.
Founded in 1972, the Caucus is a national organisation made up of members who are artists, historians, educators, gallery and museum professionals.
It is multicultural and is the largest active organisation of women artists in the world.
Structurally  it is divided into 35 regional chapters which are networked through a members newsletter.
This keeps them informed about current art events, opportunities to exhibit, publish and employment.
On a more basic level, the local chapters provide regular forums and workshops.
Since 1979, it has announced special awards to senior women in the visual arts and also mid-career achievement awards for significant contributions to the Women's Caucus for Art of to the furthering of its goals.
So far 86 women artists have been honoured through the organisation which, in itself, is a wonderful achievement.
This year's keynote speaker was Rayna Green, who is Director of the American Indian programme at the National Museum of American History.
Eminent in her own field, she clearly defined the main concerns of this conference, which were later endorsed by the appearance of the Guerilla Girls, whose printed statements —‘it's Even Worse for women of Colour’— were distributed throughout the week.
Each day was packed with formal panels under such titles as ‘Traditional Art is Contemporary Art’ or ‘Artist as healer’.
Morning, Afternoon and evening activities were scheduled, with the opportunity to take a large lunch, in the hope that you would survive and still be alert after 10pm!
One of the highlights of my stay was an evening trip to the Sacred Circle Gallery at the Daybreak Star Arts Centre.
An exhibition by native American artists opened in the gallery with a live performance, ‘According to Coyote’, given by Carlotta Kaufman.
Written by John Kaufman, performer and writer were from the Nez Perce Tribe.
The Centre provided a traditional Northwest salmon buffet, an experience such as I have never before encountered.
Tacoma Art Museum provided an opportunity to see the work of Faith Ringold: a survey of her work over 25 years and an opportunity to hear such an important artist speak.
Throughout the whole week we were bombarded with information, statistics, scandalous tales of art and commerce and corruption, surveys on gender issues in the workplace and statements by the Guerilla Girls.
it was hard to take it all in.
As a hotel guest I started each morning with a ‘wake-up’ cup of tea, the daily newspaper USA Today and a written weather report.
The front page news continued to amaze me throughout the week: and article on how women will need another 1000 years to match the political and economic clout of men, followed by one on how President Clinton has increased the sales of saxophones by 15 per cent(you can now order your own limited presidential edition 80 gold-plated for only $795).
A persistent witchhunt was carried out over the proposed women candidates within the new Clinton administration, focusing on their childcare and domestic arrangements.
But, at Seattle women's art was so prolific that you would have needed a whole month to do the work justice.
There was a great deal of interest and support for WASL and we will now be working towards having a more active American and Canadian membership.
We hope that this new network will also provide information and exchange with women artists and historians about the work of women artists practising in this country.
So, despite the culture shock, there was a great deal of common ground between all the different representatives.
Pauline Barrie is Managing Director of the Women Artists Slide Library 
Books
Sally Mann Immediate Family
Sally Mann ‘Emmett, Jessie and Virginia’ 1987 and, below, ‘Blowing Bubbles’1987
An Infant girl lies, arms and legs spread open, exhausted from the heat.
A heavily brocaded blanket pushed towards the bottom of the bed reveals drying pools of odorous urine.
While dreaming the child has wet her bed.
This is how Sally Mann chooses to photograph her daughter Jessie.
Since her infancy Mann, a professional photographer, has documented her three children growing up in the idyllic woodlands of their dream home in south western Virginia.
‘The place’, Mann says, ‘is important’.
It is the place where she grew up and where many things have remained unchanged.
Paradoxical to the process of delineating a chronology of events in her children's development, the notion of continuity is fundamental to Mann's photography.
While her images focus on her growing children, symbolically she seeks greater ‘truths’ of a ‘universal quality’.
These aims are a far cry from those of the humble family snap shot.
Indeed, to describe Mann's photographs in this context draws on a history and meaning not entirely appropriate.
While her work has in common a pre-occupation with a place called ‘home’ and the notion ‘family’, her photographic construction is quite different.
Family photography is primarily to do with the reassertion and strengthening of family life.
its amateur low-skill basis is synonymous with the photographer's uncomplicated verisimilitude — enhancing the memory preserving’ aspect of the photographic image.
Its casual pose is inevitably challenged for the amateur camera appears only at special occasions, those considered essential milestones in domestic history — special events and activities, holidays, outings, christmas and birthdays.
The yearly calendar is highlighted by photographic opportunities only limited by their future purpose, the affirmation of family life.
Unlike the feminist photography of the 1970s and 1980s, Mann is not concerned to explore the concept of family structure; the relationship of family to state and women to children.
For Mann, a camera is a creator of narratives.
Her photographic fictions and fantasies spin ‘a story of what it is to grow up’.
But this story ‘told slant’.
A story which focuses on those aspects of ‘family’, which family photography has deselected, but transforms the ordinary things every mother has seen — a wet bed (as above), a bloody nose (‘Emmett's Bloody Nose’ 1985), candy cigarettes (‘Candy Cigarette’1989) into a technically and philosophically complex narrative.
Mann's series of photographs are compelling precisely because she conflates, on the one hand the ideals of family photography, the image of perfection — Mann's arcadian setting — with the greater ideological sophistication of the documentary mode.
The initmate scenes she interrogates purport to represent the normal and the everyday but in the selection process she has constructed a cogent version of her ‘family’, aimed at a particular art audience.
Where are the other ‘realities’ of family that every mother would respond to?
The nappy changes, the meal times, the endless trips round supermarkets, school times, getting dressed and so on?
Where are the adults in all of these images?
And where is Sally Mann?
The intensity of Mann's photography is disturbing.
The subject matter often deeply personal, her children at the bedside of their sick grandfather, or surreal fictions, her naked daughter in appearance hanging dead from a tree, or freakish portraits, her son holding up two skinned animals.
It is always the formal composition which hypnotises the viewer.
In ‘hayhook’, 1989, Mann's camera is set up outside of the initmate family group in the woody undergrowth.
We are the peeping toms focusing on her daughter's floodlight naked body, suspended shimmering from a swing.
Mann's use of starkly contrasted black and white images, fully light subjects  and opaque backgrounds, leaves the viewer with nowhere to focus on but the photographic subject.
The image is invasive, yet we are compelled to look, for the privilege gaze Mann offers us in hard to deny.
Our attention to the subject is unnerving, particularly when the subject is a naked child.
Sally Mann's carefully created idyllic scenarios focuses on her children's nakedness ‘without fear and without shame’.
But her symbolic stance emerges at a time when there is considerable disquiet over the imaging of children.
For many viewers to be invited to stare at a naked child is too complex and disturbing.
If the happy family snap-shot obscures the painful stuff of family life, Mann's photographs have consigned her family to Hitchcockian pyscho drama.
Where her images read as evidence of domestic life, then the catalogue of terror, pain, vulnerability, self consciousness and overt sexuality would be deeply disturbing.
As it is this confusion has seen many of Mann's photographs censored across America.
The theatricality that the Mann children seem obsessively caught up in tells us little about their personalities or what they like to eat, play at, wear or do after school.
It would be re-assuring to see the children smile rather than glaring piercingly into our souls.
That the girls might be unaware of the camera rather than seducing it to death.
To see the family look ‘normal’ not like some weird Diane Arbus freak.
Mann's children may provide the initial impetus for her practice, but the conceptual agenda lies beyond them.
To what extent her children collaborate on the photographic image is impossible to know.
but, in borrowing from ‘naive’ photography, Mann constructs a visual relationship with them which suggests their unconscious compliance.
One of the last photographs in this collection perhaps reveals more about Mann's relationship with her photographic models than anything else.
A hard staring uncompromising young man, her son, stands waist deep in the river, the glassy water covering his genitals.
‘The Last Time Emmett Modelled Nude’ 1987.
Perhaps a statement of resistance against his mother's photographic desires?
Anna Douglas is a writer and lecturer
Feminism For Beginners
Twenty-four years ago, when my daughter was three, I remember reading Margaret Drabble's book The Garrick year and falling with gratitude and a shock of recognition on her description of life with a small baby.
At one point the heroine wants to go out, but can only think of one place to go with a baby in a pram: the launderette.
Margaret Drabble's novels were a success from the start (this one was published in 1964), so I can't have been the only new mother to feel she was speaking for me.
I suspect my story is not unusual.
Feminism for women like me grew out of our dissatisfaction with our social lot and coincided with the first books that provided a context and a theoretical explanation for what we felt.
By early 1970s, Simone de Beauvoir's The Second Sex , Germaine Greer's The Female Eunuch , Hannah Gavron's The Captive Wife , Betty Friedan's The Feminine Mystique were all read, digested and absorbed into my belief system.
In 1972 I went off to university were I could find no handle on art history until I read Why Have There Been No Great Women Artists?and discovered that research could replace airy-fairy ‘lack of genius’ answers with concrete ‘lack of education’answers.
In 1975 I answered an ad in Spare Rib and spent the next nine years in a feminist photography group where politics as well as photography was on the agenda.
Like thousands of other ordinary women, I frightened, alienated and excluded my husband with talk of marriage contracts to be renewed every ten years and marriage as legalised prostitution.
In short, feminist was an exciting identity and one to be proud of.
Because of this background, I expected a book called Feminism for Beginners to explain why all this happened when it did.
As a novel reader, I know that feelings of frustration by young mothers are not a new phenomenon.
But why did the theories of feminism develop in response to them in the 1960s and not, say, in the 1930s when novelists cast an equally critical eye over women's lives?
The book provides half an answer.
It allies the development of contemporary feminism to wider political upheavals of black consciousness in America and student protests in Europe.
But it ignores social changes like the increase in the numbers of educated women, the decline in domestic help and the development of job and life expectations.
Perhaps this is because all these changes affected middle class feminists, and middle class feminists have always been an embarrassment to their radical sisters who feel the movement would be purer if all its adherents were working class or women of colour.
Feminism for Beginners is divided into two parts.
Part one is an international overview of women's revolutionary history which takes in French revolutionary women, Mary Wollstonecraft, the suffragettes, and the main issues of feminism today — rape, body image, domestic violence.
It says a lot for the authors' efficiency in organising this cast subject that the only bit I can't pass without comment concerns the conservative backlash against the feminism of the Thatcher years.
In fact those years saw a lot of feminist activity.
For example, feminist publishing expanded: the first issue of this magazine was in 1985.
And what was Greenham but a phenomenon of the 1980s?
Feminism's death in the 1980s is a truism which I doubt.
Of course the authors are right to list the goals — from equal pay and opportunities to equal political and civil rights — that have not been reached, but I also think that many feminist ideas have entered the mainstream.
Does it make them any weaker because they've been adopted by young women who dislike the feminist label or by the ‘I'm not a feminist but’ brigade?
The three authors have designed, drawn and written a work which integrates text and pictures.
They have also incorporated paintings, photos and graphic works by women artists to give their arguments an extra visual punch.
Unfortunately they have been badly served by their publisher.
The printing is so poor I kept checking to see if the ink had come off on my clothes and the editors should have picked up errors like the attribution to Mary Cassatt of a mother and child by Berthe Morisot.
Nonetheless, the book fizzes with energy.
Far from a tombstone for a dead movement, it is a signpost to the future.
I'm donating my copy to the local comprehensive because its lively, fact-filled format deserves a place in the library.
Frances Borsello is the author of the Artists Model: Civilising Caliban , Routledge 1989 and co-editor, with A. L. Reff of The New History , Camden, 1987
Imagining Women: Cultural Representations and Gender
The last in a series of four ‘readers’ linked to a new Open University course ‘Issues in Women's Studies’,Imagining Women deals with feminism and knowledge, gender and social science, science and technology, and cultural representation respectively.
providing a pathway through the new thinking on cultural representation and gender developed by feminist artists, critics and writers over the last decade, the book is wideranging; a useful introduction to what might be defined as the field of feminist cultural studies.
The value of Imagining Women lies precisely in its ability to bridge the gaps between the different areas of feminist practice and criticism in literature, the visual arts, performance, film and media.
it does seem surprising that the academic discipline of women's studies, now well into its second decade of exciting and innovative interdisciplinary work has given rise to so little in print 1 .
This may partly reflect the inherent conservatism of the publishing world here.
But it also reflects the failure of feminist art practices and criticism to make a wider mark within women's studies.
2 In spite of the enormous flow of creative production by women over the last 20 years or so, much of it is still little known outside ‘feminist art’ circles.
So, for example, when I ask a group of students at the beginning of an interdisciplinary course in women's writing and the visual arts, to come up with the names of any contemporary women artists, they can rarely mention more than one or two.
By comparison with the immense popularity of contemporary feminist fiction, it seems that feminist art hasn't broken out of the tine art ‘ghetto’.
This is where Imagining Women is significant.
It is likely to have a very wide readership — made up not only of the 500 or so Open University students following the course each year, but also the many women embarking one of the women's studies courses now on offer in Britain and Europe.
Its impact, therefore, is likely to be considerable.
By paying particular attention to texts and images created by women in the visual arts and performance as well as in literature, the book goes some way towards making up for the lack of awareness of women's art.
As the editors say in their introduction, ‘the balance of creative power between active creators and active receivers or critical audiences is one of the key themes of this book’.
this suggests a recognition that cultural production is itself a form of knowledge or, as Hilary Robinson has put it in a recent issue of WAM (No49) in discussing women's body art, that artists could be said to be producing theory visually’.
It may seem grudging then to criticise the book for only including four essays on women's visual images compared with seven pieces on different themes and genres in women's writing.
But, for a reader coming for the first time to the subject, this cannot give a sense of the rightness, diversity and very real differences in feminist art history and criticism over the last couple of decades.
Felicity Edholm's essay on self portraits by Kathe Kollwitz, Frida Kahlo and Suzanne Valadon provides a useful and systematic approach to issues of gender, spectatorship and women's representation of the self.
But, it also begs some questions.
Why these three artists?
Are they taken to be prepresentative in some way?
It is because they have already been widely written about in feminist art history?
Catherine King's essay offers a survey of issues in feminist art, focusing particularly on the ways in which such practices have challenged the conventional hierarchy which devalues female skills.
She also pays due attention to the different positioning of black women artists within feminist art practice.
In this context, it is both welcome and yet depressing to see the major essay, ‘object into Subject’, by American writer Michelle Cliff, republished again here.
Depressing because here was an opportunity in a mainstream publishing venture to include some of the new writing on the arts by black women in Britain.
Of course, other choices can always be made, and nay edited collection which claims to ‘represent’ a field will be open to such criticism.
In other respects,Imagining Women does well by the visual image, including as it does sections on popular television, film and pornography.
It also has a short but rather wonderful section on feminism and humour — an undeserved absence in feminist cultural studies — and a timely recognition of the strength of women's ‘comic subversions’.
Sonia Boyce ‘Talking Presence’ 1988, mixed media on paper
The book's timing may be significant in another respect.
In most of the ‘new’ universities, fine art courses will shortly become part of a modular system which, in name at least, will enable students to draw on a much wider range of studies from women's writing to gender and psychology.
This may prove liberating for many female art students who have felt isolated and marginalised within the notoriously male dominated space of the fine art department.
While in manu institutions, ‘contextual’ or ‘critical’studies have traditionally provided a bridge for those who want to pursue more theoretical aspects of gender and creativity, they now have access to a more diverse range of feminist ideas and approaches.
let's hope that it will begin to break down the isolation and conservatism of some fine art departments.
At the same time it may help to support the growing recognition of feminist art practice and criticism as a vital and creative part of women's knowledge.
Rosemary Betterton teaches art history and women's studies at Sheffield Hallam University      