

COST OF DEFAULT
REPORT ON THE CONSULTATION WITH THE PROFESSION
Introduction
1.
Responses to the consultation have been received from:
a) Individual solicitors' and solicitors firms in private practice;
b) Local law societies;
c) Other organisations and individuals, including employed solicitors, solicitor groups (e.g. Association of Women Solicitors), and such representative and interested bodies as the Office of Fair Trading, Institute of Chartered Accountants, Council of Mortgage Lenders, British Bankers Association, FIMBRA, the Institute of Legal Executives, and the Association of British Insurers.
Out of a total response of 1,397, the following pattern of submissions emerged with regard to category of respondent: Employed solicitors were included in the ‘other’ category as they constituted such a small percentage of the total number of respondents.
Responses have been received from all over the country, and in geographical terms, can regarded as broadly representative.
No detailed analysis has been conducted on the geographical distribution of the responses, since the likelihood of being able to extrapolate reliable trends on the basis of the information available was thought to be slight.
Each response, whether from a local law society, sole practitioner, partner, assistant solicitor, in-house solicitor, or other professional organisation, has been afforded equal weight for statistical and administrative ease.
To have attempted otherwise would have involved methodological problems given the nature of the responses that were received.
However, it will be evident from the figures that sole practitioners account for a disproportionate percentage of the responses in relation to the percentage of firms in private practice as a whole which they constitute (63% and 37% respectively).
It seems likely that this large response was assisted by the Sole Practitioners Group (organised by Arnold Rosen), who provided sole practitioners with a pro forma set of answers to the questions posed in the consultative paper which they were then invited to amend as they saw fit.
Around 650 responses of this kind were received in time to be included in the analysis.
The majority of these made no alteration to the answers suggested by the SPG.
For a variety of reasons, therefore, it is not possible to regard the overall figures for the consultation as statistically representative of the views of solicitors in private practice as a whole.
This having been said, the consultation generated almost three times the volume correspondence as the last major consultation on the revision of the practice rules in 1990, and roughly four times as many responses as were received in connection with the consultation on multi-disciplinary partnerships in 1987 (although more local law society responses were received to the 1987 consultation).
On numbers alone, therefore, the exercise has undoubtedly highlighted the strength of feeling in the profession on the disturbing incidence of solicitor-dishonesty and the lively controversy over how (and by whom) this should be paid for.
The report has been structured both thematically and sequentially.
The questions in the consultative paper fell into five broad categories: sole practice (question 1- 3); accounts (questions 4–9 and 11); undertakings (question 10); the Compensation Fund (12–18); and conveyancing (question 19–21).
Thus, in addition to an analysis of the results for each question in turn, a section of general comments on the above themes has been included in the end of each group of questions.
Question 10 on undertakings interrupted the sequence, and the general comments on accounts are therefore attached after question 11.
Responses ranged from the highly personal and impressionistic to the densely analytical.
In order to identify any broad trends in the responses and to enable meaningful statistical information to be compiled, it was necessary in the first instance to assign answers to one of a limited number of categories.
This was not always straight-forward as the answers given frequently defied obvious the categorisation.
Thus, in order to counter-balance the reductionism of this approach, a separate ‘file’ was maintained of summaries of the comments made by each respondent.
As the comments run into hundreds of pages in total, it was not feasible to append them as a single annex to this report.
However, a collated copy can be made available on request.
The sheer volume of paperwork meant that a similar approach had to be adopted in relation to the responses from local law societies and other organisations/individuals.
Copies of the full text of each local law society and ‘other’ response have been collected into two files and will be available for inspection at both Redditch and Chancery Lane, or otherwise on request.
Annexed to this report are the following documents:
Annex A:(pages 1–16) The Cost of Default: a consultative paper
Annex B:(pages 17–21) Copy of SPG questionnaire and suggested answers
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
SOLE PRACTICE
Question 1 Should sole practice on the traditional model, including the right to hold clients' money, continue to be permitted without restriction?
Response
Interpretation
The results for this question should be read in conj unction with those for question 2.
Many respondents, especially those answering ‘no’, interpreted question 1 by focusing on the traditional model of sole practice, and appear to have answered on the assumption that support for any enforced modification of the present model would give rise to a negative response.
Other concentrated entirely on the reference to the holding of client money, and were therefore more inclined to answer ‘yes’.
Comment
The majority in favour of allowing sole practice on the traditional model to continue without restriction might have been expected to be larger given the  preponderance of sole practitioner respondents to the consultation as a whole.
Sole practitioners themselves came out overwhelmingly against the imposition of further restrictions (86%).
Amongst two partner firms, in contrast, there was a clear majority in favour of some form of restriction, while amongst respondents from ‘medium’ and ‘large’firms (here defined broadly as firms with 3–10 and over 10 partners respectively) nearly 80% answered the question negatively.
Of the 70 local law societies that responded, 49 said ‘no’, as did the majority of other organisations/individuals.
Question 2 If not, should sole practitioners be authorised to hold client money only after specific approval of their accounting system and satisfactory evidence of compliance with rules?
Response.
Interpretation
The results for this question are difficult to interpret and should be treated with great caution.
The ‘if not’ prefix was interpreted by many respondents to mean that a ‘yes’to question 1 logically required a ‘no’to question 2.
Not infrequently, however, respondents said ‘yes’ to both questions or gave answers to question 2 which clearly contradicted their answer to question 1, giving rise to problems of interpretation.
Furthermore, the figure stated for ‘no’, probably also includes a number of those who wanted restrictions placed on the traditional model of sole practice (and therefore answered ‘no’ to  question 1) but who did not necessarily agree with the particular restriction proposed in question 2.
The simplest way of recording answers was therefore felt to be to assume that all those answering ‘yes’ to question 1 were also in principle against the proposal in question 2, thus making the overall response to this question negative.
The results should thus be read in conjunction with those for question 1.
Not  surprisingly , most sole practitioners appeared to disagree with the question, as against roughly two-thirds of respondents from medium-sized and larger firms who expressed approval.
Comment
A widespread view amongst local law societies was that specific approval of accounting systems and satisfactory evidence of compliance with the rules should be required from all firms, or at least all new firms.
There were also calls for better enforcement by the Law Society of the current regulations, and for greater practical assistance to sole practitioners and new firms, perhaps along the lines of ‘Best Practice’.
Concern was expressed both that an initial compliance check would not eliminate the possibility of later default, and that firms with a number of branch offices run largely independently of one another for accounting purposes might present as big a risk of default as sole practices.
Three main but differing views emerged from the responses from medium-sized and larger firms on this question.
A number argued that an outright ban should be introduced on the holding of client money by sole practitioners.
Others favoured the extension to all firms of the principle embodied in the question; whilst others supported the proposal but insisted that the cost fall exclusively on sole practitioners.
Considerable hostility was expressed at the bifurcation of the profession for regulatory purposes into sole practitioners and others which question 2 appeared to be advocating.
Many sole practitioners responded angrily, seeing in the proposal for prior approval of their accounting systems a covert attempt to abolish sole practice ‘through the back door’.
However, some sole practitioners indicated that they might accept the principle of prior approval if it were extended to all firms or at least all new firms in the process of setting up.
A number of sole practitioners also feared that they would be forced to abandon their time honoured manual accounting procedures in favour of computerised systems in order to secure the required approval.
Some respondents also queried how it would be possible to test an ‘unworking system’, as the question seem to propose.
Question 3 Should sole practitioners routinely be required to provide an accountant's report every six months
Response
Comment
59% of respondents were against this proposal, of whom 86% were sole practitioners.
Local law societies were more evenly divided in their overall response to the question (33 against, 23 in favour), and some were hard pressed to reach a consensus amongst their members.
Some societies expressed doubts about the cost and efficacy of the proposal, whilst others were ready to endorse its extension to all firms.
Another view was that six-monthly reports should only be required in relation to those firms (regardless of size) that had already been late in delivering their annual reports.
Spot checks or random monitoring visits were felt by some societies to hold out more prospect of deterring and detecting fraud than a routine requirement to produce a six-monthly report — a view supported by FIMBRA.
A wide range of views on the question also emerged in the responses from private practitioners, from those (including some sole practitioners) who felt reports should be required every three months, to those who questioned the general value of the accountant's report on the grounds that it only provided a snap shot of a solicitor's accounts at one particular moment, and was therefore of little value in detecting fraud.
Sole practitioners were most concerned about the cost implications of six-monthly reports, and some predicted business failures if such a requirement were introduced.
There was some support from respondents from all types of practice for applying the requirement to every firm, whilst others argued it should be limited to smaller firms and/or those in breach of the rules.
The ICA considered the proposal to be desirable in principle, but acknowledged that the cost implications could be significant for sole practitioners.
In addition, they suggested that the effectiveness of the annual accountant's report in giving early warning of possible default could be re-examined in the light of the Law Society's experience of those solicitors who had already been made subject to this requirement as a condition of their receiving a practising certificate.
GENERAL COMMENTS ON SOLE PRACTICE
The consultative paper explicitly identified the ‘terms on which sole practice should be allowed to continue…’ as ‘a key question’in the debate over the cost of default.
It is clear that two main concerns animated sole practitioners themselves on this subject.
Firstly, the statistics appearing in the background paper were frequently berated for failing to make clear the actual level of default amongst partnerships and thus for misdirecting the profession on the issues.
Further research into the precise circumstances in which default had occured was considered essential before any link with sole practice could be established and an informed debate on dishonesty begin.
Secondly, the unique position of the sole practitioner in the network of legal services countrywide was often invoked to dampen enthusiasm for the imposition of restrictions on sole practice that might undermine its commercial viability.
Indeed, many sole practitioners clearly regarded the abolition of sole practice as the hidden agenda of the Council, and saw in the presentation of the issues in the background paper an attack upon the very concept of a single profession governed in accordance with single set of regulations.
Some sole practitioners described themselves as ‘scape goats’ and victims of a ‘witch hunt’.
A few had already approached the Office of Fair Trading to press their case for ‘fairer’ treatment.
That there is a broad division of opinion on the subject of sole practice within different sectors of the profession is difficult to dispute from the comments made in response to the consultation.
This was reflected in the difficulty which a number of local law societies clearly experienced in attempting to arrive at agreed conclusions on the questions posed.
Warwickshire, for example, invited comments from sole practitioners, partnerships, and other individual solicitors, and made no attempt to reconcile the often conflicting views which emerged.
Worcestershire also conceded that ‘a considerable proportion of practitioners’ in their area were ‘against the continuation of sole practitioners being permitted to practice’.
However, those advocating an outright ban on new sole practices and a phased abolition of existing ones constituted only a small, if not insignificant, minority of respondents.
Their most vocal representatives were drawn from the ranks of the larger practices.
A group of large provincial firms commented:
‘the complexities of legal practice are such that it is difficult to see how a one man band can take holidays, cope with illness, and set aside time to keep up to date with the law and still give an adequate service to public.
In many cases the public must be suffering, whether they know it or not, because of[the sole principal's]unavailability and/or  ineptitude ‘.
On this view the non-specialist sole practitioner was a species of legal animal which market forces were in the process of rendering extinct.
However, most respondents who were not themselves sole practitioners stopped well short of endorsing this argument although they were often inclined to the view that in choosing to practice in this way, sole principals should accept that the greater risk they represented to the profession should be reflected in increased contributions on their part to the Compensation and Indemnity Funds.
This approach is best illustrated with a quotation from Berkshire, Buckinghamshire and Oxford Law Society:
‘the profession must ensure that sole practices are protected against its short comings and sole practitioners should support the new proposals for their own professional and business survival’.
Other opinions on this subject included the following:
the period before which any admitted solicitor could practice as a sole principal should be increased to 10 years;
distinctions should be drawn between sole practitioners working on their own at home and those with assistant solicitors and a number of branch offices;
a distinction should be drawn between sole practitioners handling client money and those who do not (e.g. criminal legal aid practitioners) to avoid the latter being penalised; the Law Society should license sole practitioners to hold client money;
sole practitioners were ‘generally honest and highly professional and provide a valuable service for the community’, but those wishing to set up sole practices should meet strict criteria with regard to their accounting system;
there should be no discrimination against sole practitioners;
extra controls should apply to all practices;
there should be no firms with less than 3 partners;
small firms with 2–3 partners should be included in the measures aimed at sole practitioners;
there should be checks by accountants/banks on the commercial viability of sole practitioners;
sole practitioners should bear the cost of increased controls as they choose to practise in this way.
It is unreasonable for other solicitors to underwrite sole practitioners defaults to an unlimited extent;
the loss of sole practices or small firms would not be in the public interest;
consider restricting sole practitioners from handling client money in excess of 10,000 unless supervised by another firm or bank, or where the sole principal has given the Law Society a bond or deposit of around 200,000 against default;
the statistics in the background paper are inadequate, and it is wrong to single out sole practitioners when partnership dishonesty costs as much;
sole practitioners are of continuing relevance.
They operate in remote areas and are directly answerable to every client;
sole practitioners are not a homogeneous group — they represent those engaging in low risk as well as high risk work;
sole practitioners should never be allowed to operate from more than one branch office.
sole practitioners are expected to pay for the dishonesty of partners through their contributions to the Indemnity Fund;
forced mergers of sole practitioners are not in the interest of the professional or the public;
dangers of sham partnerships;
it is against freedom of trade and natural justice to subject one group of solicitors to extra rules because they do not practice in partnership;
prepared to pay cost of extra monitoring if it will limit contributions and levies (response from sole practitioner);
problems associated with partnerships will increase with the current wave of demergers.
ACCOUNTS
Question 4 Should client account reconciliations be audited by the reporting accountant?
Response
Interpretation
Some respondents appear to have answered question 4–9 as if the proposals were aimed exclusively at sole practitioners.
This should be kept in mind in interpreting the results.
Comment
59% of respondents disagreed with this proposal, 82% of whom were sole practitioners.
Local law societies were also unreceptive to the idea, although by the narrow margin of 29 against to 25 in favour.
In contrast, respondents in the ‘other’ category were largely sympathetic.
The principle objections to the proposal were:
(a) the cost, which in respect of a ‘full’ audit in the strict sense was felt to be prohibitive; and
(b) the fact that reconciliations might too easily be fabricated by a solicitor contemplating fraud.
Touche Ross and the ICA were both unpersuaded as to the cost-effectiveness of the proposal.
The ICA suggested as a cheaper alternative that firms could simply be required to forward their 5-weekly reconciliations to their reporting accountant, who could then undertake appropriate tests and verify compliance in his or her report.
The CML welcomed the principle of auditing reconciliations, but felt it might be cheaper simply to target problem firms in this regard.
There was considerable support for the latter suggestion from private practitioners in all types of firm and from local law societies.
However, there was a sharp divergence of opinion on which firms might be made subject to this particular requirement.
Sole practitioners tended to argue that, if adopted, it should apply to the whole profession, or perhaps simply to those firms where there was evidence that reconciliations were not being undertaken in accordance with the rules.
In contrast, medium-sized firms in particular thought the requirement should be aimed specifically at sole practitioners and firms in breach.
A number of local law societies felt that random checks would be more productive in revealing problems.
Question 5 Should the reporting accountant visit twice a year to check client account balances?
Response
Comment
Half of the respondents rejected this suggestion and around one-third were in favour.
Of the 53% against, nearly 90% were sole practitioners.
Out of the 35% in favour, 33% and 11% respectively were from solicitors in medium-sized and larger practices.
Local law societies were largely supportive of the proposal (42 in favour to 15 against), as were the overwhelming majority of ‘others’.
Some sole practitioners pointed out their accountants already visited twice a year at the firms' request, but the majority complained about the cost of the proposal and queried whether or not the whole  profession would be required to comply.
Respondents from medium-sized and large firms, especially the former, once again argued that the requirement, if introduced, ought to apply exclusively to sole practitioners.
Some local law societies found it difficult to reach a consensus on the issue, the main concern again being cost.
Others counselled against introducing a general requirement of this kind, but suggested the Law Society should nevertheless have the power to impose it in appropriate cases.
CML supported the proposal and favoured visits being made without notice — a view supported by others.
However, the ICA felt that the value of the second visit would be lost if there were no concomitant requirement on the accountant to report the results of the visit to the Law Society.
Question 6 Should the giving of accountant's reports be limited to those accountants who are ‘registered auditors’?
Response
Comment
The  preponderance of sole practitioner respondents to the consultation as a whole can be seen once again to have had a dramatic effect on the outcome of this particular question, with over three-quarters of the 55% who answered negatively being sole practitioners.
A substantial majority of respondents from medium and larger firms, as well as local law societies, were in favour of the proposal.
However, it is far from clear that term ‘registered auditors’ was fully understood by either the supports or detractors of the proposal.
Consequently, many added as a rider to their initial response the comment that the reporting  accountant should be registered and/or licensed by the Law Society and required to undertake training in solicitors' accounts.
Even amongst those who supported restricting the giving of accountants reports to registered auditors, concern was expressed that this might create a monopoly for larger accountancy firms who would then be in a position to charge higher fees.
Rather  surprisingly , the ICA had no comment to make on this question.
Touche Ross expressed no objection.
The CML drew attention to the initiative of the Law Society of Scotland in providing assistance to those firms of accountants responsible for auditing books of Scottish solicitors.
2
Question 7 Should late delivery of an accountant's report automatically be followed by an inspection visit in the case of sole practitioners; or all practices?
Response
Interpretation
Many respondents simply answered ‘yes’ to this question, making it difficult to know whether they were referring to sole practitioners or to all practices.
Therefore, in order to make sense of these responses ‘yes’ answers were deemed to be referring to all practices.
However, it should be kept in mind that a number of those recorded as having agreed to the proposition in respect of all practices may not in fact have agreed with that proposition at all.
Comment
With the above proviso in mind, the results for this question suggest overwhelming support for initiating an automatic inspection visit to all firms late in delivering their accountants report.
There were, however, three outstanding concerns which emerged from the additional comments to the question.
Firstly, there was substantial agreement (with some sole  practitioners dissenting) that the cost of the inspection should be borne by the firm precipitating the visit and not by the profession as a whole.
Secondly, it was not infrequently commented that exceptional circumstances should be taken into account before a visit was ordered (for example, checking with the accountant for the reasons for the delay).
Thirdly, there was a divergence of opinion on the question of how automatic the visit should be, with a considerable number of respondents favouring the lapse of periods ranging from one week to three months before the inspection was triggered.
The ICA thought that in view of the cost of an inspection visit it might be more appropriate in the first instance to approach the solicitor concerned for an explanation of the delay.
They also raised for consideration the possibility of reducing the period beyond the end of the accounting year in which solicitors must submit their report from 6 to 3 months.
Question 8 Should all practices be required to appoint an accounts compliance partner?
Response
Comment
Two-thirds of respondents were opposed to this suggestion, with around one-quarter in favour.
Three main criticisms emerged.
Firstly, the general practicality of the suggestion was doubted, although it was broadly supported as a matter of good practice.
Secondly, it was thought that the appointment of a partner with specific duties in relation to the firms' accounts could easily encourage an abdication of responsibility on the part of the other partners.
Thirdly, there was general confusion about how the suggestion might apply to sole practitioners.
More local law societies disagreed as agreed with the question, but amongst respondents from medium-sized and larger firms there were slight majorities in favour.
The ICA saw ‘no great merit’ in the suggestion; but Touche Ross supported it and made the further recommendation that each firm appoint a finance partner.
4
Question 9 Should all client account cheques and payment authorisations require only two signatures?
Response
Comment
Only 5% of respondents agreed with this suggestion, and there were huge majorities against it within all categories of respondent, the principal objections being its impracticality and the fear that it would encourage ‘blind signing’ by the co — signatory.
Touche Ross thought that the requirement was appropriate in relation to partnerships, but recommended that it should apply only to cheques made out for an amount greater than a specified sum — a suggestion also made by a number of others.
UNDERTAKINGS
Question 10 As to undertakings:
(a) should all undertakings be signed by a principal?
Response
Comment
There was strong support for this suggestion from every category of respondent, only 10% of the total registering disapproval.
It was thought by some that too great a burden might be placed on principals in smaller firms or on sole practitioners if such a proposal were made mandatory, and that either the ‘net’ of suitable signatories should be widened to include assistant solicitors or Fellows of ILEX, or that the category of undertaking to which the ‘rule’might apply should exclude those of a routine or non-financial nature.
Those against were concerned that clients may not accept the holding-up of an urgent transaction and felt this could lead to abuse.
Concern was expressed whether or not it was intended that an undertaking not signed by a principal would be binding.
undertakings and of their subsequent discharge?
(b) should every practice keep a record of the giving of all
Response
Interpretation
There was some confusion amongst respondents over whether the question related merely to the keeping of a copy of an undertaking on the relevant file, or to a central record of undertakings as intended in the paper.
Comment
Over 67% of respondents agreed with the suggestion, around three-quarters of whom were sole practitioners.
Two partner firms were roughly divided on the issue, but there was a small majority against in each of the remaining categories of respondent, barring ‘others’.
At least five local law societies found it difficult to reach a consensus amongst their members on the matter.
In contrast, Berkshire, Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire Law Society felt the proposal should take the form of a rule indicating the method of registering undertakings and their discharge, and also that firms ought to appoint a designated partner for this purpose.
The ICA felt there was merit in the keeping of a central record, and thought that, if it were made a requirement, it could be part of the responsibility of the reporting accountant to confirm its existence.
Support was also forthcoming from the CML   
(c) should all undertakings state on their face whether compliance is solely within the control of the solicitor and.
if not.
what must happen before they can be complied with?
Response
Comment
There was substantial agreement for this suggestion within every category of respondent, the strongest support (over 70%) coming from sole practitioners.
It was not uncommon for respondents to express their incredulity that any solicitor could give an undertaking the compliance with which lay outside of his or her control.
Approval of the suggestion was not universal, however.
The CML entertained ‘serious doubt as to the use of undertakings contained in the statements envisaged’ in 10(c).
Whilst acknowledging that qualified undertakings would be given in certain circumstances, most undertakings, it was argued, were in standard form, and recipients were entitled to rely on them.
Confusion might follow if ‘a proliferation of undertakings using different wording’ were encouraged.
The British Bankers Association were also opposed to the question, arguing that qualified undertakings were inappropriate.
GENERAL COMMENTS ON UNDERTAKINGS (Question 10)
The comments most worthy of note on the subject of undertakings came from the Conference of Presidents Secretaries of Local Law Societies who suggested the following measures:—
solicitors ought to be discouraged from giving undertakings which it was not within their capacity to fulfil — particularly those which effectively took the form financial guarantees;
the undertakings in the Law Society's formulae A, B and C should be tightened;
a warning card along the lines of the ‘green card’ concerning mortgage fraud should be issued in relation to undertakings;
the standard undertaking with the banks ought to be reviewed to include the phrase ‘out of monies received by us’, to avoid the implication that the performance of the undertaking was outside the control of the solicitor.
The call for the profession to be better educated on the issue of undertakings was reiterated by a number of local law societies.
One respondent specialising in the professional conduct of solicitors,(including advocacy both of prosecution and defence at the Solicitor Disciplinary Tribunal), was concerned that the proposal in question 10 might ‘restrict the meaning of an undertaking for the purpose of enforcement’, and might fundamentally alter the character of a solicitor's undertaking.
In the process it might ‘remove the whole basis for the principle that a solicitor's word should be his bond’.
He queried whether a solicitor who had made a promise without strictly complying with the criteria suggested in question 10 could escape liability as a matter of law.
The profession needed to be educated on the subject of undertakings, and any rules which might be introduced should be limited to undertakings given in the course of conveyancing transactions.
Question 11 Do you support the Council's plans for a programme of accounts rules monitoring visits to all sole practitioners within a two year period?
Response
Comment
The 7% margin against the Council's plans for monitoring visits to sole practitioners might have been expected to be larger in view of the fact that the response as a whole was weighted so heavily in favour of sole practitioners.
Indeed, over 20% of sole practitioner respondents appeared to accept the proposal.
Strongest support came from respondents from firms in the 3–10 partner category, who accounted for nearly 35% of those answering ‘yes’ to the question.
Similarly, only a very small number of large firms and local law societies expressed dissent.
It was often commented, however, that the proposal should in time be extended to include all firms.
GENERAL COMMENTS ON ACCOUNTS RELATED ISSUES
Questions 4–9, and question 11, were on accounts-related issues not specifically addressed to sole practice.
Some of the comments have already been recorded under the relevant questions.
Binder Hamlyn supported the implementation of an accounts-system authorisation process for all new firms setting up in practice, and agreed that twice-yearly visits by the reporting accountant to check balances and examines files would be productive.
However, whilst asserting that the reporting accountant should already as part of his or her duties be auditing at least two reconciliations in detail they also argued that the process was ‘highly unlikely to reveal a great deal that the reporting accountant would not otherwise pick up during the year-end work’.
They also conceded that ‘it is who gives the report that is important, rather how frequently the report is given’.
It was a ‘sad indictment’ that some reporting accountants had evidently been issuing unqualified reports in circumstances subsequently giving rise to claims on the fund.
This echoed the view of a number of solicitor respondents, one of whom argued that sole practitioners should be required to change their accountant annually; whilst others said sole practitioners should be prohibited from  instructioning sole practitioner accountants.
Touche Ross made the following general comments:
the  accountants report should involve a more general view of the financial management arrangements of a firm;
partners should have to confirm formally that they have complied with the rules;
there should be a direct financial reward/penalty with regard to compliance and financial efficiency;
qualified reports should be followed up more swiftly by the Law Society;
there should be a requirement for firms to report quarterly on the adequacy of their financial resources;
there should be a requirement for accounting systems to be capable of producing monthly profit and loss accounts and statement of assets and liabilities;
authorisation to hold client monies was supported;
there should be a requirement to appoint a finance as well as an accounts partner.
FIMBRA pointed out how useful they had found it to ‘track’ those of their members who had other business interest in addition to their financial services companies.
It had been discovered that fraudulent activities amongst these members was often associated with their other business dealings.
This reflected the experience of the Law Society of Scotland in relation to their members.
FIMBRA had also concluded that their sole proprietor members should not be authorised to hold client money.
However, this should be seen against the background of the varying capital adequacy requirements for FIMBRA regulated firms.
Other comments on this issue included the following:
the reporting accountant should have the power directly to request a firm's balancestatement from the bank — this could be used prior to a ‘spot check’;
all firms should be required to appoint a qualified legal cashier, who should undertake regular training;
there should be a capital adequacy requirement for solicitors similar to that required from firms dealing in investment business under the Financial Services Act;
Law Society approved profit and loss sheets should be issued and it should be the responsibility of the reporting accountant to ensure that these have been completed by firms;
reporting accountants should owe a duty to the Law Society to report directly where their instructions have been terminated by solicitors whose reports would otherwise have been qualified; or generally to report on ‘suspicious circumstances’;
the Law Society should maintain a register of competent and approved accountants, and negotiate a scale of  reasonable fees with their respective professional bodies; the present regulations have not been enforced adequately; there should be one random spot check per year on the accounts of all firms;
reporting accountants should have to confirm that all firms have undertaken an ‘expense of time’ calculation and budget for the following year;
sole practitioners would not object to the proposed extra accounting measures if they were aimed at all firms;
the increased cost of the proposals and the fact that many will be unnecessary in the majority of firms means that the extra requirements should only be imposed on firms with a history of late or qualified reports etc.
COMPENSATION FUND
Question 12 Should the Council normally exercise its discretion not to make a grant from the compensation fund where the application has already received payment from SIF to the full extent of 1 million?
Response
Comment
Fewer than 10% of respondents answered this question negatively, making it one of the most unambiguously supported proposals in the paper.
However some answering ‘yes’ to this also went on to oppose any cap in the case of private clients — which suggests that the capping implications of this question may not have been fully appreciated.
Question 13 Subject to this, do you agree that grants from the compensation fund should continue to be made without limitation to individual private clients who have lost money as a result of a solicitors dishonesty?
Response
Comment
Over half of the respondents were against this suggestion, with a little over one-third in favour.
As with all other questions relating to the capping or limiting of grants from the Compensation Fund, the results were swayed heavily by the the large number of sole practitioners who replied using the SPG pro forma response, on which the answer here was ‘no’ and which went on to propose a cap of 150,000 for both institutional and private clients.
Unfortunately, as very few of those who chose to respond in this way elaborated on their answer, their reasoning remains unclear.
A sizable majority of respondents in each of the remaining categories, including local law societies, agreed that grants to individual clients should continue to be unlimited.
The issues raised by this and subsequent questions go to the heart of the debate on the Compensation Fund, and it is apparent that many of those who answered negatively felt to varying degrees that in the present commercial climate the public could no longer expect the entire profession to compensate them for any losses they suffered at the hands of a tiny minority of errant solicitors — particularly as no comparable compensation was available from the providers of other professional services.
One sole practitioner argued that ‘private clients must take the risk of a business default by a solicitor as they must with any other business’; whilst another commented that capping would be justified ‘now that solicitors have been turned into a trade with the main considerations being commercial’.
A respondent from a large practice took the pragmatic view that it was only a matter of time before a computer fraud took place on a scale which made the current level of claims pale into insignificance, making the introduction of a cap imperative.
Many others, however, agreed with the sole practitioner who felt that unlimited liability ought to be accepted as part of the ‘burden and responsibility of being a member of a profession’.
Some local law societies again found it difficult to reach a conclusion on the matter, although it was generally felt (as per Suffolk and North Essex) that the political consequences of limiting payments would be counter-productive.
Those lending institutions that responded echoed the principled opposition of the Council of Mortgage Lenders to any cap and to the suggestion that a distinction could be draw between private and other clients.
This latter point was supported by a small number of respondents from private practice.
Question 14 Do you agree that no overall limit should be placed on the annual amount payable from the compensation fund?
Response
Comment
The results for this question were almost a mirror image of those for the  preceding question, with the negative response to the proposition from the majority of sole practitioners easily cancelling out the positive answer given by the bulk of the remaining respondents.
Local law societies were generally against the establishment of an annual limit on the grounds that it might lead to unfairness in the handling of claims within any particular 12 month period.
However, Furness and District reluctantly concluded that the time had come for the introduction of an annual limit; whilst Cardiff and District suggested that the question of re-insuring the compensation fund liability be reconsidered.
The Council of Mortgage Lenders, in line with the majority of respondents in the ‘other’ category, supported the maintenance of the status quo as expressed in the question.
The Legal Resources Group proposed a ceiling of 10 million per annum, payable at the end of the year, with claims being abated if that sum were exceeded.
Question 15 Should the hardship test be applied to all claims on the compensation fund so as to exclude all institutional and most corporate applicants?
Response
Comment
The majority of respondents disagreed with the application of a hardship test for the purpose of excluding all institutional and most corporate claims.
However, answers varied between categories of respondent.
Those from medium-sized and larger firms supported the introduction of such a test on the grounds that institutions could and should ‘look after themselves’.
Sole practitioners and two partner firms were understandably fearful that institutions might retaliate to the imposition of a hardship test (or cap) by restricting their conveyancing panels to firms with three or more partners, and attention was drawn to the ‘threat’ issued by the Halifax Building Society in this regard, as well as to the current practice of a number of lenders.
The British Bankers Association endorsed this conclusion, and the CML leant its voice to the chorus of opposition.
In general local law societies disagreed with the question, although they found it difficult to reach a consensus on the issue.
Some members of the Furness and District Society argued that now would be a good time to introduce a hardship test given the current unpopularity of the institutions.
Westmorland Law Society suggested that a distinction would have to be drawn between institutions and small businesses for the purpose of any test.
(a) 50,000
(b) 100,000
(c) 150,000
(d) some other figure?
Question 16
(i) Should there be a cap on the maximum amount payable out of the compensation fund in respect of an individual claim b a lending institution?
Response
(ii) If so, should the limit be:
Response
Interpretation
Some respondents answered ‘no’ to the first part of this question and then quoted a figure for the second part — making it difficult to discern their real attitude to the issue of capping institutional claims, and complicating the interpretation of the statistics.
However, the overall response was clearly favourable to such a measure.
The  surprising feature of this result was the widespread support for the introduction of a cap amongst sole practitioners who replied using the standard SPG form.
It is presumed that these respondents considered — and rejected — the argument that capping would provoke a reaction on part of institutions which would adversely affect sole and two partner practices.
However, there is no simple way of verifying whether all or any of those adopting the SPG response endorsed this line of reasoning.
The results indicate that majorities of respondents within each category (barring ‘others’) favoured capping institutional claims, with 150,000 emerging as the most popular limit (100,000 amongst a majority of the 39 law societies agreeing to a cap).
Many pitched their suggested figure at a level considered to be somewhere near the price of an average house mortgage.
It should be stressed that the figures do not reflect the fact that a considerable number of respondents answered ‘yes’ to the principle of capping but went on to argue that institutions should receive nothing at all by way of grants (see, for example, the response from the Legal Resources Group).
Comment
The Council of Mortgage Lenders emphatically rejected any form of capping, citing as their reasons:
’ a)the damage to the reputation of the profession as a whole and to sole practitioners in particular, resulting from grant limitation;
b) the possibility of significant restrictions being established on lenders' conveyancing panels;
c) the cost of separate insurance provision and increased vetting and supervision which could be passed onto the profession and might outweigh the savings made by grant limitation;
d) the perceived surrender by the Law Society to lenders of responsibility for supervising a sector of the profession, which could result from capping;
e) the practical difficulties in deciding on professional grounds which clients are subject to restrictions when claiming on the fund;
f) the options that could be available to lenders for making alternative arrangements for conveyancing;
g) the valid alternatives for capping which as recognised by the Law Society of Scotland, are available and which, if introduced, would attack the problem of solicitor fraud at source.’
The CML also queried the legal basis of grant limitation in view of‘the Law Society's duty not to unjustifiably fetter its discretion in respect of the operation of the fund’.
Question 17
(i) Should there be a cap on the maximum amount payable out of the compensation fund in respect of an individual claim by any claimant (including private clients)?
(ii) If so, should the limit be:
(a) 50,000
(b) 100,000
(c) 150,000 (d) some other figure?
Over 60% agreed and around a third disagreed with this suggestion, over 75% of the former being sole practitioners.
Respondents from medium-sized and larger practices were more evenly divided on the issue, but nevertheless registered majorities in favour of capping.
In contrast, two partner firms, ‘others’ and local law societies were largely opposed to untargetted capping, the latter by a substantial majority.
Of the various limits suggested in 17(ii), 150,000 emerged as the most popular, but many respondents made no attempt to quantify the cap.
The arguments for and against capping offered in response to this question tended merely to rehearse those already discussed.
Response
Other Amounts
Comment
Question 18 Do you have any other suggestions as to the way in which limits might be placed on grants out of the compensation fund?
The statistics for this question are a mere formality and have therefore been omitted from the report.
Most respondents  interpreted the question as an invitation to comment on the wider issues surrounding the nature and scope of the Compensation Fund, and these are discussed below.
COMMENTS ON THE COMPENSATION FUND
Arguments for and against capping the fund have already been discussed in  preceding sections.
The overriding concern of solicitors in private practice was that rapid and decisive action should be taken to reduce future contributions and levies.
The British Legal Association, in line with the Association of Public Accountants, advocated the merger of the Indemnity and Compensation Funds, and offered technical arguments to this effect.
The Office of Fair Trading agreed that ‘from a competition viewpoint there might be a great deal of benefit in combining the two funds and placing them on insurance principles, setting premiums on the basis of risk’.
This would ‘remove the anomaly whereby even solicitors who do not handle money are required to contribute to the fund to the same extent that more ‘at risk’ solicitors do’.
This was a vexed issue amongst solicitors who were affected in this way; although it was interesting that the committee of the Legal Aid Practitioners Group concluded that ‘a levy based on an equal proportion of the payment ‘was’ unavoidable’.
In addition, the BLA argued that unlimited liability generated claims by encouraging unjustified risk-taking by solicitors, clients and lenders alike, and also made solicitors the first target for loss recovery when the fault  occurred .
The force of this argument was recognised to some extent by the OFT, who went on to state that a limit on each claim was preferable to an overall limit, providing the extent of the former was made clear to clients.
On ‘one strict competition line of argument’, the OFT saw ‘no problems’ in sole  practitioners being the object of further restrictions, subject to any public interest argument in their favour.
Furthermore, ‘the proposal to give different levels of protection to institutional and private clients’ posed ‘no competition problems’.
Those who advocated the scrapping of the fund — along the lines of the circular letter from Messrs Whitfield Hallam Goodall — were relatively few in number but included at least one local law society.
The loading of Compensation Fund contributions on ‘higher risk’ practices (sole or otherwise) was widely supported by solicitors in private practice.
Many directed their comments at the Indemnity as well at the Compensation Fund.
A selection of other comments and suggestions on this subject is provided below:
goodwill argument in favour of the Compensation Fund is a myth — the public are unaware of the Compensation Fund;
other professionals involved in (e.g.) mortgage fraud should be pursued relentlessly;
the Compensation Fund is a ‘solid plank’ of the professions' reputation; it is absurd that only solicitors offer the public unlimited indemnity;
Compensation Fund should be responsible for claims over a fidelity bond ‘excess’ of around 25,000 (for sole principals) plus 100,000 per partner in firms, up to a limit of 100,000, with a cap on the fund up to 1 million, and a no claims bonus;
keep dishonesty in perspective, payments are small compared with SIF;
maintain the principle of full compensation;
Compensation Fund contributions should be based on gross fees;
reconsider contractual limitation of liability;
Law Society should run its own bonding system;
SIF should deal exclusively with negligence and Compensation Fund with dishonesty;
set compensation at level of other regulatory bodies;
distinction should be drawn between fraud and embezzlement and claims settled on different basis for each;
if the government and public undermine the professional status of solicitors, they should not have the benefit of the Compensation Fund.
payments should be 100% of loss up to a certain limit, and tapered down in varying proportions thereafter.
CONVEYANCING
Question 19 Should solicitors be prohibited from acting for lenders in a transaction in which they (or their family or employees) have a personal interest?
Response
Comment
Over two-thirds of respondents were against a prohibition of the kind proposed in the paper, and a clear majority of local law societies were unsympathetic.
Five main reactions to the proposal surfaced in the more detailed responses:
(a) it was felt that insufficient information had been given on the extent of the problem which the proposal was intended to address (i.e. had any claims resulted from solicitors acting in these circumstances?);
(b) it was felt that the circumstances envisaged in the question were already catered for adequately in the existing rules and principles of professional conduct relating to conflicts of interests;
(c) it was argued that any potential conflicts could be circumvented through the creation of ‘Chinese walls’ within firms;
(d) a number of respondents supported the idea of prohibiting solicitors from acting where they had a personal interest in a transaction, but not where the interest was that of a family member or employee.
Bristol and Liverpool law societies concurred in this approach, whilst Leicestershire felt that the prohibition should relate exclusively to a personal interest on the part of a solicitor;
(e) there was widespread agreement amongst those who  opposed the proposal, that a solicitor who wished to act in the circumstances outlined in the question ought nevertheless to be under an obligation to disclose to the lender any personal, family or employee interests attaching to the transaction which might give rise to a conflict.
This approach, according to the Council for Licensed Conveyancers, would ensure that the interests of mortgagees were adequately safeguarded.
In contrast to the views of the majority of local law societies, the Conference of Presidents and Secretaries concluded that existing conflict rules were ineffective, and they reluctantly supported the introduction of a prohibition.
It was argued that a solicitor affected by this could be represented by another solicitor after exchange of contract, so that that other solicitor could give the report on title to the lender and receive the mortgage advance.
If in partnership, the purchaser's solicitor could ask another partner in the firm to undertake this responsibility, whilst a sole practitioner could approach a solicitor in another firm.
Alternatively, it was suggested that a limit be placed on the amount of money a solicitor could handle in a personal/ family transaction.
Question 20 Do you agree that all lenders should be encouraged to provide sellers' solicitors with form 53s sealed prior to completion?
Response
Comment
68.55% of respondents answered ‘yes’ to this question.
Local law societies were alone in recording a majority against.
Amongst those who disagreed it was frequently asserted that the provision of a sealed form 53 prior to completion might facilitate rather than hinder the commission of a fraud.
The CML pointed out that a sealed form 53 was a receipt, and that lenders would be reluctant to issue it before receiving the monies in question.
Nevertheless, many respondents including Conference of Presidents and Secretaries of local law societies, took the opportunity afforded by the question to berate the tardiness of lenders in forwarding form 53.
Question 21 Where completion is delayed more than two return mortgage funds to the lender?
Response
Interpretation
It became evident in the course of analysing the submissions that a majority of those responding to the question objected not to the underlying principle but to the proposed time scale of 2–3 days.
Answers of this kind were often accompanied by alternative suggestions such as 5, 7 or 14 days.
It was therefore considered appropriate to assign responses such as these to the ‘other’ rather than the ‘no’category and this accounts for the rather unusual statistics.
Comment
Around half of the respondents would have clearly felt more comfortable with the question if the proposed time scale had been 5–7 days, and a great majority of those who took this approach including the vast majority of respondents who used the SPG form — suggested that 7 days would not be unreasonable.
In the main, local law societies answered the question negatively, or simply stated that it was a matter for the lender.
It was pointed out by a number of respondents that some lenders already include requirements of this kind in their instructions to solicitors.
Those who disagreed with the proposal, including the Council for Licensed Conveyancers, thought that a rule to this effect could result in unnecessary delays and  aggravate relations with clients.
The CML accepted the force of this objection, and proposed instead that any rule, if introduced, should require solicitors simply to inform lenders immediately if it were evident that completion would be delayed by more than 3 days — a view which appeared to be supported by a considerable number of other respondents.
GENERAL COMMENTS ON CONVEYANCING (Questions 19–21)
The CML suggested that lenders could assist the Law Society with monitoring panel solicitors through the provision of factual information and statistics which could form the basis of risk indicators.
The Law Society could reciprocate with information on solicitors who had failed to renew their practising certificates.
The CML also argued that solicitors should make annual returns on the number of conveyancing transactions they completed each year.
It was also suggested that solicitors should display their practising certificates and last accountant's report in their offices.
The Law Society was encouraged to remind solicitors of the full solicitor — client relationship which subsisted between solicitors and lender-clients (a point also stressed by negligence panel solicitors).
The CML disputed that lenders had in recent years relied on the availability of cover under the Compensation and Indemnity Funds to relax their own business practices, and claimed that lenders were largely responding to public demands for more streamlined conveyancing procedures.
Many solicitor respondents disagreed  vehemently with this view.
On a more technical level, the Conference of Presidents and Secretaries of local law societies supported the system adopted by some lenders who send the land registry acknowledgement with the mortgage advance cheque to the buyer's solicitor.
This provided ‘a check from the buyers mortgagees point of view, that the money has been used for the purchase’.
The conference also suggested that the standard requisitions on title be amended to include a reference to whether a seller's solicitor was also acting for the lender in the redemption of the mortgage.
Monmouthshire Law Society advocated that evidence of payment of mortgage monies from the purchaser's/lender's solicitor should be available in relation to new advances, or from the seller's solicitor on redemption of the charges.
Abbey National already provided a receipt for mortgage monies; and a practice rule could be introduced requiring a solicitor who expected to receive evidence of payment to report the matter if this were not forthcoming in a prescribed period.
The British Bankers Association urged the Law Society to consider setting up a clearing house where funds were automatically collected during the course of the day and then redirected.
However, they conceded that this might prove expensive and not particularly effective in the battle against dishonesty.
Birmingham Law Society suggested that redemption monies could be sent directly to the sellers lender by the buyer's solicitor.
A number of respondents suggested a similar switch of responsibility for redemption of the mortgage — in effect the property would be sold subject to the existing mortgage, and the buyer would ensure that the previous mortgage was redeemed.
A number also felt that procedures should be changed so that monies did not pass through solicitor's hands at all.
MISCELLANEOUS COMMENTS
Many respondents took the opportunity afforded by the consultation to offer their reflections on the current state of the profession and the issues facing it.
These are worthy of repetition to the extent that they give some indication of the prevailing mood of practitioners.
Four broad sets of concerns emerged:
a) entry to the profession;
b) effectiveness of the Law Society in its regulatory role;
c) the impact of the recession;
d) changing conceptions of professionalism.
a) Entry to the Profession — a number of respondents, including some local law  societies , wondered if admissions policy could be tightened to screen potential entrants to the profession more effectively.
In particular they lamented the fact that applicants for enrolment as students were no longer interviewed as they were until the late 1970's.
Other expressed scepticism about the usefulness of this procedure.
b) Effectiveness of the Law Society in its regulatory role — there was scope, argued a considerable number of respondents, for the Law Society to improve its effectiveness in enforcing the current regulations.
In particular it was felt that swifter and more decisive action on the part of the SCB in response to warnings passed by concerned solicitors and local law societies ought to be effected.
 Surprise was expressed at the apparent lack of action taken against those who failed to renew their practising certificates or to submit accountant's reports on time.
In addition, it was felt that the ‘Chinese walls’ between different sections of the Society hindered co-ordination and prevented the rapid identification of problem firms.
c) The impact of the recession — many argued that the recent increase in the number of defaults was linked directly to the current recession and to the cut-throat price competition between solicitors which this had precipitated.
Downward pressure on fees, together with a decline in the property market and escalating overheads, had driven some firms to the edge of bankruptcy and tempted solicitor to theft.
One respondent was not alone in pleading for ‘a properly funded and functioning court system and properly paid legal aid’.
d) Changing conceptions of professionalism — finally, it should not pass without comment that the traditional concept of professionalism on which successive generations of solicitors have been reared was not uncommonly perceived to have been undermined by the dominant political and economic ideology of the last decade, with its emphasis on consumerism and market forces.
Those respondents calling for a drastic limitation of the professions' liability and/or the abolition of the Compensation Fund altogether, often voiced the angry conviction that the transition from profession to trade — with the accompanying loss of status for the services of solicitors which that implied — had accelerated in recent years to the point at which the profession could no longer be called upon to pay for the dubious moral privilege of an ‘anachronistic’ system of compensation.
This analysis was not universally accepted, and it is clear that many preferred to tackle the problem of dishonesty through preventative action than to vacate the ‘moral high ground’ by abandoning or altering too radically the present basis of claim settlement.
The exception to this approach was reflected in the willingness to cap institutional claims — an issue which on the whole was regarded as a strategic and tactical consideration in the relationship between the profession and the lending institutions, rather than as a matter of high principle.