

THE MARKETPLACE
Top Ten Popularity for the Renault Clio
Success in Britain — The Renault Clio is amongst the ten best selling cars in the British market, with a total of 34,701 sales in 1992.
More British buyers chose Renault Clios in 1992 than Peugeot 205s or Volkswagen Golfs.
It was the most popular model in the Renault range, accounting for 47.4% of car sales during 1992 for Renault UK.
Clio accounted for 2.1 % of all new car registrations in Britain during 1992 and made an important contribution to the success of Renault UK, whose sales in 1992 grew by 15.14%.
Success Elsewhere — Clio is the best selling small car in the whole of Western Europe.
Its sales success in 1992 helped Renault to increase its total European sales by 5.9% in 1992 to 1.432 million.
Renault sales now account for 10.6% of West European car registrations — up from 10.0% in 1991.
Clio outsold the Peugeot 205 and 106 models combined to be the best selling car in France, accounting for 11.1 % of car sales during 1992.
Customer Profile
Supermini class vehicles appeal to a very wide cross-section of people, giving this market sector the most diverse customer profile in the market.
Important groups within the supermini market include:
Younger Buyers — both singles and couples
Two Car Families — with superminis bought as the second car
Young Single Car Families
Older Buyers of 45 years or more
The 5 Campus Prima continues in production to satisfy the demand from younger buyers for an ‘entry level’ supermini.
With more than a dozen models ranging from the RL 1.2 and RL 1.9 Diesel to the luxurious Baccara and high performance 16V, the Clio is able to satisfy the needs of every other sector of the supermini market.
The overall profile of Clio customers during 1992 makes an interesting comparison to the average for the supermini sector.
This information suggests Clios are proving particularly popular with women and professional people.
Trends also suggest the Clio is becoming increasingly popular amongst younger buyers — largely as a result of special editions designed for younger motorists and press advertising designed to appeal to younger buyers.
Success Factors
The Clio has been one of Renault's most successful models ever in the fiercely competitive British market.
Key success factors which have become clear since the Clio's UK launch in March 1991 have included:
Attractive Design — Design/Style is the factor most frequently revealed by Clio customers amongst their reasons for purchase.
The popularity of the Clio's external design is almost double the average for cars in the supermini segment.
Critical Acclaim — Since being voted European Car of the Year in 1991, the Clio has attracted warm praise from numerous expert motoring journalists.
The Clio has been contrasted very favourably to all class rivals in both objective and subjective comparisons.
Low Servicing Costs — A first oil change is not required until the initial service at 6,000 miles.
Major components such as the gearbox are sealed for life to reduce service costs, while tyre wear is minimised by highly accurate wheel alignment techniques.
Peace of Mind — All Renaults carry an unlimited mileage warranty for 12 months after purchase.
In addition to this, buyers get one-year free membership of the RAC with no-charge legal, technical and travel advice as well as the nationwide breakdown recovery service.
High Quality Service — Renault UK's Swindon-based National Parts Distribution Centre is linked to all 270 dealers by a special parts hotline.
In the vast majority of cases, parts required by the dealer can be supplied within 24 hours from the massive range of part held in stock.
Customer Care — If a customer's car is off the road for more than 24 hours waiting for a component to arrive, Renault's Customer Courtesy Service allows him or her to use a replacement vehicle free of charge until the part is delivered and the problem rectified.
Lengthy Warranty — The Clio extends the 6 year anti-corrosion warranty of the Renault 5 by a further two years, giving extra peace of mind for 8 years and protecting resale values.
What the buyers say
The reasons for purchase given by Clio buyers contrast in many ways with the average for the supermini segment.
Market research data shows that buyers choose Clio above other superminis for reasons of style, equipment, comfort, spaciousness, manoeuvrability and publicity.
Buyers are much less likely than the sector average to buy a Clio because they ‘always buy the same’.
Two thirds of all Clio sales were conquest sales from buyers who previously owned cars from other manufacturers — much more than the industry average of 50%.
Follow-up research — This suggests that Clio buyers are far from disappointed by the experience of ownership.
When asked to identify what they most liked about their Clios, the answers given by customers were as follows:
These findings prove that the Renault Clio delivers the same attributes which originally attracted buyers to make their choice.
Indeed, the experience of ownership makes them even more likely to appreciate the Clio's comfort, manoeuvrability, spaciousness and performance.
CLASS LEADING DESIGN
Style for the 90's
The Clio's predecessor, the Renault 5, did much to define the supermini segment during the seventies and eighties.
Offering a mix of practicality, comfort and performance, the Renault 5 was popular throughout Europe from its original launch in 1972.
The first generation Renault 5 was in production for 13 years before being replaced by the second generation Renault 5 ‘SuperCinq’ in 1985.
A total of more than 2.7 million have been built, and the number continues to grow with the Renault 5 Campus still remaining in production — 21 years after the Renault 5's first introduction.
The design of the Clio represented a brave decision.
Rather than‘playing safe’ by retaining the styling features of the Renault 5, the product planners looked to the future in developing the new Clio.
The design of the Clio actually began before the launch of the second generation Renault 5.
Key dates in the Clio design programme were as follows:
Essential elements of the Clio's design were determined from the outset, namely:
It should be slightly larger than the Renault 5.
Anti-corrosion should be built-in from the start.
Panel gaps and door shuts should be consistently narrow.
An exceptionally stiff basic structure should be created to: benefit durability, ride and handling enhance primary safety reduce noise, vibration and harshness (NVH)
Robust Body Structure
Computer-aided design and engineering techniques were used extensively in the creation of the Clio's bodyshell.
These helped in achieving
Increased Stiffness — The number of separate body parts fell from 170 in the Renault 5 to 119 in the Clio.
This 30% reduction increases overall stiffness and sealing effectiveness while also helping to prevent corrosion.
Thicker Steel — Compared to the Renault 5, steel thickness has been increased in critical areas, while others use high-strength low alloy steel.
For greater accuracy of assembly, major body panels such as the doors are now formed in one piece.
Improved Panel Fit — Advanced constructional techniques are used for critical joints such as the roof/bodyside and wheelarch/side panel.
Adhesive joints are reinforced by spot welds to improve stiffness and ensure accuracy of panel fit.
98% of spot welds are applied automatically.
Protection Against Corrosion
The Clio body/chassis unit uses four types of pre-treated steel.
Much of the steel used in Clio — 47.5% of the total — is pre-treated against corrosion, including galvanised door and bonnet frames.
Extra protection includes
Surface Treatments — Different types of surface treatments are used to protect steel panels.
These include tri-metallic phosphating, cataphoretic priming and extensive use of sealants such as anti-gravel protection on the leading edge of the bonnet and a clear lacquer on metallic finishes.
Protective Layers — Wheelarches, sill panels and the underside of the body are further protected with a chip-resistant mastic and plastic liners are fitted in the front wheelarches.
Underbonnet Protection — Every underbonnet component is protected by a zinc/chrome/nickel layer, along with a wax spray applied after assembly and an oil-based protective coating on the exterior of the engine to ensure no damage occurs before delivery.
Extra Thick Paintwork — The body of each Clio is protected by 3.2kg of cataphoretic primer plus 1.4kg of primer and 5.5kg of colour paint.
Metallic paint gets an additional 3kg of clear paint as well.
A further 5kg of mastic is also applied to each Clio for extra protection against gravel.
Gruelling Test Procedures — A sixty-cycle three month test is used to simulate eight years of regular motoring in Northern Europe or 15 years in a city such as London.
Each cycle includes salt spray tests and a 20-hour exposure to a temperature of 40 deg C and 95% humidity.
In this way Renault are able to validate the effectiveness of Renault's anti-corrosion techniques.
Eight Year Warranty — Renault's expertise in corrosion protection is confirmed by the new eight year anti-corrosion warranty covering all models of the Clio.
ENGINE AND TRANSMISSION
Choice of Six Engine Types
When the Clio was introduced onto the British market in March 1991, three engine specifications were available.
Buyers who favoured petrol could choose between the new fuel-injected 1.2-litre Energy concept engine and the fuel-injected 1.4-litre Energy four cylinder unit first fitted in the Renault 19.
Customers who preferred diesel could buy their Clio — in 3-door form only until July 1991 — with a 1.9-litre diesel engine.
Additions to the range followed rapidly, all of which follow the same formula of transverse engine layout and front wheel drive.
Since May 1991 the Clio has been available with a fuel-injected 1.8-litre petrol engine and October 1991 saw the introduction of the 16-valve high-performance model.
The launch of the RSi model in April 1993 added further to the choice of engine types available with a more highly tuned version of the 8-valve 1.8-litre petrol engine.
Most powerful of all Clios will be the limited edition Clio Williams model, due to go on sale in August 1993 with a 1998cc version of the 1 6-valve model which is to boast a massive 150bhp.
Caring for the Environment
The modern range of engines fitted to the Clio range all offer highly competitive fuel economy and high standards of environmental protection.
All petrol engines run on 91 octane unleaded fuel and are equipped with modern fuel injection and three-way exhaust catalysts.
Together with electronic ignition, electronic knock sensors, over-run fuel cut-off and idle-speed governing, these ‘green’ power units are thus able to comply with the stringent US87 emission regulations.
To improve fuel economy on short journeys and minimise the level of exhaust emissions, close attention has been paid to rapid engine warm-up.
A heated intake manifold combines with a thermostatic intake for the air filter to ensure good efficiency for the Clio on shorter journeys.
Fuel economy is outstanding with the 1.9-litre diesel engine available in the Clio.
68.9 mpg is possible at a steady 56 mph.
Not only does a diesel engine consume less of the world's oil resources, but — provided it is regularly serviced — also lasts longer than a petrol engine.
Exhaust emissions from a correctly-maintained diesel engine contain 20% less CC (the ‘greenhouse’ gas) than a catalyst-equipped petrol engine.
The diesel also produces 90% less carbon monoxide, 60% fewer oxides of nitrogen and 90% fewer of the unburnt hydrocarbons which help to produce acid rain.
In Britain, diesel car sales have risen to 12.6% of the new car market in 1992 compared with less than 1 % a decade earlier.
Renault has played an important role in this change, with the popularity of Renault diesel engines reflected in the way diesel versions accounted for 16% of all Clio sales in the UK during the last quarter of 1992.
The Diesel Cashback Programme running from April to August 1993 is expected to boost this growing share still further, offering Clio Diesel buyers a cheque equivalent to the fuel costs of more than 10,000 miles motoring.
Designed for Easy Maintenance
Service requirements for both petrol and diesel models are simple and easy thanks to modern engines and careful design.
By drawing engine cooling air in through the left-front wheelarch, for example, Renault engineers have not only been able to enhance the Clio's aerodynamics, but also protect the engine from damage caused by ingress of foreign bodies.
Maintenance requirements were taken into account from the design stage.
The attractive underbonnet layout is carefully set out so that all regular service items are close at hand and clearly labelled.
Clios fitted with petrol engines do not require their first service until 6,000 miles.
Oil change, check and adjustment services follow every subsequent 6,000 miles, with a major service scheduled every 36,000 miles.
Clios which are fitted with diesel engines require their first service at 5,000 miles and minor services then follow at 5,000 mile intervals.
Major services are only required every 40,000 miles.
Engine Types
1.2-litre Energy Engine
The Clio is the only Renault car to be fitted with the 1.2-litre Energy engine.
The engine block and alloy cylinder head is shared with the 1.4-litre Energy engine so the bore is identical.
A new crankshaft, connecting rods and pistons give a shorter stroke and reduce the cubic capacity to 1171 cc.
The fuel-injected 1171 cc Energy engine produces 60bhp (43kW) at 6,000rpm with a torque peak of 64 lb ft (83Nm) at 3,500rpm.
Clio models fitted with the 1.2-litre Energy Engine combine nippy performance with exceptional levels of fuel economy.
1.4-litre Energy Engine
The 1.4-litre Energy engine was originally introduced in 1989 in some models of the larger Renault 19.
Like the 1.2-litre Energy power unit, this modern unit features a sophisticated engine management system.
With this it is possible to control the emission control equipment and ensure peak efficiency thanks to cylinder-by-cylinder knock sensing.
The fuel-injected 1390cc Energy engine produces 80bhp (57.5kW) at 5,750rpm with a torque peak of 80 lb ft (107Nm) at 3,500rpm.
Petrol consumption is only fractionally greater that of the smaller Energy engine, with 1.4-litre models of the Clio enjoying a perfect combination of eager power and impressive fuel economy.
1.8-litre Engines
The 1.8-litre petrol engine first introduced in the Clio during May 1991 is similar to the unit now also offered in some models of the Renault 19.
The fuel-injected 1794cc engine produces 95bhp (68.5kW) at 5,750rpm with a torque peak of 107 lb ft (142Nm) at 3,500rpm.
The most modern of all the power units available in the Clio range, the 1.8-litre engine offers relaxed performance and delightful driving flexibility.
This unit was supplemented in April 1993 by a more highly tuned version for the RSi model.
With a slightly higher compression ratio of 9.8:1 (compared to 9.7:1), this 8-valve 1794cc engine produces 110bhp (79.5kW) at 5,500rpm with maximum torque of 114 lb ft (155Nm) at 4,250rpm.
This combines similarly high levels of refinement with even more lively performance characteristics.
1.9-litre Diesel Engine
The single-camshaft 1.9-litre diesel engine fitted in the Clio is a familiar sight in several other Renault models.
With indirect fuel injection, the well-proven power unit has been a driving force in the growing popularity of diesel amongst British drivers over recent years.
The 1870cc diesel engine produces 65bhp (47kW) at 4,500rpm with a torque peak of 87 lb ft (118 Nm) at 2,750rpm.
Performance is as good as many petrol cars with a wide torque band and a potential top speed of over 100 mph, but the most important success factor for the 1.9 diesel engine must be the outstanding levels of fuel economy — as much as 68.9 mpg at a steady 56mph.
1.8-litre 16V Engine
The 16-valve power unit available since October 1991 in the fastest Clio available in Britain is a completely different power unit from the 8-valve 1.8-litre engine.
The new F7 unit was first employed in the Renault 19 16V launched in Britain in March 1991.
Four valves-per-cylinder are operated directly by double overhead camshafts which are driven by a toothed belt.
High-pressure hydraulic cam followers feature automatic clearance compensation to reduce noise and wear.
The 1764cc 16V engine produces 137bhp (99kW) at 6,500rpm with a torque peak of 119 lb ft (158Nm) at 4,250rpm.
Though smooth and refined in use, there is little doubt that — at least until the arrival of the 150bhp Clio Williams — this is the ultimate power package for driving enthusiasts, with the 16V offering invigorating urge, rapid throttle responses and class-leading performance.
Transmissions
The Clio is available with a choice of three transmissions: Buyers can choose between manual four and five-speed gearboxes and an advanced four-speed automatic.
All are sealed for life so they do not require oil changes.
Manual transmissions accounted for 84% of Clios sales in Britain during 1992.
The manual gearboxes are derived from those fitted to the larger Renault 19 range.
They feature a light-alloy casing and a positive rod-shift linkage.
Quiet operation is ensured by using larger numbers of smaller ‘teeth’ on a number of pinions.
Steering stability is achieved by making the two transmission half shafts virtually the same length.
Both are fitted with two constant velocity universal joints so that the power can be transmitted to the wheels no matter what the angle of the suspension or the steering.
A cable-operated, single-plate diaphragm clutch is fitted to all manual models.
Automatic adjustment for wear takes place at the pedal end of the cable to maintain smoothness of use.
Automatic transmissions accounted for 16% of Clio sales in Britain during 1992.
The advanced automatic gearbox available on 1.4-litre models is superior to most cars in its class in offering four forward speeds.
Controlled by microprocessors for smoothness and durability, the automatic gearbox features a simple button control to allow the driver to convert from ‘Comfort’ to ‘Special Range’.
In ‘Comfort’, gear ratios are maintained as high as possible, while in ‘Special Range’ it is quicker to kick down for rapid acceleration and remains in a lower ratio until higher engine speeds.
SUSPENSION, STEERING AND BRAKES
Impressive Suspension
Renault cars have traditionally been known for their comfortable, well-controlled ride quality and their crisp, responsive steering.
Clio engineers sought to improve still further on these virtues.
The Clio's chassis engineers were able to achieve this by studying not only the design of the suspension, but also the way in which the suspension interacts with the entire body/chassis unit.
The exceptional stiffness of the Clio's basic structure allowed them to select and develop a suspension layout with MacPherson struts at the front and trailing arms with a torsion bar at the rear.
Dimensions — The Clio feels like a larger car to drive because it has the longest wheelbase and widest track in its class.
But with exceptionally short overhangs at front and rear, it combines this ‘big car stability’ with the predictable handling and the nimbleness of a supermini.
Front Suspension — Clio follows the success of the Renault 5 and 19 models with a MacPherson strut located by a bottom wishbone that is mounted onto a front subframe: Models with engines of 1.4-litres and above are also fitted with an anti-roll bar.
Rear Suspension — Two transverse torsion bars are located within a hollow tube and operated by trailing arms.
The rear dampers are angled forward to minimise wheelarch intrusion into the rear load area.
An anti-roll bar is standard on all models.
Comfort — Generously-sized suspension bushes are used to reduce road noise penetration and improve ride comfort.
Vibration in the suspension is minimised by special front subframe mountings and pendulum-type engine mountings which effectively decouple movements of the engine from those of the road wheels.
Performance — The Clio 16V and RSi models are fitted with larger anti-roll bars to reduce body roll plus tougher mounting bushes and uprated springs and dampers to suit its high performance driving characteristics.
The ride height is also reduced by 10mm at both front and rear.
Comfortable Steering
Rack-and-pinion steering is fitted to all Clio models.
This requires 3.8 turns from lock-to-lock and provides a small turning circle of just 33.3ft (10.15m) between kerbs and 34.8ft (10.6m) between walls.
Power assistance is available as standard or an optional extra on all models except those with 1.2-litre engines.
The turning circles remain unchanged, but the steering wheel only requires 3.4 turns from lock-to-lock.
Power assisted steering is standard on all models equipped with automatic gearboxes.
Power assisted steering is also standard on all models powered by diesel engines.
The Clio 16V and RSi are also fitted with power assisted steering as standard.
This is specially calibrated to feel increasingly firm as the speed rises.
Only 2.8 turns of the steering wheel are required from lock-to-lock.
The turning circle of the 16V and RSi models is slightly larger than other Clios at 35.6ft (10.86m) between kerbs and 36.9ft (11.26m) between walls.
Reassuring Brakes
The Clio is equipped with a servo-assisted, diagonally-split braking system.
Most Clios have disc brakes at the front and drum brakes at the rear, except the 16V and RSi, which have disc brakes at the rear.
Buyers can specify optional anti-lock braking (ABS) for the Clio 16V, RSi and RT model powered by the 1.8-litre petrol engine.
The electronically controlled, four-sensor ABS system is supplied by Bosch.
It uses two microprocessors working in parallel for maximum reliability, and each microprocessor has a nonvolatile memory to aid service diagnosis.
The ABS computer is integral with the hydraulic valve block.
By eliminating electrical connectors in this way, optimum reliability can be ensured.
SAFETY AND SECURITY
Safe Motoring
In addition to the crash tests required by the EC and other legislative bodies, Clio has passed a series of much more severe tests of safety for occupants.
These include crash tests that more accurately simulate real world events such as an asymmetric crash at 35mph (56kph).
Clio passed these tests thanks to the way in which safety was a key factor in its design and development.
Crash Protection — In the event of a heavy impact, the front and rear sections collapse progressively to absorb the energy.
The subframes are designed to deform in the same manner as the robust bodyshell and thereby contribute to this energy absorption.
Occupant protection is primary.
Detail Design — The fuel tank is located ahead of the rear wheels and the collapsible steering column is also fitted with a deformable support structure.
The front seats feature built-in safety belt attachment points.
Internal Reinforcement — A single-piece centre tunnel contributes to the robustness of the Clio bodyshell, as does a rear crossmember with a stiff ‘omega’ cross-section.
Added Security
All models of the Renault Clio have all their windows etched to show each vehicle's specific chassis number.
This standard feature makes it very difficult for a car thief to steal a Clio and falsify its identity.
Clios are unattractive to car thieves as a result.
All Clio 16V, Baccara and RT versions are fitted with a RAPS (Renault Anti-theft Protection System) engine immobiliser as standard.
A volumetric alarm system is fitted as standard on 16V versions of the Clio and is available as an option on all other models except the RL versions.
AERODYNAMICS AND INTERIOR
Sophisticated Aerodynamics
Top flight aerodynamics were one of the top priorities in the design and development of the Renault Clio.
This had a direct influence on elements such as the sloping bonnet line, steeply raked windscreen, curved roof and tapered rear section.
Concealed drip rails and careful sealing around body panels combine with other details such as an underbody deflector to smooth airflow in the area of the rear suspension, fuel tank and spare wheel to produce a Cd of 0.32 or 0.33 depending on model.
It should be noted that these drag coefficients are for Clios with door mirror on both sides — rather than the single door mirror used by certain other companies to produce flattering windtunnel figures.
An extensive programme of windtunnel testing at facilities such as Saint Cyr-l'Ecole permitted the careful refinement of the Clio's design to achieve low aerodynamic lift values at both front and rear — thereby ensuring driving stability at higher speeds.
The front air intake duct area varies according to the radiator size of each model.
Certain models are fitted with a flexible front spoiler to enhance cooling and aerodynamics and the high-performance Clio 16V and RSi models are also equipped with a spoiler at the top of the rear hatch for even greater high speed stability.
Spacious Interior
Comfort, spaciousness and equipment levels are amongst the most common reasons given by owners for liking their Clios.
The Renault design team clearly succeeded in their intention to offer big car comfort in a competitively compact package.
The owners' subjective opinions are borne out by objective facts.
Clio is the roomiest car in its class, with a larger luggage space than any of its rivals.
Comfortable Seats — Clio is equipped with seats that are manufactured in the same traditional style as those in larger cars.
The seats use metal springs with foam covering and upholstery in cloth, velour or leather.
Seatbelt anchorage points are integral with the seats, with the upper mounting points adjustable to six different positions.
The padded head restraints are also adjustable.
Versatile Stowage — As well as boasting class-leading legroom, the rear seats can be folded forward to carry larger loads.
This increases the ‘best in class’ boot capacity of 9.3 cubic feet to a massive 37 cubic feet.
On all models other than the RL/RLD, the backrest is split 60/40 for the optimum level of versatility.
Both the sill and the luggage area are completely trimmed to avoid scratches or other damage when carrying awkwardly shaped objects.
Attractive Fascia — The soft-look dashboard design uses fluid, rounded shapes to complement the form of the interior and two-tone finishing to blend in with the Clio's light and spacious driving environment.
Considerable attention was given to selecting a range of fabrics and moulding textures that were both easy-on-the-eye and in harmony with each other.
Effective Heating — The Clio is equipped with an airmix heating and ventilation system so that the heating matrix is hot at all times for immediate response when required.
Because the airflow is controlled by a 3-speed fan, the heating and ventilation is not dependent on the ‘ram effect’.
Not only does this ensure rapid response and lower noise levels; it also means that the heating and ventilation work when the Clio is at a standstill.
Comfortable Ventilation — Non-return valves are located at bumper height in the luggage compartment for extracting air from the Clio.
This helps to keep the driving atmosphere fresh and healthy by achieving a ‘throughflow’ of air.
Added Sophistication — RT, RSi, Baccara and 16V models are fitted with heating ducts to direct warm air to rear seat passengers plus an ‘Electrics Pack’ consisting of electric front windows, central locking (including the tailgate) and an infrared remote control in the key.
The Electrics Pack is available as an option on RN versions.
Sounds Great — RT, Baccara and 16V models are equipped with a 4×6 Watt Philips Hi Fi radio cassette stereo system that is specially coded for extra security.
This includes six speakers and fingertip stalk control for ease of use.
The stereo system is available as an option on RSi and RN versions, which are normally fitted with a 4-speaker radio cassette stereo system.
RL versions have a stereo radio cassette with 2 speakers.
Sunroof — A manually-operated tilt and slide glass sunroof is standard on RN and RT versions of the Clio and an optional extra on RL versions.
The tilt and slide sunroof is electrically-powered on Baccara, RSi and 16V models.
Equipment Levels — Buyers rate Clio very highly for its generous levels of equipment.
Standard features can include items such as leather trimmed steering wheel, one-touch electric window controls, exterior temperature indicator, electrically adjustable door mirrors and even a specially-shaped garment case that stows on the underside of the rear parcel shelf.
For full details, see ‘Model Specifications’.