

Right: Walkabout.
Sunny smiles from P & O SN Co Managing Director, Sir Bruce Macphail as he escorts the Queen.
Above: School for sculpture.
The Queen stops to chat with local schoolchildren during her tour of Chelsea Harbour Sculpture 93.
Inset: The River Bus, MV Conrad Chelsea Harbour sets off from Lambeth Pier with its royal passenger on board.
A RIVERBUS FIT FOR A QUEEN Royal Visitor arrives at Chelsea Harbour
Are you sitting comfortably?
The Queen takes her seat on the River Bus.
A smooth landing at Chelsea Harbour.
The Queen swapped her royal launch for a River Bus on June 9, when she travelled on the Thames to a private viewing of the P&O sponsored Chelsea Harbour Sculpture 93.
It was the first time the monarch had ever used a Thames passenger ferry — and one of the few occasions when she had arrived at an official engagement by public transport in the UK.
Her journey was described by Buckingham Palace as ‘very unusual’.
RiverBus, which is partly financed by P&O, were delighted that the Queen had been persuaded to use their 23 metre catamaran, the Conrad Chelsea Harbour , one of the new design of RiverBus currently in use.
Sunlight sparkled on the river as the royal passenger was whisked from Lambeth Pier to Chelsea Harbour, where 60 sculptures from around the world are currently on display in one of the largest open air exhibitions ever staged in the UK.
Waiting on the pier to greet the Queen were P&O Managing Director, Sir Bruce MacPhail and the President of the Royal Society of British Sculptors, Philomena Davidson Davis.
They then escorted the Queen around the 18 acre estate, which was developed by P&O and is now managed by the P&O Properties company, Chelsea Harbour Ltd.
As well as admiring a  variety of modern and more traditional pieces, the Queen met many of the sculptors and was also introduced to some of the people who had worked behind the scenes to make it all happen.
P&O Distribution and P&O Containers were instrumental in bringing many of the pieces to Chelsea Harbour from around the UK and beyond.
Amongst the challenges faced by P&O Distribution was the task of moving two giant bronze hands, weighing in at around five tonnes and valued at £50,000 safely through the heart of London to their resting place at one of the entrances to Chelsea Harbour.
Pieces from continental Europe were brought in by other POETS group companies, and P&O Containers transported works from Japan and the USA.
Beeton Rumford are the official caterers for the exhibition.
During the Queen's visit they served sandwiches, cream cakes, iced tea and strawberries and cream to over 300 people.
Chelsea Harbour Sculpture 93 will run until September 18 and admission is free.
SOME P&O PEOPLE TAKE A BOW
Accompanied by the President of the Royal Society of British Sculptors, Philomena Davidson Davis (left) and Sir Bruce MacPhail, the Queen meets the Mayor of Hammersmith and Fulham, Mrs Joan Caruana, and Chairman of P&O Properties and P&O Developments, Time Harding (Right).
Honour from Czechs for Bovis's Sir Frank Laml
Bovis construction Group Chairman Sir Frank Lampl returned recently to his birthplace in the Czech Republic to receive an honourary doctorate from Brno Technical University, in recognition of his contribution to the international construction industry.
Sir Frank's is quite a unique career history.
He first became a builder in 1953, in Communist Czechoslovakia, after being released from three years' working in the uranium mines of Jachymov as part of a five year prison sentence for political offences.
His early release was conditional on him taking up labouring work with a state owned construction company in Ostrava.
By 1960, Sir Frank had become a site manager and three years later, as Managing Director of the construction company, Pozemni Stavby Zavbod Opava, he gained a place at Brno Technical University to study construction.
He moved to the UK in 1968 following the Russian invasion of Czechoslavkia and joined Bovis in 1971 as a project manager.
In 1978 he founded Bovis International, exporting the skills and reputation of Bovis around the world and earning two Queen's Awards for Export Achievement.
In 1985 he was made Chairman of the Bovis Construction Group and appointed to the P&O SN Co Main Board.
He received his knighthood in the 1990 New Year's Honours List.
Addressing an audience of academics, ambassadors, government ministers and local government officials at the doctorate ceremony in Brno, Sir Frank stressed the importance of higher education in developing the calibre of managers and entrepreneurs needed to build a true market economy in the Czech Republic.
Sir Frank, wearing the cap, gown and chains of office of his honourary doctorate from Brno Technical University
SNOW BUSINESS LIKE THE CRUISING BUSINESS
ICE BREAKER:Royal Princess received a cool reception during her first cruise of the year to Canada and New England.
Greeted by record breaking ice floes, the ship is pictured here en route to Montreal with the Canadian ice breaker,Terry Fox cutting a path through thick patches of ice on the S Lawrence River.
BELGIAN FISHERMEN APPLAUD PRIDE OF BURGUNDY RESCUE
Mayday on a day in May
TWO BELGIAN fishermen rescued by the P&O European Ferries Pride of Burgundy , returned to the ship to offer their heartfelt thanks to the ship's company recently.
Mario Deweerdt and Rene' Everaet were stranded in a lifeboat in the Channel for over 12 hours after their fishing vessel sank.
Many ships passed them before Pride of Burgundy , crossing from Calais to Dover, came to their aid.
The ship had come into service only weeks before the rescue mission.
‘We thought we were going to die’, said Rene' who, with Mario, presented wallets to each crew member on duty that day, embossed in gold with the words ‘We will always remember you for the action on 15/5/93.’
Captain Vic Ridges, who spotted their distress flares and alerted the English and French coast guards, received a ship in a bottle, made by Rene'.
In return, the Belgians were given a framed picture of Pride of Burgundy arriving in Dover in April.
They'll never forget May 15, 1993 
CERTIFICATES OF EXCELLENCE FOR P&O EUROPEAN FERRIES (DOVER)
PRIDE OF place at a number of P&O European Ferries (Dover) offices are certificates acknowledging their success in becoming the largest UK transport and travel company ever to be awarded the international quality standard BS 5750/ISO 9000.
At a ceremony on board Pride of Calais recently, P&O European Ferries (Dover), Managing Director, Les Stephenson received the British Standards Institution plaque and certificates from the then Secretary of State for the Environmental and MP for Folkestone and Hythe Michael Howard.
As P&O European Ferries (Dover) includes the ports of Calais and Zeebrugge, Les Stephenson travelled to two further ceremonies last month where Calais Port Manager, Jean Marc Duquenoy and Zeebrugge Port Manager, Erna Vienne accepted copies of the certificates on behalf of their staff.
TRAVEL IN ROYAL STYLE
NOW YOU can sample RiverBus for yourself with Wavelength's special two-for-one offer.
The RiverBus Explorer ticket offers unlimited travel on the service all day (except weekdays between 1700 and 1800), calling at 11 piers along 10 miles of the Thames between Chelsea and Greenwich.
Explorer tickets are normally £6 for adults and £3 for children.
Using our vouchers, a family of four can travel for just £9.
For further details, phone 
Power behind the giant video show at the Epsom Derby
WYSEPOWER were the force behind a giant Mitsuibishi ‘Diamond Vision’ video screen at Epsom racecourse recently.
Our picture shows Wysepower Generator Rental Manager, Graham Thompson with the generator which Wysepower provided to run the outdoor mobile video screen during the Epsom Derby.
Once it is powered up, the ‘Diamond Vision’ screen is used to provide live television, messages from sponsors and event information.
Above: He's got the power.
Wysepower Generator Rental Manager, Graham Thompson.
Left: The screens in action.
Towering £200m contract for Bovis
BOVIS CONSTRUCTION have won a contract to manage a £200 million demolition and rebuilding programme in association with Waltham Forest Housing Action Trust (HAT) in east London.
Pre-construction work is already underway on four large housing estates in the borough of Waltham Forest.
The redevelopment is part of a UK government sponsored scheme over the next eight years which involves the demolition of 1960s and 70s tower blocks, and their replacement with low rise modern housing.
Project manager, Rob Bolt said: ‘This is the first major rebuilding contract undertaken by a HAT and is a very different market for us, as construction managers.’
Bovis have been appointed Construction Manager for all four HAT sites, and will have a permanent base on each site.
A Bovis officer will be allocated to each site and will be responsible for tenant liaison and health and safety issues concerned with the building works.
The new housing will mean a whole new way of life for the residents, who are being informed and consulted at all stages of the development.
Relocating all tenants from high rise tower blocks to low rise housing requires enormous logistic skills.
The HAT has purchased extra land at each site on which the first phase of new houses will be built.
Gradually tenants will be moved from a particular tower block to their new homes.
Once the first block is empty it will be demolished to make way for the second phase of house building, where the whole process of relocating and building is repeated.
Work currently underway on all sites involves the demolition of covered ground level car parks.
Bovis are using a special pincer machine for this work as its quieter then ordinary demolition equipment.
Work is only carried out during normal working hours, Monday to Friday.
If the noise is still unbearable a tenants' refuge is available for residents.
As the project will last for so many years, temporary improvements are constantly being made to the estate.
Whenever any area is taken over for construction purposes, an improved replacement is made elsewhere.
As Divisional Construction Manager, Jim Gillespie says: ‘The contractors are not taking the estates away from the tenants, but working with them, to improve their environment.’
Bovis also intend to offer training courses in skills such as brick laying, in the hope that the contractors will be encouraged to employ local labour.
Additionally, they are working closely with local teachers to provide information packs, videos and talks for school children about the work underway, and hope to add construction to the curriculum of schools in the area.
HAT man.
Bovis Divisional Construction Manager, Jim Gillespie
Pincer movements.
Bovis are using a special pincer machine to demolish covered ground level car parks.
The machine is quieter than ordinary demolition equipment.
£35m NORBANK TAKES TO THE WATER IN ROTTERDAM
NORTH SEA Ferries have launched Norbank , the first of their two new ro-ro super-freighters.
A total investment of £70 million in the two 5,600 dwt, 22 knot ships marks the company's biggest freight development since it was founded in 1965.
Performing the launch ceremony at Rotterdam's Van der Giessen-de Noord shipyard on June 5, was Mrs Rootliep-Costerman, wife of the chairman of Royal Nedlloyd Group, which with P&O, is a 50% partner in North Sea Ferries.
The £35 million, 156 trailer capacity Norbank is due to enter service in November, when her sister ship,Norbay , will be launched from the same yard, entering service next spring.
Norbank and Norbay will replace Norcove and Norcliff and will operate an overnight service on the Rotterdam/Europoort to Hull route.
The bigger, faster ferries will improve service timings to suit the driver-accompanied market to which North Sea Ferries say they are firmly committed.
Compared to their predecessors, the new ships are six knots faster — saving four hours per crossing — and can carry 70 more trailers and around 100 extra drivers.
To service the new freighters, and minimise their turn around time, Associated British Ports have commissioned a new riverside freight terminal in Hull, adjacent to the existing King George Dock.
A dedicated third berth at the North Sea Ferries terminal in Europort will also be ready in time for the arrival of Norbank .
Out to launch.
Norbank makes a splash in Rotterdam
Success on the menu for special caterers
FROM LONDON'S Guildhall to exotic ships, they're singing the praises of Beeton Rumford.
The company's Special Catering Division has been busy of late, arranging catering at a wide variety of functions including dinner for 400 in the magnificent setting of the Old Library at the Guildhall and two days celebrations abroad a new Geest Line Ship, moored on the Thames, off Greenwich.
The Guildhall dinner at the Seatrade Annual Awards for Achievement, whose guest of honour was the Duke of York, was one of the division's largest formal events.
By contrast, Beeton Rumford created a tropical paradise on board MV Geest Dominica to mark the delivery of the new ship.
Food and equipment for the celebrations was loaded onto barges and transported to its destination by river.
Beeton Rumford staff then transformed the ship's hold, with a steel band, palms and exotic flowers.
Above: Hall of fame.
Beeton Romford catered at a dinner for 400 guests in the Old Library at London's Guildhall
Right: Beeton Romford's Liz Stott pours the champagne for Geest 2nd Engineer David Simons, abroad MV Geest Dominica, moored off Greenwich
A FOUR PAGE FEATURE TO MARK THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE BATTLE OF THE ATLANTIC
REMEMBERING AN HISTORIC BATTLE
IN MAY, a five day programme of events was held in Liverpool to mark the 50th anniversary of the turning point in the Battle of the Atlantic — the longest continuous campaign fought during World War Two.
The Battle of the Atlantic lasted for most of the Second World War.
No campaign was more important to Britain's survival.
British Merchant ships and seamen struggled to bring food, fuel and other essential supplies across the Atlantic from the USA and Canada to the UK.
German U-bats were determined to stop them hoping to starve Britain into submission.
In the Atlantic alone, 2,600 British and Allied merchant ships totalling over 13 millions tons went to the bottom of the sea.
Germany lost over 500 submarines.
The battle cost 120,000 lives, including 30,000 merchant seamen and 6,000 men of the Royal Navy.
The P&O Group lost 75 ships in the Atlantic, out of a total of 117 lost during the whole of the war.
The turning point in the Battle of the Atlantic came in May 1943, when, for the first time, more German U-boats were lost than Allied merchant ships.
Throughout the war, Liverpool was Britain's main convoy port, maintaining a lifeline which was crucial to Allied victory.
Over 1,000 convoys arrived in the Mersey during the course of the war, an average of three or four each week.
From 1941, the headquarters of the Western Approaches Command — the nerve centre of the planning and organisation of the battle — was based in Liverpool.
In this special four page feature,Wavelength documents P&O's involvement in both the Battle of the Atlantic and the commemorations 50 years later.
Right: Pandora Captain John McCann carried the Red Ensign at the commemorative service in Liverpool's Anglican cathedral
Above: As seen from the bridge wing of Buffalo.
The Royal yacht Britannia, reviewed ships of the Royal and Merchant Navies from freight ferries to battle cruisers
Below: Buffalo's officers gave a rousing cheer to the Duke of Edinburgh and Lord Sterling as they passed by abroad the Royal yacht, Britannia
BUFFALO ROAR FOR THE BRITANNIA
Right: The proudest moment for many of the veterans was the march through the centre of Liverpool on May 29, when the salute was taken by, L to R: The First Sea Lord, Admiral Sir Benjamin Bathurst, the Lord Mayor of Liverpool, President of the Chamber of Shipping, Edmund Vestry and Lord Sterling
A Royal Liverpool Welcome!
THE BATTLE of the Atlantic commemorations began on May 26 when warships joined with merchant vessels for a review of the fleet, taken by the Duke of Edinburgh, off Holyhead on the island of Anglesey.
With the Duke, abroad the royal yacht Britannia , was P&O SN CO Chairman, Lord Sterling.
The P&O fleet was represented by the Pandora ro-ro freight ferry,Buffalo , making a slight detour from her regular Liverpool to Dublin run.
Despite atrocious weather conditions the officers and crew of Buffalo gave the Duke and Lord Sterling a rousing cheer as the royal yacht sailed by.
Afterwards, Lord Sterling sent a facsimile message from Britannia to Buffalo , which read: ‘Delighted to see you in such splendid company on this great occasion.’
The week's events, organised by the Royal Navy also included a fly-past by modern and historic maritime aircraft and a march by veterans and sailors through the centre of the city of Liverpool.
The former top secret underground headquarters of Western Approaches Command, fully restored, proved a fascinating attraction for young and old.
The Queen was in Liverpool too, and she officially opened the new Battle of the Atlantic gallery at the Merseyside Maritime Museum.
Liverpool's docks were thronged with visitors, eager to see around warships and even a German submarine, which were opened to the public.
Nestling peacefully amongst the mine sweepers and patrol vessels in Albert Dock was the P&O Thames sailing barge,Will , dressed overall with flags and used for a variety of on board functions during her stay.
Hard by the docks, the Cunard Building was the site of a special drop-in centre for veterans of the battle.
It was organised by the Chamber of Shipping, whose personnel were on hand to help with enquiries.
The P&O cadets also stood by to offer their assistance.
For those who sailed in the convoys, it was a chance to relive a thousand memories; some rediscovered old pals they had thought killed more than 50 years ago.
The proudest moment for many veterans was the march through the centre of Liverpool on May 29by over 2,000 sailors and veterans of the Royal Navy and Merchant Navy.
The salute was taken by the First Sea Lord, Admiral Sir Benjamin Bathurst, Lord Sterling, the President of the Chamber of Shipping, Edmund Vestey and the Lord Mayor of Liverpool.
P&O was also strongly represented at a commemoration service, attended by the Prince and Princess of Wales in Liverpool's Anglican cathedral the following day.
Carrying the Red Ensign on behalf of the Merchant Navy, was Pandoro Senior Master, Captain John McCann.
Captain McCann (inset, left) is one of two masters in command of Buffalo and, with Captain Nick Spencer (inset, right), was with the ship during the Fleet Review off Holyhead earlier in the week.
Survivors tell their tales
I WAS A SURVIVOR from the Raijputana , sunk in the Denmark Strait on Easter Sunday, April 13, 9141.
‘We had been escorting a convoy from Halifax to the UK and were ordered to leave the convoy, refuel in Reykjavik and take up patrol of the Denmark Strait, 150 miles west of Iceland.
‘We left Reyjavik on Good Friday and on the Sunday morning I was turned in, having come off watch at 0400 hours.
I was asleep in my bunk when we were torpedoed just before 0600 hours.
Another torpedo struck at 0730 and the order to abandon ship came just after 0900.
‘I had to jump for it.
I had been born on Easter Sunday 21 years earlier and as I went into the water, I thought: ‘Laddo, you're going to die on Easter Sunday, too’.
‘At two minutes past the hour,Rajputana was gone.
She suddenly reared straight up and disappeared.
That was it.
From five minutes to nine, to two minutes past, she'd gone.
There seemed to be no suction, nothing.
She just went down.
‘I was in the water about 20 minutes before being fished out into a lifeboat and eventually two destroyers arrived to take the survivors to Reyjavik.
We stayed in Iceland for two weeks before coming home.’
P&O's Rajputana had enjoyed a spotless record as an armed merchant cruiser before she fell victim to German submarine attack.
During her 13 months' service she escorted more than 700 ships across the world's beleaguered oceans, without loss of a single one.
When she was hit, her mahogany lifeboats proved the salvation of many men.
There was no case of leakage and several of the boats were still afloat month after being cast adrift.
Able seaman, Aubrey Brittain (right) is never likely to forget the fateful morning of Easter Sunday, 1941, when he received a rather rude awakening.
Below: One of the guns mounted abroad Rajputana
Cloak and dagger stuff at 18
P&O pensioner, Alan Hodding had been a cadet with Elder Dempster for about nine months when war broke out.
ON MY third voyage as a cadet, on the way down to West Africa war was declared.
We cadets spent that morning sewing shackles into confidential documents, so that they could be thrown over the side if anything untoward happened.
That's how I remember the very first day of the war.
To me — as a young boy of 18 — it was very ‘cloak and dagger’ stuff.
‘I did 13 voyages to West Africa and one to South Africa in total.
I was present at 56 ships going to the bottom — and one German sub.
‘But they never sank any ship I was on.
Once we had our head blown off.
We were playing Monopoly in the cadets’ room and a dive bomber attacked.
Most of the crew were killed and we came back very short handed.
Somehow we kept the ship afloat and brought her back to Liverpool on our own, which was a bit hair raising.
‘One had a certain amount of training; one knew it was coming and so in a way, fear didn't come into it very much.
But there were long periods of tension.
If someone banged a door, we'd all jump.
‘Our journey in convoy from Liverpool through the Atlantic to West Africa took 17 days.
We had some rough times off Dakar and in the Azores where the German subs had berths.
On just two separate occasions I saw a total of 34 ships go down.
‘During one of those desperate days when we were being attacked, I remember there was an official rescue ship which used to trail behind the convoy to pick up survivors from torpedoed ships.
On this occasion, the rescue ship steamed up the line of the convoy with a big blackboard out on deck saying: ‘SORRY NO MORE SEATS — FULL HOUSE’.
‘In 1943 I joined Northumberland , New Zealand Shipping Co vessel, and crossed the Atlantic to Panama, through to New Zealand and back again.
It turned out that the U-boats weren't the only menace: one ship in the convoy struck a small iceberg.
‘After that, I transferred to another NZS ship,Sussex and we went to the Pacific to join the American 8th Fleet as a supply ship.’
After the war, in 1947, Alan Hodding joined the P&O company, Bethell Gwyn.
He retired in 1980 as a director and Manager of his Bristol office.
THOMAS Berry began his seagoing career as a cabin boy abroad Viceroy of India  in 1936.
When war broke out, he was a steward with P&O.
I WAS serving abroad Ormonde when she was converted to a troop ship.
Anything of value — murals on the walls, anything that was part of the luxury of the ship — was all covered up.
Passenger liners then were very luxurious.
When we suddenly had thousands of troops come on board, we made damm sure everything was under cover.
‘Of course we were always worried because when you were on a troop ship there'd be 10 men for every space in the lifeboats.
A couple of times we were attacked by long range German ‘planes but fortunately on these occasions, they missed us.
‘In all, I made 20 trips back and forth across the Atlantic in various ships.
I was torpedoed twice.
‘We were taking men to Canada to be trained for the airforce.
When they were trained, we brought them back.
Once, we carried what we felt was the war's most valuable cargo — we had about 1,600 young airmen on board.
Imagine if that ship had been hit…
They were all Americans, Canadians and Australians, trained at the airbases in Canada.
When we picked them up there was so many, it was just unbelievable.
At that time, the B52 bombers were being introduced in large numbers and they needed air crews for them so we'd be crossing the Atlantic with enough crews on one ship to man almost 1,000 aircraft.’
JOSEPH Cullen was a Royal Navy gunner, serving on Defensively Armed Merchant Ships (DEMS).
In 1944, at the age of 21, he joined the Orient Line vessel, Orion, moving troops from Liverpool to the Mediterranean.
WE SAILED from Liverpool to Taranto in Italy.
We carried troops dropped them off in Italy and picked up German prisoners of war and Yugoslav refugees to take to Port Said.
We sailed back again to England on destroyer-escorted convoy.
Luckily we weren't attacked, though we had a few scares.
‘I was in the DEMS, which is actually the Royal Navy, but you're loaned to the Merchant Navy to man the guns for them.
We used to say that DEMS stood for ‘Dirty Evil Minded Sailors’.
‘When you were a gunner — as I was — you signed on as a merchant deckhand because if your ship put into neutral port and you went ashore as a gunner, you could be interned.
‘While I was on Orion , I was in charge of what they called the pillar box, which was a small, compact, battery which you sat inside.
It had two lids which you closed once you were in, and instead of bullets, it fired rockets.
The pillar box was mounted on a platform about 10ft above deck and you reached it by climbing up a ladder.
The hardest part was getting the ammunition up there!
‘The anti-aircraft rockets I fired were propelled up to a height of 1,000 yards.
Then the rocket propeller, having completed two and a half turns, would set off the detonator, which exploded in front of the ‘plane you were firing at.
‘My duties also included training the troops on board— a few had to help with loading the ammunition.
The rockets were kept in a big steel locker on Orion's deck and my helpers had to hand them up to me in my pillar box.
Some of them were quite scared.
We were all so young, just lads really.’
ROBERT Taylor was on board the Christian Salvesan in Line ship,Southern Princess , in convoy from America to Liverpool in 1943.
The convoy was attacked by U-boats during the night of March 16–17 and 12 ships, including Southern Princess , were sunk.
His story tells of the brave men of the New Zealand Shipping Co Tekoa .
SHIPS WERE being sunk all night.
Southern Princess went down around 0300 hours but we got away in the lifeboats.
When we saw the outline of a ship in the distance, we rowed towards it.
My leg was injured so I was put immediately into the ship's sick bay until we arrived safely back in Liverpool.
‘It was the Tekoa pictured above which rescued us that night.
She had saved 146 survivors in all, from Southern Princess and from another ship as well.
As you can imagine, it was quite packed on board.
‘It was a dangerous and extremely brave thing to do.
The rest of the convoy had continued on its way, but the captain of Tekoa stopped for about five hours to rescue men — his ship was a sitting target for U-boats.’
On the night of the attack, the master of tekoa .
Captain Hocken, signalled the convoy's naval commodore: ‘Am I to act as rescue ship without further signal from you?’
The reply was: ‘Yes’.
The commodore had made a virtually impossible decision.
The convoy's armed escort comprised only two destroyers and two corvettes.
The commodore had to assess whether he could afford to permit this small force to stay and pick up survivors from torpedoed vessels.
His burden was lightened by the courage of the men of Tekoa .
Straggling from convoy at any time was an invitation to disaster.
Dallying for hours, as Tekoa did, was against the ordinary rules of convoy sailing but, by the light of the burning ships around her, she drifted amongst the men in the water, hauling them abroad until no more survivors were found.
Sinking of Rawalpindi
WHEN WAR broke out in 1939, the UK Government Ministry of War Transport and the Admiralty quickly assumed control of shipping.
All manner of vessels were represented within the P&O Group at that time, from small coastal steamers to majestic liners.
Over the following six years, they would serve as merchant aircraft carriers, armed merchant cruisers, troopships, hospital ships, catapult armed merchantmen and would carry vital cargoes of fuel, food, ammunition and troops.
P&O merchant seamen were in the thick of the battle from start to finish and the war histories of P&O, British India, Orient Line, New Zealand Shipping, Hain Nourse, Strick, Federal Steam and Moss Hutchison tell of countless dramas and acts of courage.
Between the outbreak of war and Christmas Eve 1943, P&O Group shipping companies lost 75 ships in the Battle of the Atlantic.
P&O's first and worst single disaster during World War Two was the sinking of Rawalpindi on November 23, 1939.
Requisitioned three months earlier, the 16,000 ton rawalpindi had been converted into an armed merchant cruiser.
Typically, the arming of a merchant vessel involved mounting eight six-inch guns on the ship.
Most of the guns, however, were at least 40 years old, some of them relics from the Boer War.
Sailing with the Northern Patrol,Rawalindi was between Iceland and the Faeroe Islands when, with dusk approaching and a mist over the sea, a large vague shape was sighted.
Within minutes, the men in Rawalpindi realized they were about to face the German battlecruiser,Scharnhorst .
Built in 1935 with her sister,Gneisenau ,Scharnhorst weighed in at 32,000 tons.
Ten years younger than Rawalpindi , she carried nine 11-inch and 12 5.9-inch guns and could do 32 knots.
Commanding Rawalpindi was Captain E.C.
Kennedy, RN.
Signalling the sighting to the Home Fleet in Scapa Flow, he turned his vessel and made for the shelter of a fog bank.
Scharnhorst , taking Rawalpindi for an unarmed merchant ship, signalled her to heave to.
It was then that Captain Kennedy sighted Gneisenau .
The fog bank was unattainable and rather than surrender, Kennedy opened fire against both vessels with his antique and wholly inadequate guns.
One hit was scored against Scharnhorst , but both ships hit the old liner time and time again and 14 minutes after the first shot, it was all over.
Captain Kennedy was dead and of the 65 P&O men on board— a fifth of the total complement — 54 had also been killed.
Twenty two were officers with RNR ranks.
The others were doing the same jobs they had during peacetime: baker, steward, purser, electrician, storekeeper.
‘They must have known as they sighted the enemy that there was no chance for them’, said Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, but they had no thought of surrender’.
P&O's Rawalpindi in gallant, but hopeless action against the German battlecruisers, Scharnhorst and Gneisenau in the North Atlantic.
Men serving abroad P&O Canton pose for the camera, in suitable attire for an Atlantic crossing.
Built in 1938, Canton was converted to an armed merchant cruiser a year later and fitted with eight six inch and two three-inch guns.
A ‘Kingfisher’ seaplane on Canton's catapult
ROLL OF HONOUR
ALL SMILES FOR THIS YEAR'S SECOND REUNION OF RETIRED P&O STAFF
IT'S POST HASTE TO THE POST HOUSE
It was a case of going post haste to the Post House for those attending this year's second reunion of retired P&O staff.
Held at the Post House in Edinburgh on June 10, and attended by 66 guests, the reunion was hosted by P&O SN Co Company Secretary, John Crossman.
Guests had travelled from far and near to be there — former P&O/BI maintenance superintendent, John Line, had come all the way from Australia.
At 88 years of age, Andrew Rome was again the oldest person present.
He worked for Coast Lines and retired as a collector in 1967 after 47 years' service.
There were six other octogenarians also in attendance and between them they had notched up 170 years service with P&O companies.
Following John Crossman's post-prandial speech, the reply on behalf of the guests was made by the magnificent be-kilted Ronald MacPherson, a former accountant with Stock Conversion, who retired in 1980.
Scottish gathering
Above: Oldest person present, Andrew Rome (left) and John McCaw (Eastern Liner Service/F C Strick/General Steam) with smiles aplenty for the cameras
Left: Resplendent in the kilt, the reply speaker this year was Ronald MacPherson (Stock Conversion)
CANDID CAMERA
Above: Sharing a pre-lunch joke are Eric Watson (OCL)(left) and Ian McInnes (P & OCL)
Right: ‘Looks like a good turn out this year.’
Frederick Blackett (BI)(left) and Thomas Kelso (P & O/BI) study the form.
Left: ‘And they say the art of conversation is dead…
’ Andrew Rome (Coast Lines)(Left) proves it isn't, in the company of Ingram Ritchie (James Hemphill).
Right: A pair of likely lads.
William Gay (Mazagon Dock/BI)(left) and John Shaw (Mazagon Dock).
Sigh here, please!
Elizabeth Hendry (left) checks in at the Post House, Pictured with her are 
OVER HERE FROM OZ
Far from home: John Line
PLENTY OF CHARITIES CHEER ON CANBERRA
GENEROUS PASSENGERS have helped Canberra staff to raise almost £4,000 for two charities.
Following a colleaque's battle against skin cancer,Canberra musician, Tim Marshall (pictured right), organised a ‘one man sponsored run’ in aid of Wessex Cancer Fund.
Covering nearly 15 miles, he ran 100 laps, accompanied at all stages by several crew members and passengers.
After an hour and 55 minutes, some £1,700 had been collected for the fund.
In a separate event, a raffle, sale and four-a-side football tournament raised over £2,200 for Evelina Children's (Guy's) Hospital Appeal.
Cruise the flag and save money
P&O CRUISES still have a number of opportunities for concessionary cruises abroad Canberra and Sea Princess this year.
The prices of cruises for P&O Group staff, their relatives, and P&O Pensioners are shown in our tables, with departure dates and the likely availability of the cruise.
Application forms for P&O Group staff and relatives should be obtained from your PERSONAL DEPARTMENT and for P&O Pensioners from  .
PLUGGED IN TO SAFETY
Bright sparks Wyseplant's new service, Powersafe, has been set up to manage the inspection and testing of electrical installations and equipment used in industry, commerce and public utilities in the UK
SOME BRIGHT sparks at Wyseplant have come up with brand new service for industry and commerce.
Called Powersafe, it aims to take the worry out of monitoring electrical equipment in the workplace, a task made compulsory by the UK's 1990 Electricity at Work Regulations.
The new regulations place responsibility on businesses and industry to minimise the risk of fatality or personal injury due to faulty electrical appliances and fixtures in the workplace.
For the untrained, keeping tabs on this type of equipment, both technically and administratively, can be difficult, but Powersafe has been set up specifically to manage the inspection and testing of electrical installations and equipment used in industry, commerce and public utilities.
Over 100 million pieces
Over 100 million pieces of equipment in the UK are governed by the new regulations, from kettles and hairdriers to fax machines and power drills — in fact anything with which employees or the public may come into contact.
Powersafe has a UK-wide network of branches and its team of electrical engineers has undergone six months of specialist training.
The service starts with a ‘no obligation’ discussion with one of the engineers, who will explain the new regulations, ascertain the scope of testing required and propose a cost effective and convenient test programme.
Powersafe's services are available to P&O Group companies at discounted rates.
For further information contact Bob Page at Wyseplant on .
VICTORY WAS NIPPED IN THE BUD ABROAD FAIRSTAR
VICTORY WAS nipped in the bud for the winners of the Fairstar mud crab race.
There was no get-out clause for the gallant crustaceans who, once they had raced for glory were snapped up, popped into the cooking pot and served as ‘dish of the day’ by the ship's chefs.
Side-stepping more conventional onboard entertainments,Fairstar passengers entered into the spirit of the races, held during the P&O Holidays cruise ship's call at Townsville, Queensland.
They shelled out their dollars and gambled on the winners in a series of three exciting contests of speed and agility.
The mud crabs are an Australian delicacy and those who backed the winners were further rewarded with giant hampers of Queensland seafood, which were delivered to their homes after the cruise.
Two hopeful crabs line up for the start of the race.
Their moment of glory was fleeting, though.
The swift little fellows are an Australian delicacy and they ended the day in the cooking pot.
Appointments & Retirements
NEW POST FOR DUNLOP
GRAEME DUNLOP is appointed Chairman of Sea Oil Homco in addition to his other P&O SN Co Main Board responsibilities.
ARNDALE MAN
BRIAN MASON (above) is appointed Deputy Centre Manager of P&O Shopping Centres' Middleton Arndale Centre.
His experience in retail and shopping centre management includes managing a number of shopping centres in New Zealand.
In his new role, he will have responsibility for the day-to-day management, operations, cleaning, maintenance and marketing of Middleton Arndale.
CENTRE STAGE
DEBBIE SAVILLE (below) is appointed Catering Planning Manager with Beeton Runford at Earls Court Exhibition Centre.
She joins the company from the British Tourist Authority, having previously spent eight years with the Andry Montgomery Group of International Exhibition Organisers.
CHATWIN JOINS
YVETTE CHATWIN (above) is appointed Catering Planning Assistant with Beeton Rumford.
She joins the company at Olympia Exhibition Centre, having previously been a manager with Roux Restaurants Ltd.
Hugh Scrimgeour is Earls Court Chairman
HUGH SCRIMGEOUR (right) is appointed Chairman of Earls Court Olympia, in addition to his role as Managing Director.
A chartered accountant, he joined Sterling Guarantee Trust in 1983 as Personal Assistant to the Chairman, Lord Sterling.
Transferring to P&O Cruises in 1985, he held the position of Chief Financial Officer with Princess Cruises in Los Angeles, before joining Earls Court Olympia as Deputy Managing Director and Finance Director in 1989.
Hugh Scrimgeour has been Managing Director of the company since 1991.
JOINING PRINCESS CRUISES
MARK WARREN (right) is appointed Senior Vice President and General Counsel with Princess Cruises in Los Angeles.
He joins the company from Gibson, Dunn and Crutcher, where he practised law for 15 years.
A partner in the Washington DC and Century City (CA) offices, he has been the principal corporate and litigation lawyer for Princess Cruises for the past five years.
Before that, he served from 1979–1980 as special assistant to the then Vice President of the United States, Walter Mondale.
A graduate from Gustavus Adolphus College and the National Institute for Trial Advocacy, Mark Warren received his Jurist Doctorate from the Minnesota Law School in 1977.
A member of the California, District of Columbia and Virginia bars, he currently serves on the board of directors of the University of Minnesota Law School Alumni Association.
fred Lansdown clocks off after 43 years
FRED LANSDOWN has retired from P&O Cruises after 43 years service.
Joining Anderson Green in 1949, he worked in the Inward Freight Department and Hotel Services Accountants of Orient Line before moving to the Accounts Department of Passenger Division following the P&O/Orient Line merger in 1960.
Most recently Senior Accounts Clerk, he occasionally acted as Ship's Accountant on board P&O Cruises vessels, and was responsible for giving accounting training to ship staff.
Our picture, left, shows Fred Lansdown at a farewell party held in his honour, where he was presented with a carriage clock by P&O Cruises (UK) Finance Director, Martyn Lloyd (left).
Veitch to guide cruises marketing
IN ADDITION to his post as Chief Financial Officer with Princess Cruises in Los Angeles Colin Veitch (below) has assumed responsibility for marketing and planning.
With a Psychology degree from Universal College London and an MBA from Harvard Business School, he worked for Bank of America in San Francisco, and the management consultant corporation SIAR Inc in Boston, before joining P&O Properties International in London in 1990.
He has held the position of Chief Financial Officer with Princess Cruises since returning to the United States in 1992.
SPORTS FOCUS
Linda was not horsing around
There was no horsing around from Linda Whitelock when she took part in The Drymen Agricultural Show near Glasgow.
Entering the show's Middleweight Hunter Class for the first time, P&O Properties (Glasgow office) Promotions Organiser, Linda, and her American thorough bred.
Harvey (right), were placed second in their class and later declared runners up in the championship.
GOING WITH A SWING Pandora tee off
Just months after the P&O Golf Day, golf clubs were out in force again, as P&O people took to the green.
Hawkstone Park in Shropshire was host to the Pandora Golf Day recently, where UK Sales Manager, David Richmond received the Central Tyres Challenge Cup for the best gross score of 81.
Following the annual challenge between the Stoke and Fleetwood depots for the team prize, captain of the winning Stoke team, Maintenance Fitter, John Caine accepted the Jack Salford Trophy from main sponsor, Jack Salford.
P&O Exhibition Services held their first ever golf day at Pine Ridge Golf Club in Surrey last month, with the aim of raising money for the charity, Motability.
Pictured right: at the end of the day P&O Exhibition Services Managing Director, David Berrie (left) presented Motability Trustee, Joe Hennessey with a cheque for over £4,000.
Above: Pandora UK Sales Manager, David Richmond (left) receives the Central Tyres Challenge Cup from Fleetwood depot driver, Alan Broster.
Below left: Stoke depot driver, Tom Robson in action
Voyagers netball debut nets cash for charity
STAFF FROM P&O Shopping Centres' Voyagers Foodcourt netted over £100 for the Guide Dogs for the Blind charity when they challenged British Aerospace to a netball match.
The team had never played together before, so despite losing 17–10, Team Manager and Deputy Foodcourt Manager, Christine Chapman was pleased with the result.
With brothers Turner and Terts Ashibi now acting as coach and physiotherapist respectively, the team are ready to take on other challenges.
If any team are interested in arranging a match against the Voyagers Foodcourt netball team they should contact  .
Peter the P&O Bear lends a hand 
FUN RUN FOR P&O PROPERTIES PEOPLE
A FIT foursome from P&O Properties decided that a sponsored jog in London's Battersea Park was the ideal way to spend a sunny Sunday morning.
They each completed a six and a half mile circuit — in aid of Centrepoint, the charity which helps London's homeless.
All four were ideally qualified to check out the lie of the land as they are surveyors in the company's Knightsbridge office.
Limbering up for the big race, are 