

Shipshape look for Bovis in Plymouth
BOVIS CONSTRUCTION have sailed through their £15 million contract with the Western Morning News in Plymouth.
The new headquarters of the local daily newspaper and its sister, the Western Evening Herald , are now shipshape and fully operational.
Commanding views of Plymouth Sound and Dartmoor, Plymouth's new landmark, cut into the side of a hill outside the city, is creating enormous interest in architectural circles.
Held in place by 666 stainless steel brackets, the 2m high glass sheets forming the walls of the 12,675 sq metre ship shaped building, warp and curve in two directions at once.
With downlighting day and night, the glass walls enable the public to view the whole interior from outside.
Resembling a ship's bridge, the company boardroom is located at the top of a 22 metre conning-tower, with the three floors below housing printing presses at the ‘stern’ and 4.500 sq metres of editorial and administrative space, a restaurant and fitness room around a central atrium located at the ‘bow’.
Whilst the hillside location creates a strong visual impact it also provides practical uses.
Paper rolls for printing are delivered to a 1,200 sq m storage area at the lower level and finished newspapers are packed into bundles and dispatched by lorry from the top level.
P&O Properties in DM900m joint venture with Stadium Group
PROPERTY SCHEME IN THE RUHR
L to R
P&O Properties Chairman and Main Board Director,, P&O Developments Director, and Stadium Group Chairman, examine a model of the Oberhausen project
P&O PROPERTIES Europe have become joint venture partners with the Stadium Group on one of the largest mixed use commercial developments in northern Europe, the Neue Mitte (New Centre) in Oberhausen.
The partnership — already tried and tested at the highly successful Meadowhall retail development in Sheffield — will invest DM900 million to develop the scheme on derelict land in the heart of Oberhausen, in Germany's Ruhr Valley.
The Neue Mitte project includes a 750,000 sq ft shopping centre, promenade, arena and tennis club, business park, marina and extensive gardens.
Managing Director of P&O, Sir Bruce MacPhail said: ‘We are very pleased to be joining Stadium Group in realising one of the most outstanding urban regeneration projects in Europe.’
The development will be on land which has been in constant industrial use since 1758 and was, until recently, a steel works.
Local authorities were anxious to redevelop the area as soon as possible, as it lies at the very heart of the town's commercial district.
‘There are a number of similarities with the Meadowhall project — not least that it, too, is built on an old steel works’, explains P&O Properties Chairman, Tim Harding, and Neue Mitte will similarly be focused around a covered shopping mall.’
Once the site is cleared, construction work is expected to begin early next year with completion, in one phase, by spring 1996.
P&O Properties and Stadium have appointed Bovis International and Bovis Tillyard Deutschland as project managers.
As well as a two level mall with a traditional market and over 200 shop units, Neue Mitte is planned to have an open air promenade with around 25 theme restaurants and cafe's and a multiplex cinema.
A 20 acre site has been set aside for the Tivoli Gardens, a landscaped park with games, rides and entertainment.
Next to the gardens, there will be a sports and recreation arena seating up to 12,000 people, while brand new tennis facilities at the Oberhausen Tennis Club reflect Germany's growing enthusiasm for the sport.
A business park will provide offices and light industrial premises.
Neue Mitte is bordered to the north by the Rhine Herne Canal, which will afford the ideal setting for a marina, surrounded by 500 residential dwellings.
Some 13.5 million people live within one hour's drive of the town and nearly 30 million within two hours.
Parking for 10,000 cars is an integral part of the project and local and government authorities will be investing DM300 million in improving the area's transport and infrastructure.
As well as an excellent surrounding network of roads, Oberhausen is well connected to the Ruhr public transport network, which includes trains, trams and trolley buses.
NEUE MITTE is in the centre of the town of Oberhausen (population 225,000), which is itself in the state of North Rhine Westphalia, the largest of the German states both in population (17.5 million) and economic power, where it accounts for over a quarter of Germany's gross national product.
Oberhausen is also in the heart of Europe's economic powerhouse, the Ruhr valley.
The Ruhr, with a population of 5.3 million forms part of Europe's densest urban population belt and has excellent international connections by air, land and waterways.
Over 60 million people — one in six of the total population of the European Community — live within 250 kilometres of the Rhur.
Above: left: A close-up of the scale model of the Oberhausen development
Left: Situated in the heart of Germany's Ruhr valley, Oberhausen is easily accessible to millions of people throughout Europe.
Double deal down under JOINT PROJECT FOR P&O CATERING AND AUSTRALIAN OFFSHORE SERVICES
AUSTRALIAN Offshore Services (AOS) and P&O Catering are providing a complete package of service for a major offshore construction project off Dampier in Western Australia.
The contract provides marine crews, towing vessels and full catering services for a Dutch/American joint partnership of offshore construction contractors, Heerema and McDermott, who are building a jacket and topside modules for the new Goodwyn A platform for Woodside Offshore Petroleum Pty Ltd.
The project began last year when AOS provided a crew to bring a crane barge,Balder , from Singapore to the new site.
Balder is a semi-submersible crane barge designed for work in constructing oil rig platforms.
Working on board can build up a hearty appetite and catering for the 180 crew on board Balder has been managed by P&O Catering.
The highlight of the project so far, say AOS, was the challenge of towing the platform's 18,000 ton jacket from Batam Island, Indonesia, to its new home.
The jacket is the section of the permanent platform which is secured to the sea bed by cemented piles.
As high as a 30 storey building, it then extends above a sea level, clearing the 100 year storm level and forms the base structure housing accommodation areas, power plants, processing equipment, helideck and other topside modules.
Above: The AOS vessel, Lady Elaine, towing the Goodwyn jacket from Batam Island, Indonesia to its new home
P&O PROPERTIES MAKE BLUEPRINTS FOR SUCCESS IN GERMANY
ANOTHER MAJOR P&O Properties International project is about to move into a new phase.
The approved final designs and rental arrangements for the Hanseatic Trade Centre in Hamburg were unveiled recently, enabling the first of five building phases to begin.
P&O Properties International are developing the DM80 million project with Citibank A>G> Working closely with five architects and local authorities, they have reached agreement over revisions to the 1991 plans.
In order to create as varied development as possible, each of the five building phases will be designed by a different architect.
Using less glass than was originally planned, the Hanseatic Trade Centre — a mixed development of offices, shops, restaurants and an aparthotel — will be in traditional brick, with 50 year old trees planted around the office buildings.
The new development (pictured below) is in Hamburg's Kehrwiederspitze area, on the River Elbe.
Good medicine for McDevitt Street Bovis
MCDEVITT STREET Bovis are building a reputation in the healthcare sector, having recently won a US$30 million contract in their home town of Charlotte, North Carolina.
The 235,000 sq ft, eight storey medical office building with a 1,500 space car park, is the fourth contract McDevitt Street Bovis are currently carrying out for Presbyterian Hospital, and is on behalf of the Nalle Clinic, a local group of 85 multi-disciplined doctors.
Pre-construction work has begun, with the 14 month building programme due to begin next year.
For McDevitt Street Bovis, the Nalle Clinic contract brings to US$70 million the total value of work for Presbyterian.
McDevitt Street Bovis have also won a major contract at Prince George's County Hospital in Cheverly, Maryland.
A 56,000 sq ft building will house new surgical suites, and out-patient, intensive care and research facilities.
In Texas, pre-construction work begins in August on an 18 month project for additions and renovations to Titus County Memorial Hospital in Mount Pleasant.
PLATFORM FOR ELTON
ROCKING IT TO 'EM!
ROCKSTAR Elton John certainly made sure that the sun didn't go down on Earls Court recently, as over 16,000 fans flocked to the arena on both nights of his sell out charity concerts.
Raising money for Elton John's AIDS Foundation promoter Harvey Goldsmith was enthusiastic about the concert venue, describing is as: ‘One of Elton's best shows in London’.
Earls Court made a successful return to hosting seated events last year, in a move made possible by new developments in demountable seating and the speed with which they can be constructed and dismantled.
This has allowed short term seated events to fill the gaps in the programme between major exhibitions.
Our picture (right) shows Elton John playing to a full house at Earls Court.
Centre stage for Bovis Scotland SECRETARY OF STATE INSPECTS FESTIVAL THEATRE
BOVIS CONSTRUCTION (Scotland) invited the Scottish Secretary of State, Ian Lang to come and see how work is progressing on the Festival Theatre, Edinburgh.
The Secretary of State was accompanied by Chairman of the Theatre Trust, Lord Younger and Bovis Scotland personnel including Managing Director John McMurdo and Project Manager, Brian Garvey.
The auditorium of the old Empire Theatre is being completely redesigned and refurbished to provide a modern opera house, comparable to Covent Garden.
Bovis are on schedule for completion in April next year and the first public engagement will be a joint production between Scotland Opera and Welsh Opera, of Wagner's Tristan and Isolde .
An audience for the Festival Theatre.
(L to R):
It's a double first for proud Princess Cruises
PRINCESS CRUISES have scored a double first, with top awards from the US Coast Guard for two of their ships.
Dawn Princess and Fair Princess both received recognition for their 20 year commitment to safety at sea.
It was the first time in its 35 year history, that the Coast Guard's Automated Mutual-assistance Vessel Rescue (AMVER) safety network has bestowed such an honour on a cruise ship.
The AMVER search and rescue system provides emergency rescue services to the international maritime community through a computerised ship reporting system which maintains an updated record of ship's positions worldwide.
The voluntary programme is open to ships of all flags and is supported by almost 40 per cent of the world's merchant fleet.
When a ship is in distress, international rescue co-ordinators can search the computer and identify other ships in the immediate area able to provide emergency service.
AMVER Programme Manager, James Lombard said: ‘Cruise ships are a particularly desirable search and rescue resource because of the excellent communication and medical equipment they carry.’
Marine Operations Vice President, Steve Nielson (right), receives the two awards on behalf of Princess Cruises, from the Commander, Coast Guard District Miami, RADM 
P&O Distribution paper-chase
P&O DISTRIBUTION have won a contract to manage transport and distribution activities for the IDEM brand of Arjo Wiggins Appleton, producers of carbonless paper.
P&O Distribution have already taken delivery of the first new vehicles dedicated to the contract, which includes delivery of finished goods from the IDEM mill in Cardiff to customers in the UK and to Arjo Wiggins' Belgian distribution centre.
P  PROJECTS RECEIVE THE ROYAL SEAL OF APPROVAL
Princess visits Bovis North Olympic site
THE PRINCESS ROYAL was the latest visitor to Manchester's Olympic Arena site, currently being built by Bovis North.
She was accompanied by Bovis North Managing Director, Dennis Bate,(left) and Terry Thomas, Director of Vector Investments (right), the property developer of the £50 million project.
The Princess, who is herself a veteran of the 1976 Montreal Olympics, was joined on her tour by other members of the International Olympic Committee and the chairman of the British Olympic Bid, Bob Scott.
Bovis host, Bovis North Managing Director, Dennis Bate, with the Princess Royal at the Olympic Arena site
FESTIVE HAT-TRICK AT CHICHESTER
P&O EUROPEAN FERRIES (Portsmouth) are acting as Principal Sponsor of the Chichester Festivities for the third year running.
The theme of this year's Festivities, which run from July 4th to 20th, is ‘The Best in Britain’, but there will also be a Spanish evening, to help celebrate the new regular P&O ferry service from Portsmouth to Bilbao.
Helping launch the festivities at a reception at Olympia.
Managing Director of P&O European Ferries (Portsmouth), Richard Martin, said: ‘Sponsorship is often one of the first areas to be threatened during times of economic hardship.
‘However, I feel justified in saying that the return on our investment over the past two years has been immense.’
Amongst the extensive range of entertainments this year will be a performance of Donizetti's L'Elisir D' Amore , by the Bernini Ensemble (pictured left), which has been specially commissioned by their patron, P&O.
With fireworks, comedians, lectures, and classical and big band orchestras, there should be something at the Chichester Festivities for practically everyone.
Further details are available by calling .
Launching the 1993 Chichester Festivities at Olympia.
P&O European Ferries (Portsmouth) Managing Director, Richard Martin (left) with the Duke of Richmond, who is President of the Festivities.
COOK'S TOUR FOR THE DUKE
THERE WAS a last minute surprise for Beeton Rumford Chef, Gareth Webster (above right), during the Royal Windsor Horse Show.
The show's final reception was attended by the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh, who decided he would like an impromptu tour of the kitchens.
The Duke took a great deal of interest in matters culinary, and spent 15 minutes deep in conversation with Gareth, who has not yet revealed what was discussed.
For Beeton Rumford, winning the catering contract for the Royal Windsor Horse Show was quite a coup.
Their task included providing corporate hospitality, special receptions, barbecues and a seafood bar, as well as feeding all the grooms who look after the horses.
Personal touch for Paula
AFTER TWO and a half years' studious application, Tilbury Container Services Personnel Officer, Paula Lowe, is now a graduate of the Institute of Personnel Management.
A half day release each week enabled Paula to travel to tutorial classes at the University of Anglia's personnel management department.
‘Now that I have got a diploma, I have a higher qualification for my job which will help me with my work and future progress’ she said.
Right: People skills for Paula Lowe, pictured with Terminal Operator, Al Spriggs.
SHORT WAVES
Just the ticket
DRAWING IN on time and to budget, Bovis Construction have handed over Waterloo International, the UK's first international rail terminus to serve channel tunnel passengers.
Close co-operation between all parties involved on the £130 million project was paramount in ensuring the work was completed on schedule.
Consisting of two and a half acres of glass, two acres of stainless steel cladding and 1,000 tonnes of steel work, the 400 metre long single span terminal roof covers a four level international passenger handling complex.
Lehrer contract
LEHRER MCGOVERN International have been appointed Construction Manager for the new corporate headquarters of Scottish Equitable Life Assurance Co in Edinburgh.
Pre-construction work is already underway on the first phase, a 328,000 sq ft building set on a 20 acre green field site within Edinburgh Park, due for completion in Autumn 1995.
Home to Scottish Equitable's 1,400 head office staff, the building, designed as three wings around a central courtyard, will also include conference, boardroom and training facilities and a staff restaurant.
Parking for 1,000 cars will be provided on four levels adjoining the staff entrance.
Panama record
CROWN PRINCESS broke new ground recently with a record toll at the Panama Canal.
En route to Vancouver to start a series of Alaska cruises,Crown Princess became the third Princess Cruises ship to hold the record, paying USS 141,344.97.
This beats the toll os US$141,088.61 paid by Regal Princess last year, and the US$109,653.60 record toll set by Star Princess in 1989.
Munich venture
P&O TRANS European/Rhenania have signed a joint venture agreement designed to strengthen operations in Munich.
A new company, owned jointly with Werndl KG, will operate under the brand name Werndl, because of its strength in the local market, explained P&O Trans European Managing Director, Charles Rice.
‘Werndl will also support P&O Trans European's international network as well as providing additional services for Rhenania, the Group's German domestic operating division’ he added.
The joint venture company has already received the assent of Germany's monopolies and merger commission and plans are now well advanced for the construction of a new 4,000 sq m warehouse and transit facility in the Munich area.
Canberra to lead new Normandy landings P&O CRUISE SHIP TO CARRY ALLIED VETERANS AT 50TH ANNIVERSARY
P&O'S MUCH loved cruise liner,Canberra , is to be the flagship for the allied veterans returning to Normandy for the 50th anniversary of D-Day next year.
A charter deal has been struck between The Royal British Legion (Marketing) Ltd and P&O) Cruises.
Canberra , herself a veteran of the 1982 Falklands Campaign, will carry veterans and families from the key allied associations — The Royal British Legion (including the Normandy Veterans' Association), The Royal Canadian Legion, The American Legion and the Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States.
Sailing from Southampton on June 4 1994, she will meet up with the official flotilla at sea on the following day.
She will dock in Cherbourg later on June 5 and veterans will be taken to commemorative services on June 6.
Canberra will sail again late on June 6, arriving back in Southampton early on June 7.
Prices abroad Canberra will range from £250 to £800 per head.
Individuals and groups can register their interest by contacting: The Royal British Legion,.
When costs and details are finalised, they will be sent out with booking confirmation.
Canberra (above) will be the flagship for allied veterans returning to Normandy next year
Above: P&O Chairman, Lord Sterling (left) presents the Royal British Legion Chairman, Ted Jobson with a painting of Canberra.
ELLERMAN & BUCKNALL LAY ON THE SMILES
STAFF AT Ellerman & Bucknall had their hands full when Canberra visited South Africa recently.
Acting as Port Agent for P&O Cruises for the first time, Ellerman & Bucknall were responsible for a range of activities all aimed at ensuring a trouble free visit for Canberra in both Durban and Cape Town.
In both cities the company arranged the berths for the ship with the port authorities and sorted out customs and immigration formalities.
In Cape Town, Ellerman & Bucknall also provided quayside entertainment.
A band played as Canberra entered the port, and throughout disembarkation, each passenger received a flower to welcome them to the city.
While transit passengers went off on local tours, Ellerman & Bucknall were busy co-ordinating the delivery of 80 tons of supplies and 2,500 tons of fuel to be taken on board.
Preparations were also made for the smooth embarkation of new passengers and their luggage.
Ellerman & Bucknall rounded off Canberra's stay in memorable style with a brass band, drum majorettes and a pipe band performing as the ship left the quay.
Above: Passengers were presented with flowers and Canberra Captain Rory Smith received a garland and gifts as the ship arrived in Cape Town to a colourful welcome.
Vikings ahoy!
P  SCOTTISH Ferries will be calling at the Norwegian port of Bergen this summer.
A weekend service, using St Clair, will operate from June to August between Shetland and Bergen.
The passenger and freight vessel will leave Shetland at 11am on Saturday, arriving at Bergen at midnight.
She will then set off for Shetland again at 2 am, arriving at 2pm.
According to P&O Scottish Ferries Marketing Director, Scott Colegate, the company was asked to provide the service by the Shetland Islands Council, following the departure of Smyril Line, which withdrew from the route last summer.
Scott Colegate hopes to improve Symril's passenger carryings and also sees potential for carrying cargo such as oil related and fish farming equipment from Norway to Aberdeen via Shetland.
Encouraging Old Masters of the future
INHERITING an Old Master is probably a common day-dream.
But inheriting the sponsorship of a competition to unearth the Old Masters of tomorrow is a different matter altogether.
This was the situation P&O Containers, Australia, found themselves in after the acquisition of Associated Container Transportation (Australia) Ltd (ACTA).
In 1985, ACTA established a national maritime art award and P&O Containers have decided to continue their support in partnership with the Australian National Maritime Museum.
Speaking at the awards ceremony recently, P&O Containers Australia Chairman and Managing Director, Peter Jollie said that as a major shipping line, the company's responsibility extended not only to customers but to the wider industry and community.
The art awards, he continued, were in keeping with the best traditions of the P&O SN Co, which had been part if the maritime history and development of Australia since 1852.
This year's competition attracted 220 entries.
The winning painting, entitled Dockside , brought a prize of Aus$15,000 for artist, David Bowers (pictured inset, left receiving his prize from Peter Jollie), who judges said, had used, ‘a contemporary idiom through a lively interplay of diverse forms and lines, to project feelings about dockside activity.’
HITTING THE ROAD AT P&O ROAD TANKS
THIS MONTH Wavelength hits the road with P&O Road tanks.
As well as the UK operations profiled here, the company also covers Continental Europe through H&S Transport and Flix Troll — and provides a bridge between the Uk and the Continent through P & O Tankmasters, who are specialists in demountable tanks.
THERE'S A VERY good chance, that the next soft drink to pass your lips, or the next gallon of petrol in your car, is there courtesy of P&O Roadtanks.
The company, a specialist arm of the P&O European Transport Service (POETS) group, is amongst the major players in the UK roadtanks and tank container business, with prestigious clients including Shell, British Sugar, BP, ICI and Procter & Gamble.
Historically, the P&O Roadtanks Uk operation incorporates five companies, Thomas Allen, A.S.
Jones, John Forman, James Hemphill and Haley Bulk Powder — names which will be familiar to anyone who has been with P&O for more than three years.
In 1990, the company restructured its operation, and the individual names were phased out.
The move was steered successfully by P&O Roadtanks Managing Director, Bryan Haworth, who believes that customers are more confident being served by a company with a strong identity.
The P&O Roadtanks network of 13 depots around the UK, reaches from Grangemouth in Scotland to Pyle in South Wales and their shiny tankers are a regular sight on British motorways.
The company is highly devolved, with only a small number of staff based at head office in Altrincham, outside Manchester.
As Bryan Haworth says: ‘Our drivers are our business and their ‘office’ is the open road.’
P&O Roadtanks carry three main product groups: Chemicals, Petroleum and foodstuffs.
Different kinds of vehicle and tanks are required for different products, which in turn need specialist handling by fully qualified drivers.
Agreements for moving hazardous and nonhazardous bulk liquids, powders and gases are arranged in one of three ways.
It is Bryan Haworth's long term aim to win more contracted business for the company.
This currently accounts for around two thirds of P&O Roadtanks' UK business and involves long term contracts of between three and five years.
Vehicles are usually painted in the client's livery and for major customers it is the preferred means of transporting their products.
‘These contracts offer the minimum exposure to risk,’ says Bryan Haworth ‘and are particularly popular with our clients in the petroleum sector.’
u Logistics 
Contracts of affreightment, usually 12 months agreements, provide more of a logistics challenge for P&O Roadtank traffic planners.
The customers selects a single operator to supply all their transport needs to one geographically location.
The haulier will not necessarily know from week to week what products are to be transported — if any — but must have a range of vehicles available to cover all eventualities.
The market for this type of contract is currently highly volatile and never predictable.
‘Though it does usually tend to balance out over a given 12 month period’ adds Projects Manager, Mike Doyle, also based in Altrincham.
With flexibility the key, the third string to the P&O Roadtanks bow is to hire traffic business.
Any customer who phones in to a P&O Roadtanks depot, can hire a vehicle for a one-off delivery.
Spot hire agreements help provide an efficient balance with the contract of affreightment business, where work is guaranteed but not necessarily regular.
Clearly, Bryan Haworth's aim is being realised: contracted business accounted for 66 per cent of turnover for P&O Roadtanks in 1992 with 25 per cent from contracts of affreightment and nine per cent from spot hire.
Of the £41 million worth of revenue last year, 62 per cent came from carrying petroleum products, 34 per cent from chemicals and four per cent from food.
Right: At Altrincham head office, L to R:
ENJOYING THE SWEET LIFE AT KING'S LYNN
Shifting sugar by the ton
Right: Tinkering with a tanker.
Workshop Supervisor, Brian Sergeant inside one of the pristine sugar tankers.
LIFE IS SWEET for Norman Eggleton.
Manager of P&O Roadtanks King's Lynn depot, about 90 per cent of his work is with British Sugar.
Liquid or granulated, sugar by the tanker load is delivered all over the UK in a fleet of sparkling liveried vehicles, for use in soft drinks, confectionery and canned foods.
The King's Lynn depot, hard by a huge British Sugar factory, is in the heart of the sugar beet growing country of Norfolk.
It was established a quarter of a century ago, to provide a dedicated service to the sugar industry.
Today, 16 of the 21 vehicles here operate the British Sugar contract, with the rest carrying molasses for Intermol and a small range of products for Dow Chemicals.
‘Ours is a compact operation’, says Norman Eggleton, who was Operations Manager at Stanford-le-Hope before moving to King's Lynn in 1978.
Administration is handled by just three staff including Norman Eggleton.
The depot has 22 drivers while three fitters in the workshop are supervised by Brian Sergeant.
Cleanliness is essential when carrying a food product like sugar.
If the vehicles are tarnished, then so is British Sugar's reputation.
The insides of the tankers are sterilised at the factory by British Sugar staff, but the exterior is the responsibility of the drivers, who obviously take pride in their gleaming vehicles.
The busiest time for the King's Lynn depot is between October and February, during what is known locally as the sugar beet ‘campaign’ or harvest.
‘We work 365 days a year, 24 hours a day if necessary’ says Traffic Manager, Trevor Elston, who takes it in turn with Norman Eggleton to be on 24 hour call-out.
‘British Sugar often want to move a load at very short notice and we must always be at the ready’ he adds.
Left: King's Lynn Depot Manager, Norman Eggleton.
Right: Traffic Manager Trevor Elston checks drivers' tachograph cards to ensure they are balancing work with rest periods.
There's pride by the mile at the Stanford-le-Hope depot
‘IF WE PARKED all the vehicles in my division end to end, they would stretch for one and a half miles’, says P&O Roadtanks Divisional Director, Joe Chapman.
Further facts at his fingertips: ‘Our vehicles covered almost ten million miles last year, the equivalent to 20 return trips to the moon.
The amount of product we moved would fill 550 olympic-sized swimming pools.’
Joe Chapman is responsible for 279 staff in depots at Stanford-le-Hope in Essex, Avonmouth near Bristol, King's Lynn in Norfolk and Pyles in Wales.
Based at Stanford-le-Hope, he has spent all his working life in road haulage, joining P&O in 1989.
Before the 1990 restructuring at P&O Roadtanks, Stanford-le-Hope was the head office and main depot for Thomas Allen.
Most of the business here comes from the nearby oil refineries at Shell Haven and the Isle of Grain.
In accordance with the company's overall business plan, contractual work is carried out with major clients highest standards.
He says: ‘We are making more and more DCDs — Driver Controlled Deliveries — where the driver not only delivers a tanker of petrol to a filling station, but is trained to unload it into the underground storage tanks’ This has become a necessity, as more and more petrol stations are operated by one person locked behind security windows.
Stanford-le-Hope depot also moves a lot of bitumen where, again, drivers must be suitably trained to deal with this product.
Bitumen requires purpose-built tanks, has to be loaded hot and kept insulated in transit to prevent if solidifying.
Organising training, administration, health and safety and quality is all in a day's work for the division's Training and Administration Manager Frank Hesketh.
He ensures that all drivers are trained to the standards of the internationally recognised Accord european relatif au transport international des merchandises dangereuses par route — ADR for short.
It all adds up to a lot of loyalty, from staff and customers.
‘Some of our contracts are over 30 years old,’ says Joe Chapman, ‘And our longest serving employee, Workshop Supervisor, Reg Spooner, has been with the company since 1946!’
Above: Training and Administration Manager, Frank Hesketh discusses documentation with P&O Roadtanks' only female driver, Anita Loades.
Below: Maintaining the vehicles is a vital job for, L to R:.
Ellesmere Port puts emphasis on safety
A SHORT TANKER ride west of Altrincham lies Ellesmere Port, one of the depots for which Divisional Director Reg Jones is responsible.
Workshops at Ellesmere Port carry out the servicing, refuelling and washing of all P&O Roadtanks vehicles based at the depot and also at the massive Shell refinery at nearby Stanlow.
Reg Jones also looks after the Bromborough depot on Merseyside.
At Ellesmere Port a foreman and seven fitters run a 24 hour operation in two main shifts.
For safety purposes, the servicing of petroleum carrying vehicles is carried out in a separate work area.
Special emergency trailers are located at depots at Bromborough, Stanford-le-Hope, Glasgow and Hull.
P&O Roadtanks' safety record is excellent but if one of their vehicles gets into trouble — be it breakdown, crash or spillage — police and fire services can quickly make contact with key personnel who are on call day or night.
An emergency trailer from the nearest available location can be taken to the incident to assist the emergency services.
The trailer carries all the equipment needed to deal with an emergency, including pumps, compressors, welding and fire fighting gear, additional hoses, sand, shovels and spill kits.
‘All our drivers, of course, are trained to deal with an emergency situation too’, says Reg Jones, ‘Standards are getting higher and higher and the majority of drivers who work for P&O Roadtanks not only have a City & Guilds qualification in dealing with hazardous chemicals, but will have attended further training courses to improve the service they can offer the customer.’
Above: All steamed up.
Fitter Chris Colligan gets down to some steam cleaning
Below: Tyre-ing work for Fitter, Bob Ravenscroft
Saluting the courage of naval heroes
From a ferry service across the Mersey in World War One, the heroic Royal Daffodil (above) had a colourful history.
MEMORIES of World War One were revived at Zeebrugge recently as the 75th anniversary of the Royal Navy's blocking raid on the port was commemorated.
Laying a wreath on behalf of the Belgian delegation of the Old Veterans and Patriotic Associations, were retired P&O European Ferries Freight Manager at Zeebrugge, Charles Claeys.
The commemoration took place in the presence of Prince Philip and Lord Keyes of Dover and Zeebrugge, whose father, the Late Vice Admiral Sir Roger Keyes led the raid on the port in 1918.
The partially successful operation, during the closing months of the Great War, was an attempt to stop German destroyers and U-boats based at Bruges from reaching the open sea via the eight mile ship canal connecting the city with Zeebrugge.
Three old cruisers,Thetis, Intrepid and Iphigenia largely stripped and filled with concrete, attempted to sink themselves at the mouth of the canal.
Demolition parties
A diversionary attack was made by 200 seamen and 700 marines transported alongside in HMS Vindictive .
Vindictive was accompanied by two requisitioned Mersey ferries, owned by the County Borough of Wallasey,Iris and Daffodil .
The latter kept Vindictive pressed against the mole (or pier) while demolition parties landed.
As an interesting footnote to the story, after their part in the operation, the two gallant ferries were both given the prefix ‘Royal’ by King George V. In 1933, New Medway Steam Packet Co bought Royal Daffodil and three years later, General Steam bought out NMSP Co, thus bringing the heroic vessel into the P&O fleet.
Royal Daffodil ran on the Medway — Southend service until being transferred to Port of London Authority dock cruises in 1937.
She was scrapped a year later, when Wallasey Borough Council hoped to get the name back.
But a new Royal Daffodil was delivered to GSN Co in 1939 and the people of Wallasey were forced to call their 1934-built ferry Royal Daffodil II , until GSN scrapped their version in 1967.
Above: Commemorating the 75th anniversary of the Royal Navy's blocking raid on Zeebrugge are Lord Keyes of Dover and Zeebrugge (front row, second left) and former P&O European Ferries Freight Manager at Zeebrugge, Charles Claeys (far right).
ON YOUR MARQUES, GET SET, GO!
L to R. P&O Containers London-based Northbound Manager, ANZ Trade, David Lindsey; Jan Ryan, who accompanied her husband, Chris Ryan on the trip to London and Paul Ecclestone
WHEN THE London Sydney classic car rally began at Chelsea Harbour, London, two lucky P&O Containers Australia staff were there to give the drivers a rousing send off.
It was the luck of the draw which transported Trans-Tasman Sales Manager, Chris Ryan and Computer Programmer, Paul Ecclestone from Melbourne and Sydney respectively, on the trip of a lifetime.
P&O Containers.
official deep sea carriers for the rally, shipped cars and equipment from Australia for the start of the race.
They were also sponsors of one of Australia's top drivers, Ross Dunkerton, in his Ford Falcon GT.
To add to the festivities, they also decided to offer two all-expenses paid tickets to staff in Australia — and Chris and Paul's were the first names out of the hat.
The 106 entrants in the gruelling marathon set off from London on a route which took them through Europe to Turkey in classic cars ranging from a Ford Cortina to a Russian Moskvitch, all at least 25 years old.
Cars and drivers were then flown to India for the trip between Delhi and Bombay, followed by another airlift from Bombay to Perth and finally, an eight day race to the finish in Sydney.
P&O Containers then shipped British entrants' cars and equipment back to the UK.
Royal Tournament discount
THE PRICE of Royal Enclosure tickets at this year's Royal Tournament is £23.00 and not £22.00 as printed in last month's Wavelength .
Further information is available from the Box Office on .
Maximum endeavour for New Zealand
P&O CONTAINERS have shipped a yacht half way around the world so that she can take part in a round-the=world race!
The 25 metre maxi ketch,New Zealand Endeavour (left), is New Zealand's entry in this year's Whitbread round-the-world race.
P&O Containers brought her from Auckland to Tilbury, from where she took up her first challenge, the ‘Round Europe’ race last month.
Regarded as a favourite for the Whitbread this September,New Zealand Endeavour's 14-strong crew are also going to limber up this summer with a bash at the Fastnet race in August.
WARM WELCOME TO RETIRED P&O STAFF AT SOUTHAMPTON REUNION
Friendship flows again over lunch
MORE THAN 200 retired P&O staff attended the first reunion luncheon of 1993.
They were welcomed to the Polygon Hotel, Southampton by their host, P&O Chairman, Lord Sterling.
Over aperitifs, there was a chance to mingle with friends old and new, before sitting down to luncheon.
Amongst the guests this year were two nonagenarians, Arthur Terry, a former superintending steward with Orient Line who retired in 1967 after 48 years' service, and Captain William Solly who served with British India for 33 years and retired as a commander in 1960.
Both are ninety years old, with Arthur Terry the elder by six months.
The octogenarians were well respected too.
The 15 all present and correct had between them an astonishing 533 years' service.
Sandy Oag had a good reason for turning the luncheon into a bit of a celebration: it was his 68th birthday.
A former chairman and managing director of Mackinnon Mackenzie, Sandy Oag retired in 1973 after 27 years' service.
Farthest travelled again this year, was Captain Walter Popplewell, visiting from his home in Palma de Mallorca.
Following a speech by Lord Sterling, the reply on behalf of the guests was made by Alan Langley, who retired as Managing Director of P&O Cruises in 1990 after 42 years' service with P&O, BI and Mackinnon Mackenzie.
Left: Gerald Nye (P&O Cruises) reassured friends at the reunion that his superb white Volvo (200 series) is still going strong
Far right: Former Managing Director of P&O Cruises, Alan Langley made the reply speech on behalf of the guests.
Right: P&O Chairman, Lord Sterling, welcomed the guests to The Polygon Hotel, Southampton
The hand of friendship: Captain John Stratford (Master, P&O/Orient Line)(right) and Gerry Puckle (Fleet Personnel Manager, P&O/Orient Line).
Above: One hundred and eighty!…if you add up their ages.
Nonagenarians, Captain William Solly (left) and Arthur Terry.
Left: The Golden Girls.
L to R: Margaret Rogers, Joan Symonds, Anne Millard and Rosemary Gibbison, all of whom worked for Bovis Homes.
Above: These three are the ferry best of friends.
L to R:
THE CAPE CRUSADERS
THERE WAS a ‘mini reunion’ for a group of P&O pensioners in South Africa.
Organised by ex-P&O Chief Engineer, Bernard Hill, it was attended by a group of friends who have kept in touch over the years, and got together in Hermanus, near Cape Town, at the home of Albert Morris who retired as a director of P&O Lines Passenger Services in 1968.
Albert Morris and Bernard Hill now live in South Africa and all hope that this will be the first of many meetings.
Our picture shows, L to R:(Chief Engineer with P&O, subsequently Technical Services Division and Three Quays Marine);(Secretary to Albert Morris before going to sea as an assistant purser in 1954);(Chief Engineer, P&O, subsequently Deputy Engineer Manager);(ex-Manager, Islay Kerr in Singapore until transferring in 1967 to P&O Lines as General Manager, retired as Managing Director OCL South Africa in 1985).
SURVEYING STEP-UP
ANGUS FLETCHER (above) is appointed Deputy Group Chief Surveyor.
A Fellow of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, Angus Fletcher joined P&O Properties in 1987 as assistant to the P&O Group Surveyor, having previously worked for the Inland Revenue in the Chief Valuer's Office.
PLANNING FOR BOVIS
ALF PLUMB (below) is appointed Associate Director — Town Planning with Bovis Homes Technical Services.
Having spent 20 years working with local planning authorities, he joined Bovis Homes in 1987 as Town Planner, becoming Divisional Town Planner three years later.
Alf Plumb has been a Member of the Royal Town Planning Institute since 1973 and a Member of the British Institute of Management for 13 years.
FAR EAST APPOINTMENT
DAVID CROSS (left) is appointed Far East Marketing Manager with P&O Containers in singapore.
Since joining the company in 1977 as Cargo Planning Assistant, he has held several positions within the company and has spent time on secondments in South Africa and Dubai.
Most recently he held the position of Deputy General Manager for P&O Containers' Gulf and South Asia Trade.
Saying farewell to Terry Williams
TERRY WILLIAMS has retired as P&O Deputy Group Treasurer after 19 years' service.
He joined P&O in 1974 as Finance Officer of The European and Air Transport Division.
In 1978 he was appointed Assistant Treasurer of the P&O Group Treasury, becoming Treasury Manager three years later.
He has held the position of Deputy Group Treasurer since 1985.
On leaving school, Terry Williams served three years as a commissioned officer in The Royal Warwickshire Regiment, before moving to West Africa to pursue a career in banking.
He returned to the UK 13 years later.
At a farewell party held in his honour, Terry Williams received various mementos from friends and colleagues and was presented with a compact disc player by P&O Group Treasurer, John Beverton.
His wife, Anne, received a basket of flowers.
Above: L to R: John Beverton with Anne and Terry Williams.
TWO NEW FACES AT ANDERSON HUGHES
DAN MCSWEENEY and Nicholas Pentreath are appointed Dry Cargo Shipbrokers with Anderson Hughes.
They join the company from Maersk Company, where they had both worked as Dry Cargo Shipbrokers since 1989.
A tanker broker before switching to dry cargo broking in the 1970s.
Dan McSweeney (above, left) has spent all his working life in the shipping industry.
He is a Member of the Baltic Exchange and a Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Shipbrokers.
Nicholas Pentreath (right), a graduate from Plymouth Polytechnic with a degree in Nautical Studies, has been a Member of the Baltic Exchange since 1980.
He is also a Member of the Institute of Chartered Shipbrokers.
NEW EVENT
PAULINE RICHARDS (pictured left) is appointed Event Planning Manager with Olympia Exhibition & Conference Centre.
She joins the company from Wembley, having spent 13 years in event management.
Ray Coventry casts off from Cruises
RAY COVENTRY has retired from P&O Cruises (UK) after 14 years' service having most recently held the position of Equipment and Stores Supervisor in the Hotel Services Department.
Before joining P&O he spent 31 years at sea and ashore with Union Castle Line.
At a farewell party held in his honour, Ray Coventry received a watch from P&O Cruises Operations Director, John Marden.
Above: Ray Coventry (left) receives a watch from P&O Cruises Operations Director, John Marden
BOVIS APPOINTMENT
JOHN ANDERSON (right) is appointed an Executive Director of Bovis Construction Limited and an Executive Director of the Bovis Europe Management board.
Formerly Managing Director of P&O Developments, he is an Executive Director of the Bovis Construction Group and currently Managing Director of PSA Building Management, leading the Bovis team which is contractor manager of PSABM in the run up to privatisation.
Peter Ratcliffe is President of Princess Cruises
PETER RATCLIFFE (right) is appointed President of Princess Cruises.
Princess Cruises Chief Operating Officer since 1989, Peter Ratcliffe has worked for P&O for 20 years.
A graduate of Cambridge University, he worked for the accountancy firm, Coopers and Lybrand, before joining P&O Containers in 1973.
Spending time in both London and Sydney, he was P&O Containers Group Financial Controller before moving to Los Angeles in 1986 to join Princess Cruises as Chief Financial Officer and subsequently Senior Vice President of Reservations between 1987 and 1988.
RICE IN RHENANIA DRIVING SEAT
MANAGING DIRECTOR of P&O European Transport Services.
Jim Paton, who had assumed the role of Managing Director of Rhenania after the sudden death of Wolfgang Ferber last year, now relinquishes that post to take up again his former role as Chairman of the Rhenania Supervisory Board.
His place as Managing Director of Rhenania is taken by Charles Rice.
A graduate of Oxford University, he joined P&O in 1974, working in Tokyo, Sydney and New York as well as in the UK, before completing an MBA at Fountainebleau in 1988.
A year later he joined the board of P&O European Transport Services, moving to Mannheim in 1990, with responsibility for the development of the POETS' European transport network.
Ruldolf Herr is appointed Director with responsibility for Road Haulage.
Joining Rhenania in 1971 as a Forwarding Manager in Heilbronn, he became Manager of Spendition Schneider in 1984.
In 1987 he was appointed Managing Director of Rhenania Transport GmbH in Mannheim, a position which he will continue to hold.
More recently Rudolf Herr has had overall responsibility for the road haulage interests of the group, and until his promotion, was Chairman of the management board of Rhenania.
Klaus Kuck remains Finance Director.
Joining Rhenania in 1973, he has been responsible for the company's finance and accounts since 1976.
Qualified with a management diploma, Klaus Kuck has also completed a Business Administration course at Columbia University, New York.
Table talk at Themania.
Left, L to R: Director with responsibility for Road Haulage, Rudolf Herr, Managing Director, Charles Rice and Finance Director, Klaus Kuck.
POSTS IN NEW ZEALAND
PAUL WINFIELD is appointed deputy Managing Director of P&O Containers, New Zealand.
Most recently a Director of P&O Containers in Australia, responsible for Trades and Operations, he has held several positions within the company in both Sydney and London.
A Law graduate from Sydney University, Paul Windfield joined P&O Containers in Sydney as a graduate trainee after qualifying as a solicitor with the NSW Supreme Court.
TIM RITCHIE is appointed General Manager — Marketing and Commercial with P  Containers, New Zealand.
He joins the company from the New Zealand Meat Producers Board where he was General Manager, Corporate Affairs.
Since graduating from Lincoln College with a degree in Agricultural Science, he has held several positions within the meat industry, in New Zealand and London, and has been particularly involved in export marketing.
Men of figures
BRIAN STEDMAN is appointed Financial Director of P&O European Transport Services.
After graduating from Cambridge with a BA in Mathmatics and Economics.
he trained as an accountant with Price Waterhouse in Manchester.
He joined P&O Ferrymasters in 1974, transferring to P&O Roadtanks in 1979, where he was most recently Financial Director.
Carl Stead is appointed Financial Controller at P&O Roadtanks.
After studying MORSE (Mathmatics, Operational Research, Statistics and Economics) at Warwick University, Carl Stead qualified as a chartered accountant in 1987 with Spicer & Oppenheim.
He joined P&O Roadtanks in 1988 and was most recently Personal Assistant to Brian Stedman.
OVENDEN JOINS GUIDE INSURANCE
DAVID OVENDEN (below) is appointed Head of P&O Group Insurance and Risk Management.
He joins the company from the Wellcome Foundation Limited, where he has been Group Risk and Insurance Manager for eleven years.
An Associate of the Chartered Insurance Institute and a Fellow of the Institute of Risk Management, in his new role, David Ovenden will also have responsibility for the management of the two P&O Insurance Companies, Proteus and Beaufort Insurance.
Waller is Commodore Chief Engineer
BRUCE WALLER is appointed Commodore Chief Engineer with P&O Cruises.
Having served his apprenticeship with R.H. Green and Silley Weir, Commodore Waller (below) received his first appointment with P&O in 1958 as Assistant Engineer in Dongola , later transferring to Stratheden for his first sea service.
After his promotion to 4th Engineer in 1959 he served in Empire Fowey (trooping),Sudan and Stratheden , before becoming 3rd Engineer in 1962 when he joined Chusan and later Himalaya .
In 1968 Commodore Waller joined Patonga as 2nd Engineer.
Subsequently serving in Himalaya, Orsova, Spirit of London, Oriana and Island Princess .
Since his appointment as Chief Engineer in 1978, Commodore Waller has served in Pacific Princess, Island Princess, Royal Princess, Canberra and Sky Princess .
Currently seconded ashore, Commodore Chief Engineer Waller returns to sea duties abroad Royal Princess this month.
At the helm in Dover
LES STEPHENSON (above) is appointed Managing Director of P&O European Ferries (Dover) Ltd.
This follows the appointment of Graeme Dunlop as Chairman of P&O European Ferries Limited, announced in the May issue of Wavelength .
Prior to this appointment, Graeme Dunlop had undertaken responsibility for P&O European Ferries (Dover) Ltd within his role as Managing Director of P&O European Ferries Ltd.
Graeme Dunlop continues as Managing Director of P&O European Ferries Ltd, while responsibility for Dover is now handed to Les Stephenson.
Les Stephenson joined European Ferries in 1973 as a naval architect.
Appointed Chief Superintendent with Atlantic Steam Navigation Company at Felixstowe in 1976, he became Managing Director of Thoresen Car Ferries in Portsmouth ten years later.
In 1978, he was appointed Deputy Managing Director of P&O European Ferries Limited, a position he will continue to hold in addition to his new appointment.
McDougall becomes a director
NEIL MCDOUGALL (below) is appointed a Director of P&O Developments.
He joined P&O in 1988 as Assistant to the Chairman of P&O Properties, Tim Harding, having spent a year as Finance Manager with Prudential Bache Capital Funding Ltd.
After graduating from the University of Wales in 1983 with a degree in Accounting and Finance, he trained with the accountancy firm, Coopers and Lybrand.
As a Director of P&O Developments, he will have responsibility for the Continental European property development and investment portfolio.
SPORTS FOCUS
MARATHON EFFORT AT P&O
SEVERAL P&O Marathon Men successfully completed this years' London Marathon — each in their own style.
From Cape Town to Charing Cross, via Canberra was the route taken by Ellerman & Bucknall Services Manager, Brian Speck to get to the London Marathon on time.
Intending to complete two weeks of intensive training whilst sailing to Southampton, he was distracted by the food and entertainment, but still managed to cross the Marathon finishing line on Westminster Bridge just over four hours after the starter's gun had fired.
u Minutes 
Having recently completed a company first aid course, P&O Distribution Warehouseman, Terry Phillips, decided to run his first marathon to raise money for the St John Ambulance Service.
Crossing the line in four hours and three minutes, he managed to raise over £650 for the charity.
Finishing within minutes of each other were three men from P&O Roadtanks.
Tanker Driver, Ian Newman, from the Stallingborough depot, ran the race armed with a hooter dressed as British comedian Russ Abbott's mad Scottish character ‘Jimmy’.
He crossed the line in three hours and 56 minutes, raising over £600 for the British Epilepsy Association.
Just two minutes and 10 seconds behind him was fellow driver, Ken Burgess from the P&O Roadtanks depot in King's Lynn, who was still looking fit and cheerful as he ran along The Mall, with just over one more mile to go.
Bettering his previous time by 10 minutes.
Ken was sponsored to raise money for a local day centre for the mentally ill.
It was a calm and collected, HGV Fitter, Mick Richardson from the Hull Depot, who completed his fourth marathon in four hours 19 minutes and 40 seconds, raising £600 for the National Asthma Campaign.
Keep on running.
Right: P&O Roadtanks driver, Ken Burgess, sees the end in sight as he runs along The Mall with just over a mile to go
It's all over.
Below, Left: Ellerman & Bucknall Services Manager, Brian Speck (top) and P&O Distribution Warehouseman, Terry Phillips, proudly display their medals.
Left: Follow that rabbit!
P&O Roadtanks Tanker Driver, Ian Newman found a novel way of training for the marathon
Right: P&O Roadtanks HGV Fitter, Mick Richardson, looks calm and collected after completing his fourth marathon
FLAG DAY AT TABLE MOUNTAIN
THE P&O flag has been flying at Table Mountain.
Whilst on a tour of South Africa, the rugby team, pictured above, from Loretto School in Scotland met up with staff from Ellerman & Bucknall in Cape Town for what their agenda described as ‘P&O Day’.
The team, their staff and Ellerman & Bucknall Sales Representative, Bazil Chricton (front row, far left) paraded their P&O T-shirts for the camera, before embarking on a trip up Table Mountain.
Ellerman & Bucknall ladies are simply oar inspiring
AN OAR inspiring performance from a team of Ellerman & Bucknall rowers left the competition all at sea in South Africa recently.
At a regatta in Port Elizabeth harbour, local companies associated with ships and shipping were invited to enter teams of six rowers and coxswain in both men's and women's races.
The Ellerman & Bucknall ladies team won their heat and then went on to victory in the final.
On the crest of a wave.
The victorious Ellerman & Bucknall rowers at the Port Elizabeth regatta.