

GUINNESS PLC HIGHLIGHTS
Guinness is the world's largest alcoholic drinks company by operating profit.
Guinness has a market capitalisation of over £9 billion, making it the eleventh largest company in the UK (18.4.93).
Guinness is the EC's third largest consumer goods group.
Guinness is the fourth largest net exporter from the UK.
Guinness exported £975 million worth of goods from the UK in 1992.
Guinness is the highest UK employer in Japan.
THE GUINNESS GROUP
Guinness PLC is an international company producing, distributing and marketing premium branded consumer products and services throughout the world.
It employs around 24,000 people worldwide.
Guinness PLC is also a substantial contributor to the UK economy.
It is both a major exporter from the UK and the largest exporter in the food and drinks sector.
Its export earnings are in excess of £975 million per annum, and it collects a total of £1,175 million in excise duty, of which £336 million is paid in the UK.
The group's core business is premium quality alcoholic beverages.
It is one of the leading beverage companies in the world, and a major international producer of spirits and beer.
In addition, Guinness publishes The Guinness Book of Records and a range of successful reference titles, and owns The Gleneagles Hotel in Scotland, part of Guinness Enterprises.
United Distillers,the spirits company of Guinness, has an unrivalled portfolio of leading brands of Scotch whisky, gin, vodka, bourbon, rum and other spirits.
It sells more than 50 million cases annually.
Johnnie Walker, Dewar's, White Horse, and Bell's Scotch whiskies are just some of the well known names in the portfolio.
Gordon's, Tanqueray and Booth's Gins are similarly leading brands in the white spirits market.
Other famous brands include Asbach Uralt Brandy, Pampero Rum and Bundaberg Rum.
United Distillers employs around 10,000 people worldwide and, with its joint ventures, an additional 1,500.
For worldwide production and distribution, United Distillers has four operating regions: Europe, North America, Asia-Pacific and International.
Guinness Brewing Worldwide (GBW)brews Guinness Stout, one of the best known and most popular beers in the world.
It is now brewed in 44 countries and sold in over 130.
Through its Cruzcampo subsidiary based in Seville, GBW is also Spain's largest and most profitable brewer.
Guinness Stout is GBW's key brand, but over a third of GBW sales are now accounted for by Cruzcampo brands, Harp Lager, Smithwick's Ale, and Kaliber (alcohol-free lager).
Guinness Business Worldwide has over 12,000 employees.
It is also organised into four operating regions: Ireland, Rest of Europe, Africa & Americas and Asia-Pacific.
Guinness Enterprises includes The Gleneagles Hotel and Guinness Publishing, which produces the world renowned Guinness Book of Records.
GUINNESS BUSINESS VENTURES
In 1988 Guinness reached agreement with Financière Agache to form a new company, Jacques Rober S.A..
Through this link and its shareholding in Christian Dior S.A., Guinness has a shareholding interest of 24% in LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton — the world's leading luxury goods group.
In parallel, LVMH has a shareholding of 24% in Guinness.
Direct investment in its own distribution and marketing allows Guinness to manage its brands, in the context of international brand strategies.
It is only through direct involvement that Guinness can guarantee that local marketing is consistent with its international strategy.
Joint ventures provide a particularly attractive route to direct involvement as they allow Guinness to benefit from linking its brands with those of complementary partners.
Some of these partners include Bacardi, Irish Distillers, Boutari, Real Companhia Velha, Codorniu, Inchcape, Jardine Matheson, Henry Taylor Reis, Malayan Breweries and Sapporo.
Guinness and LVMH also have 15 international joint venture agreements.
These are in Hong Kong, Japan, Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand, France, Ireland, USA and Mexico.
At the end of 1990, Guinness acquired Asbach — Germany's leading brandy.
In 1991, as well as the acquisition of Cruzcampo, Spain's largest brewer, Guinness acquired Industrias Pampero — producer of the original Venezuelan golden rum, and a 50% interest in Bundaberg, the leading spirits brand in Australia.
In 1991, the acquisition of Glenmore Distilleries of Louisville, Kentucky, made United Distillers the USA's third largest spirits business.
In 1992, United Distillers also acquired a 75% shareholding in its Mexican distributor Empresas Unidas.
In all its acquisitions, Guinness has sought business opportunities that have enhanced and strengthened its core activities.
PERFORMANCE
Guinness is one of the world's leading drinks companies.
In 1992 its pre-tax profits were £795 million, after exceptional items of £125 million.
Although the UK continues to be an important market for Guinness, some 85% of its profit before interest and tax is earned in continental Europe, North America, Asia-Pacific and other world markets.
In 1992, 75% of the Group's trading profits were derived from the sale of spirits and 25% from brewing.
Since 1987, the group's dividends per share have grown from 4.6p to 11.85p in 1992 — a 158% increase.
With a market capitalisation of over £9 billion, Guinness is the UK's eleventh largest company (18.4.93).
PROFILES OF EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Chairman Tony Greener 
Joint Deputy Chairmen Brian Baldock Sir David Plastow
Directors Bernard Arnault Crispin Davis Ian Duncan Dominic Cadbury Michael Julien Sir Ian MacLaurin Helmut Sihler Brendan O'Neill Philip Yea 
TONY GREENER Chairman, Guinness PLC 
Tony Greener was appointed chairman of Guinness PLC in January 1993, after being chief executive from January 1992.
Born in May 1940, Tony Greener joined Guinness PLC as managing director of United Distillers in 1987.
He had been a non-executive director since September 1986 and was appointed to the LVMH Board of Directors in January 1989.
Prior to joining Guinness, he was group managing director of Dunhill Holdings PLC, a position he had held since it was formed in 1981.
He joined the Dunhill group in 1972 as retail controller and, in 1974, was appointed to the Board of Directors.
The following year, he became managing director, at the age of 34.
BRIAN BALDOCK Joint Deputy Chairman, Guinness PLC Chairman, Guinness Brewing Worldwide 
Born in June 1934, Brian Baldock was appointed a deputy chairman of Guinness PLC in May 1992.
He joined the company in June 1986 as a main board director responsible for the Development Group.
In 1987 he was appointed managing director of Guinness Brewing Worldwide.
In May 1989 he also became Group managing director of Guinness PLC, a post he held until the end of December 1991.
Prior to joining Guinness, he was managing director of Imperial Leisure and Retailing, part of Courage Plc, and he has previously been Courage's marketing director.
His career has been in international brand companies — Procter & Gamble, The Rank Organisation and Revlon International.
Brian Baldock is also chairman of the Lord's Taverners.
CRISPIN DAVIS Managing Director, United Distillers 
Born in March 1949, Crispin Davis was appointed managing director, United Distillers in May 1992 and elected to the main board as an executive director of Guinness PLC in July 1992.
He joined United Distillers as managing director for the European Region in June 1990 and became deputy managing director of the company in 1992.
He was previously divisional manager (president) Foods Division, USA of Procter & Gamble, and from 1988 had also held the position of vice president and officer of Procter & Gamble Inc.
IAN DUNCAN Managing Director — Finance & Administration 
Born in November 1931, Ian Duncan was appointed managing director finance & administration in June 1990 after joining Guinness PLC in April 1990 as managing director finance.
He was previously chairman, president and chief executive of G.O.
Holding Management Inc. in the USA where he had been since 1983.
Prior to joining G.O.
Holdings Management Inc., he held various positions with ICI since 1957 and joined Cavenham UK in 1972 as group controller, becoming director of planning and special studies in 1977.
BRENDAN O'NEILL Managing Director, Guinness Brewing Worldwide 
Born in 1948, Brendan O'Neill was appointed managing director of Guinness Brewing Worldwide in February 1993, and was appointed to the main board in April 1993.
Prior to this he was managing director of the International region of United Distillers from January 1991.
In 1987 he joined Guinness as director of financial control for Guinness PLC, after having been group financial controller for Midland Bank.
Brendan O'Neill is chairman of GUD Pensions Trustees Ltd and a member of the United Distillers plc board.
PHILIP YEA Finance Director (Designate), Guinness PLC 
Born in December 1954, Philip Yea was appointed finance director (designate) of Guinness PLC from March 1991.
Philip Yea joined Guinness PLC in 1984 as controller (Beer).
In 1985 he was appointed divisional controller of Guinness Brewing Worldwide; in 1987 group controller of Guinness PLC; and also in 1987 director of business development of United Distillers.
He left Guinness in 1988 to become finance director of Cope Allman, returning three years later.
Director of Legal Services David Powell
Director of Public Affairs Christopher Davidson
Group Personnel Director Colin George
Group Company Secretary Geoffrey King
Director, Information Services & Technology Harry Knightbridge
Strategic Affairs Director Peter Mitchell
Director of Group Treasury Ian Scott
GUINNESS AND THE COMMUNITY
Guinness has a long standing tradition of community involvement dating back to the eighteenth century.
Guinness has maintained this tradition, believing that making a contribution to the society in which it prospers is as important today as it was when the company was founded.
In 1993, the group's charitable donations will be around £2 million in the UK along.
Guinness provides financial support to organisations engaged in medical research, health, youth, environment and conservation, employment and enterprise trusts, education and the arts.
In addition to financial support, personnel are sometimes seconded to projects and charities.
Guinness is also a significant supporter of the arts.
As well as lending works from its own renowned art collection, the group sponsors the Summer Exhibition at The Royal Academy of Art.
The Guinness Prize is awarded to the best first time exhibitor.
Worldwide, in 1992, the group supported projects as diverse as Raleigh International, Kenya Wildlife Trust, the Hong Kong Business School and the American Cancer Society.
All Guinness employees are encouraged to participate in charitable projects and the company matches, pound for pound, contributions made by employees to nominated charities through the payroll giving scheme and other fundraising efforts in the UK.
In 1992, charities benefited by more than £290,000 from money raised or donated by employees and company matching.
GUINNESS ENTERPRISES
Guinness Enterprises consists of those companies which do not form part of the Group's core activities in beer and spirits.
The Gleneagles Group The Gleneagles Hotel, located near Auchterarder in Scotland, is one of the finest golf resort hotels in the world.
It holds the British Automobile Association's supreme accolade of Five Red Stars.
Included in the sporting complex are three championship golf courses, the Queen's, the King's and the new Monarch's.
There is also the Jackie Stewart Shooting School and the Mark Phillips Equestrian centre, as well as a Champneys health spa.
Guinness Publishing Built on the success of the world famous Guinness Book of Records, Guinness Publishing today boasts a list of over 140 titles covering an extensive range of subjects.
The company is committed developing its reputation for factual and reference books.
In 1990 it took a major step forward with The Guinness Encyclopedia — a family reference book for the nineties.
LVMH — HIGHLIGHTS
Guinness PLC, in association with Financière Agache and its shareholding in Christian Dior S.A., has a shareholding interest of 24% in LVMH.
IN parallel, LVMH has a shareholding of 24% in Guinness.
LVMH is the world's leading luxury goods group, with pre-eminent positions in champagne and wines (Dom Pérignon, Moët et Chandon, Veuve Clicquot, Pommery, Mercier, Henriot, Canard Duchêne, Ruinart), cognac (Hennessy, Hine), luggage goods and accessories (Louis Vuitton, Loewe), perfumes and beauty products,(Christian Dior, Christian Lacroix, Givenchy, RoC), Haute Couture(Givenchy, Christian Lacroix) and horticulture (George Delbard).
CHAMPAGNE
LVMH is the largest champagne company in the world with consumption of Moët et Chandon being more than double that of its nearest competitor.
Somewhere in the world a Moët et Chandon cork pops every second!
Moët et Chandon owns 1840 acres of vineyards in the finest growths of the Cô des Blancs, the Montagne de Rheims and Vallée de la Marne.
It has 28 kilometres of cellars in which the equivalent of 90 million bottles are stored, and which are visited by more than 150,000 people a year.
Moët et Chandon has the leading brand in most world markets and supplies one in four of all bottles of champagne exported from F rance.
In 1992, LVMH sales of champagne and wine amounted to FF 5,245 million.
COGNAC
Unlike brandy, which can be distilled anywhere in the world, cognac can only be produced in a defined area.
Marketing priorities for LVMH's Hennessy and Hine cognacs concentrate on premium product categories such as VSOP and XO ranges, which undergo a longer ageing process in oak casks.
In 1992 total cognac and spirits shipments amounted to FF 5,553 million.
PERFUMES AND BEAUTY PRODUCTS
Parfums Christian Dior, internationally renowned for its quality and vitality, now produces six fragrance lines for women and three for men, as well as a large variety of beauty care products and make-up.
In 1992, LVMH's total sales of perfume and beauty products amounted to FF 5,487 million.
Parfums Givenchy produces and distributes five fragrance lines for women and three for men throughout the world, as well as a children's cologne.
RoC specialises in pharmaceutical skin-care preparations.
LUGGAGE AND LEATHER GOODS
Louis Vuitton founded his own custom-made luggage establishment in Paris, in 1854.
Today, LVMH's luggage, leather goods and accessories segment primarily encompasses the prestigious activities of Louis Vuitton Malletier and its retailing subsidiaries throughout the world.
Best known is Louis Vuitton's monogram range, incorporating the distinctive LV initials and logo.
Total sales of luggage and leather goods by LVMH in 1992 amounted to FF 4,700 million