

UNITED DISTILLERS
Is the world's largest and most profitable spirits company.
Is the world leader in sales of Scotch whisky.
Sells over 50 million cases of spirits worldwide each year.
34 million cases are produced in the UK, of which over 80% is exported.
Produces Johnnie Walker, the world's best selling Scotch and deluxe Scotch.
One in five bottles of Scotch whisky exported is Johnnie Walker.
Produces the leading brand of Scotch whisky in eight out of the top fifteen markets in the world.
Accounts for 41% of all ‘Bottled in Scotland’ Scotch whisky exports.
Is the world leader in sales of gin, selling 50% more than its nearest world gin competitor.
Produces Gordon's Gin.
Some 88 million bottles are consumed every year, i.e the equivalent of nearly ¼ million bottles every day — or about three bottles every second of every day.
Accounts for 50% of all UK gin exports.
Is the world's third largest exporter of bourbon.
Is the world's largest supplier of branded spirits for the duty free market.
Worldwide, owns 2 of the 3 top spirits brands in duty free.
UNITED DISTILLERS
United Distillers, the spirits company of Guinness PLC, produces and markets premium quality, world-famous brands.
It is the international leader in both the Scotch whisky and gin industries, and is the world's largest and most profitable spirits company.
The company employs around 10,000 people worldwide.
It maintains a portfolio of leading brands of Scotch whisky, gin, bourbon, vodka, rum and other spirits.
More than 50 million cases are sold annually.
United Distillers' international sales and marketing headquarters is at Landmark House, Hammersmith, London.
Distillers House, Ellersly Road, Edinburgh, is the headquarters for operations.
United Distillers has four geographical regions: Europe, North America, Asia-Pacific and International (rest of the world), with an Operations group responsible for worldwide production and physical distribution.
In overseas markets, it owns sales and marketing companies, has joint ventures, notably with LVMH, and directly oversees over 85% of its brands distribution.
It also produces spirits locally, either directly or through third party arrangements.
UNITED DISTILLERS' PRINCIPAL BRANDS — 1992
Johnnie Walker Red Label
Gordon's Gin
Bell's
Johnnie Walker Black Label
Dewar's White Label
Gordon's Vodka
White Horse Fine Old
Skol Vodka
Tanqueray Gin
Asbach Uralt Brandy
KEY BRANDS
United Distillers' comprehensive portfolio includes internationally famous brand names such as:—
JOHNNIE WALKER RED LABEL the world's best selling Scotch and the leading duty free spirits brand worldwide.
JOHNNIE WALKER BLACK LABEL the world's best selling deluxe Scotch whisky, and the world's third largest duty free spirits brand.
BELL'S the best selling Scotch whisky in the UK and South Africa.
DEWAR'S WHITE LABEL the best selling Scotch whisky in the USA, and the fifth largest Scotch brand in the world.
WHITE HORSE FINE OLD the best selling Scotch whisky in Japan, and the seventh largest Scotch brand in the world.
IW HARPER the best selling bourbon whisky in Japan.
OLD PARR the best selling deluxe Scotch whisky in Japan.
GORDON'S GIN the world's leading gin, selling 50% more volume than its nearest gin competitor.
TANQUERAY GIN the most successful imported gin in the USA.
ASBACH URALT BRANDY the leading premium brandy in Germany.
BUNDABERG RUM the biggest spirits brand in Australia.
PAMPERO RUM the original Venezuelan golden rum.
PRODUCTION
United Distillers' aim is to be the highest quality, lowest cost producer in the industry.
SCOTCH WHISKY
Scotch whisky must be matured in oak casks for a period of not less than three years.
There are two types of whisky — malt and grain.
Malt whisky is made from malted barley, while grain whisky is made from both malted and unmalted barley, and maize.
A single malt or grain whisky is the product of a single distillery.
Malting:There are five maltings sited strategically at Burghead, Roseisle, Glenesk, Ord and Port Ellen, to service the group's malt distilleries.
The combined capacity of the maltings is 210,000 tonnes, making United Distillers the second largest maltster in the United Kingdom (after Pauls Malt).
Malt Whisky:There are 27 distilleries producing almost a third of the total industry capacity.
United Distillers produces malt whiskies in all four whisky-producing ‘regions’ of Scotland — Speyside, Highland, Lowland and Island.
Grain Whisky:United Distillers' grain whisky distilleries account for more than one third of total industry production.
Blended Whisky:High quality single malt whiskies and lighter grain whiskies are combined to create blended whisky.
United Distillers' 80 different blends of Scotch whisky, each using up to 40 malt and grain whiskies, are bottled at facilities located in Scotland's central belt.
WHITE SPIRITS
White spirits production worldwide is strictly controlled by Tanqueray Gordon, whether it applies to full production, rectification, or to the bottling of bulk gin.
The company's largest overseas white spirits plant producing Gordon's Gin and Vodka is located at Plainfield, near Chicago, Illinois, USA.
With the completion of the new gin distilling complex alongside the modern packing plant, the 26 acre site at Laindon in Essex, UK is now fully integrated.
The grain neutral spirit required for the majority of the gin production is now distilled at Cameronbridge in Scotland and transported to Laindon.
Gin is produced by the rectification of neutral spirits with premium quality botanicals in traditional copper pot stills.
About 30% of gins and other products are transported in bulk for bottling in Scotland with the remainder being bottled at Laindon.
U.S. AND CANADIAN WHISKIES
Production facilities in the USA are grouped under United Distillers Production Inc..
In Louisville, Kentucky, they include the Stitzel Weller and Bernheim plants, which distil and bottle bourbon.
George Dickel Tennessee Whisky is distilled at the George Dickel plant in Tullahoma, Tennessee.
All Canadian whisky is distilled at Valleyfield, Quebec.
RUM
Bundaberg Rum is distilled in Bundaberg, Australia.
Industrias Pampero in Venezuela is one of the world's leading golden rum producers.
OTHERS
Asbach of Rüdesheim, in Germany, produces Asbach Uralt, the leading German premium brandy.
Pimm's is produced to the original unique recipe and bottled at Laindon.
In addition, Pimm's in a can (ready mixed with lemonade) is now widely available throughout the UK.
DISTRIBUTION
United Distillers has a worldwide network of distributors, which provides sales and marketing support for its brands in every country.
The company is now directly involved in 85% of its overseas distribution compared with 25% five years ago.
Distribution is broken down by region:—
EUROPE
United Kingdom
United Distillers' sales and marketing are handled by United Distillers UK.
The company is the largest spirits sales and marketing company in the UK.
It has the brand leader in sales of both whisky and gin.
Bell's outsells its nearest rival brand by nearly 2:1 and Gordon's Gin has 50% of the UK market.
United Distillers UK is based at Cherrybank, Perth, Scotland and has the largest sales team of any British spirits company.
A well-developed control and distribution system enables the delivery of 95% of orders within three days.
The company's portfolio is spearheaded by Bell's, Johnnie Walker Black Label and Gordon's Gin.
Austria
All United Distillers brands are handled by a subsidiary of Asbach and Co. in Vienna.
Belgium
United Distillers Belgium is a wholly-owned subsidiary, whose principal brands are Johnnie Walker Red Label and Gordon's Gin supported by a wide range from the United Distillers portfolio.
Canary Islands
United Distillers Canarias S.A. is a majority-owned subsidiary company whose portfolio includes Cardhu, Johnnie Walker Red and Black Label, Bell's and White Horse Scotch Whiskies and Tanqueray Gin.
A joint venture with Bacardi continues through DIBACSA.
It distributes, amongst others, Gordon's Gin and Haig Scotch Whisky.
Denmark
Husman A/S is a wholly-owned subsidiary, whose principal brands are Johnnie Walker and Gordon's Gin.
Husman also markets a range of agency brands.
Hans Just markets, as third-party distributor, Booth's Gin and King George IV Scotch Whisky.
France
United Distillers France operates two joint venture operations with LVMH.
Moët Hennessy Distribution's (MHD) portfolio includes Dom Pérignon, Moët et Chandon and Mercier Champagnes, Hennessy Cognac and Rozes Port alongside United Distillers brands such as Cardhu, Johnnie Walker, Gordon's and VAT 69.
Champagnes et Spiritueux Associés (CSA), UD's second joint venture in France, distributes other United Distillers brands such as the Classic Malts, Royal Lochnagar, The Dimple, Black & White, Haig, Tanqueray and White Horse.
Germany
United Distillers owns Asbach of Rüdesheim.
Asbach produces, markets and sells the famous Asbach Uralt Brandy, the leading German premium brandy.
The brandy market in Germany accounts for one quarter of spirits sales in that country.
Asbach is also responsible for the distribution of The Dimple, Black & White, VAT 69, John Begg Blue Cap, Haig, Dewar's White Label, Royal Lochnagar 12 yr old, the Classic Malts, Tanqueray and Safari, as well as Gilbert Calvados, Champagne Pommery and Nusbaumer Edelbrande.
United Distillers also has a joint venture company in Germany with Bacardi subsidiary, Charles Hosie.
Named Vedima, the joint venture markets Johnnie Walker Red Label and Black Label, Cardhu, Pimm's No. 1 and Gordon's Gin.
Greece
Greece is a dynamic and growing spirits market.
A joint venture, named United Distillers Boutari, has been set up with Boutari, the leading Greek wine producer.
It markets Johnnie Walker Red Label and Black Label, Black & White, Cardhu and Gordon's Gin.
UD Kanellakis, a second joint venture with the Athens spirits distributor Nektar S.A., handles the distribution of Dewar's White Label, The Dimple, Bell's, Haig and Tanqueray Gin.
Holland
United Distillers Nederland, a wholly-owned subsidiary, distributes a portfolio of company brands.
UD Nederland also markets other brands, such as Safari Liqueur, produced at the company's production plant at Tilburg.
Ireland
United Distillers associate company, Edward Dillon & Co.
Ltd, is Ireland's leading wine and spirits importer.
A joint venture between United Distillers, Moët Hennessy and Irish Distillers, its brand portfolio includes Haig, Black & White, Gordon's Gin, Hennessy Cognac and Moët et Chandon Champagne.
Italy
United Distillers Italia is a wholly-owned subsidiary, whose principal brands are Johnnie Walker Red and Black Label, White Horse, Black & White, The Dimple and Gordon's Gin.
Portugal
A new subsidiary company, United Distillers Companhia Velha, was created in September 1992.
The company portfolio includes all of UD's leading brands plus Real Companhia Velha's wines and port, as well as LVMH brands Veuve Clicquot and Hennessy.
Spain
Baguin, a joint venture with Bacardi, handles Gordon's Gin, Cardhu, Johnnie Walker Red and Black Label, Black & White and Tanqueray Gin.
Codisa, a joint venture with Codorniu SA, markets Dewar's White Label, Bell's and The Dimple.
Switzerland
Siegenthaler & Cie SA, wholly-owned by United Distillers, distributes Johnnie Walker Red and Black Label, Gordon's Gin, Cardhu, Bell's and White Horse, as well as Asbach products.
NORTH AMERICA
United States
The USA is United Distillers' largest single world market.
With sales volumes in excess of 18 million cases annually, the company ranks second among spirits producers and marketers.
Premium brands are marketed through New York based Schieffelin & Somerset, a joint venture with LVMH, while United Distillers Glenmore in Stamford handles quality/value products.
United Distillers Canada Inc. distributes the company's brands including Johnnie Walker Red Label, Gordon's Gin and Tanqueray Gin.
ASIA-PACIFIC
Australasia
United Distillers' regional head office for Australia, New Zealand and the South Pacific Islands is based in Sydney.
Following the acquisition of John Cawsey & Company in early 1991, including 50% of Bundaberg Rum, United Distillers Australia is the largest wholesale spirit distributor in Australasia, with over 40% share of the Scotch market and over 42% of the gin market.
United Distillers New Zealand is based in Auckland and holds 34% of the Scotch whisky market and 28% of the gin market.
Major brands include Johnnie Walker Red and Black Label, Dewar's, Rebel Yell, Gordon's and Tanqueray Gins and Cossack Vodka.
Distribution of United Distillers brands in New Zealand is carried out principally by the Magnum Corporation.
Japan
United Distillers has a regional headquarters in Tokyo, and two mainstream distribution businesses.
Jardine Wines & Spirits , a joint venture between United Distillers, Moët Hennessy and Jardine Matheson, is one of the largest spirits operations in Japan.
It brings together five brand leaders: White Horse — the leading standard Scotch whisky, IW Harper — the leader in the dynamic bourbon category (the fastest growing sector in the Japanese liquor market), Hennessy Cognac and Moët et Chandon Champagne — leaders in their respective categories, and Tanqueray Gin — the leading premium gin.
UDJ International Liquor Marketing Limited is a wholly-owned operation.
Its portfolio includes Johnnie Walker, Old Parr, Gordon's Gin and other Scotch brands including Dewar's White Label, and bourbon and Tennessee whiskies.
Johnnie Walker Gold Label 15 year old, launched in Japan in May 1990, was specially developed for the Japanese market.
Other top of the range deluxe products do especially well in the Japanese market with its strong indigenous gift giving culture.
In total, the Japanese operations employ 690 people.
United Distillers has the largest commitment to Japan by any member of the international spirits industry.
South-East and Central Asia
United Distillers has set up two distribution networks in South East Asia through joint venture companies: one with Moët Hennessy, called Riche Monde, and the other with Moët Hennessy and Inchcape, called Caldbecks.
The Riche Monde and Caldbecks companies operate in Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand where the Riche Monde companies each have a local partner.
Key brands in Riche Monde are Johnnie Walker Premier, Johnnie Walker Swing, Johnnie Walker Red and Black Label, Hennessy and Gordon's.
The principal brands in Caldbecks are The Dimple, Black & White, Dewar's and VAT 69.
Northern Asia
United Distillers also has two distribution networks in Hong Kong and Taiwan: one with Moët Hennessy and Jardines, called Jardine Riche Monde, and the other with Moët Hennessy and Inchcape, called Caldbecks.
Major brands are the same as in South-East and Central Asia.
INTERNATIONAL
Covering South America, Central America and the Caribbean, the Middle East and Africa, the International region is the most widely dispersed and varied of United Distillers' regions.
Its markets collectively contribute in excess of 20% of United Distillers' profit.
Whilst International operates through third party distributors in the majority of its markets, it has an involvement in the import, marketing and distribution in the four largest markets — Venezuela, Mexico, Brazil and South Africa.
South America is International's largest market, contributing 10% of United Distillers' total profits.
The largest market in South America is Venezuela, and United Distillers has the clear number one brand in the deluxe, the standard and the locally bottled Scotch whisky sectors.
United Distillers has a 70% shareholding in Morris E Curiel, a major Venezuelan spirits distributor.
In August 1991, United Distillers acquired Pampero, the original Venezuelan golden rum.
Industrias Pampero produces Pampero Especial, Pampero Anniversario and Pampero Estelar, as well as other spirits brands.
In Central America, United Distillers is very well placed in Mexico, the largest and fastest growing market in the region, where its brands have 55% of the Scotch market.
In 1992, United Distillers acquired a 75% shareholding in its Mexican distributor, Empresas Unidas.
In Brazil, United Distillers Do Brasil Ltda is responsible for importing and marketing United Distillers brands.
In South Africa, Bell's is the leading brand of Scotch whisky and Gordon's Gin is growing from an already strong position.
In West Africa, Johnnie Walker Red Label and White Horse lead the Scotch whisky market, whilst Gordon's enjoys an equivalent position in gin.
In East Africa, Johnnie Walker Red Label and Haig are the largest selling brands of Scotch whisky.
United Distillers brands also enjoy high market share in the Middle East.
RESEARCH AND NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL TECHNOLOGICAL SERVICES
A long tradition of technical support for potable spirit production continues at United Distillers' International Technological Services (ITS) based at Glenochil, Clackmannanshire, Scotland.
Acknowledged as the foremost in the industry, the unit employs over 90 scientists, engineers, laboratory technicians and support staff and provides international services covering process support, quality support, analysis, environmental and regulatory advice, overseas operational support and new product development.
Also based in Glenochil, the New Product Development group works on content development to support regional brand initiatives.
While the expertise of ITS was built on Scotch whisky and gin, the on-site activities have developed an increasingly global role.
Through co-ordination of international activities, ITS provides an essential link towards achieving consistently high standards for all of United Distillers' portfolio.
DUTY FREE
Each region handles its own duty free business from offices situated in the market.
TOP 30 WORLDWIDE DUTY FREE SPIRITS BRANDS IN 1991 