

Alcohol and Society
Some years ago, we distributed copies of a booklet called ‘Common Sense and Drinking’ to employees.
This was part of our ongoing campaign to raise awareness of alcohol issues amongst all those who work for Guinness PLC and our subsidiary companies.
This booklet is intended to provide further background for employees on these issues.
Whilst the basic facts about drinking are well known and mostly based on common sense, some of the issues surrounding alcohol abuse are a lot more complex.
It would be wrong to pretend that in a booklet of this size, we can do any more than raise some of these issues and give an overview of the way in which the company tries to deal with them.
But this booklet is a serious attempt to highlight some of the questions which are most frequently asked about the role which alcohol plays in society.
I also hope it will prove helpful to you, as employees, by enabling you to correct some of the misapprehensions commonly expressed about our industry and its products.
If you would like any further information on the issues addressed in this booklet, please contact Strategic Affairs, Guinness PLC.
A A Greener
CHAIRMAN, GUINNESS PLC
When did people start drinking alcohol?
Alcoholic beverages have played a role in many societies for over 7000 years — before the existence of written history.
For most people nowadays, drinking is simply a natural part of their lives.
Whether consumed in the form of beer, wine or spirits, alcoholic beverages give pleasure to many millions.
The first written reference to drinking from around 5000 BC list beer as part of the daily wages of temple workers in Mesopotamia.
There are also many references to drinking in the Old Testament —‘There is joy for the heart and soul in wine without excess’(Ecclesiastes).
Alcoholic beverages frequently played a ceremonial and religious role and were also consumed on social occasions, mainly with a meal.
So why is there so much concern about drinking nowadays?
With life expectancy rising in most parts of the world, we now pay more attention to the ‘quality’ of our life-style.
Drinking is caught up in this debate because of the health and social problems associated with alcohol abuse — even though these problems have probably always affected a small minority of people in most societies.
Whilst the issue of alcohol abuse is quite properly a matter for concern, it should be seen in perspective.
Most drinkers do not abuse alcohol and do not suffer from health or social problems associated with their drinking.
Media coverage of issues relating to a healthy lifestyle is certainly extensive, but can be confusing.
Contradictory messages are given on diet, fitness and health in general— for example the advice on coffee, butter or even jogging, may change from week to week.
In the face of all this, public opinion has remained remarkably level-headed.
Most people take a common-sense approach, accepting that moderation in most things — including drinking — is the key to a balanced and healthy lifestyle.
Is alcohol harmful?
For most people, moderate drinking is not only harmless but can even be beneficial.
Common sense as well as medical evidence tells us, however, that excessive drinking over a long period of time can lead to health problems — and that drinking vast quantities in a short space of time is both foolish and dangerous.
There are some people who, for health or other reasons, should either restrict their drinking or not drink alcoholic beverages at all, eg. pregnant women, people taking certain medications etc.
For the vast majority of people however, drinking can form an accepted part of a balanced and healthy lifestyle.
People who drink very heavily on the other hand, either over a prolonged period or in a single drinking session, do run the risk of damaging their health.
Or, if they drink and then drive, they may put other people's lives at risk.
Like many commonplace food products, including salt or even carrots, alcohol can be regarded as harmful if consumed in very large amounts, but at low levels of consumption it is harmless.
How can moderate drinking be beneficial to health?
It is now increasingly accepted by scientists that moderate drinking offers protection against heart disease.
It also reduces stress, makes people more sociable, helps them to sleep, may lower blood pressure and may even reduce the incidence of gallstones.
Most of the research into alcohol and health has been based on studies of the health records or health performance over time of large numbers of people (retrospective and prospective epidemiological studies).
Studies such as these can only indicate a statistical association, not prove cause and effect.
However, in recent years the number and diversity of these studies has grown substantially to such a point where evidence from America, Japan, Europe and Australia all point to a link between moderate drinking and a significant reduction in death rates from heart disease*.
Some researchers believe that alcohol, whether consumed in the form of beer, wine or spirits, increases the level of high density lipoproteins (HDL) in the bloodstream, which in turn reduces the harmful cholesterol levels associated with heart disease**.
*It is only in the last 15 years that the accumulated evidence has been strong enough to conclude that the regular consumption of up to four standard drinks a day may reduce the risk of coronary disease by as much as 50 per cent.’
Sir Richard Doll, 1991.
**Dr Meir Stampfer, Harvard Medical School, found in a 1988 study that a 1 point increase in HDL produced a 7 per cent reduction in heart attack risk.
Do people drink more nowadays?
No, just the opposite.
Worldwide alcohol consumption has fallen by over 13 per cent in the last ten years, reinforcing a downward trend that began in the late 1970s.
UK consumption is around a third lower than it was at the beginning of this century.
During the Depression of the 1930s and the Second World War, alcohol consumption, understandably, fell significantly.
With post war affluence and rising living standards consumption grew steadily through the 1950s, 60s and 70s, peaking around 1978/l979.
From then on there has been a general trend downwards in consumption that shows a remarkable degree of consistency across North America, most of Western Europe and Australasia.
Consumption patterns are influenced by many factors, including social trends, prosperity and industrialisation.
These factors also influence the demand for one sort of drink in preference to another.
In Britain and America, for example, wine has grown at the expense of beer and spirits whilst in Spain and Italy, it is beer that has grown at the expense of wine and spirits.
But in all these instances total alcohol consumption (measured in litres of pure alcohol, per capita) is declining.
Do young people drink more nowadays?
Research studies in the US and the UK have found that young people are drinking no more than they were 20 years ago and that the vast majority drink sensibly.
A small minority of young people does drink excessively — that has probably always been true.
Educating young people to drink responsibly and in moderation is best achieved by parents setting a good example.
For many young people drinking alcohol is a symbol of ‘growing up’.
Teenagers like to experiment and to feel rebellious, and problems can arise if they are not given guidance in the use of alcohol.
Attempting to prevent young people from drinking does not seem to work.
In the US, where the legal age of drinking has been raised to 21, some would argue that the banning of alcohol on college campuses only serves to promote alcohol abuse by removing supervision and normal social controls.
Sensible drinking by young people seems easier to achieve in countries which do not have strict controls, such as France, Italy and Spain, where young people are introduced to drinking modest amounts of alcohol at an early age by their families.
Drinking is a natural part of these societies — but drunkenness is not tolerated.
What is being done about drinking and driving?
In recent years many governments have mounted vigorous campaigns against drinking and driving.
There is considerable evidence from North America, Britain and elsewhere that these have been very successful.
The drinks industry supports and reinforces these campaigns.
In Europe, it has been estimated that one quarter of road traffic deaths and 10 per cent of injuries are associated with alcohol.
There is no doubt that this is a serious issue, both in Europe and elsewhere.
Nevertheless, much progress has been made in recent years.
Over a ten year period, drink related road traffic deaths fell by over 60 per cent in the UK and by a similar percentage in Germany.
In the US, the number of fatal accidents involving drunken drivers has fallen from 31 per cent to 20 per cent of total accidents in the last ten years.
This seems to indicate that most drivers have heeded the message of drink driving campaigns.
More effective deterrents must be found for the minority of drinkers who persist in driving but the progress made in many countries is very encouraging.
What are standard drinks or units of alcohol and what do they mean?
Alcoholic drinks vary considerably in strength and in the measures by which they are served.
In many countries, regular servings of beer, wine and spirits contain roughly the same amount of alcohol — but many people still believe that a measure of spirits contains more alcohol than a glass of beer.
The concept of standard drinks or units is an attempt to help people understand how much they are drinking.
Very roughly, a glass of beer (half a pint in the UK), a small glass of wine and a standard measure of spirits contain about the same amount of absolute alcohol.
Some authorities refer to this measure as a unit or a standard drink.
But confusion can arise due to the difference in sizes between packages or glasses, and the definition of a unit varies widely from country to country.
The only accurate way to calculate the amount of alcohol consumed is to understand the amount of alcohol in a given drink — expressed as a percentage of alcohol by volume — and to know the size of the serving.
What is the definition of moderate drinking?
Moderation is a personal concept — that is, it varies according to the age, sex, weight, diet, health and fitness of the individual.
Moderation means drinking at a level which is enjoyable and harmless, without suffering from short-term drunkenness or long-term health hazards.
Many attempts have been made to define safe or unsafe drinking levels.
They have been revised over time — usually downwards — and they vary significantly from country to country.
The Health Education Authority in the UK currently recommends three drinks a day for men and two for women.
Advice of a similarly cautious nature is given in the United States and Canada.
This is in spite of the emerging medical consensus that people who drink up to four drinks or so a day live longer and are less likely to suffer from heart disease than either abstainers or heavy drinkers.
This is reflected in the advice currently given by medical authorities elsewhere, including Australia.
It is understandable for health authorities to err on the side of caution, as these guidelines will not apply to everyone.
It is up to the individual to assess his or her own ‘limits’ based on their own experience and on the advice which they receive.
Should women drink less than men?
As a general rule, women ought to drink about two thirds of the safe levels for men, mainly because of their lower average body weight.
In fact, the vast majority — some 92 per cent in the UK — drink far less than this.
Due to social changes, women now play a more prominent role in most societies, and it has become more commonplace for women to be seen drinking.
This does not mean that they are drinking significantly more than before.
Lower average body weight and a greater proportion of fatty tissue mean that the effect of alcohol on women is more pronounced than for men.
However, given a lower tolerance and consequent lower recommended intake, the same health benefits apply to moderate female drinking as do for men.
During pregnancy women are advised to consult their doctor about appropriate drinking levels.
Medical opinion varies from country to country, but recent UK research suggests that modest drinking — say one or two drinks, once or twice a week — is unlikely to have any adverse effect on mother or child.
Does alcohol advertising cause people to drink or to drink too much?
The purpose of drinks advertising is to promote competition between different brands.
There is no convincing evidence that advertising influences total consumption or has an impact on levels of alcohol abuse.
An analysis of major countries from 1974–1990 including France, Germany, UK, USA and Australia, showed that advertising expenditure rose by more than 70 per cent over the period (weighted average) but that alcohol consumption per capita declined.
A wide range of factors is known to influence consumption patterns — including social changes, family income and interest in diet and fitness.
Advertising does not seem to influence total consumption or levels of abuse.
Similar studies have found no link between advertising and the drinking habits of young people — who are mainly influenced by peer pressure, local cultural traditions and parental control.
It is however essential for the drinks industry to ensure that its advertising campaigns do not target vulnerable groups such as young people.
Self-regulatory codes or legislation exists in most markets to ensure that this is the case, and these are strongly supported both by Guinness PLC and by the industry as a whole.
Given the potential for abuse, should drinks packaging carry a health warning on the label?
The idea of putting warning labels on drinks packaging is a simplistic and ineffective attempt to resolve a complex issue.
Problem drinkers will not change their habits because of a warning label.
Drinks are usually served without the opportunity to read a label in detail.
It is unrealistic to believe that warning labels will do anything to reduce alcohol abuse.
The results of a fifteen month study carried out in Utah, USA (1991) found no evidence that the introduction of warning labels on drinks packaging had affected knowledge and perceptions of the nature of alcohol.
Moderate drinkers do not benefit from warning labels and it appears that alcohol abusers pay no attention to them.
Giving balanced, factual information about consumer products is sensible and useful, but complex issues cannot be explained by putting slogans on a label.
Should health warnings be extended to drinks advertising?
Health warnings on advertisements do not work for the same reason as health warnings on labels — they represent a token gesture which will have no material effect.
Health warnings should be reserved for truly hazardous products, otherwise the warning becomes devalued.
Those who promote the idea of warning labels are looking for a ‘quick-fix’ solution to problems which require a thoughtful, long-term approach.
Alcohol abuse is often described as a minority problem.
How extensive is it?
Estimates vary widely because there are so many definitions of abuse.
A recent World Health Organisation paper put the level of alcohol abusers in Europe at 4 per cent of the population and alcohol dependency at 3–5 per cent of the population, but there is no reliable way of verifying these or any other estimates.
It is clear that the proportion of abusers is very small; it is equally clear that the vast majority of drinkers do not abuse alcohol at all.
It is not in the interests of the drinks industry to encourage alcohol abuse and no matter how small the percentage of abusers, it will always be too high.
For this reason, research and education programmes must continue to identify ways of preventing or dealing with alcohol abuse.
Guinness PLC will continue to support such activities.
What are the costs of alcohol abuse?
Alcohol abuse undoubtedly has a cost, through treatment, accidents and lost productivity.
But there is no agreement on the way these costs should be calculated and estimates vary so widely as to make them practically meaningless.
Most studies fail to balance the costs with the benefits — the economic contribution of the drinks industry through job creation, taxation and export earnings.
Estimates for the cost of alcohol abuse in the UK range from £900 million to £2 billion per annum.
Similarly questionable figures exist for Australia and the United States, with vast variances in the estimates produced by different sources.
These disparities throw a question mark over the accuracy of social costs data.
On the benefits side, the drinks industry worldwide contributes vast amounts to national economies in the form of jobs, investment, exports and tax revenues.
Whilst any human cost of alcohol abuse could be said to be too great, it is important not to ignore both the economic and the social benefits associated with drinking.
What is the control theory approach to alcohol consumption?
Control theory, or control of consumption theory, claims that levels of alcohol abuse are directly related to levels of alcohol consumption in any society.
Therefore, if total consumption is reduced, abuse will fall too.
Advocates of control theory press for increased prices, fewer outlets for drink and restrictions or bans on advertising.
The control of consumption theory was developed in the 1950s by a French demographer, Sully Ledermann and has since been adopted by many neo-prohibitionists, notably in Scandinavia.
Whilst it has certain simplistic appeal, there is no evidence to show that alcohol abuse is in fact linked to total consumption.
A hard core of alcohol abusers would probably exist in most societies even if the vast majority of moderate drinkers reduced their consumption drastically.
The control theory would only eliminate alcohol abuse if consumption were reduced to zero — an unrealistic proposition, as the prohibitionists in the United States found out earlier this century.
Is it fair to equate alcohol with hard drugs?
Anti-alcohol campaigners deliberately seek to confuse alcohol with narcotic drugs.
They play on the fears of society in general and parents in particular, about the disastrous and often lethal effects of hard drugs on young people.
By contrast, alcohol has been enjoyed for thousands of years and in moderate quantities is harmless.
There is no valid comparison with drugs.
The term ‘drug’ is associated in most people's minds nowadays with the distressing effects of hard drug abuse.
But the definition of a drug is much wider than that: a textbook definition would be ‘any chemical agent that affects living processes’.
In the medical context, drugs can save lives, relieve pain and promote healing.
In the social context, drugs such as caffeine, sugar and chocolate are well accepted and much enjoyed by millions worldwide.
The linking of alcohol and hard drugs confuses health education messages.
It implies to young people that crack and cocaine are no more dangerous than a glass of wine, beer or spirits.
This is not only wrong, but irresponsible and dangerous.
For society in general and young people in particular, equating alcohol with dangerous, illicit drugs is a high-risk  strategy that is very likely to backfire.
What is the drinks industry doing to combat alcohol abuse?
Around the world the drinks industry is active in the promotion of moderate consumption and the prevention of abuse.
In the past few years alone millions of dollars have been invested in North America, Europe and Australia.
This is used to fund work with governments, health educators, schools, colleges and local communities on effective ways of combatting abuse and improving alcohol education.
Internationally, the industry is seeking to work with the World Health Organisation, the European Commission and other regional authorities to develop practical alcohol policies.
There are many issues on which the drinks industry can and does join forces with governments and health promoters to combat alcohol abuse.
These include drunken driving, underage drinking and research into alcohol related problems.
In many countries, the industry has set up and funded organisations which work on these issues full-time.
For example, in the United States the Century Council targets drunken driving and underage drinking.
In the UK, the Portman Group works closely with schools and the police and has introduced a ‘Proof of Age’ card for young people.
In Holland, STIVA has a long established reputation for helping young people to drink responsibly.
Research into alcohol-related problems is supported by joint programmes between the industry and government in Europe, North America and Australia.
In addition, many individual companies and national trade associations work closely with authorities and academics to improve understanding on social and medical aspects of drinking and alcohol abuse.
Surely it's not in the industry's interests to support moderate drinking?
The drinks industry's best commercial interests lie in the long-term, steady progress of its trade.
To achieve this, it needs healthy, long-lived customers who can purchase and enjoy its products in a society which considers drinking to be socially acceptable.
Abusive or excessive drinking is harmful not only to society but to the long-term interests of the industry as well.
Negative publicity associated with alcohol abuse — eg drunken driving or underage drinking — is directed not only at the individuals involved but at the industry as well.
It leads to calls for increased marketing restrictions, unwarranted price rises and restrictive licensing laws.
Policies such as these penalise those who drink sensibly, are detrimental to the drinks industry and do nothing at all to deter those who are determined to abuse alcohol.
It is therefore in the industry's own long term best interests to work with governments and health promoters on measures which aim to reduce alcohol abuse.
The industry believes that research into why some people abuse alcohol and carefully targeted education programmes are more effective than blanket restrictions which apply to the whole population.
What does Guinness do to combat alcohol abuse?
Guinness PLC is one of the world's leading drinks companies.
The company was a founder member and is still a major supporter of the Portman Group in the UK and of similar organisations which combat alcohol abuse worldwide, such as the Century Council in the USA and DIFA-Forum in Germany.
Guinness PLC is proud of its products and seeks to market its brands in a responsible manner.
It is not in the company's interests to encourage its consumers or its employees to abuse alcohol.
In most of the countries in which Guinness PLC sells its products, the advertising and promotion of alcoholic drinks is regulated by voluntary codes or by legislation, which seeks to ensure that advertisements do not target, mislead or exploit vulnerable groups, especially young people.
As a company, Guinness PLC encourages and actively participates in the development of effective self-regulatory codes and of course, abides by any legislation which exists.
The company also strives to promote awareness amongst its employees of the nature of alcohol, the benefits of moderate drinking and the prevention of alcohol-related problems