

Short Courses in Religious and Moral Education
1.
INTRODUCTION
In January 1991 the Scottish Examination Board issued the document ‘Arrangements for Religious and Moral Education Short Courses For Certification In And After 1992’.
The publication of this document was preceded by a period of nationwide discussion and consultation which began in 1987 with the publication of Scottish Education Department Circular No.1157 indicating the Secretary of State's intentions with regard to the development of S.C.E. Short Courses for implementation into the curriculum in Scottish Secondary Schools.
The setting up in 1988 of a Joint Working Group of representatives of the Scottish Examination Board and the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum in order to devise Short Courses in Moral, Social and Religious Education increased discussion of the needs of S3/4 pupils in regard to these topics and, in due course, led to the publication of the Arrangements document.
The Catholic Education Commission for Scotland welcomes the development of Short Courses in Religious and Moral Education, and endorses the considerations which led to a change in title.
It recognises that these courses will give fresh impetus to the status and quality of Religious Education provision for S3/4 pupils in Scottish Secondary Schools, and wishes to pay tribute to the work of the members of the Joint Working Group and the Central Support Group in this regard.
While it recognises that the Catholic community has a particular vision of Religious Education (related to a wider catechesis and formation in faith) the Commission urges that Religious Education teachers in Catholic Schools give due consideration to the benefits in terms of organisation, teaching methods, assessment and motivation to learn which are offered in the Religious and Moral Education Short Courses.
The Commission considers that four of the six Short Courses are particularly suitable for development with a view to possible inclusion in the Religious Education programme in Catholic Secondary Schools namely:
CHRISTIANITY TODAY
A WORLD OF VALUES
LIVING IN A PLURAL SOCIETY
ISSUES OF BELIEF
The following pages are the fruit of discussion and consultation among the Catholic community in relation to the above four Short Courses, and are offered as a guide to Catholic teachers who are considering how these courses might be implemented in their schools.
It is, however, recognised that prior to the introduction of any new Religious Education course into a Catholic School approval must be sought and obtained from the Bishops' Conference, and, subsequently, from the Diocesan Religious Education Advisorate.
It is understood that such approval will be sought in relation to the introduction of S.C.E. Short Courses.
2.
RATIONALE
Definition of Terms:
It is appropriate at this stage to offer some clarification in relation to the Catholic understanding of the terms Religious Education and Moral Education.
Religious Education:—
In order to fully understand what is meant by Religious Education in the Catholic Secondary School it is necessary to refer to two other distinct, yet at times overlapping, concepts namely Evangelisation and Catechesis.
Evangelisation:—
During his lifetime Jesus challenged the people of his time to accept the message of the ‘Good News’, or Gospel (Mark 1:15).
Evangelisation is the process by which people are challenged by the demands of the Gospel.
By promoting a respectful dialogue among people it aims to effect a radical conversion to God in the light of Gospel values.
Since in any faith community there will be varying levels of commitment and a need for all to constantly renew faith, evangelisation is an essential feature of the Catholic school.
It will be evident in the life of the whole school community, and in the various elements which contribute to its distinctive ethos e.g. the quality of relationships, shared liturgy, community service, differing forms of retreat and religious experience, and, above all, in the witness of practising Catholics, both staff and pupils alike.
All these elements of evangelisation are fundamental to the vision of a Catholic school, but, while part of the wider aims of religious education, are distinguishable from classroom R.E., where the focus is more directly educational.
Catechesis:—
Catechesis has been broadly defined as ‘a dialogue between believers’(1), or as a ‘process of education in faith’(2).
Its purpose is to help believers to improve the quality of their faith, particularly by increasing understanding, and its ultimate aim can be summed up as ‘the free adherence to God in faith’(3).
Catechesis differs from evangelisation in that catechesis assumes that a faith commitment has been made by the participants.
It is therefore primarily an adult process, but will take different forms depending on the circumstances of the participants.
To the extent that Catholic Secondary School pupils have received the Sacraments of Initiation and are living in a community of faith, catechesis can validly be said to be a function of the Catholic School.
Such adolescent catechesis ‘is not irrelevant or purely preparatory.
It has its own value, but should always be given with an eye to the future’(4).
By having ‘an eye to the future’ the Catholic R.E.
teacher will be aware that faith development is a lifelong process, and will encourage pupils to see it as such.
Religious Education:
In the Catholic School, Religious Education seeks to accomplish two tasks:
a)
to develop pupils' knowledge and understanding of the areas of man's religious search for ‘meaning, value and purpose’ outlined in the Arrangements document (1.1).
This aspect of religious education can be described as ‘education in religion’.
b)
to be of value as a form of catechesis by promoting the development and maturing of faith — a faith based not on blind obedience, nor brought about by coercion on the part of parents or teachers; but rather, based on a reasoned, personal response to the call of Jesus.
This aspect of religious education can be described as ‘education in faith’.
In attempting to assist pupils in both these areas the Catholic teacher is conscious of the necessity of being true to educational principles.
Hence, ‘the formal R.E.
curriculum of a Catholic School includes the knowledge, skills, attitudes and values related to religion and faith which are formally taught by teachers in the curriculum.
Its emphasis is predominantly educational and it employs all the methods, activities and creativity associated with good education’(5).
The reconciling of these two facets of religious education may appear to present difficulties to R.E.
teachers, particularly those whose pupils are at the adolescent stage.
Nevertheless, catechesis and true education are not incompatible.
Religious Education can include ‘a mode or style of catechesis.
The catechetical element — assuming a faith, however dormant or troubled — should continue.
Often at this stage, it will be centred not on specific ‘Church’ topics or events.
It will aim at a Christian vision of human life as it is and could be.
It will centre on the themes which are most predominant in adult human experience: on freedom, justice, relationships, morality, suffering and happiness’(6).
In this regard, it is recognised that while a faith background can be assumed in the Catholic R.E.
class, teachers cannot assume an active faith commitment on the part of each pupil.
Accordingly, in the Catholic R.E.
class, catechesis takes an educational form which, on the one hand, respects freedom and encourages personal development and growth, and on the other hand, provides the context within which the pupil can find meaning and purpose in the everyday experiences of life.
In assisting pupils in their education in religion and faith, the Catholic R.E.
teacher is concerned to give central place in the R.E.
curriculum to the person of Jesus.
He/ she is conscious that the way in which Jesus is presented is crucial.
Jesus will be presented as offering an invitation — just as he did to his disciples — an invitation freely given and freely accepted or rejected.
Opportunity will be given for the pupils to experience the invitation of Jesus personally in the classroom through moments of prayer and reflection and appropriate liturgical experience.
However, specific faith-sharing and prayer group activities are more relevant in retreat settings and will not normally take place in the classroom where the focus is predominantly educational in nature.
While, as indicated above, the process of evangelisation will permeate all aspects of the school, it is firmly maintained that the witness of the confident, yet  sympathetic R.E.
teacher is crucial if Catholic R.E.
teaching is to be effective.
‘This witness is what brings the content of the lessons to life’(7).
Such witness, combined with the evangelising influence of the school ethos, will provide the appropriate setting where a religious education can take place which promotes the development of an intelligent, thoughtful and self-critical faith, and assists pupils ‘in coming to a deeper awareness both of their own identity, beliefs and values, and of the beliefs and values of others’(Arrangements document 1.1).
Moral Education:—
Moral education in the Catholic School is intimately connected to Religious Education because fundamental to both is the personal call of Jesus to follow him as Lord and Saviour in the everyday events of life.
In moral education, the young person needs to acquire sufficient knowledge and understanding to be able to make a mature, personal response to Jesus' invitation in relation to judgements of moral value.
These judgements will be based on a knowledge of the underlying principles of Christian morality, and on consideration of the reasons and motives behind particular actions and attitudes, rather than merely ‘on the rigid application of a set of rules’(Arrangements document 1.1).
In this, pupils will be guided by the realisation that they are part of a community of moral wisdom, the Church; and the reasons for Church teachings will be presented in a way that makes possible informed, personal choices.
The Arrangements document suggests that the concepts which will be studied in the Short Courses will be ones which ‘contribute to beliefs and values held to be fundamental to our society.
They include freedom, honesty, integrity, justice, tolerance, and personal and social responsibility’(Arrangements document 1.1).
Central to a Catholic understanding of religion and morality is the dual principle of love of God and love of neighbour.
Accordingly, it is hoped that the above definitions have sufficiently outlined the nature of Catholic Religious and Moral Education as to make it clear that the concepts described in the Arrangements document are an integral part of the content of Catholic religious and moral teaching.
3.
CATHOLIC RELIGIOUS EDUCATION AND THE SHORT COURSES
In considering the relationship between the religious education of Catholic Secondary School pupils and the S.C.E. Short Courses in Religious and Moral Education it is appropriate to do so under the following headings:
A.
MEETING THE NEEDS OF ADOLESCENT PUPILS
B.
THE AIMS OF THE SHORT COURSES IN A CATHOLIC CONTEXT
C.
TEACHING THE SHORT COURSES IN A CATHOLIC CONTEXT
D.
THE CONTENT OF THE SHORT COURSES IN A CATHOLIC CONTEXT
A. MEETING THE NEEDS OF ADOLESCENT PUPILS
The teenage years are among the most critical in regard to the relationship between catechesis and religious education.
Since the Short Courses are intended for such an age group it is appropriate to consider the following:
At teenage level pupils are developing a sense of their own identity, and it would not be uncommon for the influence of the three main catechising agencies of home, school and parish to begin to weaken.
Much of the catechesis in Primary School is linked to events such as first reception of the sacraments, which tends to strengthen the bonds of home, school and parish.
Such influences are crucial in the development of faith and every effort should be made in Secondary School to maintain and improve these links.
Nevertheless, it is recognised that the young person is becoming increasingly influenced by the world in which he/she lives — in the main a pluralist and secular world.
Linked to the increase in external pressures is the increase in the young person's own natural questioning of authority.
Accordingly, significant changes are taking place in pupils and in their expectations of school.
These factors will often lead to a testing of faith in the mid to late teenage years.
Teachers and catechists will recognise that this development is not a negative one, but rather one which, on the one hand, may indeed lead to rejection of faith, but on the other hand, will present the opportunity for an enriching and maturing faith which will lead to an adult commitment to God.
Such developments in adolescence can present a major challenge to the Catholic R.E.
teacher.
The key to overcoming this challenge is three-fold:
a)
the teacher must remain true to his/her own beliefs based on the Church's teaching.
Young people respect sincerity and integrity; it is only in honest dialogue that true communication and education takes place.
b)
the teacher must strive to create a non-threatening atmosphere in which the pupil can articulate fear, disagreement and possible rejection of previously held beliefs, and still feel valued and accepted as a person.
c)
the pupil must be encouraged to see the work of the R.E.
class as his/her own work, of direct relevance to his/her own life, rather than merely as something imposed from an external authority.
Given that adolescent Catholic pupils come from a variety of differing faith backgrounds, and bring to the R.E.
class their own personal varying faith stances, it is recognised that Catholic teachers face a difficult task.
Nevertheless, it is only in such an environment that the young person will be able to move forward in his/ her search for meaning, value and purpose in life.
B. THE AIMS OF THE SHORT COURSES IN A CATHOLIC CONTEXT
The aims of the Short Courses are as follows:
‘to promote an enquiring, critical and sympathetic approach to the study of religion;
to encourage pupils to reflect on their own experience of life to date;
to develop insights into situations which pose moral and social questions, and capacity to respond to these situations in a balanced and understanding way;
to explore the contribution of religion to human identity and fulfilment, both individual and corporate;
to contribute to  understanding of the multi-cultural dimension of the society in which pupils live.’
(Arrangements document 2.)
The Commission accepts these Aims of the Arrangements document as a valid educational basis for the Short Courses.
It recommends however, that in order to satisfy the Catholic view of Religious Education as a mode of Catechesis two other Aims be added, namely:
to assist pupils to consider the implications of Christian belief in their lives
to assist pupils in preparing to make an adult commitment to God in faith
C. TEACHING THE SHORT COURSES IN A CATHOLIC CONTEXT
As indicated above, the environment in which Catholic religious education takes place is important if religious education is to perform its function as a mode of catechesis.
In this regard, it should be noted that the Arrangements document points teachers in the direction of methods of teaching which are well suited to the creation of such an environment.
1) Enquiry Methods of Teaching
The Arrangements document advises that Active Learning, Resource-based Learning, Investigation and Discussion be part of normal classwork in the Short Courses.
All of these methods of teaching are based on the understanding that, in addition to being given information, young people need the opportunity to discover it for themselves.
Many well-intentioned R.E.
teachers have found to their cost that merely telling teenagers what is the Church's teaching on a particular topic fails to motivate or interest.
The personal involvement of the pupil, both at an individual and group level, is important in building up enthusiasm for learning.
In this way, pupils will have the opportunity to discover for themselves the reasons for their beliefs, values and opinions.
In terms of faith development, such personal involvement will give the possibility of added meaning being brought to actions which in adolescence are in danger of becoming mere external observances e.g. prayer and attendance at Mass.
To suggest that enquiry methods of teaching are important at teenage level is in no way a devaluation of the role of the teacher.
It will, however, require from some teachers a change of emphasis from an overly-didactic and instructional style of teaching to one of more direct interaction with pupils in the exercise of their educational tasks.
Nevertheless, the role of the teacher is recognised as crucial.
As the prime resource in the classroom, the teacher should be conscious of his/her responsibility to lead pupils to a deeper understanding of the person of Jesus and of gospel values, sometimes at an individual level, sometimes at group level, sometimes at class level.
Accordingly, the suggestion in the Arrangements document of ‘an appropriate balance of whole class teaching, group activities…and individual work’(4.5) is acknowledged as being conducive to the formation of the correct setting so necessary in teenage religious education.
In this regard, the acknowledgement that ‘Working with the whole class…reinforces the social cohesion of the class’(4.5) has relevance in Catholic religious education where the view of the class as a community of faith is recognised.
It is appropriate that, with this in mind, the teacher will, on occasion, invite pupils to experience moments of prayer or reflection.
Some, if not all, of these methods of teaching are an everyday part of normal religious education in many Catholic Schools.
It is recognised however, that a change in teaching methods to a more enquiry mode of teaching has implications for both resources and In-Service training in Catholic Schools.
In relation to resources, efforts will be required to amend existing texts and to supply a range of materials appropriate to Resource-based Learning.
In this task, the production of materials catering for the needs of pupils of all abilities will be seen as a priority.
The Short Courses are clearly intended for all pupils, and  details such as the reading level of written materials require as much attention in R.E.
as they do in other subjects.
In relation to In-Service training, it is recognised that since so many R.E.
teachers are non-specialist teachers, considerable In-Service training will be required if the Short Courses are to be undertaken in the correct spirit.
The fact that many non specialist teachers will have experience of a change to enquiry methods in their own specialist subject area is acknowledged as being of considerable value.
But, this of itself is not deemed sufficient as preparation for R.E.
teaching.
2) The Relationship Between Skills and Content
In education recently, there has been a move away from over-emphasis on the assimilation of facts to an appreciation of the need for pupils to experience the processes by which one learns.
In many courses, content has been reduced and a greater emphasis has been put on the acquisition of subject-related skills by the pupils.
In this context, the Arrangements document identifies the cognitive skills of ‘weighing up evidence, developing arguments and drawing conclusions’ and encourages the promotion of ‘attitudes of empathy and tolerance’(1.2).
These attitudes are fundamental to a Christian view of life, and the opportunity to develop such cognitive skills is to be viewed positively if pupils are to be helped to make their own informed and reasoned act of adult faith.
Nevertheless, if the Short Courses are to be  studied in a Catholic context, the content of these courses is important and its relationship to the development of skills needs clarification.
The Arrangements document states that ‘the emphasis in the Short Courses will be on exploring aspects of religion and morality which engage significant concepts emerging from the above definitions’(i.e. of religious and moral education)(1.1).
In like manner, the concepts studied in a Catholic context, will be ones which emerge from a Catholic understanding of religious and moral education.
The content of catechesis is ‘the Mysteries of the Faith’(8), and specifically the four key mysteries of The Trinity, The Incarnation and The Redemption, The Spirit and The Church.
There are five main content areas in which these mysteries are enunciated, namely: Scripture, Doctrine, Liturgy, Life Experience and Morality.
It is understood therefore, that, as part of the pupil's exploration of aspects of religion and morality, he/she will have access to these five main elements of the Mysteries of the Faith, and the opportunity to relate them to the particular issue/topic being explored.
The way in which the pupil explores these content areas will reflect the ‘balance’ of teaching methods mentioned above, but the acquiring of knowledge and understanding of relevant aspects of Scripture, Doctrine, Liturgy, Life Experience and Morality are to be seen as of significant importance by both teacher and pupil.
In particular, in the attainment of a Learning Outcome such as : ‘describe a number of responses to a selected major social issue’(L.0.2 — A World of Values), it will be understood that the pupil will study the Church's response (referring to relevant aspects of the above content areas) and include mention of the Church's position as part of his/her Response Item.
Similarly, in completion of the  Investigation part of each Short Course, it is again expected that appropriate acknowledgement of the Church's teaching/practice be made.
The ability to ‘express an opinion’(based on an evaluation of an issue/topic/ practice etc.) is a requirement in each of the Short Courses.
While it is understood that the pupil will acknowledge the Church's viewpoint, it is recognised that he/she may express a personal opinion which differs from, and/or is critical of, the Church's teaching/practice.
In this situation it would be counter-productive for the teacher to reject such a personal opinion, and, as such, would be poor education.
A more fruitful response would be to acknowledge the research which went into the arguments supporting the opinion, and make use of the opportunity to explain more clearly the Church's position in the matter.
In this way, even if the pupil does finally reject the Church's teaching, at least it will be on the basis of informed opinion rather than emotion, bias or misunderstanding.
In conclusion, with regard to the relationship between content and skills, the Catholic R.E.
teacher will be required to strike a balance between the two.
Neither will dominate to the exclusion of the other, but rather, both will be seen as complementary.
3) Assessment In Learning And Teaching
In the area of assessment there has been considerable debate in recent years among Catholic teachers.
Accordingly, it is appropriate to note the following:
It is a fundamental principle of Catholic Education that all pupils are seen as of value in themselves, being created ‘in the image of God’(Gen 1: 27) and raised to the dignity of ‘children of God’(Romans 8: 15).
Consideration of this principle has led some Catholic R.E.
teachers to feel that assessment has no place in the R.E.
classroom.
The reason given for this conviction has been that assessment, in grading pupils' performance in any given test, would leave some pupils with a sense of being of less value than others in the class.
As such, it would detract from the underlying principle of equality, and, in the logic of the argument, was accordingly to be rejected.
It is now generally accepted in Scottish Education that the above view of the purpose of assessment (i.e. in order to grade pupils' performance) is a limited one and is not the most conducive to the education of the majority of pupils.
A different view of assessment however, can lead to considerable benefits in terms of the pupils' sense of value and personal motivation.
This view of assessment concentrates not so much on end of unit tests nor results in an external exam (such as in former S.C.E. ‘O’ Grades), but on assessment as an on-going and integral part of the learning and teaching process.
When linked to the attainment of specific learning outcomes it can provide pupils with a positive stimulus and aid to learning.
Such a view is the one proposed in the Arrangements document (6.1).
Catholic teachers are urged to consider the benefits of such a process of formation for all in religious education.
In particular, they should ponder its special value during the teenage years when affirming the worth of the individual is vital.
4) Assessment For Certification
Just as some teachers have been slow to appreciate the value of assessment in learning and teaching, similarly, many Catholic R.E.
teachers have been unsure about assessment for certification and, indeed, about the value of certification itself.
The reason behind this hesitancy is again related to the grading of pupils' performance and the fear that such grading would be taken as a value judgement on a pupil's worth.
This is a serious concern, particularly in the case of less academic pupils who, despite admirable effort and diligence, may not be capable of attaining appropriate academic standards.
In this regard, the following requirements of the Short Courses are seen to be of positive value:
Firstly, the assessment will be ungraded.
There will be no ‘order of merit’.
Pupils will simply achieve the learning outcomes or not.
Secondly, in the attainment of each learning outcome pupils must be informed of the tasks which contribute to summative assessment.
This removes the unknown element as in, for instance, an external exam.
Thirdly, normal classroom activities will provide the evidence for the greater part of assessment.
In this regard, the teacher will know the pupils who need more help, and, as in all classes, will be in a position to give them any extra help needed in order to achieve the learning outcomes.
Fourthly, pupils who have been unsuccessful in achieving all the learning outcomes must have the opportunity to be re-assessed after appropriate consolidation or reinforcement.
This requirement is linked to the formative view of assessment as outlined above, and will clearly be of benefit to less academic pupils.
Fifthly, it is a requirement that Extended responses and Reports (i.e. any piece of writing of more than 100 words in length) can be either written or presented orally or on tape.
This likewise is clearly of significance for pupils with writing difficulties.
Nevertheless, despite the above positive features of assessment and certification, there may be some well-motivated and diligent pupils who still fail to achieve all the learning outcomes.
It would be unfortunate, and indeed ironic, if the introduction of certification as a means of offering positive stimulus to learning, was to lead to some pupils losing interest as a result of lack of achievement.
It may be appropriate therefore, for schools or Dioceses to consider the possibility of awarding such pupils some form of Certificate of Course Completed.
In conclusion, it is recognised that, in educational terms, the possibility of certification in a school subject is a positive, motivating factor for the majority of secondary pupils.
As indicated above, religious education in the Catholic secondary school, while being a vehicle for a mode of catechesis, has essentially an educational focus.
Accordingly, it is reasonable that pupils be given the opportunity to attain such certification where it is deemed appropriate.
5) Progression
As noted in the Arrangements document, the Short Courses are free-standing (5: Management and Organisation).
In all schools however, they will be part of an over-all religious education programme which will stretch from Primary 1 until the end of Secondary School.
It is recognised that in the Catholic school they will also be seen within the context of a wider and life-long catechesis.
As indicated above, it is important to take into consideration the needs of pupils at the various stages of their development.
In regard to the Short Courses therefore, it is suggested that ‘Christianity Today’ and ‘A World of Values’are appropriate for S3 pupils; and ‘Living In A Plural Society’and ‘Issues of Belief’for S4 pupils.
It should be noted however, that this advice is not to be taken as suggesting that pupils must study these four Short Courses throughout S3/4.
As indicated above, any decisions regarding the implementation of Short Courses into the Catholic Secondary School R.E.
programme will be a matter for discussion and consultation with Diocesan R.E.
Advisers and the Catholic Education Commission.
D. THE CONTENT OF THE SHORT COURSES IN A CATHOLIC CONTEXT
Prior to consideration of each individual Short Course, it should be noted that it is not intended to give a developed version at this point.
Rather, the main suggested content will be outlined and examples of appropriate biblical, liturgical, doctrinal, life experience and moral references given.
CHRISTIANITY TODAY
Learning Outcome 1:
Know understand and evaluate some of the basic beliefs of Christianity
The choice of the following 3 Key Concepts is advised:
a)
Faith: The Response to God's Call
Life Experience:
Pressures in adolescence to conform e.g. in relation to alcohol abuse, drug abuse etc.
Necessity of choosing direction in life
The decision to follow Jesus
God calls/Man responds: e.g.
call of apostles (Mark 1: 14–20)
responses of Peter to Jesus' questions (Mark 8: 27–29; John 6: 66–69)
conversion/call of Paul (Acts 9: 1–20)
To live as a Christian today involves a personal on-going response to God's call to have faith in Jesus
b)
Reconciliation
Life Experience:
Living with disunity e.g.
among families/friends (e.g. unkind arguments)
within society (e.g. prejudice)
among nations (e.g. war)
Man's need for forgiveness/reconciliation
Cause of disunity: Sin — alienation of man from God; alienation of man from man
God and man reconciled in Jesus: e.g. Col 1: 20; Romans 5: 18–19
God calls man to be reconciled with man e.g. Parable of unforgiving servant (Matt 18: 21–35)
c)
The Church as Community
Life Experience:
People's experience of loneliness and despair e.g. old folk, young adolescent
People's need for community
The Church as a Community:
Experience of early Christians (Acts 2: 43–47)
Jesus' prayer for unity among his followers (John 17: 20–23)
Learning Outcome 2:
Know and understand the religious practices within one of the main Christian traditions and evaluate one of these practices
Practices corresponding to the key concepts as outlined in L.O.1:
a)
Faith: The Response to God's Call
Evangelisation (1990's — Decade of Evangelisation):
Personal — Call to renew personal faith in Jesus e.g. through prayer/ reading the Bible
Community — Mission/Prophecy/Witness to others e.g. in relation to examples of abuse mentioned above
Example of someone who has responded to God's call today e.g. St. Maria Goretti, Nicky Cruz
b)
Reconciliation
Work of healing the divisions within society — e.g. Justice and Peace-Scotland
Sacrament of Reconciliation — with emphasis on the social aspect of the sacrament i.e. a celebration not just of reconciliation between God and man, but also of reconciliation between man and man (A class experience of a Penitential Service stressing the social aspect of reconciliation would be appropriate)
c)
The Church as Community
Community celebration: The Liturgy of the Eucharist as the celebration of the unity among Jesus' followers —‘Do This in memory of me’(Luke 22: 19)
Community Life: e.g.
The work of the parish — clerical/lay ministries
The work of base communities in South America
The Ecumenical Movement: e.g.
local ecumenical initiatives;
the work of Action of Churches Together in Scotland (A.C.T.S.) Church Unity Week
Learning Outcome 3:
Know.
understand and evaluate Christian involvement in social issues
Choice of any Church organisation involved in areas of social concern: e.g.
Justice and Peace-Scotland
Voluntary Missionary Movement
Missio Scotland
Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund
The Faith and Light Association
The Talbot Association
The Saint Vincent de Paul Society
St. Margaret's Adoption Society
The Focolare Movement
L'Arche Communities
The work of Religious Orders e.g. the Jericho Benedictines
A WORLD OF VALUES
Learning Outcome 1:
Recognise the general moral values and principles underlying a number of social issues
Life Experience: Pupils' values in life e.g. relative importance of sport, film and pop industry, friends, family: their relationship to beliefs
Christian Values: Catholic Moral Principles: e.g.
Love of God and neighbour (Matt 22: 34–40)
The Beatitudes (Matt 5: 3–12)
The dignity of man (Gen 1: 27; Romans 8: 15)
Necessity of choosing values in life e.g. Parable of Last Judgement (Matt 25: 31–46)
Learning Outcome 2:
Describe a number of responses to a major social issue and evaluate these
From the list of suggested social issues the following choice is recommended: Either
a)
The Rich/Poor Divide or
b)
Prejudice (encompassing Racism and Equal Opportunities which are listed separately in the Arrangements document, but can be presented as forms of prejudice)
[The Catholic response to these issues reflects the Scriptural and Doctrinal teaching outlined above, plus relevant other references e.g.
Appropriate Social Teaching e.g. ‘The Church in The Modern World’ Vat.II ‘The Progress of Peoples’Pope Paul VI
The Rich/Poor Divide — Parable of Rich Man and Lazarus (Luke 16:19–31)
Prejudice — Parable of The Good Samaritan (Luke 10: 25–37)]
Learning Outcome 3:
Understand the role of religion in relation to one aspect of a social issue
Action and Viewpoints of the Catholic Church and other Christian Churches in relation to the issue chosen in L.0.2: Either
a)
The Rich/Poor Divide: e.g. the work of SCIAF and Christian Aid or
b)
Prejudice: e.g. the actions and statements of Christian traditions in South Africa or Northern Ireland
Learning Outcome 4:
Complete an investigation into an aspect of a social issue
Either
i)
The Rich/Poor Divide or Prejudice (the one not chosen in L.0.2) or
ii)
The same issue as in L.0.2, but studied now at a local level i.e.
a)
The Rich/Poor Divide: In Scotland — e.g. the work of S.V.D.P.
b)
Prejudice: In Scotland — e.g. gender inequality; attitudes to ethnic minorities/the handicapped
Learning Outcome 1:
Be aware of the variety of religious/cultural groups in contemporary society
Life Experience:
Pupils' experience of growing up in today's society:
the pressures of secularism/consumerism/materialism
pupils' search for meaning in the face of such pressures
religious beliefs and practices as offering a meaningful response to today's society
The meaning of a Plural Society:
the differing religious/cultural groups in Scotland today
Learning Outcome 2:
Know and understand some practices and customs that distinguish the lifestyle of two religious/cultural groups and evaluate one of them
Either
a)
Practices and customs of the Catholic and Muslim communities in relation to today's society or
b)
Practices and customs of Catholic and other Christian Churches in relation to today's society
a)
Catholic practices/customs:
Personal: e.g. prayer, fasting, almsgiving, observance of Lent
Community: e.g. celebrations esp.
Easter and Sunday as a weekly reminder of Easter
Islamic practices/customs:
Personal: e.g. Salat, Sawm, Zakat
Community: e.g. celebrations e.g. Id Ul Fitr; Friday prayer at mosque
b)
Catholic practices/customs and practices/customs of other Christian Churches:
Personal: e.g. prayer, sacraments/ceremonies of initiation, witness, care for others
Community: e.g. worship e.g. The Eucharist/Holy Communion Service, the importance of Scripture, celebration of Christian feasts, work for justice
Attitudes towards others in a plural society:
Respect for religious freedom: Declaration on Religious Freedom — Vatican II
Tolerance: ‘Who is my neighbour?’
Parable of Good Samaritan (Luke 10: 25–37)
Ecumenical Dialogue: Declaration on the Relationship of the Church to Non-Christian Religions (Vatican II)
Work of Action of the Churches Together in Scotland (A.C.T.S.)
Learning Outcome 3:
Understand and evaluate the implications of living in a plural society with different lifestyles
ISSUES OF BELIEF
Learning Outcome 1:
Understand that people have different kinds of belief which are influenced by a variety of factors
Life Experience:
Different kinds of beliefs e.g. political beliefs, scientific beliefs, sporting beliefs, religious beliefs
The nature of belief: Reasons for beliefs; factors influencing them e.g. family, peers, social and religious background
Learning Outcome 2:
Understand that the beliefs of a religion/stance for living are concerned with key questions of life
The relationship between religion and key questions in life — man's search for meaning in life
Two key questions — the following two are recommended:
a)
Why is there suffering and evil in the world?
b)
Is human life sacred?
a)
Beliefs associated with suffering and evil: It is suggested that Christian and Jewish beliefs be chosen:
Christian attitudes/beliefs: e.g.
Original Sin (Gen 3: 1–24)— suffering as a result of man's deliberate action of turning away from God by use of his free will
Jesus' attitude to suffering (e.g. Mark 1: 21–28; Luke 5: 11–17; Luke 22: 41–42; Luke 22: 63–65)
The Christian virtue of hope — as a result of Jesus' overcoming of suffering (e.g. Romans 8: 12–18)
The Sacrament of the Sick (e.g. Mark 6: 13; James 5: 13–16)
The Christian vocation to work to alleviate suffering (e.g. work for the sick/handicapped in the local community, work of H.C.P.T.)
Jewish attitudes/beliefs: e.g.
The problem of why a good man should suffer (e.g. Book of Job)
Is evil the payment for doing good?(e.g. Jer 18: 18–20)
The Suffering Servant — one who would suffer for the evil/sin of others (e.g. Is 52: 13 — 53: 12) Modern examples e.g. Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Anne Frank, Franz Jagerstatter
b)
Beliefs associated with the sacredness of human life: It is suggested that Christian and humanist beliefs be chosen (except if the issue of war is being studied, in which case it would be appropriate to consider the Christian view of a just war and the Islamic concept of holy war, or Jihad).
Christian attitudes/beliefs: e.g.
General principles:
Human life sacred (i.e. a gift from God);
God the creator of life;
Respect for the dignity of the human person;
Man and woman ‘made in the image of God’(e.g. Gen 1: 1–27; Exodus 20:13)
Life a continuum from conception to after death;
Death as an event in life — belief in resurrection/life after death (e.g. 1 Cor 15: 1–28)
Examples of beliefs associated with particular issues:
Euthanasia: Jesus' care for the sick and dying (e.g. Luke 14: 1–4; 7: 11–17); support for the Hospice movement
Suicide: the importance of one's self-esteem e.g. ‘Love your neighbour as yourself’(Mark 12: 31); the work of The Samaritans
Abortion: the right to life of the child; the work of the Pro-Life movement, the Innocents Society, S.P.U.C. etc.
The Taking of Life in War: Jesus' rejection of political/military power (Luke 4: 5–8); the principles of the just war theory; the inadequacy of the just war theory in a nuclear age
Humanist attitudes/beliefs: e.g. Genera]principles:
Belief that human life is precious and dignified, but not sacred (i.e. not a gift from God)
Rejection of belief in God and belief in life after death
Belief in the freedom of the individual to choose his/her own destiny, while maintaining respect for others
Examples of beliefs associated with particular issues:
Euthanasia/Suicide: belief in a person's right to be able to choose to die; support for The Voluntary Euthanasia Society (Exit)
Abortion: belief in a woman's right to choose; support for abortion on request
Islamic attitude/belief in relation to the issue of the taking of life in war e.g. General principle:
Belief in God as the giver of life and death (Qur'an 57: 1–2)
Particular belief:
The acceptance of the waging of war in order to uphold Islamic principles — Holy War or Jihad (Qur'an 2: 194; 22: 39–41)
Learning Outcome 3:
Understand that the beliefs of a religion/stance for living affect the lifestyle of a selected individual
It is suggested that pupils choose a person whose Christian commitment has led him/her to work for the good of others, thus making a link with the Christian vocation to alleviate suffering and/or the work of Christians in relation to respect for human life (both indicated in L.0.2).
The person chosen may be a well-known figure e.g. Mother Teresa, Leonard Cheshire.
Alternatively, there would be great benefit in choosing someone working in the pupils' locality e.g. a youth worker, a nurse, a pupil involved in the provision of a soup kitchen or the organisation of a pro-life cell.
Learning Outcome 4:
Complete an investigation on a selected issue of belief
It is suggested that pupils now investigate an issue within the Catholic tradition.
It is recognised however that PC(a) requires pupils to identify a variety of viewpoints on the issue, and therefore they may have to include differing views.
It is advised that the choice of issue should reflect the choice of the two key questions as indicated above i.e. relate either to the problem of evil/suffering in the world and/ or the topic of the value of human life.
Accordingly, particular issues outlined above, but not already studied in the course (Arrangements document P. 38) would be appropriate: e.g. just war studied in L.0.2; euthanasia investigated in L.0.4.
Alternatively, pupils could be encouraged to investigate a fundamental issue of belief underlying the Catholic response to the above key questions.
Examples of such beliefs would include: belief in the Resurrection, the claim of Jesus to be God, the value of prayer and pilgrimage in relation to those who are sick.
REPORT
INTERNAL EVALUATION DEVELOPMENT OFFICER QUALITY ASSURANCE UNIT
Secondment Period: 16/8/90 — 28/6/91
1.
INTRODUCTION
The following goals were established for the ten month secondment period:
Provide SRC Department of Education, particularly the Quality Assurance Unit with information on school internal evaluation processes such as those operating in Queensland Catholic Education.
To work with employees of the system in school improvement efforts and professional development activities.
To promote and facilitate discussion at school level about the philosophy of the Catholic school (using my experiences working for the Queensland Catholic Education Commission as a stimulus.)
To assist in the development of an approach to school internal evaluation in Strathclyde Catholic schools that considers the distinctive philosophy of the Catholic school as a basis for review and development.
The purpose of this report is to detail the achievements in these areas and to provide information that will be useful for those responsible for continuing this work.
2.
OVERVIEW OF ACTIVITIES
2.2 ESTABLISHMENTS VISITED
During the academic year 1990–91, I was involved in over 200 meetings (consultations, professional development delivery and reception, committee work) in 70 establishments.
The establishments visited consisted of 24 secondary schools; 16 primary schools; 13 training centres; 9 offices (regional, divisional, diocesan); 5 tertiary institutions; 1 special school and 2 community centres.
A complete list of establishments visited is provided in the Appendix to this report.
2.
2 NATURE OF ENGAGEMENTS
2.2.1 Consultations
Much interest was expressed from personnel across the system in the work in which I had been involved over the last eleven years with Queensland Catholic Education.
My initial letter, addressed to headteachers and staff of Catholic schools in Strathclyde, outlining my background and intended role in the region led to many invitations to meet with people to share experiences.
This was carried-out in the main with individuals or small groups of promoted staff.
Many of these consultations led to invitations to work with staff during PAT sessions and on inservice days.
The range of topics covered and the nature of the professional development activities undertaken are detailed in 2.2.2.
Other invitations to address groups of professionals such as associations of headteachers were offered and accepted.
The main issue of interest to Catholic school headteachers and staff was the evaluation of the Catholic school.
Of particular interest was the approach endorsed by the Queensland Catholic Education Commission entitled ‘Self-Renewing Catholic Schools’.
This programme involves the total Catholic school community in discussion of Catholic school philosophy, ethos and goals and leads to an examination of programmes, structures, relationships and practices in the school.
2.2.2 Staff Professional Development
There were many aspects of Catholic education that people wished to explore.
Some school staff requested information about Church thinking on Catholic schools.
Others wished to explore their own community's perception of the philosophy of the school.
A number of schools wanted to examine practical ways of putting their vision of Catholic education, already  discussed to some extent, into practice.
To address the  varying needs of staff in different schools inservice sessions and workshop programmes on the following topics were developed and delivered.
Self-Renewing Catholic Schools
School Self-Evaluation
Issues Challenging Catholic Education in the 1 990's
Official Church Vision of the Catholic School
The Philosophy of the Catholic School
Catholic School Mission Statement
Parental Involvement
Teaching as Christian Ministry
Pastoral Care in a Catholic School
Catholic School Boards
Participative Decision-Making
School Development Planning
Techniques of Group Decision-Making
Christian Leadership
Community Situation Analysis/Needs Assessment
Spiritual Development of Staff
Community Involvement in the Catholic School
The sessions varied from ninety minutes to whole day programmes.
Groups ranged from small numbers of participants up to groups of over ninety.
2.2.3 Committee Work
Throughout the secondment period, I worked with a number of groups and committees set-up within the QAU.
This work contributed to the development of papers and instruments for the use of the QAU in the inspection of schools.
As a co-opted member of Catholic Education Commission working parties, I was involved in the production of discussion papers and other materials aimed at promoting Catholic Education.
The most significant resource developed has been the Self-Evaluation Programme for Catholic Secondary Schools, piloted under the title ‘The Nature Of the Catholic Secondary School Self-Evaluation Project.’
The details of this programme are discussed in 3.3
3.
IMPRESSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR THE FUTURE
3.1 THE FUTURE OF THE ROLE
A feature of the role has been the opportunity it has provided for closer liaison between the Catholic Education Commission and the Department of Education.
The result has been a greater awareness by each of the priority areas of school development upon which the other has decided to focus.
This will allow for the co-ordination of school development approaches, particularly the Nature of the Catholic School Self Evaluation programme and the Department's inspection of schools procedure.
If the continuation of liaison is desired by both parties then this could be part of the remit for future development officers.
With the move to devolved management of schools there is an ever increasing need for the promotion, at school level of internal evaluation as a useful management tool:
assisting in needs identification;
enabling shared decision-making;
establishing the priority of issues;
planning school developments;
gaining ‘ownership’ and commitment to decisions;
facilitating community involvement in the school;
and enabling change to happen.
The climate in schools is receptive as school communities look for management advice to assist in the implementation of DMR; the school board structure; new curriculum guidelines (e.g. 5–14); and other initiatives as well as the changing expectations of pupils and parents.
For Catholic school communities where there is a strong emphasis on Christian ethos and values education, reflection on the philosophy of the school is a desirable  prerequisite prior to any self-evaluation.
Such reflection enables a sharing of understandings, a greater awareness of the school's goals and a renewed commitment to them.
This reflection has not been the practice in the past to any great extent in Scottish Catholic schools.
The self-evaluation programme designed by the Catholic Education  Commission working party offers schools processes for reflection and examination of practice.
Schools would require substantial support in the training of facilitators and in the provision of school based inservice as well as on-going support and assistance throughout the process.
For Catholic schools the need exists for personal and professional development of staff in the spiritual dimension with a focus on Catholic school philosophy and the ‘ministry’ of teaching.
The planning and delivery of inservice in all of these areas would continue to be a priority concern for future incumbents.
The role has facilitated a promotion of trust between school and authority through the inferred recognition of professional competence by giving the school the autonomy to make decisions about its own development.
This trust would seem to be an important issue of the future as the need arises for difficult decisions to be made.
Such trust would help to eliminate the suspicion of the Region's intentions when making decisions about controversial issues e.g. school closures.
(Internal evaluation with the involvement of parents and pupils encouraged, has been used in Queensland and elsewhere as a successful method of closing schools with community support.
The investigation of provision of quality education and options for the future by the school community itself has led the community to see the need to close schools and to amalgamate, in the best interests of the pupils.)
3.2 THE WORK OF THE QUALITY ASSURANCE UNIT
The Quality Assurance Unit has provided for schools a much needed closer contact with ‘the Authority’.
There is a feeling of isolation and professional insecurity in schools.
Visits made by inspectors to schools have been praised by school personnel in many instances for the value of the advice, recognition of good practice and the consequent professional support given.
The work of the Quality Assurance Unit will go a long way in restoring public confidence in the education system.
Public dissemination and broadcast of good practice in schools, an intention of the QAU is necessary to justly portray teaching as a responsible profession, responsive to the needs of the community.
Much of what is currently discussed in the media about schools and education in general is based on misinformation and ignorance.
There is a need to continue the restoration of self-confidence in the teaching profession and to raise morale.
The notion that quality control is in the hands of teachers also needs to be promoted within the profession.
Of critical importance to the success of the QAU is the need for school communities to become aware of how they can use the QAU to assist them in school improvement activities.
The Unit should be perceived to be of service to professionals in schools.
3.3 SCHOOL INTERNAL EVALUATION
To date the QAU has not concerned itself as a unit with the issue of school internal/self evaluation.
Catholic secondary schools in Scotland have been trialing approaches to school internal evaluation through the Catholic Education Commission project: ‘The Nature of the Catholic School’.
The trial has resulted in the development of a programme of internal evaluation.
The programme designed for schools to examine all aspects of the overt and covert curriculum begins with reflection on Catholic school philosophy and goals.
Schools are encouraged to produce a mission statement resulting from widespread discussion of the school's raison d'etre.
Examination of the school's practices takes place in a planned approach over a number of years.
The programme asks schools to consider five aspects of the Catholic school i.e. Community of Faith; Parental Partnership; Development of the Whole Person; Leadership; and Faith Development.
Schools would deal with one or two topics at a time.
The programme materials provide for school communities up-to-date information on church teachings; suggested criteria of exemplary practice (whilst allowing the school community to recognise and articulate its own good practice); school profile pro-forma; and suggestions for action planning and implementation.
Details of how to approach the examination exercise are outlined in a section on evaluation processes and techniques.
School internal evaluation would seem to be a pressing need in the region with the advent of the Delegated Management of Resources programme.
There is a need for management skills that enable and accommodate participative decision-making, if the rhetoric of devolved responsibility is to be put into practice.
The processes of school internal evaluation are recommended by the Hargraves Report, ‘Planning for School Development: Advice to Governors, Headteachers and Teachers 1989’, as the way to organise School Development Planning, a widely endorsed approach to management for the effective school of the 1990's.
The implication for the region is the provision of inservice training for all staff in schools to facilitate their participation in internal evaluation.
3.4 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
The Planned Activity Time structure works effectively in many schools with inservice programmes at school and departmental level planned well in advance.
Such is not the case though with the on-going professional development of  individuals within the system.
On a comparative basis there seems to be less value placed on professional development in Strathclyde than in systems elsewhere, particularly in Australia.
The absence of extrinsic rewards and recognition for staff who complete courses of study beyond basic requirements for appointment could be an influencing factor.
(The Teaching Award in Queensland has scales of salaries based on qualifications and experience.
Increments are awarded for years of service and upon completion of recognized courses of study, teachers move to a higher scale.
It would not be unusual to find at any given time, a significant number of staff in a school involved in part-time study or research activities.)
Professional reference material in schools is given a low priority.
Whilst some schools have a teachers' library the range of resources available seems poor.
Information on current trends in the system and the profession is limited to a few SED & regional publications.
The encouragement of professional readership would allow for informed debate of issues amongst teachers.
This would enhance professional confidence in what schools are achieving and the methods used to do it.
In turn the profession would articulate philosophy and justify efforts and achievements with confidence to the wider community.
This encouragement could become a priority of the QAU.
3.5 OTHER ISSUES
Positive Discrimination
The Region's policy of positive discrimination is impressive and commendable for the opportunity it provides for the provision of education in deprived areas.
During my visits to schools in these areas, I was impressed with the commitment of staff in the face of obviously difficult circumstances.
My first reaction was one of concern for the affirmation these communities require and deserve.
Any approach to the affirmation of good practice in the region should include the day to day achievements of these schools.
There is a danger in the search for good practice of looking only at those schools with good academic records.
School Boards
A challenge that School Boards are yet to come to terms with fully is how they can contribute to the achievement of the school's goals.
School Internal Evaluation processes would be one way of involving the Board in a role of shared responsibility for quality education.
Through the school board, parent expectations and opinions could be fed into a school self-evaluation.
The Board could become responsible for collecting and analysing such information and for drafting recommendations.
Rationalization of Resources
With the advent of delegated management responsibility to schools and the use of internal evaluation processes, schools could take on more responsibility for the distribution of resources.
Such is the intention of DMR.
As a sizable amount of the education budget is spent on school maintenance, repairs and cleaning, obviously the elimination of vandalism and litter would provide schools with substantial spending power.
Through the use of school self-evaluation with pupil involvement, school communities could take more responsibility for maintenance and cleaning of school premises and at the same time improve pupil attitudes through raising awareness of social and environmental issues.
(The litter problem in the U.K generally, is an obvious one to an overseas visitor and it seems that the schools actually reinforce a bad social norm i.e. others should/will clean-up after you.
If pupils and staff together planned how money saved in these areas could be used to provide better facilities and recreational opportunities then perhaps these problems could be overcome.)
Consultation Processes
Despite the positive aspects of school/authority relationships mentioned in this report thus far, there seems to be a gulf between the intentions of the Authority,(the Directorate, QAU etc) and the understandings of personnel at the school level.
In a system such as the education department where personnel are highly trained professionals perhaps more trust could be placed in ‘grass roots’ consultation at earlier stages of developments.
The developmental work of the Quality Assurance Unit (mission statement, quality pointers, indicators of good practice, etc) despite its excellence in content will be slow to take root in schools as there is a low degree of ownership by teachers in the material.
WORKING PAPER 7
RELIGIOUS AND MORAL EDUCATION CEC/SOED SECONDMENT PROJECT RESPONSES, OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Within the project a substantial survey was conducted, consulting with each diocese through Religious Education advisers, selected primary and secondary schools, individuals and groups of teachers, theologians and other interested parties.
Respondents welcomed the document, clearly indicating that it gave Religious Education parity of status with other areas of the curriculum.
Although a compulsory element of the curriculum in Scotland it has never held such a high priority at national level.
Within the denominational sector this renewed emphasis was considered to be an excellent forward step.
Obviously, such parity of status has implications for time allocation, resourcing, staff development and, in the secondary sector, an adequate supply of specialist teachers of Religious Education.
Most respondents recognised the need for R.E.
to be approached with proper academic rigour with attainment targets, programmes of study and, where appropriate, assessment procedures.
The document offers a structure of good teaching practice in keeping with that of other subjects in the national development programme.
Everyone appreciated the professional approach to the subject within the document and recognised the expertise and effort involved in its compilation.
All respondents had reservations about several sections in the document especially the Rationale.
It is in the light of these reservations that the following observations are made.
RATIONALE
Some respondents considered that since the rationale was inappropriate for Religious Education in Catholic schools all else that followed was likewise inappropriate.
It is recognised that there is no easy response to be made by referring to the independence of Religious Education in Catholic schools.
Any curriculum innovation of such far reaching design as we have in Scotland at present will inevitably influence the whole life of the school.
Those concerned with Religious Education in the Catholic sector know the importance of ethos for the success of their work.
When all other subjects are to be described in terms of attainment targets, strands and levels, Religious Education must consider the implication of ignoring or accepting such a framework.
Catholic schools are an integral part of the national system and, like other schools, trends in educational theory and practice have an immediate impact on them.
However, within the Catholic sector, it is the responsibility of Headteachers, School Boards and the appropriate Church authority to take a discriminatory view of curricular changes.
Since Religious Education makes a major contribution to the life of the school it becomes particularly important that any curricular innovation is in accord with the aims of Religious Education in the Catholic School.
Religious Education in Catholic schools is Trinitarian and Christocentric in scope and spirit yet the general orientation of the Working Paper 7 is not, nor does it show any real concern for the faith development and Christian formation of pupils.
This would seem to be the fundamental weakness in the document, which in its present form would be inappropriate for use in Catholic schools.
At no point in the document is account taken of the context in which Religious Education is presented in the Catholic school, namely that of a faith-sharing community and this does not presume the commitment level of any individual.
It is imperative that we emphasise the uniqueness of the Catholic school which understands itself as a faith community in which the beliefs and values communicated in Religious Education inspire and unify every aspect of the school life.
Religious Education should provide the context for and substantially influence the whole school curriculum.
It should also offer living experience of the life of faith — in the way it is organised and in the relationship of those who work and learn there, in its approach to pastoral care and guidance, liturgy, extra-curricular work, to discipline and to a concern and appropriate approach for those with special needs.
Religious Education stamps the Catholic school in every area of its educational task with its distinctive Catholic character.
Nowhere in the document is the interdependence and collaboration of the home, school and wider community of the parish taken account of in relation to the religious education and formation of young people.
Yet nowhere in the primary school curriculum is the influence of home, school and wider community more tangible than in the area of religious, moral and social education.
Between the ages of 5 and 14 it is clearly recognised that the teacher is one of the most significant adults in a pupil's life.
In the Catholic school, and especially within the primary sector, the teacher's role is not only that of professional educator but is also that of companion on a pilgrim journey of faith.
The teacher is not a neutral chairperson but one who assists and guides the pupil on their own unique journey.
The teacher, along with their parents is one of the first to share faith with them and recognise the diversity of experience in the family and faith stories the pupils bring with them.
The commitment of the Catholic teacher in the Catholic school bears witness to a living faith.
In the Catholic school context one of the principle tasks of the teacher is to help pupils know, understand and appreciate the spiritual and religious dimension of life as expressed in the Catholic faith tradition.
This is not to ignore the value of knowing about and understanding the expression of other faith traditions, especially those which may impinge on the life of the pupil.
MORAL EDUCATION
Most of the respondents felt that in the document moral education is based upon a consensus of values.
The Catholic sector is unable to accept such a view.
As a community of faith the model and inspiration in life is Jesus Christ and not merely a consensus among individuals.
Working Paper 7 makes a distinction between Religious and Moral Education whilst the Catholic Church sees moral education as an integral and essential part of Religious Education.
In the moral aspect of Religious Education it is essential to integrate knowledge of basic moral principles with the idea of learning how to make moral decisions.
The sources for Catholic moral teaching are Scripture, Tradition and the teaching of the Church.
With this in mind there is distinct reluctance about the direction of Working Paper 7 since it effectively takes no cognisance of either tradition or authority.
On specific issues Catholic moral teaching would give specific guidance.
It does not content itself with giving guidance in the form of general principles, codes or rules.
Religious Education in the Catholic school helps pupils to the realisation that they belong to a community of moral wisdom, the Church.
In the Catholic school moral education is a whole school task where pupils are enabled to experience moral values lived in the life of the school.
Moral values permeate the whole activity of a Catholic school.
A basic concern for Christian formation should be to enable young people to grow as free persons and to encourage personal responsibility and moral maturity.
Catholic schools continue and, indeed, are expected to provide a moral framework in a society which no longer has a common moral code.
There is no such thing as a value-free education.
A neutral stance in relation to moral and spiritual development of pupils is not acceptable to the Catholic community especially in the Catholic school.
Catholic Education is not simply about preparing young people for the job market — it is about enabling them to become fully human, it is about learning to make moral judgements and about the whole process of Christian formation.
ATTAINMENT TARGETS
It is recognised that the model of Attainment Targets, Strands and Levels, offers a well-structured instrument capable of providing progression and continuity within a spiral curriculum plan.
The national programmes of religious education in use in Scottish Catholic schools (5–14) already contain courses which are coherently constructed according to the principles of curriculum development, paying particular attention to continuity and progression in terms of a spiral curriculum.
CHRISTIANITY
Targets as presented in Working Paper 7 are easily attainable within the existing programmes in Catholic schools.
However, the content required for such targets is inadequate for a true presentation of the Catholic faith tradition — it does not embody that content which adherents know as the essential elements of their faith.
It is recognised that there is a view of Religious Education in which educational principles will take precedence in deciding the appropriateness of the content to be studied over that which adherents to a particular faith tradition may consider essential and appropriate.
In this view the concern is for what the process of study contributes to the pupil's development rather than what the religion being studied contributes to that development.
Religious Education programmes in Catholic schools, however, are constructed according to both educational and catechetical principles, the latter demanding fidelity to the Christian message.
Religious Education must, therefore, take account of the central truths of the Catholic faith and present the rest in proper perspective.
These central truths are:
* the mystery of God, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.
* the mystery of Christ the incarnate Word.
* the mystery of the Holy Spirit who is present and active in the Church.
* the mystery of the Church, in which the Virgin Mary holds the pre-eminent place.
(G.C.D. 43)
Those who are baptised into the Catholic tradition seek understanding of this content through Christian revelation and the privileged signs or sources of revelation are found in: the Bible, Liturgy, the teaching of the Church and Christian witness.
God speaks to us also in the world of nature and human experience.
STRANDS
The different aspects of the Christian faith can be distinguished for the sake of clarity but they cannot be separated in the life of the Christian community as if any one of them could exist alone or have priority over the others 
OTHER WORLD RELIGIONS
Most respondents showed concern at the emphasis which seemed to be given to world faiths other than Christianity.
It is felt that any formal approach to the study of other world faiths should take place in the later stages of the primary school and appropriate stages in secondary school.
Within the Catholic sector the existing allocation of time is essential for the current Religious Education programme.
Indeed, most secondary schools use more than the 5% of time allocated to Religious Education.
However, this will not preclude other world faiths from that particular discrete area of the curriculum should their introduction be appropriate to the childrens' experience or the particular theme, topic or unit of work being studied.
Usually, other world religions will be presented separately and in an open-ended approach — neither from a committed stance nor for commitment but rather with a view to fostering respect and understanding of other people's beliefs and customs.
It is recognised that in a multi-faith society this is necessary.
However, the Catholic school will retain its right and obligation to proclaim the Christian message and all that entails in the Christian faith tradition.
PERSONAL SEARCH
All respondents agreed that Personal Search would permeate every aspect of Religious Education in a Catholic school; they further agreed that appropriate areas of study for the attainment targets in Personal Search were identifiable in current Religious Education programmes but would need to be retextured in terms of exposition and presentation.
It is in the area of personal search that pupils are helped to find answers to their questions about themselves, about the world and about God in the light of Christian revelation, enabling them to develop a Christian view of life in the world and a faith which is personal, reflective, knowledgeable and freely adhered to.
ASSESSMENT IN RELIGIOUS EDUCATION
An ambivalence to assessment in Catholic schools rightly stems from the view that religious education in its entirety cannot be submitted to formal and sharply focussed testing because of its very nature and its concern with personal faith and commitment.
However, many  recognise that if Religious Education is to hold parity of status with other areas of the curriculum it must be open to assessment which is an integral part of the teaching and learning process.
The question of ‘what’ to assess gives cause for concern.
Assessment in Catholic Religious Education would have to take great care against falling into the trap of only aiming to develop that which readily lends itself to measurement.
Teachers should realise, therefore, in presenting their programmes of Religious Education which seek to foster a personal faith and commitment they can quite properly assess pupils' knowledge, understanding, skills and attitudes in varying degrees for the benefit of the individual pupil.
KNOWLEDGE
There is a certain amount of relevant factual information which can be assessed; e.g. knowledge of significant characters, places and events from scripture; the structure of the bible, information about the life of Jesus, the Church, the Sacraments, the Saints, the work of Christian organisations, etc.
UNDERSTANDING
This reflects on the meaning of individual Church teachings, the significance of sacramental symbolism and religious practices, the meaning of Jesus' life, death and resurrection, the significance of particular beliefs for daily life, etc.
SKILLS
Transferable skills, communication, observation, handling of information, personal and inter-personal skills, creating, decision making, etc.
It is essential that assessment in a Catholic school should be compassionate.
No child should leave school with a sense of failure or a poor self-image.
Many techniques for assessment in Religious Education are recognised within the Catholic sector but sometimes these are casually applied and yield a diversity of information which is too general for effective use.
With this in mind there is need for a uniform approach and one that addresses the issues of continuity and progression from 5 — 14.
RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCE
Religious Observance holds a very special place in Catholic schools, it is not something added on to the Religious Education component, it is the expression of commitment to one's faith, it brings reality to theory, it is the vehicle through which faith is deepened.
Moreover, it is the area in which emotions and feelings are educated; it engages the effective domain in drama, song, movement, prayer, words and gestures, symbols and colour and, consequently, has a more direct emotional impact than doctrine.
Liturgy has power to blend people into community and in the Catholic school it  harnesses active participation between pupil and teacher both in preparation and celebration.
In many ways it is a natural gathering together and celebration of the teaching and learning which has taken place in the Religious Education class and all the aspects of the Catholic way of life of the school.
CHAPLAINCY
This is a  significant area of importance in the Catholic school and has been clearly expressed in several documents but attention is drawn to Position Paper 4 (Catholic Education Commission).
1.
Re-write an appropriate rationale for Catholic schools.
2.
Within Attainment Targets a re-write on Christianity.
3.
Personal Search section requires development for Catholic schools.
4.
Programmes of Study require re-write for all targets.
5.
Addition of two Strands:— Prayer and Liturgy.
6.
Intense development of Religious Observance and Chaplaincy.
7.
Thorough staff development programme.
8.
Availability of specialism in R.E.
for primary sector.
9.
All of this would suggest a total re-write of Working Paper 7 for development within the Catholic sector.
In essence this would mean a parallel document recognised by the Church within each diocese and used as a basis for provision of R.E.
within each Region.
This would not be to the exclusion of other World Religions which would be included in their appropriate curricular area.
Such direction for R.E.
within the Catholic sector would be the yardstick for analysis, assessment and inspection by the appropriate authority.
Proposals for future development based on Working Paper 7
16–19 Provision
Traditionally Catholic provision for this age group was found in the Sixth Forms of our Grammar and Comprehensive schools and was confined in the main to A level provision.
In recent years however two distinct yet equally important changes have come about.
i)
The range of education and training options for 16 year olds has widened considerably.
ii)
Increasingly the free standing sixth form has found difficulty in responding adequately to these changes and consequently a variety of alternative forms of provision has been developed.
Education and training options
These fall into four main categories —
i)
‘A’ level provision — 2 years, full-time.
Traditionally these courses are for the more able, particularly those with their sights set on higher education.
To combat the often heard argument of too early specialisation the Government intends to introduce A/S levels from September 1987.
At present 7C% of all sixth formers in Catholic schools and colleges are following A level courses.
ii)
One year courses.
To date these have tended to be O Level/ C.S.E.
repeat courses for those who wished to remain in full-time education but for whom A level was an unrealistic target.
For a small minority, success led to A level courses the following year, but for the great majority the goal was employment either during or at the end of the year.
Where staffing allows, many schools/colleges try to ensure that this year contains a large element of new material, rather than a stale repetition of past experience.
An alternative introduced last year, is the Certificate of Pre-Vocational Education — the C.P.V.E. The aim of this course is to enable students to develop their general education in a broad vocational context.
It is the Government's hope that the non A level student, wishing to continue in full-time general education will increasingly come to consider the opportunity offered by C.P.V.E. Whilst this exam has yet to establish itself with either students or employers, there can be little doubt that it is here to stay.
The C.P.V.E. must be seen in conjunction with the whole thrust of Government initiatives in the area of vocational training and in particular of its T.V.E.I. schemes.
‘The debate is no longer whether the Technical and Vocational Education Initiative will spread to all schools but when it will.’
B. Nicholson, Chairman, Manpower Services Commission.
Its growth has certainly been both startling and rapid.
In November 1982 the scheme was announced, in September 1983 projects were started with 14 LEAs, in September 1984 a further  48 LEAs joined, in September 1985 another 12, whilst for 1989, 28 more are under consideration — at that stage over 90% of all LEAs will be participating.
The Government White Paper ‘Working Together — Education and Training’ indicates clearly that it is the Government's intention to extend T.V.E.I. to all secondary schools by the early 1990's.
iii)
Vocational courses.
There i9 a wide variety of such courses which have a more practical bias combining training and work experience with education and leading to the vocational qualifications of such bodies as CGLI, BTEC and RSA.
Whilst our schools and colleges are offering some of these courses, traditionally the bulk of such courses are to be found in the county Colleges of F.E. They can be of one year duration or provide a route either to higher education or more advanced professional qualifications.
iv)
Youth Training Schemes.
A quarter of all 16–18 year olds are now taking part in these schemes.
They are designed to give those not wishing to continue full-time education the chance to gain work experience, training and education.
All participants receive 27.50 per week.
To date all schemes were of one year's duration but as from April a new 2 year scheme has been introduced with it is hoped an accredited certification at its end.
Increasingly all institutions catering for the 16–19 age group will need to run a ‘mixed economy’— preparing students for entry into higher education or for employment.
C.P.V.E., T.V.E.I., G.C.S.E., A/S levels will lead to a breaking down of the traditional patterns of provision at 16+.
16+ Numbers
The general prediction is that the  overall size of the age group will fall by 1993 to two thirds of its 1981 peak.
Though it is expected to recover slightly thereafter it will still remain some 25% short of its peak until the end of the century.
The peak in our schools was not reached until 1983 (Table 1) nevertheless the subsequent drop has matched that in the state sector.
In the three years since 1983 sixth form numbers have dropped by 13% from 40,055 to 34,961 with a staying on rate of 33% (as against the national average of 31
One consequence of the recent shift in patterns of provision introduced to combat falling rolls and to widen educational/vocational opportunities has been to highlight the different sizes found there.
(Table 2)
From this it can readily be seen that only 56 institutions are of the size advocated in ‘Better Schools’ and yet this 19% caters for nearly half the student population whilst 148 sixth forms (52% of the total) each with less than.
100 students, cater for only a quarter.
Types of Institution
Size alone can never be the sole determinant when considering types of provision for the 16–19 age group.
Many institutions of less than 150, either free standing or in collaboration with others, have offered and will continue to offer a range of courses well matched to the needs of the student population as they are at the present time.
Geographic, demographic, social and financial factors combine in many areas of the country, to ensure that institutions of 150+ represent not only an unrealistic goal but an unattainable one too.
When considering the differing types of provision now available it is important to recognise that there is no one single pattern of provision which can be uniformly adopted.
On the other hand, it is essential that wherever possible, the pupils and staffs of our schools/colleges enjoy the same range of opportunity as is offered in the state sector — we need to compete on equal terms.
There is a need to ensure that we will be able to provide in the future the range and type of courses, especially the technologically/vocationally orientated courses that will be offered in F.E./tertiary colleges.
In such areas as Y.T.S. and T.V.E.I., there is some evidence to suggest that Catholic provision is already being left behind.
Sixth Form Colleges
The thirteenth Catholic Sixth Form college opened in September 19 in Clapham (Table 3).
They now cater for some 22% of the 16+ population and vary in size from 200+ to 1000+.
In many areas where they have been established, staying on rates have risen and they have proved to be popular with students and staff alike for a variety of reasons.
They are able to offer a wide range of subjects and courses.
They are well equipped — all resourcing being channelled to that age group rather than being dispersed over a wider age group.
To many students the break at 16+ proves stimulating.
A fresh start in a more adult environment being contrasted with, by what is seen by some, as the constraints of the school environment.
Nonetheless, it must also be recognised that for some students, especially those of a more retiring nature, the break at 16+ can prove very daunting, hence there is a great need for very close co-operation between a Sixth Form college and its feeder schools.
The absence in the institution of unwilling and disaffected pupils engenders a pleasant informality in staff/student relationships.
For many staff, the satisfaction of exam level work outweighs the possible disadvantage of working within a narrow age-range.
Because of the relative shortness of time in which a student is a member of the college, great emphasis is placed on pastoral care.
One consequence is that less opportunity exists in 6 Form colleges for staff who are less than committed to pastoral care, to be carried.
To date our Sixth Form colleges have offered a very wide and attractive range of options and opportunities.
In many areas they are now however finding themselves in direct competition with Tertiary Colleges which operate under F.E. regulations and which are not constrained by school regulations.
The difficulties which at present confront the Sixth Form colleges centre around
The curriculum.
At present it can be very difficult to get validation for certain vocational courses.
Student attendance.
Under Schools' Regulations, students should be in full-time attendance and under the age of 19.
Neither constraint applies to the Tertiary College where adults and part-time students make up a sizable proportion of the student population.
On the other hand, admissions to Tertiary Colleges are far more difficult to control.
Payment of staff.
Some of our colleges are losing staff to the tertiary colleges as Burnham, especially at the lower levels, compares unfavourably with F.E. scales.
F.E. resourcing and staffing are more generous than for institutions under Schools' Regulations.
At present there is no provision in legislation which positively prevents the establishment of a Voluntary Aided tertiary college.
However the constraints are such that without new legislation it is extremely unlikely that this is an option open to the Catholic sector.
Nonetheless the possibility of Voluntary Aided tertiaries should be explored and meanwhile strategies devised 80 that the effects of existing constraints can be minimised.
Other forms of provision
For a variety of very sound reasons, it will not be possible in many areas to contemplate the setting up of a Sixth Form College.
What other alternatives currently exist?
Mushroom.
In this arrangement one or more 11–16 schools feed into the Sixth Form of one 11–18 school.
Such schemes whilst safeguarding and rationalising 16–19 provision often permit other schools, albeit with a reduced age range, to continue to exist.
Positive efforts need to be made to ensure that the 11–16 schools are seen as partners and not as inferior to the 11–18 school.
The links with the sixth form must be seen to be strong 80 that the risk of leakage to the county provision at 16 is minimised.
Consortium.
In this arrangement at least two 11–18 schools agree to combine at sixth form level, ideally with a common timetable.
In some cases where it is geographically and numerically feasible this has been  done within the Catholic sector e.g. Hounslow; in other areas, normally where a Catholic school stands alone, it has been done in conjunction with State schools e.g. Corby.
A third alternative e.g. Harrogate, has seen the formation of an ecumenical Sixth Form with the local Catholic and Anglican schools combining at post 16.
Whatever the partnership, such schemes depend for their success on the wholehearted support of staff, governors, parents and pupils.
In setting up such a scheme great care needs to be taken in explaining to all participants the rationale behind the decision and the positive gains involved.
Free standing arrangements.
Many school sixth forms continue to operate as separate limits.
Increasingly however, they will have to look to other institutions, sometimes another school but more often a College of F.E., to provide specialised courses for their students at set times in the week.
In many cases this will be the only option available to a school which wishes to increase the range of vocational courses on offer.
City Technology Colleges.
The Government has indicated an intention to set up some 20 such colleges in Inner City areas.
Inevitably, if successful, they will draw pupils from both the county and voluntary sectors.
Transport
Whichever form of provision is in operation, the question of transport — both distance travelled and the cost — needs to be addressed.
Inevitably, the rationalising of 16–19 provision, has led to more students having to travel longer distances.
Where the provision proves attractive there is no evidence to show that students won't travel these longer distances, however the opposite is equally true.
Where students esteem that there is better provision to be found in, for example, a local Tertiary College, they will vote with their feet and the argument that they should remain in a Catholic Sixth Form, solely because it is Catholic, holds little sway.
For such Catholic sixth forms or sixth form colleges, therefore, the challenge is not simply to be as good as the alternative but to exceed it in reputation and appeal.
In such circumstances, the necessary task of self publicity, can become a considerable additional burden.
It must also be noted that transport costs continue to rise and more and more local authorities are seeking to make savings in this area.
Consequently more students in this are group are having to pay fares — a very cogent reason, indeed, for them to choose carefully where they wish to study.
11–16 schools
It has been seen that many of the current schemes entail a break at 16+ This raises questions about the remaining 11–16 schools.
Are they as attractive to parents and staff?
Is recruitment of staff made more difficult?
In answer to the first question there is some evidence that initially there is a degree of opposition — staff see themselves losing the opportunity of sixth form teaching, parents, who often went to 11–18 schools themselves, regard them as a second best alternative.
However where the whole educational system within an area breaks at 16+ such opposition appears to disappear very quickly.
Problems seem to linger where there is a ‘mixed’ economy.
That is to say some 11–16 schools side by side with 11–18 schools.
It must be noted that some sixth form colleges have encountered the same problems and are more successful in areas where they are not in direct competition with 11–18 schools.
Regarding recruitment of staff, there is little factual evidence available to substantiate the claim either way.
Certainly the promise of sixth form reaching appeals to some staff but numerically those teaching the 16+ age group remain a very small minority.
There is evidence to show, however, that in many schools with small sixth forms the remainder of the curriculum and scale point allocation is disproportionately affected by them.
In such cases a clean break at 16+ removed many existing constraints and frustrations.
Undoubtedly in many 11–18 schools, sixth formers are seen to give the lead to younger pupils and to play very active and key roles throughout the school.
Their loss to such schools is considerable.
Nonetheless, there is a clearly definable move, even in 11–18 schools, to provide the sixth form with its own base — and its own rules — often markedly different from the remainder of the school and in many 11–16 schools, the fifth form have successfully taken over the duties and responsibilities traditionally given to sixth formers,
Catholic Provision outside of schools/colleges
Current provision
A major responsibility for catholic formation from the age of 5 to 19 remains within our schools.
However it has always been recognised that they can only complement the work done in the home and the parish and do not replace it.
The goal of all Catholic schools must be to build close links with both partners.
In this respect, an interesting development has been the growth of Community Schools/Colleges.
Though to date there are but a handful in the Catholic sector, their potential use as centres for post 16 adult religious education, as well as for serving the needs of the community as a whole, including the unemployed, is an exciting one.
In recent years, strong parish based courses — especially in preparation for the Sacraments of the Eucharist and Confirmation — have grown up and schools have been happy to change their programme accordingly.
Their remain a minority of Catholic children aged 5–16 and a majority aged 16–19 who do not attend Catholic schools.
Their needs are met to varying degrees by the home, parish or deanery.
At 18+ all universities and some colleges have the services of a chaplain.
Outside these areas there is but very patchy support.
Future provision
At present it would be unrealistic to think in terms of every parish being able to sustain a catechetical programme for all its parishioners.
Similarly, the shortage of suitably qualified priests and religious, rules out the possibility of a chaplain being found in every educational institution where Catholics are studying.
Indeed the supply of chaplains to educational establishments outside of our schools/colleges and their role within them needs careful appraisal.
Whilst recognising that the 16–25 age group has a very strong claim to any manpower which might become available, the question arises as to whether it would be better placed at, for example, deanery level serving the needs of the whole age group rather than in an educational establishment serving an important but small minority.