

Longcase clocks
working on the mechanism of the clock.
NMS
Time for a change in the Museum of Scotland exhibition with a temporary display on the conservation of longcase clocks.
The NMS has about 60 of these clocks, sometimes known as grandfather clocks, which were particularly popular in Scotland between the 1790s and 1869.
However, some clocks needed urgent repairs after water damage, and this led to a programme of conservation for all the clocks.
The display shows the work undertaken by NMS conservators on one clock case and mechanism, together with the working clock.
The restoration enables visitors to see it as it would have been in use in good running order but not ‘as new’.
It was made by John Smith of Pittenweem, who worked between 1770 and 1814 and was one of the most inventive Scottish clockmakers of this period.
Photographs show the clock-case before any treatment, with its warped and twisted door and damaged veneer.
The restoration of the clock-case was done by the Museums' furniture conservator , while the mechanisms of the clock were repaired and restored by , head of the engineering conservation section.
And to complete the picture there is an example of an unconserved clock…but visitors may have to wait for the Museum of Scotland to see this one tick!
Front cover: Inuit men of Igloolik — an illustration from the NMS publication No Ordinary Journey.
NMS
Polish exhibition
In 1940 Scotland was ‘invaded’ by thousands of Polish soldiers, driven from their homeland by the German army.
The links they forged here, both during and after the Second World War, are being illustrated for the first time in a remarkable new exhibition, which opens at the Scottish United Services Museum, Edinburgh Castle on 21 April.
‘For Your Freedom and Ours; Poland, Scotland and the Second World War’ looks at how the men of the 1st Polish Army corps adapted to their new surroundings and, in many cases, decided to settle here for the rest of their lives.
When they first arrived the Poles were based in the Borders, living in large tented camps or billeted in schools and private houses in the Biggar and Crawford area.
Within a few months they moved to the east coast of Scotland where they were allocated a large stretch of coastline, from Rosyth to Montrose, to protect from the very real threat of German invasion.
This brought the Poles to the Lothians, Fife, Perthshire and Angus, the areas where many were to stay when the threat of invasion had lifted.
This exiled army played an important part in the allied fight against the Germans but eventually it was Stalin's Red Army who liberated their homeland, turning the country into an eastward-looking nation.
Because of this new political regime many decided to stay in the country they had known best during the war: Scotland.
Using uniforms, photographs, drawings, insignia, equipment and other types of material, this exhibition will trace the experiences of the Poles from their arrival in Scotland, through the various stages of the war, until German surrender, the Soviet occupation of Poland and the consequent resettlement of many Poles in post-war Scotland.
Many of the items on display have been lent by Polish soldiers who settled in this country and their families.
The exhibition is free, but there is an admission charge to the Castle.
For details about opening times see diary page of the Reporter.
Bits and pieces
MASKS
Uncover mystery, magic, suspense and comedy in an exciting new exhibition to be held this summer in the Royal Museum of Scotland in Chambers Street.
‘The Power of the Mask’ will reveal the history behind one of the earliest forms of disguise, used by many different cultures throughout the world to entertain, fascinate and frighten.
On display will be approximately 90 masks, costumes and related objects from the Museums' collections from Africa, America, Europe, the Pacific and the Far East.
There will also be about 20 contemporary masks, bought or specially made for the display, and dozens of comics featuring masked characters.
‘The Power of the Mask’ will run from August to the end of October this year and there will be lots of associated events and activities.
Look out in The Reporter for details!
BOOK WORDS
JOHN RAE'S ARCTIC JOURNEYS
No Ordinary Journey: John Rae, Arctic Explorer 1813–1893 chronicles a remarkable and unusual life.
After an Orkney childhood, he studied medicine and joined the Hudson's Bay Company.
As surgeon, explorer, surveyor and Chief Factor, Rae built up invaluable experience and knowledge of the Arctic environment and its peoples.
But to the Victorians he was a controversial figure, too independent and too sympathetic towards the Indians and Inuit to be acceptable.
His extraordinary achievements of discovery, surveying and collecting were not acknowledged in his lifetime.
The Canadian Arctic remains as challenging as it was in Rae's time.
With a spectacular array of illustrations, the book captures that challenge, as well as commemorating the life of an exceptional man.
No Ordinary Journey: John Rae, Arctic Explorer 1813–1893, by  price £9.95 (paperback) or £15.95 (hardback) is on sale at The Museum Shop and bookshops throughout Scotland.
Like father, like son
Following in father's footsteps was former NMS warder , who retired last year after 15 years service.
's father  was a warder in the old Royal Scottish Museum from 1932 to 1952 and as a boy  remembers being a frequent visitor to Chambers Street.
He says his father had a particular interest in coins.
‘He made sure he was up-to-date with all the collections but his favourite was coins.
If you asked him where a particular coin was he would be able to tell you exactly where it was on display, even to where it was pinned in a case.
‘He had his own small collection of coins too, which he was very proud of.’
His father also used the Museum as a source of punishment for his son.
‘If I'd been bad he made me copy the notices and labels in cases.
And it had to be word perfect!’
The Scottish Home
Over the centuries, people in Scotland have developed distinctive forms of housing and furnishings to suit the Scottish environment and way of life.
The intriguing history of the Scottish home over the past 400 years is now the subject of a three-year research project, which started in October 1991.
This is funded by the Leverhulme Trust and is organized by the NMS in collaboration with the University of St Andrews.
The main purpose of the project is to investigate the architecture, furniture, and equipment of dwellings over the whole range of Scottish society, looking at large-scale buildings like castles and tenement blocks and also at small cottages and council houses.
Consideration will be given to seasonal dwellings (such as the shielings where members of rural communities lived while tending their animals in the upland summer grazing) and to the temporary nature of much Scottish housing in the past.
This was frequently influenced by the fact that easily available building materials like turf or heather thatch were not long-lasting, or by a short-term need for housing in particular places, such as mining areas where the demand disappeared when the coal seam ran out.
Evidence is being sought in surviving buildings, in records such as photographs, drawings, and documents, and especially in the goods that people have had in their houses.
Museums all over Scotland have vast collections of domestic objects, which give an indication of what was available in particular areas, but how and in which rooms they were used is often not known.
This kind of information is difficult to acquire after things have gone out of general use and was often not recorded in the past because it was taken for granted.
The pace of change since the Second World War has been so swift that we have to be careful not to make assumptions about the past based on what we see around us every day.
By piecing together evidence from many different sources, we hope to gain a better understanding of how the different elements of a home worked.
The home as a status symbol: a woman of leisure at Larchgrove House, Balerno in about 1897.
Scottish Ethnological Archive, NMS
A souter's (shoemaker's) cottage in Perthshire, around 1850, as seen by an anonymous watercolour artist.
The house was used as a workplace, both by the woman who is preparing vegetables and whose spinning wheel stands in the background, and by the shoemaker, whose tools and materials hang to the right of the fire.
Scottish Ethnological Archive, NMS
To help in this process, the research is based on the idea of ‘form and function’, looking at how much the appearance of houses and household goods is influenced by the purposes for which they are used, and how much by other factors.
The ready availability of good-quality building stone in most parts of Scotland, the lack of timber in many northern areas, and the need to protect against strong winds and abundant rain, are a few of the many practical considerations which have had an important effect on the nature of Scottish buildings.
But the shape and layout of a house is not entirely conditioned by such things.
The choice of items of furniture and equipment, and their arrangement within rooms, is more likely to be related to work carried out in the home, to the use of the home as a place for leisure and entertainment, or to its value as a symbol of status in society.
By comparing objects in museums with those mentioned in inventories or seen in old drawings and photographs, we expect to get a fuller picture of domestic life in Scotland than we can find in any one source alone.
This will be made more complete with the help of archaeologists, architectural historians, furniture specialists, social historians and others.
Research on collections is an important aspect of the work of museums but this partnership of the NMS with the University of St Andrews is an unusual and welcome opportunity to take a very wide view of a subject which embraces many different disciplines.
It has proved to be of great popular interest and audiences of more than 200 people have attended the series of lectures on ‘Studying the Scottish Home’, which were held in the Royal Museum of Scotland this winter.
A further series is planned for Autumn 1993.
The results of the project will be published in 1995–6 in a book on the Scottish Home.
is the Leverhulme Research Fellow.
She can be contacted via the Science, Technology and Working Life Department of the NMS or the Art History Department at St Andrews University.
of Keith, in Banffshire.
At home in the country in the 20th century.
Photograph by Alexander Fenton from the Scottish Ethnological Archive, NMS
Leisure in the home: this photograph is labelled simply ‘An Interior Kitchen 1927’ and may have been taken in Paisley, but nothing is known of the boy.
By courtesy of Paisley Museum and Art Galleries, Renfrew District Council
U is for Umbrellas
Umbrellas are one dress accessory no one should be without in Britain.
Every year these humble and useful articles are bought in their thousands and just as regularly left on buses and trains, in shops and museums, forgotten by their owners once the rain has stopped.
Originally umbrellas were used to shade high ranking people and they are still used this way in some parts of the world, for example in Ghana.
They were not used as protection but to mark the importance of the people under them who, of course, did not hold the umbrellas themselves.
The umbrella was adopted by the Church in the medieval period and later by the European nobility as a kind of moveable canopy of state, similar to that which was suspended over thrones.
It is thought that Mary Queen of Scots had an umbrella in the 1560s.
Umbrellas could be made of oiled cloth, so that they did incidentally hold off the rain.
In Britain umbrellas are thought to have been first used to protect people from the rain in Bath in the 1660s.
Bath is a very hilly town, not easy for carriages or sedan chairs.
They were chiefly used by women but also by doctors and clergymen who had to go out in all weathers.
A famous early umbrella is that made by Robinson Crusoe.
At this period umbrellas and sunshades, later known as parasols, were often the same thing.
In southern Europe sunshades were more necessary while in the north protection from the rain was more in demand.
By the 1770s umbrellas were quite accepted in Britain and many shops selling them appeared.
In his appendix to the History of Edinburgh Arnot states that in 1763 there was no such thing as an umbrella known or used in Edinburgh.
About 1780 an eminent surgeon made use of one and by 1783 ‘umbrellas are also as frequent as shoes and stockings and many umbrella warehouses are opened’.
Very few early umbrellas survive but the Museums have about three dateable to the first half of the 19th century.
They are all rather clumsy and fairly large, being distinguished from the parasols of the period by their short stumpy handles.
Colours were usually plain greens and browns, black being a later preference.
By 1900 no gentleman and few ladies would have gone out without a smart, tightly furled umbrella of black silk with a touch of silver on the handle.
Outstations reopen
The new season is about to start for the NMS outstations and visitors can expect to see many new exhibits and displays.
The Scottish Agricultural Museum, by Edinburgh Airport, opens on 1 May and this year a new set has been put on display to show a Border herdsman's house.
Visitors will be able to see the livingroom from a Lauderdale Farm in the 1930s, where a shepherd, his wife and three children lived.
Hangar One will be open from 1 April at the Museum of Flight at East Fortune Airfield, East Lothian.
There will be a naval aviation display as well as examples of Ferranti weaponry, a Royal Observer Corps display and items from the Cold War.
A tunnel has been built from the tea room to Hangar Four, where the Museum's collections of aircraft, rockets and aviation equipment will be on show.
The new season will also bring admission charge to Museum of Flight, £2 for adults and £1 children and concessions.
Biggar Gasworks Museum opens at the  beginning of June.
Set in the pretty Lanarkshire town of Biggar the gasworks were the last in Scotland, now preserved for future generations to show how this once thriving industry provided gas for both private homes and street lighting.
Finally, Shambellie House at New Abbey, Dumfries will reopen on 18 June after a year-long refurbishment programme.
There  will be more details about Shambellie in the next Reporter.
For details about opening times and admission please  see diary page.
Day in the life
Buildings Branch
From replacing a lightbulb to repairing acres of roof, the work of the NMS Buildings Branch is vast and varied.
As visitors will be well aware, the Royal Museum of Scotland in Chambers Street is in the grip of an extensive programme of building repairs which are being carried out under the guidance of the Buildings Branch.
The department was set up four years ago when responsibility for NMS property passed to the Museums' Trustees.
was appointed as head of the branch in 1988 and he arrived just as Phase II of the works project was about to start.
‘Parts of the Chambers Street building are 130 years-old and we found that virtually no maintenance had been carried out.
The roof of the Victorian section was not water-tight and in some places it was leaking like a sieve.
‘So the repairs programme was begun in 1986 and it will probably continue until the end of this decade.
But, in the end, we will have secured the building to last well into the next century.’
No two days are the same for the Buildings Branch and  says it's the variety which makes his job so enjoyable.
Eight people work in the department, ensuring that all phases of the building programme run smoothly and cause as little disruption to the daily routine of the Museums as possible.
One of the biggest, and most satisfying, projects  has organised was the roof work in Gallery 18 — Victorian Engineering.
‘This gallery had been closed because the roof had become dangerous.
We had to construct a cradle to support the roof while parts of the wood beams were replaced.
It was a massive job but well done.
A lot of what my department does is vital but unseen, as this project showed.’
Last year the branch tackled one of their toughest and most unusual jobs when they moved the Totem Pole from the staircase by the tea room to the Main Hall.
The 36ft pole was brought to its new home through Gallery 2, where the Rae exhibition is currently being held, and then carefully raised and fixed into place.
Members of the department are on call 24 hours-a-day.
Water is the main cause of emergency.
‘It's our worst enemy as it can destroy property and objects.
I've been called in to the Museum during the night or at weekends for a variety of reasons.
When there was the gas explosion at Guthrie Street we lost more than 100 panes of glass, all of which had to be replaced as quickly as possible.’
now lectures on how the NMS has coped with various structural problems over the years and he says people are always interested in hearing about the changes taking place in the NMS buildings.
‘I think for this department it's important that we work as a team and we all get great satisfaction from seeing a complex job completed.’
inspecting one of the statues on the roof of the Chambers Street building
Friends of the NMS
The Friends are holding their next Open Evening — called Rogues and Royals — on Tuesday 16 March 1993 from 7 — 9.30pm.
This will be a joint meeting with the Scottish Society in the Museum of Antiquities and Scottish National Portrait Gallery in Queen Street, Edinburgh.
Open Evenings have become very popular and guests will be welcomed with a skirl of the pipes, played by NMS curator .
Among the activities planned for the evening are continuous guided tours of the exhibition Dynasty: The Royal House of Stewart, an introduction to the Scottish Photography Archive with  with a chance to view the current display, and an historic overview of the Queen Street building given by .
The shop will be open and mouthwatering Scottish specialities will be on sale in the Queen Street Cafe.
Tickets are £3, £2 for Friends and members of the Scottish Society, and the price includes a complimentary drink.
Buy them in advance from the Enquiry Desk, Chambers Street, or at the door in Queen Street on the night of the event.
The Friends are always looking for new members, so why not join and become more involved in the NMS.
See Diary for details of forthcoming events.
Single — £10
Family — £15
Junior (16 — 23)— £5
To join, and for more information about Friends' activities, contact   .
Forthcoming Events
21 April Behind the Scenes: Education, Documentation and Library Services.
2pm Chambers Street.
18 May Lecture: new look at Iznik pottery with , London University.
8pm Chambers Street.
Joint event with Society of Antiquaries.