

Western Decorative Art
A New Gallery
Exquisite 19th-century porcelain, popular Staffordshire earthenware and exclusive gold jewellery by Picasso are among the display of treasures in the new gallery on the first floor of the Royal Museum of Scotland.
‘Western Decorative Art 1850 Towards 2000’ offers a delicious feast for eyes with objects ranging from the mass-produced to the select few.
Using material from Europe and North America collected by the Museums during the past 150 years, the gallery offers an historical record of styles and taste and shows how the development of communications helped shape the work by artists and manufacturers.
The displays are shown in Victorian cases housed in a long, narrow gallery running parallel to the windows onto Chambers Street.
It was once used as storage space and curator of European Glass, Ceramics and Furniture  says the idea is to provide a straightforward display of things which the public would enjoy looking at.
Three plates by Picasso & Madoura and Jean Cocteau.
‘People can dip in and out, looking at objects which represent the best that artists of a certain period believed they could do woven in with some everyday things.
For example, we have some wonderful cast chimney-piece ornaments reflecting the popular taste of the time — Dick Turpin, Uncle Tom and Babes in the Wood.
These were cheap, cheerful and fun.’
Vase, Picasso 1958.
German nef, partly-gilt silver, before 1874.
In the popular vein there is also a selection of lids from flat pots which would have been collected as souvenirs from special occasions, such as major  exhibitions and the completion of a bridge or important building.
Pompeian decoration features in ceramics, glass and metal from the 19th century as the public craved objects decorated with designs discovered at the excavations of the ancient Italian city between 1860–1875.
All these items were acquired at the time of their manufacture, as it was museum policy to buy contemporary material.
Splendid silver German nefs and wager cups are also featured, along with enamels and jewellery by Phoebe Traquair and a selection of Italian micromosaics.
There are Russian icons, japonisme, contemporary art medals, Scottish studio ceramics and jewellery from the collection of the Scottish Development Agency.
Visitors will also recognize artefacts dating from the swinging 60s to the present day.
Admission to the Gallery is free.
Front cover: Man in a Green Striped Tie, Jilly Crowley 1976.
Deskford Carnyx
One of the most remarkable objects in the Museums' collections is part of a Celtic war trumpet, in the shape of a boar's head, found in Deskford parish, near Banff, Grampian.
A replica of this has just been completed and is currently on show in the Museum of Scotland display area in Chambers Street.
The carnyx was found early last century, but its identity puzzled experts for over 100 years.
It was seen as a mask, a helmet fitting and a standard before being correctly identified in the 1950s.
Two thousand years ago carnyces were widespread throughout Europe, from Scotland across to Turkey.
Now, however, very few survive and the Deskford head is the finest remaining example.
The replica was the brainchild of musicologist , and produced with funding from the Glenfiddich Living Scotland Awards and the National Museums.
It is destined to be a key object in the new Museum of Scotland.
Top metalsmith  has skilfully created the replica, with NMS archaeologists providing academic support to ensure it is as accurate as possible.
The project has emphasized how important the carnyx was to its makers.
In Celtic society elaborate metal objects were often used to display the power of an individual or a tribe.
The carnyx is one of many items of prestige metalwork created in Scotland shortly after the Romans conquered southern Britain.
Although these objects are Celtic in design, they were given a distinctive Scottish style — perhaps as a deliberate attempt to retain an identity in the face of the Roman threat.
But why did the carnyx end up buried in Banffshire?
It was found in what was a pool in the iron age.
Lochs and pools were often seen as places where the gods could be contacted.
Was the carnyx a sacrifice to some unknown gods, 2000 years ago?
Carnyx reconstruction being made.
Bits And Pieces
PLATINUM
Adding to the splendour of the Main Hall is a temporary display of platinum jewellery, made by students and graduates of Edinburgh College of Art.
The Platinum Jewellery Exhibition shows pieces crafted by winners or finalists in the UK Platinum Award.
This was established in 1979 by Ayrton Metals Ltd as part of the support and promotion of platinum in the UK.
The aim is to provide a taste of the disciplines and dilemmas of designing jewellery in this unique metal.
Few art colleges can afford the high costs of supplying precious metals for student experiment and the award provides students with the opportunity to handle an expensive and rewarding material.
The Platinum Award has become a regular feature of Edinburgh College of Art's jewellery curriculum and for several years students from the section have made it to the finals — frequently winning at least one of the prizes.
It is this success story that prompted the College, in conjunction with the Royal Museum of Scotland, to exhibit 17 jewels dating from 1982 — 1992.
The display runs until 23 May.
LEITH RACES
Watch out for a display in Chambers Street on Leith Race Prizes.
This is due to open in the Main Hall on 31 May and among the exhibits will be a gold cup and cover, by Ker and Dempster of Edinburgh.
This was known as the King's Plate Prize and was made in about 1750.
Horse races on the sands of Leith have been recorded as early as 1504 but were not properly organized until 1665, when the town council took charge.
By the early 18th century the races became annual events in July or August with the City's Prize a cup worth £40 — £50.
The races were now a holiday occasion covering several days and very well attended.
The King's Plate, worth 100 guineas, was added in the 1720s.
One of only four King's Plate prizes known to have survived, the NMS example was bought with the aid of grants from the National Heritage Memorial Fund and the National Art Collections Fund.
Also on display will be racing memorabilia, including a hand bill advertising the Leith event in the 1680s.
The Scotmid Carriage Collection
The horse drawn bread van, once a familiar sight on Edinburgh's streets.
To generations of Edinburgh folk it was known simply as ‘The Store’.
It was a huge organization, where shoppers were members and reaped a dividend for their loyalty.
It was St Cuthberts Co-operative Association, founded in 1859 in the St Cuthberts Parish of Edinburgh.
Today the name has changed to Scotmid, there is no longer a ‘divvie’ for the members, and the image of a corner store has given way to that of bright modern supermarkets.
Scotmid was among the first in the field to introduce bar-code readers to their store checkouts, and the use of computer stocktaking brings them soundly into the 1990s.
There is one area, however, where Scotmid is firmly rooted in the past; they are probably the last commercial operators of horse-drawn vehicles in Scotland.
Starting in the early days of St Cuthberts with local delivery carts, there has been continuous use of this economical form of transport, through the heyday of the horse around the turn of the century, and the rapid change to motorized vehicles in the 1920s and 30s, to the hire carriages in use today.
SCOTMID
The present fleet of some 20 carriages can trace its origins back to 1946, when  became Transport Manager.
The department at that time consisted of a fleet of motor vans and lorries, with milk delivery by horse-drawn floats.
In addition to the milk floats there were also a few redundant horse vehicles, including a pre-war bread van and a hansom cab.
It was the small group of assorted vehicles which formed the basis of a collection which at its peak in the late 1960s numbered over 60, and covered almost every possible type of cart and carriage.
The early post-war years saw a rapid rise in prosperity  and with it a desire to own motor cars.
Along with the rise in car ownership came a fall in interest in horse-drawn vehicles which were seen by many to symbolize war time austerity and petrol rationing.
This change in attitude together with the problems of housing the vehicles, ensured the rock-bottom values which enabled  to collect.
We shall perhaps never know what sparked his enthusiasm for collecting, but  is certainly to be thanked for saving the many carriages, vans and carts which would otherwise have been broken up or left to rot.
Many of the vehicles saved in the 1940s and 50s, were being passed on to museums or back to private ownership, as interest was revived during the late 1960s.
The vehicles had come from diverse locations such as stately homes, shooting estates, garages, scrap yards and castles.
Kirkcudbright, Huntly, Eyemouth, Stirling and Edinburgh were among the many places which yielded unwanted vehicles for the collection.
Perhaps the greatest accolade which  could receive for his efforts came in June 1966 when Her Majesty the Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh visited the St Cuthberts Carriage Museum, and inspected restoration work on the collection taking place alongside work on coaches from the Royal Mews.
Vehicles from the collection have taken part in almost every ceremonial occasion in Scotland since 1946.
The Royal visit to Edinburgh in 1953 was conducted almost entirely using carriages from the collection.
Many films made in Scotland have included the Scotmid vehicles, including Greyfriars Bobby, Greystoke: The Legend of Tarzan Lord of the Apes and Journey to the Centre of the Earth.
The Co-op even commissioned their own film in 1966 entitled The Coachbuilders which involved about 20 carriages being driven round Edinburgh's New Town on a Sunday morning.
By 1992 the collection was reduced to about 20 vehicles, and further rationalization was called for to dispose of those which were non-revenue earning.
The most popular use for the vehicles today is wedding carriage hire, and there is little call for items like the Fire Engine except occasional film work.
Scotmid's transport manager,, was concerned that any item of the collection disposed of should stay in Scotland, and he approached the National Museums.
After much deliberation, six horse-drawn vehicles were selected to complement the existing road transport collections.
A careful balance of commercial and passenger vehicles resulted in the choice of a bakers van, butchers cart and fire engine representing commerce and public service, with a brougham, hansom cab and pony phaeton all for passenger service.
Although the history of Scotmid is very much of local interest, the carriages they collected are of national importance.
Four of those acquired by the National Museums are of Scottish manufacture, and all are now rare.
The hansom cab is almost certainly the sole survivor in Scotland of the large number in service prior to the introduction of motor taxis.
Each vehicle has it's own fascinating story to tell; the fire engine was delivered new to St Marys Isle estate near Kirkcudbright in 1894, the pony phaeton was built as a invalid carriage and was almost certainly used at Balmoral Castle.
Others require further information to complete the story — for example, the brougham which came from an estate near Stow in the Borders, but when and which estate?
To enable the vehicles to be shown together for the first time, and to celebrate the work of the ‘Store’ carriage works, an exhibition entitled ‘Cobbles and Carriages’will be held in the Main Hall at Chambers Street from 5 June — 1 August.
This is being sponsored by Scotmid and to coincide with the display there will be horse drawn tours of the High Street, run in conjunction with Scotmid and using one of their working carriages.
It is hoped that the tours will enable people to experience the sights, sounds and smells of old Edinburgh, as it was when the horse was the only means of transport.
The first St Cuthbert's shop at 50 Fountainbridge, c1859
Three Scottish built vehicles acquired; hansom cab, butchers cart and brougham.
V is for Volunteer Guides
Adding to the enjoyment of a visit to the Royal Museum of Scotland are the Volunteer Guides, who run a series of exhibition and general tours in the Chambers Street building.
This enthusiastic group of 16 men and women share an affection for the Museum and its objects and their informative tours have helped many visitors to understand and make the most of the collections.
The Guides were started in 1991 by , who had previously worked with volunteer guides at museums in Oxford and London.
With a team of five, organized tours of the Japanese exhibition ‘Behind Golden Screens’ and the excellent response from the public resulted in the scheme being expanded.
More guides were recruited and in August 1992 tours were provided for the Hungarian exhibition and weekend highlight tours of the Museum introduced.
The Volunteer Guides have now become an important feature of the Royal Museum of Scotland and  says their aim is to encourage satisfied customers to return again and again.
‘People can wander around a museum at will but with a guided tour they get that extra bit of background information that can make the objects or exhibition come alive.
If someone goes away with good memories of what they have seen and heard then they will come back and bring their family and friends.’
The aim of the Guides is to create interesting, enjoyable and imaginative tours.
This requires a great deal of homework as they must have a solid rock of knowledge about the collections or an exhibition before they can talk in a relaxed and informative way.
says the information comes from many sources and has high praise for the generous help given by curators and librarians.
‘Since the exhibitions change every few months there is a steady and very varied work load with a great burst of activity before the big Festival exhibitions.
‘We use the NMS library but for the Hungarian exhibition books were sent from the Hungarian Embassy in London and the Cultural Attache lent videos.
A Hungarian living in Edinburgh taped the pronunciation of difficult place names and luckily one of our team had lived in Hungary, so had a wealth of background information.
‘It is important we get these things right but basically we just want to add to the enjoyment of the displays.
And, of course, we are all looking forward to this summer's exhibition on masks, which opens in August.’
The Guides come from all walks of life and include a student, a research chemist and a music critic.
They have all undergone training in communication skills and must be able to do general tours of the Museum, as well as theme and  exhibition tours.
gets the odd enquiry about becoming a guide and she meets those interested to explain about the job, but for the moment she has a full complement of volunteers.
‘It is a rewarding job and a good guide is someone who can make the topic fun but at the same time get their facts right.
The Guides have taken over 1000 visitors through the Museum and this will grow as more people become aware of this valuable service.’
PROGRAMME FOR GUIDED TOURS
Saturday Walkabouts
Every Saturday at 12noon and 2pm free guided tours of Museum.
Sunday Theme Tours
Every Sunday at 2pm — free guided tours with a theme.
John Rae Exhibition
Every Saturday and Sunday at 3pm until 16 May — free guided tours
Pre-booked tours
These can be booked exclusively for groups during the week for a small charge.
Details from Museum Enquiry Desk,.
(left) and a group of volunteer guides.
Day in the life
Documentation
In an ideal world, and the NMS, there's a place for everything and everything in its place.
At least, that is what the Documentation department hope as they carefully record the objects in the collections and where they are stored.
The name documentation is deceiving as there is very little paperwork and the department's tools are computers and the software packages MINISIS and QUIXIS.
All the information is stored on these computerized records resulting in almost instant access to information about NMS objects.
There are 14 people in Documentation and the department was established seven years ago when the old Royal Scottish Museum and the National Museum of Antiquities merged to become the National Museums of Scotland.
The NMS is accountable for its collections and decided to use computer databases to store this vital information.
The first department to  input to the system was Archaeology and Documentation calculate that by the year 2003 they will have finally  input all NMS records — approximately 600,000 entries.
There are an estimated 3,000,000 objects in the collections but many, including more than 1,000,000 insects, do not need to be recorded on the database individually.
As Stocktaking Manager, is in charge of location control.
This means that once she knows where an object is and recorded it on the database, it is her responsibility to keep that information accurate.
says she works with curators to identify the location of objects.
‘One of the projects I worked on recently was in Queen Street with the Department of History and Applied Art.
We had to find out exactly where an object was stored, or on show, and record that information.
If anything is moved then I am informed and we also record the new  acquisitions .
This shows that we are accountable for the collections.’
To make sure the system is working  says stocktaking exercises are carried out on a regular basis and there are random checks of the collections.
‘For example, last year we checked the collection of European gold coins and a check on Scottish silver at Queen Street is about to be undertaken.
By keeping up-to-date-records of our objects and where they are we are trying our hardest to behave responsibly with what we have and what we know we have.’
in Documentation.
Spinning Through Time
Something over 33 years ago, I mounted an exhibition in what was then known as the Shandwick Place Gallery, on various rural crafts that included spinning.
It was out of this first floor gallery, with its annually changed exhibitions on different aspects of rural life, that the Scottish Agricultural Museum was eventually born.
The spinning wheel display brought to light a number of names of spinning wheel makers, and a list was published in the former Scotland's Magazine in 1963 (Vol 59 No 7).
This actively brought me into contact with , who wrote from Poole in Dorset in October 1961 to give details of a wheel purchased in Argyll in 1960 from .
It had been made by  in 1906, at Port Sonachan, and was stamped ‘DS 1906’, with an upside down horseshoe on the base.
The initials stood for , who was, according to‘a wheelwright (known to our friends in Kilchrenan where we stay every summer) who made these wheels to order only’.
The wheel was in active service from 1960, after a long journey by train from Argyll to Dorset.
is an experienced spinner, who used Sinclair's upright wheel, beautifully made of walnut, for spinning silk, whilst using a horizontal Swedish wheel for wool.
When the  retired to Peebles they donated the wheel to the Museum.
Obviously it is sad to part  with such a fine piece of craftsmanship, but it will be appreciated and well-looked after in the National Museums of Scotland, as one of the major items in the important spinning-wheel collections.
And perhaps it will find its place also in the coming Museum of Scotland.
Friends of the NMS
The Friends next evening event will be a joint meeting with the Society of Antiquaries to be held at Chambers Street on Tuesday 18 May at 8pm, where the lecturer will be , a leading authority of Islamic Art.
He will talk about Iznik pottery, one of the glories of Ottoman art.
has had a distinguished career at the British Museum.
He is the author of Islamic Art and Design 1500–1700' and is now Professor of Archaeology at the School of Oriental and African Studies, London University.
For the summer, in addition to the lecture tour of Sicily and the weekend excursion to Iona, the Friends have arranged a fascinating guided tour of Greyfriars Kirkyard — which has the finest collection of 17th century monuments in Scotland.
will take a party of forty round the kirkyard on the afternoon of Wednesday 7 July.
Our next Open Evening will be held on Wednesday 16 June at Chambers Street.
We had hoped to hold the Summer Open Evening at the Castle but after-hours security problems made this impossible.
Instead we shall build the evening round ‘An  Embarrassment of Riches’; the Museum's gallery of European Decorative Art 1200–1800, the newly opened gallery Western Decorative Art: 1850 Towards 2000 and new displays of enamels, silver, arms and armour, iron work and plaster casts on the newly decorated back stairs.
During the 1993/94 programme we shall continue the series of afternoon events which have proved extremely popular.
A visit to the three exhibitions in the Scottish United Services Museum at the Castle is planned for October.
We always need to welcome new members.
Please encourage your friends to become the Museum's friends.
In addition to the existing benefits, entry to the Museum of Flight at East Fortune and the refurbished Shambellie House Museum of Costume will be free to our members.
Single — £10
Family — £15
Junior (16–23)— £5
Further information from: