

1.
INTRODUCTION
This document details and explains the regulations governing the professional certificate and diploma programmes of the Hotel, Catering and Institutional Management Association.
These regulations are effective for programmes of study starting in and after September 1990.
The certificate and diploma courses have been designed to provide flexible, progressive, industrially orientated programmes of professional education, development and training based on extensive research into the current and predicted future needs of managers in the hospitality industry.
They are designed primarily for practitioners who are either currently working or who have previous work experience in the industry.
This document should be read in conjunction with the Subject Specifications which set out more detailed aims for the programmes.
Both the certificate and the diploma are qualifications in their own right and can be studied as complete programmes.
Alternatively individual areas may be studied and will receive certification in the form of a ‘Record of Achievement’ for successful completion and may contribute credits to the educational points requirement for a grade of membership.
Tutors and students undertaking study for these programmes should familiarise themselves with these regulations.
Supporting documentation on specific aspects of implementation is available from  the HCIMA Education Department as follows:
For Centres offering the Programmes
Notes for the guidance of centres on the procedure for applying for approval of programmes leading to the HCIMA Professional Certificate or Professional Diploma.
For Centres and Students
Notes on applying for credits for Areas of Study and exemption from specific requirements of the HCIMA professional qualifications.
2.
APPROVAL OF PROGRAMMES
Applications from Centres seeking HCIMA approval to offer programmes of study leading to the Association's Professional Certificate and/or Professional Diploma, must be submitted to HCIMA at least eight months before the date on which it is proposed to start the programme.
Applications from centres seeking HCIMA approval to offer single areas of study or short courses to meet identified needs must be submitted to HCIMA at least six months before the date on which it is proposed to start the course.
Centres are required to satisfy the HCIMA that the proposed structure, resources and assessment schemes are appropriate to the individual areas of study or total study programmes which they wish to offer.
HCIMA will issue, and regularly update, more detailed guidelines to centres.
Those planning to offer the programmes should obtain a copy of the guideline from the Education Department.
Centres may be visited in connection with their submissions to offer the programmes of study.
Submissions to HCIMA must be signed by the Principal/Director/Personnel and Training Director of the centre applying to offer the programme(s).
This signature will be taken to indicate that the centre has agreed to satisfy the resourcing and staffing requirements of the programme(s) to be offered.
In the case of joint submissions a letter will be needed confirming that methods of resourcing are available and have been agreed between the two parties.
3.
CONDITIONS OF ENROLMENT ONTO A PROGRAMME OF STUDY LEADING TO THE AWARD OF A PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATE OR TO INDIVIDUAL AREAS OF STUDY WITHIN THE CERTIFICATE PROGRAMME.
3.1
To be eligible to enrol onto a programme of study leading to the award of the professional certificate or to any area of study within that programme applicants must:
EITHER
be working in appropriate concurrent full-time employment within the industry directly concerned with food and/or beverage preparation or service or with provision and/or service of accommodation.
OR
must have at least two years full-time employment in the industry directly concerned with food and/or beverage preparation or service or with provision and/or service of accommodation.
This employment should include some experience at supervisory level.
AND
have an entry profile of appropriate qualifications and/or prior learning which would suggest that the applicant has the ability, and in particular the literacy and numeracy skills, to succeed on the programme of study.
Examples of appropriate entry profiles are set out at a, b and c below.
a)
At least three years appropriate full-time employment within the industry and successful completion of a vocationally relevant course of one year's full-time duration or part-time over 2 years.
(eg. a BTEC First Certificate or Diploma or SCOTVEC National Certificate Modules in relevant studies, such as in Hotel and Catering), or have successfully completed a Catering YTS programme or hold appropriate CGLI certificates in catering and/or accommodation subjects).
or
b)
Other combinations of hotel and catering craft or supervisory qualifications and experience (such as successful completion of a two year full-time craft course plus one year's appropriate experience).
or
c)
Appropriate work experience and attainment of 4 GCSE level passes at grades A, B or C, which include subjects which demonstrate the individual's command of the English language, general literacy and numeracy and which, desirably, include a science subject.
(Or equivalent GCE or SCE or Scottish ‘Standard’ grade passes).
3.2
Checking of Entry Profile
It is the responsibility of centres to check evidence of all qualification.
Course/admission tutors will, on behalf of HCIMA, assess the learning claims of applicants, together with supporting evidence and decide whether the individual should be admitted to the centre's programmes of studies.
Any decision on acceptance of an entry profile and offer of a place on a programme of studies is specific to an individual centre and that offer is not necessarily transferable between centres.
HCIMA will accept the ruling of London University on the recognition of overseas qualifications as GCSE ‘O’ level equivalents as listed in Appendix II of the leaflet ‘Regulations for University Entrance’.
Qualifications not included in this list should be referred to HCIMA for a ruling prior to enrolment of an applicant.
The HCIMA Careers Adviser will advise centres and will counsel unsuccessful applicants should the centre wish to refer individual cases to HCIMA.
In order to monitor the sources of recruitment on the programme HCIMA will require centres to complete, for each cohort of students, a standard form setting out the prior qualifications/learning experience for the student group.
4.
CONDITIONS OF ENROLMENT ONTO A PROGRAMME OF STUDY LEADING TO THE AWARD OF A PROFESSIONAL DIPLOMA OR TO INDIVIDUAL AREAS OF STUDY OR ELEMENTS WITHIN THE DIPLOMA PROGRAMME.
4.1
To be eligible to enrol on a programme of study leading to the award of the professional diploma or to any area of study within that programme applicants must:
EITHER
be working in appropriate concurrent full-time employment in the hospitality industry and normally hold a post involving section or departmental responsibilities
OR
for those wishing to study for the professional diploma on a full-time programme.
either have worked in the hospitality industry for at least one year in appropriate full-time employment.
or have undertaken at least 48 weeks of planned and supervised work experience to include a range of significant learning experiences.
This learning experience must be recorded via a Learning Diary and confirmed by the signature of employer and/or course tutor.
Information on the format for a Learning Diary is obtainable from HCIMA.
AND
have successfully completed the HCIMA professional certificate.
OR
have a profile of equivalent prior attainment acceptable to HCIMA.
Examples of such profiles include:
a)
Practitioners with five or more years experience as managers in the hospitality industry who may hold no formal qualifications but who can submit to HCIMA through the Association's Accreditation of Prior Learning (APL) Scheme, a portfolio of evidence which demonstrates prior learning at the required level.
Candidates wishing to enter a professional diploma programme via the APL Scheme should contact the HCIMA Careers and Training Advisers.
b)
Holders of one of the qualifications listed below who, in addition, may be required by the centre to undertake, prior to or during the early part of the course, a centre devised programme of bridging studies.
These studies should extend students' prior learning in order to provide an adequate and sound basis for the diploma programme of studies.
current LHCIMA's (via points assessment)
HCIMA Part A examination
TEC/BTEC National Certificate or National Diploma in Hotel Catering and Institutional Operations
SCOTVEC National Certificate in Hotel Catering and Institutional Operations
BTEC Continuing Education Certificate in Hospitality Management
Or a qualification at the same level which predates the above
4.2
HCIMA will provide and regularly update from time to time information on the match between the content of the professional certificate programme and other equivalent/relevant courses, indicating areas where bridging studies are likely to be needed.
4.3
Checking of Entry Profile
It is the responsibility of centres to check evidence of all qualification.
Course/admission tutors will, on behalf of HCIMA, assess the learning claims of applicants, together with supporting evidence and decide whether the individual should be admitted to the centre's programmes of studies.
Any decision on acceptance of an entry profile and offer of a place on a programme of studies is specific to an individual centre and that offer is not necessarily transferable between centres.
The HCIMA Careers Adviser will advise centres on comparability of overseas qualifications and will counsel unsuccessful applicants should the centre wish to refer individual cases to HCIMA.
In order to monitor the sources of recruitment on the programme HCIMA will require centres to complete, for each cohort of students, a standard form setting out the prior qualifications/learning experience for the student group.
5.
APPLICATIONS FOR CREDITS FOR AREAS OF STUDY OF EITHER THE PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATE OR THE PROFESSIONAL DIPLOMA PROGRAMME
5.1
Applicants seeking credits for areas of study, for Sections of the certificate level areas C1 or C2, or for elements from within an area of study at diploma level must submit their application to the HCIMA and should have received a favourable decision prior to enrolment on a programme or area of study.
Applicants can only be given credits if they already fulfil the entry requirements for the programme of study and must be able to supply proof of qualifications or prior learning attainment which they are submitting in support of credit application claims.
Applicants, providing that they are eligible to enrol on the programmes, may gain credits in respect of recognised qualifications and/or prior learning.
Credit for not more than 50% of the Certificate or Diploma programmes, excluding the case study and project can be achieved by accreditation of prior learning.
An applicant who believes that he is eligible to gain credit for prior learning in relation to some areas of study, sections or elements of the certificate or diploma programme of studies should contact the HCIMA Careers and Training Advisers who will advise him in how to proceed with an application for credit via the APL scheme.
5.2
Scope of Credits 
It is possible to gain credits as follows:—
C1 — Food and Beverage Operations — Either for the complete area of study or Section A or Section B
C2 — Accommodation Operations — Either for the complete area of study or Section A or Section B 
C3, C4 and C5 — For the complete areas of study but not for individual elements
The Case Study Credit will not normally be obtainable for the Case Study.
Certificate Programme
Diploma Programme
It is possible to gain credits either for complete areas of study or for single elements.
Those applying for credits for single elements are likely to be:
either seeking licentiate by experience points towards a grade of membership
or seeking to gain an area of study through a combination of short courses and accreditation of prior learning.
Those enrolled for complete areas of study will be required to undertake the full assessment schedule for those areas of study.
The Project — Credit will not normally be obtainable for the Project.
5.3
Credit for Recognised Qualifications
Applicants wishing to apply for credits for qualifications and/or prior learning should obtain a ‘Credit Application Form’ from HCIMA.
A tutor from the centre where the applicant has applied to study, will act as mentor and advise/assist the applicant as necessary in completing the form and preparing a supportive portfolio of documentary evidence.
Applications should be made as early as possible as a decision from HCIMA is normally required prior to enrolling on a programme of studies.
5.4
The Concept of Prior Learning
Prior learning often refers to achievements acquired directly from life experience and can refer to achievements from some distance back in the past.
It may refer to uncertificated achievements but might include those which have been certificated, especially where the certification does not record the precise nature of the achievement, or was acquired in a different/unrelated context.
The concept is that applicants should be given credit for prior learning whether it is certificated or uncertificated providing it is at the right level and relevant to the qualification being sought.
This should provide fair and flexible access for practitioners from the industry who can supply an appropriate profile of prior learning achievement.
5.5
Acceptable Evidence of Prior Learning for Exemption Purposes
In order to validate prior learning a range of evidence is required.
It must clearly relate to the areas of study and competences for which credit/entry is being sought.
The quality of particular kinds of evidence will be critical in establishing standards of achievement and credibility.
Evidence may be in a wide range of forms.
Examples are listed below but the list is not definitive and other information may be acceptable:
industry based training courses
non-examination courses
articles, papers, computer programmes, policy papers (marketing/manpower etc)
projects, dissertations
written accounts endorsed as authentic
distance learning, adult education
independent and self-directed study
employment and work experience
testimonials from senior managers/employers
explanations of operational performance in the form of:
records (eg. trading analyses)
reports (eg. marketing strategy)
working papers (eg. policy planning)
printed material (eg. brochures)
6.
MEMBERSHIP
6.1
Candidates studying for an HCIMA Professional Qualification must normally be registered members of the Association.
Those studying for the Professional Certificate will normally be eligible to become student members but may be eligible for other grades of membership.
Those studying for the Professional Diploma will normally be eligible to become either intermediate or licentiate members but may be eligible for other grades of membership.
Those accepted for study on either of the programmes who are not already members must, before commencing their studies, apply for an appropriate grade of membership.
6.2
STUDENT MEMBERSHIP WHILST STUDYING ON THE CERTIFICATE PROGRAMME
A person is eligible for registration as a student member provided that he/she is, in the opinion of the Council, a fit and proper person to be so admitted and:
is regularly attending a recognised course in preparation for an HCIMA qualification and satisfies the criteria for entry to the course; and
has his/her application for student membership countersigned by an officer of his centre; and
has his/her application for student membership countersigned his employer (as appropriate); and
has paid the current student membership subscription
Successful applicants will be admitted to for one year and membership may be renewed annually on payment of further subscriptions.
6.3
OTHER GRADES OF MEMBERSHIP 
Student members who have successfully completed Part A or holders of qualifications which give entry to the Professional Diploma are eligible to apply for Intermediate Membership.
Intermediate Members may normally enrol on the Professional Diploma Course but may be required to undertake, in the early part of the course, a schedule of bridging studies designed to fill any gaps in their profile of achievement.
(a)
Student members who have successfully completed the HCIMA Professional Certificate Programme, including the Case Study and who have gained appropriate work experience in the industry are eligible to apply for Licentiate Membership.
(b)
Licentiate by experience are deemed to have satisfied the requirements of the Professional Certificate and are eligible to enrol on the Diploma Programme.
Intermediate Membership
Licentiate Membership
Corporate Members
MHCIMA's and FHCIMA's who wish to update their knowledge and skills are eligible to enrol on any part of the programmes of study.
Affiliate Members
This grade will be considered for entry to the Certificate programme but applicants must satisfy the normal entry requirements for the programme.
7.
DEVELOPMENT AND RECORDING OF STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT
7.1
Assessment Strategy
Continuous assessment programmes in each area of study must be totally integrated with and supportive of the specification for the topic area.
Assignments must be relevant to current industry practices and should wherever appropriate relate to the individual students' work places; this applies particularly to the technical areas of food, beverage and accommodation operations/management.
Where several areas are being studied concurrently centres should consider cross referencing between areas of study.
Students should, through assignments, be required to make use of and apply knowledge and competences across a wide spectrum of situations.
Assignments should be devised to test both individual abilities and abilities to work as a member of a group; in the latter case, when group assignments are submitted for moderation as part of the course assessment, moderators will require clear indication of how the contribution of individual students will be identified in the marking of the work.
HCIMA will welcome innovative approaches.
NCVQ require testing at supervisory/management level to achieve ‘a balance between tested practical competences and assessed knowledge, understanding and application’.
Assignments may include work based projects, seminar presentations, case studies, field studies and work based investigations and other appropriate exercises.
They should become more demanding as students progress through an area of study and increasingly test skills such as application, evaluation, use of judgement, decision making and problem solving.
Examinations set for areas of study of the diploma programme may reflect the individual centre's current approach to unseen testing and could include, for example, unseen case studies.
No formal examinations are specified for the certificate programme but HCIMA will expect some form of unseen (possibly end of study) testing to be part of the assessment schedule.
7.2
Learning Diaries
HCIMA requires each student undertaking its programmes of studies to keep a learning diary during periods of work experience.
This diary is a method of building up a record of the learning which is taking place through workplace experience, which extends the student's previous knowledge and skills and which can be used to measure competences in the workplace.
Students will need to discipline themselves to keep a record, in a loose leaf binder, on a very regular basis eg. weekly or at the longest once a fortnight.
They should record briefly the new and/or unusual activities which they have undertaken since the last entry and should then concentrate on recording the learning which has taken place as result of these work activities.
The entries in the diary should be supported, wherever possible, by evidence such as copies of staffing schedules, menu sheets, stock records, reports, etc. produced during the working day.
Learning diaries are being used increasingly by such bodies as the Council for National Academic Awards (CNAA) and by professional bodies such as HCIMA who are seeking to credit prior learning in support of such matters as
applications for grades of membership of a professional body
applications for entry to programmes of study
applications for credit for parts of a programme of study.
Learning diaries are likely to be a key element in contributing towards NCVQ accreditation.
As practitioners progress in their careers it becomes increasingly difficult and onerous to remember and record prior experience and achievement in a way which can achieve the type of credit which is often needed (and is becoming more important in the present climate of belief that individuals should not be required to repeat learning which has already taken place).
It is advisable, wherever appropriate, to get managers to certify entries in a learning diary and to include in it references which may be difficult to obtain at a later date.
More detailed information and guidance on the way in which a learning diary may be developed can be obtained from the HCIMA Education Department.
8.
MEASUREMENT OF STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT: THE PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATE
8.1
The professional certificate programme comprises the following areas of study:
C1 Food and Beverage Operations
C2 Accommodation Operations
C3 Human Resource Organisation
C4 Business Accounting and Introduction to Law
C5 Sales and Marketing
The HCIMA Set Case Study.
C1 to C5 will be tested by college devised assessment schemes which will be moderated by HCIMA.
Moderators will expect to see some form of unseen testing within these schemes.
The Case Study will be tested via two papers, one open book and one unseen; these will be set by HCIMA, marked by college tutors and moderated by HCIMA.
8.2
Assessment and Award of the Professional Certificate
in order to gain the professional certificate students must have
either a)
successfully completed the assessment schedules of all five areas of study.
or b)
gained credit via APL for up to 50% of the areas of study and successfully completed and passed the assessment schedules for the other 50% of the areas of study.
and c)
successfully completed and passed the Case Study assessments.
Students must have successfully completed/or gained APL for 50% of the areas of study for the Certificate Programme and have undertaken (or undertake within the subsequent two  months ) the assessments for the remaining areas of study of the Certificate Programme in order to be eligible to sit the final Case Study (unseen) paper.
8.3
Assessment and Award of a Record of Achievement
In order to gain a Record of Achievement a student must have successfully completed the assessment schedule(s) of the single area(s) of study for which he/she is registered.
Records of Achievement will not be issued for success in areas of study being taken as part of the certificate programme except in exceptional cases.
8.4
Assessment of Individual Areas of Study
In order to pass an individual Area of Study (C1 to C5) students will be required to:
a)
successfully complete all the college set, HCIMA approved, assignments which contribute towards gaining the area of study.
b)
gain a weighted aggregate of 50% overall
8.5
The Case Study
The Case Study assessment will comprise
a)
one paper completed in the student's own time (open book) which will carry 40% of the total marks
b)
a three hour, HCIMA set, unseen paper taken under examination conditions which will carry 60% of the total marks
In order to pass the case study a student must gain
a)
a minimum of 40% in the unseen examination
b)
a weighted aggregate of 50%
8.6
Reassessment Procedure — Areas of Study C1 — C5:
Students are required to successfully complete all assignment which contribute to the overall mark for the area of study.
A student who fails any assignment will normally be required to retake the failed assignment.
Centre devised Programme Regulations should set out clearly policy on reassessment of students who fail or fail to complete assignments.
Moderators may request to see these Regulations and students work submitted for reassessment.
8.7
Reassessment Procedure — Case Study
Students who fail the Case Study will be accredited with the five areas of study if they have successfully passed these and should be eligible for the grade of intermediate membership.
To gain the professional certificate they will have to take and pass the Case Study in a subsequent year; see section 17.
9.
MEASUREMENT OF STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT THE PROFESSIONAL DIPLOMA
9.1
The professional diploma programme comprises the following areas of study.
D1 Food and Beverage Management
D2 Accommodation Management
D3 Human Resource Management
D4 Financial Management
D5 Marketing Management
D6 Operational Management
D1 to D5 will be tested in two ways:
a)
centre devised assessment schemes which carry 40% of the weighting for the areas of study
b)
centre set and marked, HCIMA moderated, examinations which carry 60% of the weighting for the areas of study.
D6 will be tested via centre devised assessments and via the completion of the Integrative Industry Based Project.
9.2
Assessment and Award of the Professional Diploma
In order to gain the professional diploma students must have
either a)
successfully completed the assessment schedules of all six areas of study.
or b)
gained credit via APL for up to 50% of the areas of study and successfully completed the assessment schedules for the other 50% of the areas of study
and c)
successfully completed and passed the project.
Students must normally have successfully completed or gained APL for 50% of the areas of study of the Diploma programme and must be studying for the remaining areas of study before they are eligible to start work for their projects.
9.3
Assessment and Award of records of Achievement
In order to gain a Record of Achievement a student must have successfully completed the assessment schedule(s) including the examination(s) for the single area(s) of study for which he/she is registered.
Records of Achievement will not be issued for success in areas of study being taken as part of the Diploma Programme except in exceptional circumstances.
9.4
Assessment of Individual Areas of Study
In order to pass an individual area of study students will be required to:
a)
successfully complete all the centre set, HCIMA approved assignments.
These assignments together carry 40% of the marks for the area of study.
b)
successfully complete and gain a mark of at least 40% in the centre set, HCIMA approved, examination relating to the area of study.
This examination carries 60% of the weighting for the area of study.
c)
gain a minimum mark of 40% in the examination.
d)
gain a weighted aggregate of 50% for the area of study overall.
THE PROJECT
In order to pass the project students must successfully complete the written report and the verbal presentation and gain a mark of 50% overall.
9.5
Reassessment Procedures — Assignments
Assignments — Students are required to successfully complete all assignments which contribute to the overall mark for the area of study.
Centre devised Programme Regulations should set out clearly the centre's policy on reassessment of students who fail or fail to complete assignments.
In borderline cases moderators may request to see students' marked assignments.
Assessment marks gained by a student can be taken into account with one resit examination.
Examinations — A student who fails an examination related to the diploma area of study may, at the discretion of the centre and in agreement with HCIMA, be allowed to retake examinations as many times as he/she wishes (providing the centre is prepared to set and mark new papers) and that the programme is still current.
Students intending to resit an examination will normally return to the centre where they originally studied in order to take the resit examination.
Students will need to:—
a)
inform HCIMA who will charge a moderation fee to resit candidates.
b)
inform their centre at least six months before the date of the resit examination; the college may charge a resit fee.
In exceptional circumstances, and by arrangement with the centre concerned students may take examinations at HCIMA Head Office in which case HCIMA will charge an invigilation fee.
Projects — A student who fails the project may
a)
be required to undertake further work on the project and be referred to his project tutor or mentor for counselling
b)
be required to work in the industry for a period in order to improve his management competences before undertaking a project on a new topic area.
10.
EXTENUATING CIRCUMSTANCES AND APPEALS
10.1
Illnesses and Extenuating Circumstances
Cases of illness and other extenuating circumstances which may have affected a  student's performance overall or in an individual assessment or examination should normally be dealt with through the centres regulations and by discussion of individual cases with the HCIMA moderator prior to the Assessment/Examination Board Meeting.
The moderator will normally expect to see documentary evidence of the circumstances cited and samples of the students work at the time of moderating the assignments and/or examination scripts.
10.2
Appeals Against Published Results
The HCIMA will not consider an appeal from an individual student against his/her published result.
Appeals must be made to the centre where the student was enrolled to study for the programme; each centre will deal with the case in accordance with its appeals procedure.
11.
HCIMA MODERATION OF THE PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATE
11.1
Role of Moderators
Moderators dealing with the professional certificate will be grouped into a number of teams.
Within each team will be subject specialists to deal with each of the five areas of study of the certificate programme.
One moderator will be the team leader and will co-ordinate the work of the team.
Centres will be allocated to a moderation team and will have two main forms of contact with their moderators.
for approval of assessment schemes
for moderation of students' marked assignments
11.2
Approval of Assessment Schemes
Before the enrolment of a new group of students onto a programme, centres are required to submit to HCIMA three copies of assessment scheme and information listed below for the areas of study to be offered in the coming session.
Two copies of the scheme will be forwarded to the Moderator and one retained by HCIMA.
In due course one of the Moderator's copies will be returned to the centre together with the Moderator's comment form.
The following details should be supplied for each area of study to be offered:
a)
An outline assessment plan for the area of study.
b)
A copy of the schedule of assignments which contribute to the assessment.
c)
The elements of the area of study to be tested in each assignment ie.  students' knowledge and competences.
d)
The allocation and weighting of marks to each assignment.
e)
A marking scheme for each assignment.
f)
Cross-reference to other areas of study to be drawn on in completing the assignment (as appropriate) and the methods by which integration will be achieved.
g)
A statement explaining the method by which the centre will deal with failed assignments.
Moderators will require information on these in particular at the end of the programme.
11.3
Dates of Submission to HCIMA
Assessment schemes must be approved for each new intake of students onto a programme and are best approved before the programme commences.
Centres are advised to forward schemes to HCIMA as early as possible and to allow 10 weeks for the moderation process (in order to allow for resubmissions).
Assessment schemes should be finally agreed, at the latest, by the fourth week into a programme as non-approval means that a programme is not validated to operate.
The Moderator will review the assessment programme as submitted by the centre and may:
a)
Approve the content: in which case centres will be advised within 6 weeks of submission
b)
Require content to be modified, revised or re-written: in which case the centre will be advised within 4 weeks and will be required to resubmit within the next four weeks.
NB.
No programme is valid if continuous assessment programmes have not been approved: it is the responsibility of centres to ensure that their programmes have been approved.
11.4
Moderation of Student's Marked Assignments
The Moderation Team dealing with a group of centres will ensure that each centre, within the group, is allocated a moderator who will have special responsibility for that centre.
This moderator will visit the centre at least once a year and will during this visit review samples of students marked coursework assignments.
Dates will be agreed between the moderator and centre.
All completed and marked assignments should be retained by either the centre or the students.
Before the visit the moderator will normally agree with the centre the percentage sample and type of assignment he/she wishes to see.
Moderators have the right to see, for any area of study:
a)
all the marked scripts for one specific assignment.
b)
all the marked assignments of a particular student (normally a borderline case)
c)
all the marked assignments for the area of study.
11.5
Marking of Assignments by Centre Tutors
HCIMA supply a mark sheet format which may be used by centres if they wish.
Alternatively they may devise their own format for indicating to students and to moderators the way in which the student has achieved marks for each individual assignment.
Marks and comments on assignments provide feedback to students and are part of the learning exercise.
Moderators will expect to see marked work which clearly and helpfully indicates to students the strengths and weaknesses of the work submitted.
Moderators may require that assignments which are not clearly marked and annotated be re-marked.
11.6
Certification of Assessment Marks by Moderator
HCIMA supplies a triplicate standard form onto which assessment marks for an area of study should be entered.
This shows clearly the weighting for individual assignments as approved by the moderators, names of students taking the area of study, student registration numbers, marks gained by students for each assignment and total marks achieved by each student expressed as a percentage mark.
These mark sheets must be signed by the moderator during his visit (or subsequent to the visit by agreement between the centre and the moderator).
Two copies of the signed mark sheets must be forwarded to HCIMA (the centre will retain one copy).
HCIMA will publish, annually, three dates for submission of moderated mark sheets.
Mark sheets not received by these dates may mean that issue of certificates, diplomas and records of achievement to students is delayed.
Certificates, diplomas and records of achievement will normally be issued within three months of receiving signed marks sheets.
Dates for submission will normally be
end of December
end of April
end of July
12.
HCIMA MODERATION OF THE PROFESSIONAL DIPLOMA
12.1
Role of Moderators
There will be one team of moderators dealing with the centres offering the diploma programme.
This team will include specialists in each of the areas of study of the diploma programme.
However, each centre will deal with only one moderator who will thus have the opportunity to develop a more ‘in depth’ understanding of the centre's assessment strategy, encourage integration between areas of study, ensure that there is no undue overlap or gaps in the overall assessment plan and give continuity.
12.2
Approval of Examination Papers and Assessment Schedules
For each area of study which a centre is currently offering the centre is required to submit to HCIMA for forwarding to the centre's moderator three copies of the following:
a)
a statement on the assessment strategy for the year, setting out how the various elements of the area of study will be assessed (assignment and/or examination) and how the assessment will contribute to the student's learning experience.
b)
the examination paper
c)
the marking scheme for the paper
d)
the date on which students will sit the examination
12.3
Dates of Submission of Examination Papers to HCIMA
Examination papers should be approved four months before students are due to sit the examination and centres should allow three months for the moderation process (to allow for any resubmission).
Therefore schemes need to be submitted seven months before the date of the examination (eg. for centres working within an academic year and holding examinations in mid-June, assessment schedules and examination papers should be with HCIMA by mid-November in order to be agreed, or revised as required, and an approved edition to be with the centre by mid-February).
12.4
Moderation of Marked Examination Scripts and Award of Grades for each Completed Area of Study
Examination scripts should be marked by the subject tutors within two to three weeks of students sitting the examinations.
Within four weeks from the date of the examination centres should send: to the moderator for each area of study completed
a)
all marked scripts
b)
the question papers and marking schemes
c)
an HCIMA mark sheet detailing examination marks
d)
an HCIMA mark sheet detailing continuous assessment marks
and to HCIMA for each area of study completed: copies of c) and d) above
12.5
Moderator's Visits to Centres
Moderators will normally visit centres once a year in order to agree final student grades for assessed areas of study.
This visit will take place subsequent to moderators receiving and moderating the examination scripts.
Moderators should agree early in the year with the centre the date for this visit and should normally attend on the day of the Course Assessment/Examination Board.
This will provide an opportunity for lecturers and moderators to discuss student grades and borderline cases.
Moderators may request, in borderline cases, and otherwise at their discretion to see student's marked coursework assignments.
At the end of the visit or by agreement with centres subsequent to the visit (but within one week of the visit) moderators will sign two final copies of each of the HCIMA examination mark sheets and the HCIMA continuous assessment sheets.
One signed copy of these sheets should be retained by the moderator and the other copy to be forwarded to HCIMA.
13.
PROGRAMME REGULATIONS — RESPONSIBILITIES OF HCIMA, CENTRES AND STUDENTS
13.1
HCIMA Moderators and Programme Moderating Panels
The HCIMA moderators are responsible to the Association, through the Education and Development Committee, for maintaining standards, for interpreting and implementing HCIMA assessment and examination regulations and for ensuring that centres are operating programmes to the required standard.
They are responsible for agreeing with the  centres' final decisions on details of awards to be recommended for individual candidates.
Their  decisions in matters of academic  judgement are final.
13.2
Centres Offering HCIMA Programmes
It is the responsibility of centres offering HCIMA programmes of study to develop and have printed, for distribution to students, Programme Regulations relating to the operation and administration of such sections of the programmes as they have authority to offer.
This document should compliment the HCIMA regulations and should make clear centre requirements relating to such aspects as:
a)
attendance
b)
assessment schedules: dates by which work must be submitted/  resubmitted to tutors
c)
reassessment procedures
d)
examination procedures
e)
procedures in case of illness
f)
other ‘centre specific’ requirements
13.3
At the commencement of a programme/period of studies centres should ensure that each student has copies of
a)
HCIMA regulations
b)
the centre's own Programme Regulations
c)
dates of ‘end of programme’ tests or examinations
d)
dates of meetings of Assessment/ Examination Board.
13.4
Students Undertaking a Programme of Studies
It is the responsibility of students enrolled on a programme of studies to ensure that they obtain, read and understand both HCIMA and Centre regulations relating to the area(s) of study on which they are enrolled and abide by these regulations.
13.5
Acceptance of Programme Regulations
Each centre which has received approval to offer a course leading to the Professional Certificate or the Professional Diploma is deemed to have accepted the HCIMA Regulations.
Similarly it is expected that the Examinations Officer and other officers of the centre shall have understood and accepted these regulations.
Each candidate, by virtue of signing to enrol upon a programme of studies shall be deemed to have understood and accepted these regulations.
14.
CONDITIONS OF AWARD OF A CERTIFICATE OR A DIPLOMA OR A RECORD OF ACHIEVEMENT FOR A SINGLE AREA OF STUDY
14.1
Candidates who wish to gain certification for the HCIMA Qualifications or some part thereof will be required to:
(a)
have satisfied the conditions of course enrolment.
(b)
have followed an approved programme of studies (or gained HCIMA APL for up to 50% of the programme)
(c)
have fulfilled college attendance requirements if applicable.
(d)
be a member of the HCIMA (Student, Intermediate, Affiliate LHCIMA, MHCIMA or FHCIMA);
(e)
have paid in full the appropriate programme fee.
Unless the above conditions have been met awards may be withheld.
14.2
Issue of Examination Results
The official notification of results is a communication from HCIMA to each candidate, indicating his performance in each area of study and the Case Study/Project on the following grades:
Marks of 80% and over = Distinction
Marks of 65 — 79% = Merit
Marks of 50 — 64% = Pass
Marks of 49% and below = Fail
No other form of notification from any other source is valid.
Results should be issued as soon as possible after the candidates' work has been marked by centres and moderated by the HCIMA, and within three months of the date of the final assessments for an area of study.
The information given in the ‘notification of results’ concerning a candidate's result constitutes a record of performance.
The HCIMA will not enter into any correspondence with individual candidates concerning the results.
15.
ISSUE OF CERTIFICATES AND DIPLOMAS
15.1
HCIMA will issue Certificates, Diplomas and Records of Achievement three times a year in February, May and October.
a)
Record of Achievement Cards
These will be issued to students successfully completing a single area of study or a short course involving two or three areas of study, but not to those following a full certificate or diploma programme.
Should a student not complete or withdraw from a programme of studies he/she will, after an interval of one year, be issued with a record of achievement listing the areas of study  successfully completed.
b)
Professional Certificates
These will be issued to candidates who have passed, or gained credit for, the 5 areas of study and the Case Study of the certificate programme.
The certificate lists the subjects studied and passed.
c)
Professional Diplomas
These will be issued to candidates who have passed or gained credit for the 5 areas of study and the Project of the diploma programme.
The diploma lists the subjects studied and passed.
These certificates and diplomas do not in themselves entitle the holder to admission to any grade of membership of the HCIMA.
Certificates, diplomas and records of achievement are sent direct to external candidates by the HCIMA.
The certificates and diplomas and records of achievement for centre candidates are sent to the centres concerned for distribution.
Candidates are responsible for the safe custody and retention of their records of achievement, examination certificates and diplomas.
The HCIMA may replace lost or damaged certificates and diplomas (but not records of achievement) on payment of a fee.
16.
MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS
16.1
Centres are required to maintain student records including:
a)
students enrolled for each area of study and entry profiles.
b)
assessment schemes, including weighting of the assignments, relating to areas of study being offered.
c)
records of students assignment marks for each area of study.
d)
records of students qualifying for award of a certificate, diploma or record of achievement.
17.
OPERATION OF TIME LIMIT
Candidates are awarded credit for individual areas of study as these are completed, and no time limit applies to the length of time it may take to complete either the professional certificate or diploma programmes so long as these programmes are still offered by HCIMA.
However, due to the Association's system of regularly revising and updating its qualifications these programmes are not likely to be offered indefinitely.
When the Association plans to revise the programmes students will, through centres offering the programmes, be given due warning.
Should they wish to complete the programme students should make arrangements to do so within the time limits specified.
HCIMA will ensure that adequate interim arrangements are made.
18.
REGISTRATION OF STUDENTS AND PROGRAMME FEES
Students enrolled to study for HCIMA programmes are required to pay a registration fee in respect of moderation of:—
each area of study
the case study
the project
resit examinations
Students must pay the fees, due to HCIMA, to the Examination Officer of the centre where they are enrolled to study.
Centres are required to use a standard HCIMA registration form for enrolling students and recording payment of fees.
Fees must be collected and forwarded to HCIMA within three months of enrolling students on a programme.
Each student registered with HCIMA is issued with a registration number.
Each student's registration number must be entered against his/her name on the student assessment and examination mark sheets before these are signed by the moderator.
The scale of fees payable to HCIMA is published annually in September for the next calendar year.
19.
TRANSFER BETWEEN EXAMINATION CENTRES
Students are strongly advised, wherever possible to take examinations at the centre where they are enrolled to study.
However in exceptional circumstances:
1)
HCIMA will act as an examination centre
Candidates must apply to HCIMA three months before the date of the examination and must obtain, from the centre where they are enrolled, a signed letter stating that the centre is prepared to forward an examination paper to HCIMA.
There will be an invigilation/administration charge for sitting an examination at HCIMA.
2)
Candidates seeking to sit examinations at some other centre in the U.K. will be required, three months before the date of the date of the examination, to:
a)
apply to the examination centre and obtain written confirmation that the centre is willing to undertake the necessary arrangement.
There may be a fee chargeable.
b)
apply to the centre where they are enrolled and obtain written confirmation that they are prepared to liaise with and forward examination paper(s) to the selected examination centre.
c)
inform HCIMA of the transfer of centres and dates of examinations.
3)
Candidates seeking to sit examinations at centres overseas should make arrangements via the correspondence college.
Normally arrangements to invigilate these examinations should be made with the nearest British Council Office.
20.
DISTANCE LEARNING AND CORRESPONDENCE MODES OF STUDY
20.1
The programme regulations equally apply to students enrolled for distance learning or correspondence modes of study with one exception mentioned below under 20.2.
HCIMA publishes and regularly updates a list of centres offering its programmes including the modes of study which each centre offers.
Students should apply direct to appropriate centres in order to enrol on a distance learning or correspondence programme.
20.2
Enrolment on the Certificate Programme
Areas of study C1 and C2 require the application of supervisory level decision-making skills to practical operational situations.
Because distance learning and correspondence modes of study have no practical content it is essential that those choosing to study by either of these modes have adequate background practical skill and knowledge in key aspects of hospitality operations and can provide evidence to the centre to which they are applying that the skills they possess are likely to be transferable to supervision of other aspect of a hospitality operation.
Centres should ensure, taking into account the entry requirements of Section 3, that applicants have an appropriate profile of prior attainment, including adequate practical experience, to succeed on the programme or on the individual area of study for which they wish to enrol.
In cases of individuals lacking practical experience in an area of study C1 or C2 (or a section of those areas of study) centres may be able to advise and/or assist individual in gaining appropriate practical work experience sufficiently to improve their profile and potential to succeed in the area of study.
20.3
Enrolment on the Diploma Programme
Conditions of enrolment as set out in Section 4 of this document apply in the case of those enrolling on a distance learning or correspondence programme.