

Research on Animals in Oxford
Throughout the 20th century biomedical and biological research on animals has been carried out in the University of Oxford.
Occasionally the medical benefit of this kind of research is questioned: in fact basic research on animals has led to the award since the beginning of the century of more than 50 Nobel Prizes for medicine.
Without such research there would not have been effective vaccination, antibiotics, analgesics, anaesthetics, transplant surgery, brain imaging, intensive care for babies, and drugs for the treatment of psychiatric disorders.
This document provides a brief account of just a few of the important discoveries and medical advances which have been achieved as a result of such work, discoveries and advances which have benefited animals as well as people.
1.
Antibiotics.
The first clinically useful antibiotic drug was penicillin.
Its almost miraculous effectiveness in controlling and reversing an otherwise lethal bacterial infection in mice was demonstrated in Oxford in the 1940s.
This demonstration led shortly afterwards to the demonstration in the Radcliffe Infirmary of its effectiveness in patients with blood poisoning; subsequently penicillin became one of the most important therapeutic agents in the history of medicine and has saved the lives of millions of animals and human beings.
Penicillin was not, however, effective against all forms of bacterial infection, and later work in Oxford led to the development, chemical analysis and widespread clinical use of cephalosporin, which was and still remains effective in treating illnesses caused by these other forms of bacteria.
Like penicillin, cephalosporin has saved the lives or relieved the suffering of countless patients and animals world-wide.
The pioneering work on penicillin was internationally recognized when scientists from Oxford shared in the Nobel Prize for Medicine in 1945.
2.
Autoimmune Diseases.
In diseases such as multiple sclerosis and certain forms of neuromuscular disorder the body appears to destroy part of itself, as if it were foreign tissue.
Experiments on animals have played a crucial role in revealing the disease mechanism in paralysing autoimmune conditions, and some of these experiments are still in progress in Oxford.
3.
Behavioural work on awake animals.
The need for experiments on awake animals is sometimes questioned on the grounds that the answer could be found by studying isolated cells in dishes or by using computers instead of real brains.
There are some secrets which isolated cells or computers cannot reveal.
For example, brain damage commonly leads to serious disturbances of memory.
No one yet knows how to study such disturbance in isolated cells or how to ‘measure and treat’ impaired memory in a computer.
Experiments on animals in the last 20 years have revealed that there are several different types of memory (for example, memory for places, or for events, or for movements), that each can be independently disturbed, and that each is primarily controlled by a different part of the brain.
Oxford has been in the forefront of this research, which has shown why certain surgical procedures for the relief of epilepsy or for the removal of brain tumours in people can have disastrous effects on certain types of memory.
The work is additionally important in that it  provides sensitive methods of assessing the effectiveness of new drugs which are designed to improve memory in diseases such as senile dementia.
4.
Dehydration in young infants.
Life-threatening dehydration as a result of diarrhoea, often associated with dysentery, is now extensively treated by oral rehydration therapy in which certain sugars are added to the fluid.
It has been estimated that this particular treatment has saved about 10 million lives.
The treatment is based upon a discovery, made in Oxford, that absorption of fluids from the intestine of the rat is stimulated and improved by adding these sugars to the intestine.
5.
Diabetes.
Diabetes remains an important medical problem.
It shortens the lives of millions of people world-wide and is one of the commonest causes of blindness.
Type 1 diabetes affects about 1 in every 300 children.
Fortunately, enormous progress has been made in the understanding and treatment of the disorder as a result of research on animals.
The demonstration, made in Canada, that diabetes resulted from malfunction of the pancreas was made as a result of experiments on dogs and led to the award of the Nobel Prize for Medicine in 1923.
The disease was then treated by injections of insulin derived from pigs.
Research on diabetes continues in many centres, including Oxford, where research on animals has led to techniques of isolating and purifying the human pancreatic cells that produce insulin with a view to implanting them in diabetic patients and curing the disease.
Clinical trials are about to begin in Oxford but this stage would not have been reached without research on animals.
Finally, work in Oxford on a strain of diabetic mouse is beginning to reveal the genes that govern susceptibility to the disease.
As the genes in question appear to work in the same way in mice and people it should be possible to develop ways of detecting the genes in people at risk and discovering methods of implanting cells with the normal genes or blocking the action of the defective genes.
Very recently it has been shown that treating prediabetic mice (that is, before they develop symptoms) with various chemical agents, including insulin, will prevent diabetes from developing.
These agents are now being tested in clinical trials with people at risk.
6.
Disorders involving hormones and neurotransmitters.
Hormones are chemicals that are released in the body and control many important functions such as growth and development, eating, and sexual behaviour.
Neurotransmitters are chemicals that are released at nerve endings and control the signals between nerves and nerves and muscles.
Their mechanism of action has been worked out chiefly by experiments on animals.
One of the best known examples is the neurotransmitter dopamine whose production can be impaired in middle to old age, leading to Parkinson's disease.
The discovery of dopamine and its mode of action involved basic experiments on catecholamines in animals carried out at Oxford; it contributed to the development of L-dopa as a treatment for Parkinson's disease.
Other studies in Oxford on the hypothalamus led to the discovery of compounds now successfully used in the treatment of sterility and cancers of the prostate.
Finally, the pharmacological basis of changes in blood pressure which lead to hypertension was uncovered in several research centres, including Oxford, and these investigations on experimental animals led to the use of hexamethonium compounds as one of the first effective treatments for hypertension.
Alzheimer's disease is one of the most crippling and distressing diseases of the elderly.
Few of us will not have seen its effects.
Although the gross changes in the brain that accompany and probably cause it can be studied after the death of the patient, the details of the disease process are just beginning to be worked out in animals by studying the microscopic structure of the brain regions that are principally involved together with their biochemistry and their neurotransmitters.
Such work is taking place in Oxford, where experiments are directed to finding ways of replacing the deficient brain neurotransmitters or increasing their production with drugs.
Once this has been achieved in animals it will be tried with patients.
7.
Health of Newborn Babies.
Oxford is a national centre for the treatment of problems associated with childbirth, and research in Oxford has made a major contribution to the treatment of these problems.
In the early 1950s an effective method of resuscitating newborn babies who did not breathe was not known.
Various methods were tried, including artificial ventilation, delivery of gases enriched with oxygen, and drugs that were known to enhance breathing in adults.
It was even proposed that the brains of the babies should be cooled in order to prevent brain damage.
The answer to this important clinical problem was shown by experiments (between 1950 and 1967) on a variety of animals from rabbits to monkeys, which showed that only artificial ventilation was a reliable method of resuscitation.
Beginning in 1970, experiments in Oxford on sheep and monkeys have demonstrated that for several weeks before birth the foetus in the uterus makes periodic breathing movements, rather as if the developing foetus were practising what it would have to do immediately after birth, and that shortage of oxygen to the foetus arrested these breathing movements.
As a result of this work on animals, methods were developed for assessing the health of the human foetus which were based on its breathing movements in the uterus.
These methods enable doctors to detect babies that may have problems with breathing at birth and therefore to be in a position to treat the condition promptly.
This pioneering work continues in Oxford and has led to the discovery that in sheep the heart-rate of the unborn lamb can be accurately measured; it varies with the health of the mother, and in particular with the oxygen in the mother's blood stream.
This discovery has recently led to the development of a system for measuring the heart-rate of the human foetus before and during labour in women about to give birth.
8.
Malignancy.
Cell fusion and genetic research at Oxford over the past two decades have shown that malignancy and the ability of tumours to spread and kill an animal can be suppressed by the function of normal cellular genes.
This discovery has now been extended to the present-day analysis of human cancers by scientists world-wide and holds real promise for understanding the mechanisms that cause malignancy and treating them or even preventing them.
The initial study of cancer cell behaviour can only be done with a living animal in order to define those ‘test tube’ characteristics which correlate with uncontrolled growth and spread of tumour cells within the whole body.
9.
Surgical Transplantation.
Organs and tissues can be transplanted successfully from one person to another and many lives are now saved as a result.
The vast majority of the biomedical research that made this possible was carried out on animals.
About thirty years ago it was first demonstrated that a drug, 6-mercaptopurine, suppressed the immune response to bovine serum albumen in the rabbit.
This promptly led to the demonstration that the drug suppressed the otherwise rapid rejection of a kidney grafted from one dog into another dog.
Other drugs, such as azathioprine were soon shown to be even more effective; and azathioprine was very quickly used for human kidney transplants, and produced a dramatic improvement in their survival.
The drug cyclosporin was then shown to be a particular effective immunosuppressive agent as a result of extensive experiments on mice, rats, dogs and pigs.
Much of this work on animals was done in  Oxford and has led to radical improvements in the transplantation of kidney, liver, bone-marrow and hearts in human patients who would otherwise have died.
Summary
The treatment of human and animal disease has benefited substantially from experiments carried out on animals.
Some of these experiments were designed to solve a specific medical problem.
Others were part of basic research on living tissue, and their benefits could not have been realised at the time.
There is a continuing need for both types of investigation.
However, as other methods of investigating the properties of living tissue have been developed, the total number of animals used is beginning to fall.
The great majority of animals used in experiments are mice and rats and this is likely to continue.
All the experimental animals are housed and treated in accordance with the strict Home Office Regulations which stem from Act of Parliament.
The scientists who use the animals must be individually licensed to do so by the Home Office.
Strategic Plans and Financial Forecasts
The following paragraphs set out the response of the University of Oxford to the HEFCE's invitation in circular letter 17/93 to submit information on its strategic plans and financial forecasts up to 1996–7.
This information comprises
the University's Strategic Plan;
numerical data (submitted separately both in hard copy and in disc form); and
the University's Operating Statement.
Strategic Plan: University of Oxford
1.
Academic aims and objectives
1.1.
Subject development
1.1.1
Management Studies.
The University continues to make progress in establishing its new School of Management Studies and plans the introduction of a new two-year MBA degree, with an eventual intake of 150.
Appointments have been made to the Directorship of the School and to the newly established Peter Moores Professorship of Management Studies (the holder of which will also be the first Academic Director of the School), and arrangements are being made to fill a Readership in Management Studies (the holder of which will also be the first MBA Director).
At the undergraduate level, courses in Engineering (or Metallurgy), Economics, and Management are to be expanded, and a new course in Economics and Management will begin in October 1994.
The full realisation of these plans, which constitute a major new academic development for the University, are dependent on the raising of significant capital funds through the Development Campaign.
1.1.2
Computing Science.
The construction of a major extension to the Computing Laboratory is now well under-way.
In the light of this planning for the introduction of the new Honour School of Computation in October 1994 is proceeding, with the provision of the first necessary additional posts and other resources.
1.1.3
Continuing Education.
The University has continued to expand its CE activities in the light of its 1990 review of policy in this area.
It has agreed a substantial increase in funding and premises for the Department for Continuing Education to facilitate new developments.
A new Advisory Council on Continuing Education has been established to provide an improved mechanism for consulting individuals outside the University on the development of CE programmes.
The department co-operates with Oxford Brookes University in teaching a new Master's course in Historic Conservation; the course is modular in form, and part of it entitles students to a certificate awarded by the department.
Most recently, a new, progressive structure for CE qualifications has been introduced, leading from access-level certificates through undergraduate certificates and diplomas to postgraduate, post-experience diplomas and Master's degrees.
It is planned to introduce more credit-bearing CE courses available on a part-time basis, particularly Master's degrees, and Foundation courses at first-year undergraduate level.
The numbers returned in the student forecasts show a substantial increase, particularly in the latter part of the planning period, but much will depend on decisions still to be taken by the HEFCE on what constitutes an ‘accredited’ course.
Continuing Professional Development (CPD) activities have developed following the creation and filling of the new post of Director of CPD in 1991 and consequent additional appointments in the CPD unit.
A network of staff across the University has been established to identify needs and trends in a range of disciplines and related industrial sectors.
The University has recently introduced two part-time graduate courses in association with the department; and, in addition to the department's CE activities, the role of Rewley House as a college base for CE students will develop further, since many of these students will be presented for matriculation through it.
1.1.4
Four-year undergraduate courses.
The University remains of the view, in common with many other institutions, that with changes in the school curricula on the one  hand and the need for better preparation for graduate work (notably in the European context) on the other, it will need to extend some undergraduate courses from three to four years.
It has now been agreed to introduce a four-year course in Physics (alongside the three-year course) with effect from October 1993.
It is expected that most undergraduates will take this.
Discussions are proceeding on the introduction of a four-year course in Mathematics which perhaps one-third of the undergraduates reading the subject would take.
The University none the less is carefully reviewing this matter, given the possibility of financial penalties by HEFCE in respect of recently lengthened courses and the proposals in the White Paper on the funding of science for the establishment of one-year taught graduate courses as the common precursor to the undertaking of the D.Phil.
1.1.5
European Studies.
The University has established an Institute for European Studies, which will consist of several centres concerned with teaching and research in particular aspects of this subject.
The institute will be the co-ordinating body for the centres and will link with Institutes of European Studies in other European countries in a network known as the Europaeum.
Funds will be available for these centres (and in particular for Oxford in the first instance) from the European Studies Fund, a trust established within the University to which generous donations have already been made, including funds for a five-year professorial level appointment as Director of the Institute.
This appointment and the appointment of three five-year lecturers have now been made.
A fixed-term professorship is being filled.
Oxford is the co-ordinating institution for the Europaeum.
At present two Oxford centres are planned under the auspices of the institute.
One, which is already established, is in European Politics, Economics, and Society under the auspices of the Social Studies Board and concentrates in particular on graduate teaching for an M.Phil.
in this area and on research.
The other is in European and Comparative Law, under the auspices of the Law Board, and will be related in particular to the degree of M.Juris., a one-year postgraduate degree, and to a new four-year undergraduate degree in Law, one year of which is spent at a European university.
Other developments are probable, including further graduate degrees.
Through the institute and its centres, and as part of the Europaeum, the University will develop research work in contemporary European fields and will be able to provide a source of expert advice to European governmental agencies and industries.
1.1. 6
American Studies.
The University is actively seeking funds under the Development Campaign for a proposed Institute for American Studies, designed to link and to reinforce existing interests in American History, Law, Politics, and Literature.
Funding has been obtained for lecturerships in American History and American Foreign Policy, and the establishment of further posts is planned.
An integral part of the development will be the reorganisation of the University's associated library holdings, and funding has been obtained for the institute's library.
1.1. 7
Oxford Institute of Legal Practice
The University attaches importance to collaboration with Oxford Brookes University.
This already exists both formally and informally but a new development in this respect is the proposed establishment of the Oxford Institute of Legal Practice (OILP), a joint venture between both universities.
The object of this will be to run a Legal Practice Course (LPC), validated by the Law Society, and so to establish in Oxford an institute, based on cooperation between the two universities, to bring together academic and professional aspects of law.
Members of the Law Faculties of Oxford and Oxford Brookes Universities have  worked together to develop the LPC, and it is intended to establish OILP, subject to formal validation by the Law Society, as a company limited by guarantee and as a charity, under the guidance of a board of trustees appointed jointly by the two universities.
It is hoped that validation will be finalised in September 1993 to allow the course to start in 1994.
1.1. 8
Taught Master ‘s courses.
The University continues to review provision of taught Master's courses, bearing in mind the White Paper on the funding of science, and in particular is considering the introduction of further part-time taught Master's courses as a way of increasing access by students from non-traditional academic backgrounds (see para. 1.1.3 above).
1.1.9
Learning technology.
The University is committed to encouraging the use of learning technology in all disciplines.
It is an active partner in eight TLTP consortia and hosts an ITTI project, a CIT Centre and CTISS, the co-ordinating body for the CTI.
CTI services are well used by academic staff and the University would wish to see the initiative continue.
1.2.
Research
The University is determined to continue to strengthen its standing as a world-class university in respect of its research.
To achieve this will require further investment of resources in academic staff and the infrastructure to support them, such as library provision, information technology, research support, and additional space, including the acquisition of further sites for development.
These needs, and the University's response to them, are discussed at greater length in section 3 of the planning statement on physical resources.
As a general policy the University expects all its departments and faculties to be rated highly in terms of their research, and where this is not the case has reviewed, and will continue to review, the position to see how research standing can be improved.
It is currently taking steps to develop in detail a long-term strategy for research in the Biosciences (see para. 3.4 below).
As indicated in paras 1.1. 5 and 6 above, the developments in European Studies and American Studies are expected to consolidate and build on existing research strengths in these fields.
1.3.
Student numbers
1.3.1
As indicated in its mission statement, the University is determined to nurture excellence in all subjects.
Given the severe limitations of physical plant, the University is planning a slow but steady growth in student numbers (home/EC and overseas) of around 1 per cent per annum across almost all subject areas, with a modest increase in the ratio of Science to Arts students.
One major problem affecting growth is that residential accommodation in the City is expensive and in short supply, and the local planning authority expects the University and the colleges to provide accommodation for all additional students.
Moreover, within Oxford itself, there is a shortage of space for new buildings for teaching, research, and student accommodation (see para. 3.2 below).
Given the constraints on space and the existence of two universities within the city, the University operates an informal zoning agreement with Oxford Brookes University, so that, for example , the University made no bid for a major site which was recognised as being crucial for the development of Oxford Brookes University.
1.3.2
The University's 1990 planning statement envisaged overall growth of 1 per cent a year with an increase in the proportion of graduates to undergraduates.
In keeping with that statement growth in undergraduate numbers over the past few years has been less than 1 per cent a year.
This in part reflects the view of a majority of colleges that they have now reached the optimum size for operating as a cohesive academic unit and do not envisage any growth of total student numbers (although of these a significant proportion has indicated that they wish to change the ‘mix’ of students, by admitting more graduate students in place of undergraduates).
The University expects this trend to continue.
A new standing committee has been established jointly between the University and the colleges to improve co-ordination and planning on undergraduate admissions matters.
1.3.3
As planned, graduate numbers are growing at a much faster rate than undergraduate numbers (17 per cent since Michaelmas Term 1989).
The University has reviewed with faculty boards and other admitting bodies the number of additional graduate students which on academic grounds they would wish to take (within the limits of their predicted resources) over the next five to ten years.
(A similar inquiry was directed to colleges.)
As a result of such consultation it is planned that over the period 1989–90 to 1999–2000 there should be an increase in total (FTE) graduate numbers of around 700 (home/EC and overseas), a significant proportion of which has already been achieved; this would allow room for undergraduates to increase by 1,300 and for the overall growth of the University to be contained within the broad policy approved by Congregation of 1 per cent a year to the end of the decade.
1.4.
Educational Studies and Westminster College
The University agreed with effect from September 1992 to validate, in place of the CNAA, courses at Westminster College leading to the Degrees of Bachelor of Education, Bachelor of Theology, Master of Education, and Master of Theology, as well as the Postgraduate Certificate in Education, the Diploma in Higher Education (in certain restricted circumstances), and the Postgraduate Diploma in Applied Theology.
This was an important new step, the immediate advantages of which are involvement in all aspects of teacher training, instead of only in the training of secondary school teachers with which the Department of Educational Studies was previously concerned, and the broadening of the University's own activities in accordance with the general changes now taking place in higher education.
The University continues to foster this relationship with its neighbouring college of higher education, while at the same time recognising that the changes proposed most recently in initial teaching training are likely to have a significant impact on its provision in Education.
As a result, the University will review not only its relationship with Westminster but the balance of activity within its own Department of Educational Studies.
2.
Staffing policies
2.1.
Policies, objectives, and patterns of employment.
The University wishes to continue to recruit and retain staff of the highest quality.
A point of serious concern is the shift in the balance of staff from established to contract-funded posts which appears set to continue primarily as a result of the transfer of research funding from the UFC/HEFCE to the research councils, of substantially increased external research income from all sources, and of constraints upon core funding from the HEFCE.
In consequence, concern is mounting in  the University over its ability (a) to maintain the core of qualified staff who provide essential services and continuity, especially in the science departments, by way of research support, and (b) to provide an internal career structure which will prevent a wasteful loss of skilled and experienced staff.
This concern will continue to be addressed, and the University will also keep under review the terms and conditions of employment of grant-funded staff as compared with established staff.
Consideration is also being given to issues associated with the profile of the University's staff by sex, ethnic origin, and grade, and this work is expected to develop further in relation to the University's equal opportunities policy.
A major consultative exercise on the nature and role of promotions with regard to academic staff is also under way.
2.2.
Staff training and development.
The University has committed additional resources to this area, and has increased the range of courses and professional development opportunities for all categories of staff.
It is expected that the staff development programmes will be improved and extended still further.
2.3.
Appraisal.
Appraisal is in operation for academic and related staff.
The scheme for academic staff has been thoroughly reviewed, and that for academic-related staff is under review.
Both schemes are accepted as playing a valuable role in institutional and personal development.
Appraisal has recently been introduced for clerical staff, and appraisal schemes for other categories of non-academic staff are being developed.
2.4.
Selective salary payments.
A range of such payments has been introduced following the inclusion of an element for this purpose in successive academic and academic-related salary settlements (e.g. more extensive promotion exercises, distinction awards for professors, other payments for readers and lecturers, and super-scale payments for academic-related staff).
While there may be some doubt whether such provision will continue in future salary settlements, the University remains firmly of the view that the majority of these arrangements, at least as regards academic staff, are an inadequate substitute for satisfactory levels of general salary increase when applied to a university in which virtually all staff are of the highest quality.
It is this University's view that selective payments to a minority are more likely to do damage by their divisiveness than to benefit the University by encouraging those who receive them.
Moreover, the administrative cost of the procedure for making awards is high.
The University would prefer a truly discretionary system of salary awards, i.e. one which would give the University complete freedom to decide how to disburse the whole of the national settlement.
2.5.
Joint college/university appointments.
The University is currently undertaking a detailed inquiry into the general relationship between college and university responsibilities in respect of undergraduate teaching and graduate teaching and supervision.
This includes the possibility of ‘trade-off’ arrangements between various duties (for which some funds have now been set aside), comparative financial incentives for the different kinds of teaching, and resource allocation questions related to these matters.
An important strategic requirement over the next few years will be to make progress with the resolution of these questions which bear crucially on the structure of a collegiate university and raise fundamental questions about the nature of undergraduate teaching at Oxford and its relationship with graduate teaching and supervision.
3.
Physical resources
3.1.
Medical School —‘the Headington Strategy ‘.
As the HEFCE is fully aware, one of the major issues arising for the University within the planning period is the likely effect on the University's Medical School of plans by the Oxfordshire Health Authority to consolidate Oxford hospital activity at Headington.
Activity in Oxford city hospitals is at present scattered across a number of main sites (the John Radcliffe and Churchill Hospitals, the Radcliffe Infirmary, and the Nuffield Orthopaedic Centre) as well as several smaller specialised sites (Warneford, Littlemore, Rivermead, etc.).
The Health Authority has had it in mind for many years to consolidate the main hospitals on to one or two principal sites and to rationalise the use of the specialised sites.
The authority has put forward positive proposals (‘the Headington Strategy’), now under consideration by the Regional Health Authority with the intention of submitting the proposals to the Department of Health by December 1993 for ‘Approval in Principle’, for consolidating the main hospitals on to two sites, namely the John Radcliffe and Churchill Hospital sites, with the consequent closure of the Radcliffe Infirmary.
As a separate project, which will go ahead irrespective of progress of ‘the Headington Strategy’, the Oxfordshire Health Authority intends to close Littlemore Hospital and to transfer the activities carried out there to a new site or into the community.
These proposals will have a major effect upon the University, since several Medical School departments (the relocation of which alone is estimated to cost some £16m), as well as a number of related research groups, are located at the Radcliffe Infirmary, while the Department of Psychiatry has laboratory space at Littlemore Hospital.
Under the reorganisation plans both these hospitals would be closed and the sites sold.
In addition, one option also envisages the closure of the Nuffield Orthopaedic Centre, where the University's Nuffield Department of Orthopaedic Surgery is located.
The University is pursuing separate discussions with the HEFCE on the full financial implications of these proposals, which raise matters of major importance for the future financial position of the University, especially when taken in conjunction with para. 3.2 below.
3.2.
Radcliffe Infirmary site.
The University has as a major objective for the future the acquisition of the whole of the Radcliffe Infirmary site, if the Headington Strategy goes ahead, for use for university purposes.
It is essential for the continued academic development of the University, even though its projected expansion in student numbers terms is relatively modest, that the University should achieve that objective.
There remain few available sites for development in Central Oxford, and the Radcliffe Infirmary site is well placed to serve as a logical extension of the University's Science Area.
It is clear from current projections that demand for additional space within the University for both Arts and Sciences will considerably exceed the capacity of the University's present buildings and the available development sites on which the University might build.
The University's aim of securing the Radcliffe Infirmary site has been recognised and is supported by the Health Authority, subject to appropriate funding being available for the purchase of the site, the value of which is estimated by the Health Authority to lie in current prices at around £20m.
It has also been endorsed by the city planning authority in the context of the Oxford Local Plan Review 1991–2001.
The University has in place a funding strategy to enable it to achieve this objective; the funds, however, which it would hope to raise for that purpose would not be available to meet the costs of relocating the medical departments (see para. 3.1 above).
There is then the further issue of funding for the university capital developments on the site once it has been acquired.
3.3.
Facilities for Arts and Social Studies.
The need for improved facilities for Arts and Social Studies, as an aid to the recruitment and retention of academic staff and to assist in the improvement of research activity, has caused the University to launch a review or three sites (namely the area around the St Cross Building, the central site surrounding the Bodleian Library, and the Taylorian/Ashmolean site) to see what scope there is for the rationalisation of existing uses and what changes can be made to make better use of them, with a view to defining a comprehensive and coherent scheme for the development of each site which has most to commend it on academic grounds.
In conducting this review the University has taken into account the feasibility of raising the necessary funding from outside sources.
The St Cross development is crucial for the development of Management Studies and of European Studies and the rationalisation of provision for Social Studies (including International Relations) and Law.
In reviewing the central site, consideration has been given primarily to the needs of History and of English in so far as the needs of the latter cannot be satisfied on the St Cross site.
Rationalisation of the Ashmolean/Taylorian site is expected to produce much improved facilities for teaching (especially for graduate teaching) and research in several subjects in the Humanities (namely, Archaeology, Classics, History of Art, Modern Languages, and Oriental Studies), and to enhance the space available to the Ashmolean Museum and improve its ability to fulfil its teaching, research, and public roles.
In all three cases a considerable improvement of library provision and management in the relevant areas is expected.
Initial reports have now been received and detailed consideration will now continue.
The implementation of the proposals, once fully defined (and subject to the raising of the necessary funding), will form a major element of the University's management of its physical resources during the planning period.
In the meantime modest additional sums have been set aside for research and other support for the subject areas concerned, and some funds are available for further increased infrastructure support once additional accommodation can be made available.
3.4.
Science Area.
As indicated in para. 3.2, most sites in the Science Area are now full, but one pocket remains for modest development, probably for the Biosciences.
Proposals drawn up in 1990 were unsuccessful but other plans are being prepared.
Procedures for planning developments in the Biomedical Sciences have been improved, to ensure that full account is taken of the needs both of subjects based in South Parks Road and of those on the hospital sites.
3.5.
Research facilities.
Given the pressure on sites within the Science Area the University is actively pursuing the possible provision of research facilities on other sites within the City, in addition to seeking to acquire the Radcliffe Infirmary (see para. 3.2 above).
3.6.
Libraries and museums.
The University is committed to continuing its support for Oxford's great historical collections (including the Bodleian Library and the Ashmolean, Pitt Rivers, and University Museums), which form a national, and international, resource for scholarship, and to maintaining acquisitions in its central research libraries (Bodleian, Ashmolean and Taylorian) at a level commensurate with their responsibilities to the international scholarly community.
The University has established a Museums Committee to permit more formal discussion of common problems amongst its museums and is about to launch a review of the Ashmolean.
As indicated in para. 3.3 the University is reviewing relevant library provision as part of its inquiry into the rationalisation of academic provision on three major university sites.
The University is also committing substantial funds to assist with automated cataloguing, in particular for the conversion of recent paper catalogues in the  Bodleian, and is pursuing other aspects of library automation, to facilitate access to its collections.
By this means, scholars from other universities world-wide will have improved access to the library's collections without leaving their desks.
The University through its Libraries Board regularly reviews specific aspects of the organisation of the University's library provision with a view to making the most effective use of available resources.
3.7.
IT developments.
The University has been pursuing the details of its IT strategy and in 1992–3, following extensive consultation, it has settled on the framework for the technical elements of this, the principle of which is distributed computing using a client-server model.
The University and the colleges are jointly funding the installation of a university-wide fibreoptic network, which will provide the necessary infrastructure for this.
The plan for the next few years is to implement the strategy by significant additional investment in staff and equipment and the internal networking of buildings.
All aspects of IT (i.e. teaching and research, library and administrative) are being looked at as a whole.
The University has accelerated its planning process in order to take account of the ending of the seven-yearly cycle for the replacement of central computing equipment and the provision of interim funding by the HEFCE in 1992–3 and 1993–4.
The University has committed substantial additional resources for IT in 1993–4 in order effectively to implement its long-term strategic plans for IT.
Administrative computing (for which the University has created and filled the new post of Director of Administrative Information Services) will continue to be developed under the Management and Administrative Computing Initiative.
3.8.
Long-term maintenance.
The University has completed its own survey (through consultants) of the backlog of repair and maintenance of university buildings, and has reviewed the level of funding which might reasonably be put towards the backlog in addition to its customary allocation for repairs and maintenance.
This has involved non-recurrent additions of £2m in 1991–2, and £1.5m in 1992–3 and 1993–4 over and above its recurrent baseline of £3m.
The University has noted the intention of the HEFCE to make grants over the next two years towards the costs of the highest priority work.
None the less, it has concluded that if the backlog is to be eliminated there will need to be a similar increase in the recurrent baseline, which represents a substantial commitment of university funding.
3.9.
Lecture theatre usage.
The University has recently reviewed usage of lecture theatres and seminar rooms, and will be giving further consideration to the question whether more efficient arrangements can be adopted with regard to the scheduling of lectures, including further co-operation with its constituent colleges in the shared use of facilities.
4.
Financial requirements
4.1.
General policy
The University's approach to financial planning (as has been explained on previous occasions) is essentially conservative, in that its systems are aimed at forecasting what funds will be available during the planning period and deciding how best to apply them to the academic priorities already identified.
As mentioned above, the development of Management Studies (para. 1.1.1) and (more particularly) physical developments relating to the Radcliffe Infirmary site (para. 3.2) and to the facilities for Arts and Social Sciences (para. 3.3) are dependent upon additional external funding being received.
The financial forecasts do not  assume that such funds will be available, but reflect the position as it is expected to be on the basis of reasonably firm government funding projections, with Management Studies developing slowly and with no major physical developments other than those funded by outside sources.
4.2.
Specific issues and assumptions
4.2.1
The University is budgeting for a deficit in 1992–3 leading to an accumulated deficit at the end of the year of £3.7m, having decided that the general financial outlook was sufficiently encouraging for it not to delay allocating funds towards the backlog of long-term maintenance (see para. 3.8 above); it believes that there will be a small but steady growth in student numbers, and that changes in the HEFCE's method of distributing funds for research will benefit it.
It is currently budgeting for a modest deficit on the Income and Expenditure Account for 1993–4, which will result at 31 July 1994 in an overall deficit of £4.2m.
The possible effect from 1994–5 onwards of the lifting of the cap on QR income has encouraged the University to prepare plans which, if its assumptions about future funding levels are realised, will allow it to reinforce the physical infrastructure of the University as well as funding academic developments, while bringing the Income and Expenditure Account back into a cumulative surplus by 31 July 1996.
Evidence is accumulating that the cap, in combination with the transfer of funds to the Research Councils, has had a serious effect on the intellectual life of the University, and its removal is earnestly awaited.
4.2.2
The financial forecasts assume that the University will in due course succeed in recovering from the research councils the funds which it is expected will be lost from its HEFCE grant under the DR-shift.
It is exceptionally difficult to make predictions about the effect of the DR-shift with any accuracy; and it is a matter of concern to the University that even when the shift has been completed it will not be possible to say (either at this University or, probably, at any other university) how much is being recovered as additional direct costs.
The figures used in the financial forecasts must therefore be regarded as to some extent hypothetical.
4.2.3
The University is assuming that any growth in its student numbers will be on a fees-only basis, and will include proportionately more graduate and Science students than undergraduates and Arts students.
4.2.4
The financial forecasts include income from benefactions already received as a result of the University's Development Campaign, but make no allowance for future capital or revenue receipts.
They do, however, reflect the expectation that expenditure on the Campaign will be significantly reduced with effect from 1994–5.
5.
Securing quality
5.1.
It will be clear from the foregoing paragraphs that the maintenance of quality in all its aspects is central to the University's aims in every area of activity.
The major initiatives to which reference has been made, and the very many more lesser developments which are in train are a direct result of a continual process of review of structures, organisation, academic procedures and course content.
5.2.
The initiative for such quality-related changes arises variously:
(a)
at departmental and faculty level in the course of routine evaluation and monitoring of staff development, student intake, syllabuses, teaching and examining methods, and support facilities in response to the evidence of annual appraisal, training course reports, examination results, examiners' reports, and student feed-back, as well as to external factors such as school syllabus changes and employers' requirements;
(b)
from the process of the regular review of departments and faculties by ad hoc review bodies, which always include strong external representation (this formal review procedure has recently been amended to provide for the review of all departments and faculties on, approximately, a ten-year cycle rather than, as previously, simply associating reviews with the impending retirement of a head of department); and
(c)
through the standing committees of the central university bodies, for example, the Libraries Board and the Committees on Academic Computing Services, the Relationship of the University with Schools, Undergraduate Studies, Graduate Studies,(academic) Appointments, the Training of University Teachers, and Planning and Development.
These committees, most of which meet several times each term, are responsible under the Hebdomadal Council and the General Board for keeping under review all aspects of academic activity in their areas in the University as a whole and for scrutinising proposals for new developments and procedures, which must be submitted to them by faculty boards, departments, and other bodies.
All but minor changes are subject further to the scrutiny and approval of the General Board, and, where major developments are involved, also to that of Council and Congregation.
5.3.
The University will take account of the report of the Academic Auditors (which is expected in August 1993) and of reports of the HEFCE quality assessors as they review individual subjects.