

TOO NOSEY
My name is Sandra Forsyth and I was just twenty eight when the events took place that changed my life.
I was working as a legal secretary for Malcolm Edwards at Hutton and Edwards where he was Junior Partner.
But I was more of a dogsbody really — I was ‘allowed’ to help with conveyancing, but most of the time I made the coffee and did bits of typing, especially if the other secretary, Doreen, was absent.
Doreen was a girl who always sounded as though her nasal passages were obstructed or her throat sore.
She took every bit of sick leave she could.
Personally, I don't know why they kept her on.
One January morning I arrived at work late.
Not my fault: the train had been cancelled due to ‘staff shortage’, which commuters into London know is British Rail speak for ‘the driver did not turn up’.
Dishy Malcolm was already working in the office, but Doreen had not yet arrived.
I groaned, ‘I expect she has a cold’.
‘She was sniffling yesterday,’ Malcolm said.
I said I had not noticed.
I noticed only when Doreen was not sniffling.
Anyway, I'd been very busy the day before and Doreen had irritated me for other reasons.
Mr Hutton often calls her in for dictation and then she gets behind with her work for Malcolm, but he gets annoyed with me rather than her.
I often asked Malcolm why Mr Hutton didn't get another secretary.
I was sure he could well afford it, though we were a small, old-fashioned practice.
That morning Doreen's absence meant that I had to make the coffee and take in the biscuits to Mr Hutton.
I knew why Hutton called in Doreen so often when he could perfectly well have given her memos.
It was because, apart from sniffles, she was a blonde bombshell with a large bosom.
I'd  caught him once or twice patting her bottom which the silly girl probably took as evidence of her superior attractions, whereas I knew he did it to every woman under forty.
I think Malcolm also found her attractive, but it was the love that dares not speak its name.
He's a sly man.
Anyway, I came back into his office and gave him his coffee, and was just getting down to a long bout of conveyancing when the phone in our room rang.
‘Is that Hutton and Edwards?’
I said it was.
‘Put me on to your boss, please.’
I did so and heard Hutton take the call in his office.
After a few minutes he burst into our room with a shocked look on his face.
‘It's Doreen,’ he gasped.
‘Found dead in her bed this morning by her mother.’
We both gaped at him.
‘A police inspector is coming round to speak to us all — ask us a few questions.’
‘An inspector!’ babbled Malcolm.
‘What on earth for?’
‘Her mother called the doctor this morning when she couldn't wake her and her GP must have called the police.’
Hutton wiped his face, which was pale and sweaty.
‘Poor little girl,’ he said.
Considering Doreen was at least five feet nine and big with it I thought this rather excessive.
Nobody got any work done for the rest of the morning.
Just when I was intending to go out for my tuna sandwich, there arrived what I believe they call the full panoply of the Law, in the shape of an Inspector called Bush, and his Sergeant.
Hutton gave them permission to poke around.
We had no idea what they were looking for.
Malcolm raised his eyebrows at me and I shrugged my shoulders.
‘Did she say anything unusual yesterday?’ the inspector asked.
Like what?
I wondered.
Doreen, apart from the sniffles, was a silent worker.
‘Nothing, nothing at all,’ replied Hutton.
Malcolm said: ‘Absolutely nothing!’
I gathered my courage to ask: ‘What is it all about?’
He did not reply so I said, ‘Shall I make a cup of coffee?
Or would you prefer tea?’
He thanked me politely and returned to his prying, looking in all the drawers, flicking through files even as he was drinking his tea.
The sergeant was looking at Doreen's new word-processor acquired only last year.
‘Lovely things, aren't they?’ he said to me.
‘They give me a headache,’ I said.
‘But Doreen was a dab hand at computers.’
‘Was she indeed?’ said Bush and looked mysterious.
Then he sat down again.
‘She died of a heart attach,’ he said.
We looked suitably sorrowful.
Malcolm cleared his throat.
‘Then why —?’ he begin.
‘Suspicious circs,’ said Bush who was a man of few words.
Malcolm was looking pale.
Hutton came in, looking bemused.
‘Do you keep copies of all your old accounts and correspondence, Sir?’ the inspector asked Hutton.
Hutton looked as though he had no idea.
He left all that to Doreen.
‘Doreen still did if she used the old electric,’ said Malcolm helpfully.
‘But she did most of the important stuff on that.’
He pointed to our splendid new machine.
‘Just carry on as normally,’ said Bush.
Soon after that he and his sergeant went away carrying the manual of instruction that came with the computer monster.
I'd never made head or tail of it myself.
Hutton told us to go home.
‘We can't possibly do any more work today.’
I went to Selfridge's sale instead of going home immediately.
I felt  uneasy and depressed and tried to cheer myself up shopping, but there was nothing I wanted and I caught any early train home.
The next morning the train was, for once, on time.
Malcolm looked up when I came in.
‘Has the inspector discovered what he was looking for?’
I asked him.
‘He rang to say he'd be in again later,’ he replied.
Hutton came in then.
He looked terrible.
I could see he hadn't slept a wink all night.
Well, at eleven o'clock Bush arrived again with a police-woman.
‘I'll have to interview you all separately,’ he said.
Hutton offered him his office.
Malcolm went in first and was there for about twenty minutes.
Then it was my turn.
Hutton was hovering around.
‘Will you be long, Inspector?’ he asked.
‘I'm awfully behind hand with work.
Doreen —’ he cleared his throat —‘She was such an efficient person you see…
’ His words trailed off and I went into his office.
Bush was sitting at the boss's table and I sat down opposite.
He was twiddling his fingers and looking pleased with himself.
Not at all professional, I thought.
‘How well did you know Doreen Banks?’ he began.
‘Not well — at least not as a friend,’ I said.
‘But we chatted sometimes in the office.’
He asked me low long I'd worked for the firm and what my duties were and what Doreen did.
‘I'd have thought being such an efficient secretary she would have worked somewhere more —’ he stopped.
He'd been going to say important or fashionable.
I said nothing.
After all, I worked there too.
Then he said: ‘Do you think one of the partners was gone on her?’
‘They both flirted with her a bit,’ I answered frostily after a pause.
‘Was she attractive?’
If you like bosomy blondes with no clothes sense I wanted to answer, but  said instead: ‘Some people might have thought that.’
‘Was she a suicidal type?’ he asked me then.
‘What?— Doreen!
I shouldn't have thought so.’
‘Any boy friends?’
‘She did occasionally mention a Trevor.
But I don't think they were really going out together.’
‘Ah yes, Trevor Soames,’ he said, and consulted his notebook.
Then he switched tack.
‘Was she a healthy person?’ he asked me.
‘Strong as a horse,’ I answered.
‘Except she was always catching colds.’
‘Colds, catarrh and sinusitis,’ he said, looking at me in a funny way.
‘She often did seem to be, er, ‘bunged up’,’ I said helpfully.
‘She was always taking throat lozenges and cough mixtures.
Personally I thought it was just to draw attention to herself.’
‘Really?’
He drummed his fingers on the desk.
‘That will be all,’ he said, and I was dismissed.
‘They searched the office again last night,’ said Malcolm when I got back.
‘What are they looking for?’
‘No idea — but I gather she must have had a wonky heart.’
‘The inspector didn't tell me that,’ I said.
He shrugged his shoulders.
Doreen's other typewriter stood shrouded on he table as though in mourning for its owner.
I saw everything had been tidied up.
Malcolm went on looking very upset and Hutton sat at his desk hunched and bowed.
Malcolm was more talkative though.
When I gave him his afternoon coffee he said, ‘She was such an interesting person,’ and dabbed his eyes.
I looked at him in surprise.
‘Who?— Doreen?’
Apart from her admittedly efficient knowledge of the intricacies of computers I'd thought Doreen  rather a nonentity.
‘It's unusual for a girl to be so good at the technical stuff,’ he went on.
‘She once mended my watch when it went wrong —’ Malcolm was old-fashioned and liked watches made about ninety years ago in Switzerland by little hunch-backed men.
Well, it wasn't till the Tuesday of the week after when we'd all been to the funeral at the crematorium that Inspector Bush came in again.
We'd got a temp by now who eyed Malcolm through a haze of blue eyeshadow and tapped on the typewriter with fingernails like goose quills.
I was just saying to Malcolm how surprised I'd been to see so many your men at Doreen's funeral, but I shut up when the police arrived.
Bush asked us all to come into Hutton's room, except for Sharon, the new girl.
We all stood there waiting for him to speak.
But Bush waited, and then he took something out of his pocket and threw it down on the desk.
We all stared at it.
At first I didn't know what it was, then I realised it was what Doreen called a ‘floppy disc’, one of those things you store your words with on a computer.
I'm not very conversant with them myself.
I'm an old-fashioned girl.
Bush cleared his throat.
His next words struck us all dumb.
‘Doreen Banks may have been murdered for what she had recorded on this,’ he began.
‘Murdered!’
Hutton squeaked.
Malcolm was digging his nails into the palm of his hand.
‘How?’
I asked.
He did not reply to my question but shuffled a paper and looked at his sidekick, the same woman who'd visited with him before.
There was a silence.
Then he turned to me.
‘Miss Sandra Forsyth,’ he said.
‘I have here a warrant for your arrest on suspicion of fraud.’
He sounded so pompous I couldn't help giggling.
Then he went on to say those words you never believe they  say, but they do — the ones about anything you may say may be taken dow, etc., etc.
Malcolm just gaped at me and Hutton coughed nervously.
‘What on earth are you talking about?’
I asked
But Bush would say no more except I'd need legal representation.
I looked beseechingly at Malcolm, but he turned away, the rat.
Well, I was bailed on a charge of fraud but I feel they've got something else up their sleeve.
My solicitor is helpful.
He's a nicer man than Malcolm — stupid Malcolm whom I'd hoped to marry before he became besotted with Doreen.
But it's all so ironic — if my little tinkering with her inhaler hadn't led to her death nobody would have known that Doreen guessed — that I'd been helping myself to the firm's cash now and then — only piffling amounts over the years I'd been with them, a few thousand here and there, just enough for some designer clothes and jewellery.
I'd denied it all when Doreen confronted me, but she must have confided her suspicions to the word-processor and left the floppy disc on her bedside table.
It was only to teach her a little lesson that I'd added some nail-varnish remover to the ephedrine in that nasal spray she carried around everywhere.
I wasn't having her marrying Malcolm, who'll inherit the firm when Hutton retires.
How was I to know it would give her a heart attack when it reacted unfavourably with some other medicine she was taking/ I only meant to give her a bit of discomfort.
It turns out I needn't have bothered after all though.
The chemicals in her bloodstream that reacted unfavourably with the acetone and ephedrine were sex hormones!
Yes!— Doreen was a man going through a sex change.
She was really Derek Banks.
Why she always sounded hoarse was because she had a masculine voice and to cover it up she pretended to have a cold.
A pity she really did have a cold on the morning she woke  up and used her inhaler, the morning after I'd taken it out of her hand-bag and added my little cocktail.
But she was living a lie wasn't she?
She deserved what she got.
Malcolm has had a nervous breakdown.
To think he fancied a man!— or a person’, shall we say, when he could never legally marry.
Why do they always want to be bosomy blondes is what I want to know.
Doreen's hair was a wig and the bosoms were foam rubber.
Well, they can't prove what I did.
My solicitor thinks my sentence won't be a long one.
Doreen Banks though, she was just too nosey for her own good!
A LITTLE BIT OF CHRISTMAS
Linda Johnson felt as though she'd been doing nothing but prepare for Christmas for months and was exhausted before it all began.
Christmas Eve had now arrived along with her two grown-up children, Stephen and Carol and Carol's husband tim.
they had been married for two years but had as yet no offspring.
She and Tim both had good jobs locally whilst Stephen worked abroad, and had arrived home for Christmas the night before.
Linda had her own part-time job helping out at Oxfam and listening to infants read at the nearby Primary School, so she had less time in fact than her husband, for Frank had been made redundant from his job in electronics in October.
He seemed too depressed to do very much, wandering round the house like a zombie.
She knew how dispirited he must feel, but wished he would help her a bit more with the housework.
She signed as she sifted a little icing sugar on to her home-made mince pies.
The rest of the family was in the sitting-room and the last time she had looked in they were eating chocolates and sorting through a pile of videos.
Tim was looking through an old photograph album she'd put out, with pictures of previous Christmases.
Carol had been born at Christmas twenty-seven years ago — how long ago it seemed.
The photos were there to remind her.
Their dining-room table was set, its centrepiece her lovely home-baked cake, which Carol had iced in white with a red frill.
She'd been surprised Carol had offered to ice it, for Carol had never been domesticated.
Linda was restless, moved several bowls of nuts around and took some crystallized 
fruits and another large bowl of Clementines into the dining-room.
and placed a vase of unseasonable daffodils on the table.
The flowers would be out tomorrow and were a pleasant foretaste of spring.
there were five red and gold crackers on the starched, white cloth and all the presents were ready in the old pillowcases they'd all used for years at Christmas.
Silly really to go on doing what you'd always done, she supposed.
But if you couldn't keep up traditions at Christmas, when could you!
‘Anything I can do, Mum?’
Stephen poked his head into the kitchen where she was now checking the vegetables for the morrow.
‘Come and join us,’ he went on.
‘We've lined up a nice selection of videos — you must have first choice since you've done all the work!’
‘No — I just have to pop over to Mrs Smythe.’
‘You do too much!
Why don't you sit down?
Carol says I ought to get up early and help you put the turkey in the oven.
It's your Christmas as well, Mum.’
‘How do you think  Dad looks?’ she asked in a low voice, not replying to his offer.
‘He's all right— he'll get over it — might even enjoy a bit of free time — you ought to ask him to help you more, Mum.’
She agreed with her son, but Frank was reluctant to do domestic chores.
When spring came he'd find plenty to do in the garden.
They were luckier than many middle-aged people in having a pension from his firm, even though it had arrived a bit earlier than he'd expected or wanted, along with a small amount of redundancy money.
But money wasn't everything.
He'd not offered to help her with the Christmas preparations and she hadn't felt like asking him.
Men never realised that without women there'd be no Christmas — and probably no other festivities such as birthdays either!
He'd seen her buy the cards and stamps and go through the list of presents to get, seen her  write letters to elderly relatives, make the puddings and the mince pies, clean the house, polish the little pieces of silver and brass she'd acquired, make long shopping lists and then go out and buy things, wrap presents and take out their old Christmas tree and sort through the ornaments.
He had helped her carry the shopping to his old car, which now would probably never be replaced — and he'd fixed the fairy lights, but that was about all.
Seeing her wrapping the presents and addressing the cards he'd exclaimed: ‘Do you need to do all this?’
He'd sounded quite amazed.
‘I always do it every year,’ she'd replied rather snappishly.
It was getting dark; she must go over to Mrs Smythe.
She felt tired and a little fed up.
She'd leave them watching their choice of video or music for an hour or so before returning to give them their tea.
She remembered that Carol had offered to entertain everyone on Christmas Eve rather than coming home, but she'd resisted.
Carol had quite enough to do with her own job and all her own shopping without preparing meals as well and she hoped she would have a little rest after Christmas, now that people took time off in lots of offices until after the New Year.
Linda was just taking off her apron when Carol was the next person to pop her head round the kitchen door.
‘Oh, Mum, why don't you sit down?’
‘I promise I will when I get back from Mrs Smythe.
Now go and listen to some music and when I'm back we'll all have our tea.’
‘OK — do you want me to come too?’
‘No, love — she gets a bit flustered with more than one person at once.’
Really, it was because she looked forward to getting out of the house by herself!
It was true however that Doris Smythe, an elderly widow who lived on the opposite side of their suburban road in a small rented house, didn't like too much bustle around her.
Linda had always passed the time of day with her when Doris had been able to get out and about, but now the old woman was con  fined to her house with arthritis.
Carol went back to the others and Linda cast one quick final look at her preparations for tea and for the dinner tomorrow.
The turkey was defrosting nicely in the garage, the vegetables all prepared.
She put four mince pies in a little basket she'd decorated earlier when she made the other table decorations, put on her coat and was out of the back door in a flash.
She took a deep breath of the cold air outside and hurried across the road.
There were Christmas trees in all the windows except Doris's and everyone was probably at home, though most people did not do much on the Eve.
She was still feeling a little anxious when she thought of all she would have to do before she could get to bed that night.
Stephen would also want a little time alone with her to tell her about his work.
She tried not to interfere in her children's lives.
They were not children any more!
In the old days it had all seemed worth it — she'd enjoyed filling stockings and wading through a carpet of toys and dressing the tree and singing carols when they were little.
Now it all seemed pointless.
‘You look tired, dear,’ said Doris Smythe when she had hobbled up to her door and let Linda in before carefully locking it again once Linda was standing in her dark hallway.
‘No — it's just Christmas — a family get-together, you know — it seems to take more out of me than it used to — so I thought I'd come and have a quiet minute or two with you.
I've brought you some mince pies.’
‘Your family get on with each other though, don't they?
Not like some!
Sit down, dear.
Thank you so much for the mince pies — you never forget me—’
Linda sat down across from Doris in the only other chair.
There was a small gas fire emitting just enough heat to warm their ankles.
‘I get  a bit fed up sometimes,’ she confessed to the older woman.
‘There always seems so much to do — but they like everything the way it's always been.
They always say that families argue at Christmas — mine don't much — it's more me, I think!
Sometimes I think I'd just love to be alone with a nice book to read and a carol service on the wireless!
It's quicker to do most of the preparations myself though.’
‘Oh, as you get older you like to do things your way,! replied Doris after a pause.
‘Yes — I never used to be tidy, you know, but since the children grew up I'm less able to tolerate mess — and Christmas is so messy!’
Why was she telling Mrs Smythe all this?
She knew she sounded self-pitying.
‘I wouldn't mind someone else here to make a mess,’ Doris Smythe said wistfully.
Linda put her hand impulsively over the other woman's gnarled old one.
‘I envy you, Linda,’ said Doris.
‘Enjoy it all while you can!’
As she looked round the rather cheerless room Linda stopped feeling quite so harassed.
Here she was, past the prime of life it was true, but grumbling because others depended on her for their family traditions to be kept up, and here was Doris Smythe with no family and unable to do much for herself — and she was the sort of person who'd always helped others when she was younger, Linda remembered.
But I do envy anyone who can have a few hours to themselves at Christmas, she thought.
‘If I go to church I feel that I go more to escape the chores than for any other reason!’ she said aloud.
‘Don't be so hard on yourself,’ said Doris.
‘Would you like to come over and join us?’
Linda asked her on a sudden impulse.
‘No, dear — it's kind of you, but when you get to my age you like to sit  quietly and think about the past — and I watch my telly and listen to carols on my old wireless and then the Home Help comes and puts me to bed.
They don't usually come at Christmas now but she's a real heart of gold and worries about me.
But you've put the finishing touch to my Christmas, Linda, coming over and sparing the time when you're so busy.
Not many would.’
It was peaceful with the plop-of the gas fire and the dark sky outside through the window, for like many old people Doris did not draw her curtains till late and Linda did not feel like going back to the bustle of tea-time, but she couldn't keep them waiting for their tea.
Then there'd be the washing up…and Auntie Mary and Uncle Dennis might drop in…
‘Woman's work is never done,’ she said.
‘It's a luxury to talk to you, Doris.’
Mrs Smythe looked sympathetic and said: ‘I was thinking, your husband's such a kind gentle person — he might like to do a bit of voluntary work.
They need cars to take folk to hospital or help wheel people out — it's not just women's work, you know, all that.’
‘I could ask him — I don't suppose he's ever thought of it.
Having to retire early was a shock — but if he felt he could be useful…’
‘And he'd be less under you feet, dear, when you wanted to get on at home,’ said Doris with a twinkle in her eye.
Linda laughed.
‘We didn't train them up to help, did we?’ she said.
‘Carol's Tim — he does more than his fair share of housework, you know — and he loves cooking!
He even wanted us to go to them tomorrow,’ she added, feeling rather guilty as she remembered.
‘But I wanted it all to be as it used to be so I said I'd rather do it myself.’
‘I should accept their offer next year if I were you,’ said Doris.
‘Perhaps I shall.’
Linda felt quite cheered up, and Doris echoed her thoughts, for she said,
‘It's as blessed to receive as to give — at least I hope!
I shall enjoy the mince pies.’
I suppose it's as selfish to want to go on being ‘In charge’ as never to do anything for anybody, linda was thinking.
‘Nobody but you thought to call in on me,’ said Doris.
‘But you must put your feet up and let the younger ones get on with being busy for a change.
People appreciate what you do for them so much more if you let them do it occasionally.
I remember in my young days —’ She stopped and for a moment they sat quietly, both thinking of past Christmases when their parents and grandparents had been alive.
‘My grandmother would have been a hundred and forty this Christmas,’ Doris began again and then lapsed into silence.
Linda saw the visit had tired her and rose to leave.
She helped up the old woman who insisted on seeing her out, and drew the curtains for her.
‘Happy Christmas, Doris,’ she said as she stood on the threshold.
‘Happy Christmas, Linda — you've been my little bit of Christmas — it's always the busiest folk who make time for others.
But remember what I said.
You let them get on with it!’
Linda felt better after an hour away and glad she'd made the effort to go across to Mrs Smythe.
She re-crossed the road back to her own front gate with a spring in her step, thinking over what Doris had said about Frank's doing voluntary work.
She'd have to be tactful, would begin by saying there was a real need for male helpers…
Frank wanted to be needed, that was it.
Everybody needed to be needed, but she'd magnified her own need.
She was smiling to herself as she let herself into her kitchen by the back door.
The house was quiet except for the sound of carol-singing from the TV set.
She took out her warmed mince pies and put them on a tray.
Then she put her head round the sitting-room door.
‘Anyone for a cup of tea and a mince pie and cake?’ she asked brightly.
‘It's all ready in the dining-room.’
For a moment she thought they all looked at her in surprise.
Perhaps because she'd sounded so cheerful.
They trooped into the dining-room, sat down, admired the cake, ate the mince pies and most of the rest and drank their tea.
‘No place like home,’ said Frank, and she thought — he really means it.
‘We'll wash up,’ said Stephen and she accepted his offer and went to sit next to her husband on the sofa.
He patted her hand.
‘Just like the old days,’ he said.
It was the next morning, the morning of Christmas Day, that Carol made her announcement.
Rather abruptly, when they'd all opened their presents and had a glass of sherry in their hands, she said, with a shy look at Tim, ‘Before we start our dinner we'd like to tell you that this time next year you'll be Grandma and Grandpa.’
After the congratulations and hugs and kisses, Frank said: ‘Does that mean I'll be senile then?
And me thinking of doing a bit of voluntary work!
Do they take grandparents — or shall I be wanted to wheel a pram?’
‘They take young grandpas,’ said Linda, amazed and overjoyed he'd had the idea for himself and still not able to get over her daughter's news.
‘And we shall give you Christmas,’ said Carol.
‘Uncle Stephen can help too!’ she added, looking in the direction of her brother who smiled wryly, a little out of it.
Next Christmas would be different, thought Linda, felling full of strength and good will.
There would be a different role for her next year.
She might even buy mince pies instead of making them!
What had been missing in it had been children, she decided.
On Boxing Day she put a short note through Doris's door with her little bit of news and positively ran back home, feeling suddenly young again and full of energy.
cover;
I was fed up with talk of ‘Architraves’ and ‘transoms:’The Secretary of the Antiquarian Society fancied himself as an architectural expert and loved the sound of his own voice.
We'd come in a coach to study Baltravers Hall, about twenty miles from our town.
It is a small Stately Home mostly dating from the eighteenth century, but bits of it go back to Elizabethan times.
The house is fairly modest as stately homes go but I knew the gardens were outstanding as soon as I glimpsed them.
I wished I'd come instead with the local Horticultural Society — of which I am also a member — so I decided to wander off.
As Mr. Todd was expatiating upon windows I stepped over the very low sill of one that was open.
It was almost a door and looked out on to a long paved garden bordered with box hedges and there was an inviting looking higher hedge at the bottom with an arch of greenery over a gap in the middle.
I skulked down one side of the garden and went through the arch which led me to a walled garden in the middle of which there was a fountain playing.
There were old roses climbing up these walls and other old roses in borders — I mean really old ones, not nineteen twenties' and thirties' ones which catalogues count as old.
Félicité et Perpétue crept up the mellow brickwork, and Gloire de Dijon climbed higher, and there were heavy dark  crimson Bourdons and Portland roses in the borders and pink Ce/1leste clumped at the corners with its paler leaves.
All a bit of a mix up, but I liked it.
I wondered what was on the other side of the far wall, for there was a green door in its centre.
Like an illustration in a childrens' book, you look at it and know there will be magic on the other side.
Nobody would miss me.
I looked back at the silhouette of the house through a haze of sun: tall chimneys and mellow brickwork in the older part.
There was only the sound of the fountain plashing away.
I felt strange, almost disembodied, but my feet carried me to the green door and I pushed it open.
It was a bit stiff, and squeaked, but I went through it and found myself in yet another garden, a smaller, even more enclosed one, with higher walls, a bit like an old Tudor tennis court.
The thing here was that all the flowers were blue — delphiniums and cornflowers and forget me nots round a sundial in the middle of a smooth green velvet lawn.
To the left, on a bench with a wooden back under apricot coloured brick, hidden at first by an apple tree, was seated a young man — in a red and black doublet and scarlet hose.
I blinked, hesitated, and looked again.
He was leaning back, his face in the sun, his eyes shut.
I could not believe my own eyes and stood staring at him.
He had a pointed black beard, and an earring dangled in one ear.
I just stood there, smelling the pungency of the herbs in the hedge behind me, that sharp sweet scent I remembered from Mediterranean holidays.
The sun was beating down and there was a sort of mistiness in my head, but a pleasant mistiness.
Was I dreaming when the misty feeling changed into a sudden heightening of all my senses: the scent and the vivid costume of the young man and the sound of droning bees and the  taste of summer in my mouth?
I stood a few yards away from him, my sandalled feet feeling the mossy lawn underneath,— and then he opened his eyes.
He seemed real and solid; it was myself who felt weightless as though I was just a conduit for all these sensations..
‘A vision fair’ he said, staring at me.
‘Approach, maiden, and let me gaze on thee’.
I approached, hypnotised by the mellow tone of his voice.
He did not get up, went on sitting there devouring my face with his black eyes.
Then —‘Sit by my side’, he said, and gestured to the bench.
I had time only to think, he will find my own garb strange, before I walked dazedly up to him and sat by his side a yard away from him.
He turned round and continued to stare at me.
He was an extraordinarily handsome young man of about my own age, which is thirty, and he had an aquiline nose, sculptured lips and hair curling over a high black and  silver collar.
His hands were clean and well-manicured.
I saw that the expression in his eyes was now one of slight amusement.
I tried to gather up my wits but all I could find to say was ‘The sun is hot’.
‘Methinks’, I added.
‘A dream of summer’ he said softly.
‘This garden sees sweet sights that do o'ertop my sense.
Tell me from whence thou comest — thy garb is mighty strange.
Dost come from Muscovy?’
I swallowed.
‘Nay’ I replied ‘From Rustington — I dress to suit the weather’.
I was wearing a shirt of green silk loose round the wrists and my green linen culottes — I had found they creased less than a skirt when sitting in a coach.
I was glad I wasn't wearing my jeans.
‘Tell me your name’.
He put out his hand and touched my wrist and I shuddered with delight.
It must be a dream.
‘Elizabeth’ I got out and, suddenly emboldened, ‘Like our great queen’I added, hoping I had guessed the correct period, thought it did for the present as a well.
‘Eliza’ he said ‘Or Bess?
What name dost thy mother call thee then?’
Mother actually calls me Lisa but I did not think that name appropriate to this strange meeting and anyway I have never liked it.
‘Tis Eliza’ I said.
‘Eliza — I called thee up’ he went on.
‘And Lady Greensleeves thou wilt be to me.
Let me take thy hand — ah ‘tis a soft hand, and jewelled!’.
I was wearing a large theatrical ring with an enormous ‘emerald’ surrounded by paste diamonds and he bent more closely to look at it.
Then he touched his lips to my hand and murmured ‘I would sing for thee, bright vision — woulds't thou like me to sing for thee?’
‘Aye’ I said in a trance and found myself moving closer to him on the broad warm bench.
He put his arm round me then and I leaned my head on his shoulder.
The high velvet shoulder of his doublet smelt musty as though it had been lying in a trunk for centuries.
But his arm felt comfortable.
When he begin to sing I felt a warm deep pleasure steal over me, a feeling of sensual bliss which was yet mingled with an aching sadness.
Perhaps such feelings cannot be described and whatever I remembered afterwards could be only a shadowy replica.
Imagine your favourite operatic tenor is singing your favourite aria just for you, perfect bel canto, every  syllable clear, yet hushed and honeyed, subduing a richly passionate voice and modulating it with an effect of caged power!
It was a voice which I knew would fill the arena at Verona if he were so minded — though he would not sign this song, for it was ‘Greensleeves’.
And I had not even asked him for his name!
When the song finished we were both silent.
I felt tears running down my cheeks.
He turned my face to his and kissed them away — overpowering me with such a potent mixture of excitement and tenderness and yearning that I almost swooned.
If he had said ‘Come away with me for ever’ I should have followed him.
Yet it was a dream and I knew that dreams never last.
As he took my hand again I managed to whisper ‘Tell me your name, sweet sir’.
‘'TIS Orlando’ he replied —‘Or plain Roland in our tongue’.
‘You speak Italian?’
I ventured.
not really feeling the need for a conversation, wishing only that I could stay on this bench with him forever.
‘Si, cara mia’ he said.
I had attended evening classes in Italian all winter and so after a pause I said ‘I sogni non durano mai’—‘Dreams never last’.
He looked enquiringly at me.
Of course he would not think this encounter a dream.
I wondered into which year I had stumbled, and tried to remember Queen Elizabeth's dates — didn't she die in 1603?
I guessed we might be in the latter years of her reign — Shakespeare would still be alive!
Maybe I would never be able to return to the present — not that I cared just then.
Then he said ‘Eliza — I must part from thee, for friends await me in the forest.
Dear heart, tell me where we shall meet again.
Since thou art from Rustington tell which dwelling is thy father's.
‘Tis some leaques away but I shall ride over to thee’.
‘I live in Market Street’ I answered him sadly, knowing he would never find me again.
‘The house next to the Smithy’.
He removed his arm from my waist, kissed my lips, brushed away a stray hair from my temple then stood up.
He was a tallish man.
I looked to see if he cast a shadow but the sun was in the wrong direction.
I found myself pleading —‘Oh do not go now I have found thee’ Why can I not stay with thee forever?’
‘Alas’ he said 
‘My forest duty calls — but I shall see thee again — thou hast my word’.
He bowed and turned on his heel and walked slowly to the green door where he blew me a kiss.
I did not think of following him, my feet seemed rooted to the sandy path and I saw him through a mist of tears as  he appeared to melt through the door, which closed behind him.
I shut my eyes, too full of sorrow to move.
In my head I heard again his lyrical voice, on my lips I felt his lips, and on my wrist.
I don't know how long I remained there.
Maybe I did fall asleep for a moment or two when I shut my eyes hoping to enter my dream again.
When I finally roused myself and walked, unsteadily at first, to the green door and then through the other garden and the house, now silent — for our party had moved away and there was only a lady in an obviously twentieth century flowered smock at a little table in the hall — I felt the world was drained of colour and that I could not face anyone who was not Orlando.
My life was an empty shell without love.
I t had been a lightning love I had felt on that bench, I was sure — too sudden, too amazing — but nevertheless love 
I waited for him in our little house by the Smithy but he never came.
Several weeks later I was talking to a friend who lives in the next town.
It transpired that she had also been one of a party at the Hall the same day.
Sir Matthew Baltravers (she told me) had been hosting the amateur operatic society, to which she belonged.
In the evening they were to sing by the lake and gone to inspect the stage.
‘Do you know a man called Roland?’
I asked her.
It was a windy autumn day and we were standing in the market place.
‘Roland Essendine, you mean?
He's our lead singer, or rather I should say he was.
A talent scout heard him sing — actually it was at that performance at the Hall.
He's going to be a professional tenor!
Can't act for toffee though!’
On but he can, I wanted to say.
I had finally met a man as romantic as myself!.
This is not the end of my story.
Not long after that I had a letter addressed to Miss Eliza, The house  next to the Smithy, Rustington.
It had an Italian postmark.
‘I am sorry I did not contact you before — things just moved too quickly.
I am to finish my training here in Milan.
Will you join me here, dear Eliza?’
I lost no time.
You don't get a second chance to live your dreams, do you?
A DREAM IN HAWORTH
I lay down on the Pennine moors
At noon, under a sky of childhood cobalt,
And then walked over the hills.
By dusk, following the amber stream,
The valley stretched out in emerald
And the sky changed to rose-madder.
After sunset the crystal stars sharpened,
And the dark farmhouse that smelt of bread
And apples and burning ash
Sank me back into the past,
Where the youthful Cavalier
Rode by the mullioned porch…
At dawn by the ingle I looked
Out at the frozen garth
Stabbed raw by wuthering winds;
The stone parsonage stood
In fields of hoar-frost
And there was a skyline of snow on the moor,
Tatterdemalion clouds hanging
Over valleys fed by fire;
Halfway up the ridge another farm,
Some sheep and wind…
The snow dazzled my eyes now
As I met Charlotte on the path,
Snow falling forever on those graves.