

7 Instabilities and chaos in lasers and optical resonators
W.J.Firth Department of Physics, Strathclyde University, Glasgow G4 ONG, UK
Turbulence in lasers and other optical systems is a newly recognised rather than new phenomenon.
What is especially interesting about such systems is the possibility that experiments can be constructed which are sufficiently simple and close to theoretical models that routes to chaos can be studied in detail.
That is an as yet unfulfilled hope, but the recent pace of experimental progress has been so great that there is every reason for optimism.
7.1 Introduction
This chapter aims to introduce the reader to the most important concepts and systems in the field of optical chaos.
It is necessarily selective and undoubtedly subjective in choice of material, and the author apologises where appropriate.
The cited works, in the reference lists, will introduce the interested reader to the wider literature.
A broad selection of papers on chaos in passive resonators is available in Optical Bistability 2{8}, and the January 1985 issue of the Journal of the Optical Society of America, Series B, devoted to instabilities in lasers, will be a very useful source in that field.
The chapter opens with an introduction to the semiclassical theory of light-atom interactions and optical resonators.
The remainder of the chapter selects three topics which are, in the author's view, the most Important and/or mature in the field: homogeneously broadened single-mode lasers, passive resonators, and inhomogeneously broadened lasers.
The treatment tries to concentrate on the physical ideas and interactions involved, rather than on detailed mathematical analysis and computer results, which are available in the original sources as well as elsewhere in this book: most calculations lead to one or more of the so-called "universal" routes to chaos.
Where possible, the status of experiments is described: only for inhomogeneously broadened lasers are the experiments, thanks largely to the efforts of Lee Casperson and Neal Abraham, as well developed as the theory.
All the results in this section can be derived in the semi-classical approximation, in which the atoms are treated quantum mechanically, but the optical fields as entirely classical.
There has been considerable interest, and some work, in fully quantum-optical treatments of these problems, but quantum-optical chaos' is essentially a topic for future reference.
7.2 Semi-classical two-level system theory{4}
We therefore write the system Hamiltonian as where is the unperturbed (dark) atomic Hamiltonian, expressed in its own basis set n>, with corresponding energy{maths}.
The radiation field is treated as a perturbation, with the form (in the dipole approximation) where E(t) is the radiation field and er the electron dipole operator.
In the basis set I n) H"has matrix elements where we have neglected as an inessential complication effects due to the vector nature of E.
Next we restrict ourselves to harmonic (optical) fields E(t), with angular frequency w: Assuming, for definiteness, that the atom is initially in state 1, and expressing its subsequent evolution as then standard application of time-dependent perturbation theory gives, to lowest order Clearly the largest excitation will occur in cases where hw is resonant  with an atomic energy spacing{maths}.
We assume, for simplicity, that only for n equal to 2 is there such a resonance (i.e. the atom is free from degeneracies).
This allows us to drop all other energy levels from the analysis, and consider only a two-level atom.
For consistency, we must also neglect the second term above, which is anti-resonant: this is termed the rotating-wave approximation.
We can thus, finally, set{maths}equal to R (the Rabi frequency), and obtain the simplified Hamiltonian where{maths}and we have arbitrarily set w = 0.
This simplified single-atom Hamiltonian can be explicitly solved, of course: the solution consists of an oscillation of c1 and c2 at frequency it — so-called Rabi-flopping.
We are interested, rather, in ensembles of atoms, at different space-points and, in many cases, with different thermal velocities.
Further, these atoms interact with each other and their environment in unknown ways.
These complexities are best handled by the density-matrix formalism.
The density matrix is defined as The density matrix is a weighted average over atomic variables over which we have no knowledge or control.
For our purposes, the averaging leaves p as a function of position (with some coarse-graining on the optical wavelength scale) and velocity component, v, parallel to the optical propagation direction (z-direction).
The definition of p is such that the averaged expectation value of any quantum operator Q is given by As a quantum-mechanical operator, p obeys the Heisenberg equation of motion A major advantage of the density-matrix formulation is that it is easy to augment this equation by terms representing the interactions not accounted for in H. In the cases of interest, these can be represented by simple excitation and decay terms.
The diagonal elements of p (here simply P11 and P22) are, by definition, the mean populations of states 1> and 2>.
Their dynamics can be described by P describes incoherent pumping processes and y decay processes: if is zero, then the commutator vanishes, and we obtain the steady-state solution for the "dark" populations: In a laser, the pumping processes (electrical, chemical, etc., as well as collisional) must be such as to maintain a population inversion, i.e. 
The decay processes contributing to y represent all collisional and other processes which destroy c;, including spontaneous emission.
The off-diagonal element is described by Physically, P21 represents a coherence between 1 and 2, since it vanishes in the sum (7.1) unless there is correlation between the amplitudes c1 and c2.
By hypothesis, such a correlation is induced by H"(Rabi-flopping), but by no other means.
The decay constant F includes any process that destroys c1, c2 or their correlation.
The latter class include phase-changing collisions, in which the interatomic forces in a collision temporarily change without inducing a transition.
Physically, a non-zero value of P21 implies a polarisation of the atomic medium, since 
The atomic polarisation acts as a source term in the Maxwell equation: We thus have, within the limits of the approximations made, a complete, self-consistent set of equations for the evolution of the field-atom system, subject to appropriate boundary conditions.
One further simplifying approximation is often made: recognising that all rates of change are commonly slow compared with the optical cycle time (and the wavelength , one can reduce the Maxwell equation to first order (slowly varying amplitude approximation), and also take out the rapidly varying part of P21 setting .
This leads to the Maxwell-Bloch equations, which are the basis for the subsequent treatment: where the Rabi frequency has been written explicitly in polar form, G is a coupling constant and <> allows for a velocity average over the Maxwellian distribution of longitudinal velocities of the atoms.
In (7.2d) equals (), the term recognises that a changing phase of the field is equivalent to a frequency shift, and kv expresses the Doppler shift of the field frequency on transformation into the atomic rest frame.
The presence of the continuous parameter v and the space derivative a/az clearly endows the Maxwell-Bloch system with a phase space amply large enough for chaotic behaviour: our first priority is to constrain the phase space by examining various idealised limits.
In particular, we can eliminate the space derivative by placing the system in an optical resonator: indeed most experimental evidence of optical chaos involves resonator systems.
We proceed, therefore, to a brief survey of the relevant aspects of resonator theory{24,34}.
The simplest optical resonator at least from a theoretical standpoint is the unidirectional ring cavity (Fig. 7.1), comprising four 45- tilted  minors, two perfectly reflecting, and two of transmittivity T (amplitude transmittivity), and reflectivity R (respectively).
The cavity contains a two-level medium of length L, and the total optical path is The boundary conditions at the entrance and exit from the medium are, respectively: and The latter relation simply implies a unique relationship between the transmitted field amplitude ET and the internal field.
The former enshrines the major cavity properties: E1 is the incident field amplitude (normally zero in a laser); t is the time for light to propagate from the cell output around to the input, equal to (":-— L) /c; 8 is the cavity mistuning, whose physical significance is best examined for the empty cavity, in steady state, whence and thus The cavity field thus has resonances spaced at intervals of in 8, which are very sharp if R is close to unity (high-finesse resonator).
These resonances correspond to constructive interference of the circulating field with the incident field, and 8 thus sweeps through 2 as the total cavity length is fine-tuned over an optical wavelength.
A laser (without injected signal) necessarily operates at a frequency such that the total mistuning (8 plus any phase shift due to the medium) is equal to zero (modulo 2n).
Each such frequency is termed a longitudinal mode frequency of the cavity, and their frequency separation c/ is termed the free spectral range.
Instabilities, both in lasers and passive resonators (E, 0, lossy cavity), are termed single mode or multimode according to whether the resulting frequency spectrum for E (0, t) is or is not narrow compared to the free spectral range.
Single-mode instabilities in high-finesse resonators are particularly simple because the propagation and time-delay effects can be reduced, using a first-order Taylor expansion, to a simple first-order differential equation for the mode amplitude, as will be described in the next section.
Note that the cavity feedback involves a finite time delay, of order in certain circumstances this enables the Maxwell-Bloch equations (required to relate E (L, t + L/c) to E (0, t)) plus cavity boundary conditions, to be expressed as a discrete mapping in steps of tR — this has been extensively studied in the context of passive resonators, and will be elaborated below.
Practical resonators share most of the properties of this ideal unidirectional ring resonator, but with complicating features.
One of these is the transverse mode structure.
The ideal resonator, with plane, and necessarily finite, mirrors, actually supports an infinity of transverse mode structures, of varying complexity in amplitude and phase, transverse to the resonator axis.
This introduces undesirable extra degrees of freedom into the system, which can, however, often be suppressed by an appropriate choice of mirror curvature and aperture, assisted in some cases by wave-guiding properties of the medium itself.
A ring laser has a further degeneracy: each longitudinal mode frequency supports a pair of counterpropagating modes, which will ordinarily have the same threshold, and thus both be excited.
To suppress one of these, and produce a unidirectional laser, it is necessary to employ a nonreciprocal element usually based on the Faraday effect — which makes the cavity more lossy for one of these modes than the other.
This last degeneracy does not occur in a Fabry-Perot resonator, in which the light bounces between parallel mirrors.
This is by far the commonest cavity for lasers in general, but has major drawbacks from a theoretical standpoint: the standing-wave pattern greatly complicates the atomic response and can also lead to multimode operation, and time and space are much more intimately mixed in the feedback process.
None the less, Fabry-Perot experiments seem to give rise to broadly the same sorts of instability as those predicted from ring cavity analyses.
7.3 Single-mode homogeneously broadened laser The first laser, operated in 1960 by Maiman at Hughes Research Laboratory, was based on flashlamp-excited ruby.
This laser provided an early impetus for studies of instabilities by tending to produce noisy, spiked output even under quasi-steady excitation.
In these early years, equations similar to the Lorenz system (Chapter 6){35}were written down, both for lasers and masers, but failure to find a practical system in either spectral region which was adequately described by these equations, plus of course the abundance of other avenues opened up by the development of lasers, led to a rather quiescent phase lasting till the resurgence of interest in the late 197Os.
The basic equations for a single-mode (unidirectional) homogeneously broadened laser in a high-finesse cavity, tuned to resonance so that is = 8 = 0, may be written as the real system Here x is a scaled electric field (or Rabi frequency), and (7.3a) arises in the single-mode limit of the Maxwell equation (7.2a): Yc, equal to c (1 , describes the decay of the cavity field due to mirror transmission, and C, the cooperativity parameter, is defined as is the small-signal absorption coefficient and the population inversion per atom due to the pumping processes (in the dark).
C is thus negative for a laser: its definition arises from the field of optical bistability  (see below) where the medium is lossy and thus C is positive.
D and p are scaled atomic population differences (P22 — P11) and polarisation (P21) respectively: scaling is such that in the small signal limit D = 1, p = x"and then, for consistency in (7.3a), 2C = — 1: this last condition thus defines the laser threshold; for 2C 1, the only solution of the laser equations is the trivial one x = p = 0, D = 1, which is stable.
For 2C 1, this solution still exists, but becomes unstable, whereas the nontrivial solution is stable at least for small enough I C I- since the system (7.3) is formally equivalent to the Lorenz system{35}, though this fact was not recognised until 1975{17}.
Motivated by practical considerations, analysis had tended to concentrate on the rate-equation limit of the above system (and more complicated systems describing real lasers).
This involves adiabatic elimination of the polarisation (F 00), and replacing x by the "intensity" I, equal to x2, yielding the system which has only damped oscillatory solutions (relaxation oscillations).
Turning to the full three equations, the instability condition becomes This condition, derived in 1964 by Korobkin and others{16,25}is termed the "bad cavity" requirement, since it demands that cavity loss damp the field more strongly than the damping of either the polarisation or the population.
These same authors also derived the instability threshold condition, here expressible as: Consideration of the effect on the above expression of varying the various decay rates shows that the right side of the above inequality will always be greater than nine, which implies a pumping rate at least nine times above the laser threshold.
This is the major stumbling block to experimental realisation of the Lorenz system in lasers.
One can get high gain by lengthening the laser, but then the free spectral range falls, and the laser will go multimode except close to threshold.
To prevent this, a short laser is necessary, which means a high density of atoms, which increases I"and y, which demands an increase in y, which raises the threshold  (actual pump rate at threshold is proportional to y) which demands still higher density, etc. a vicious circle.
Interestingly, in masers, the first electromagnetic wave devices for which equations of the Lorenz type were developed, the problem was that y "in the then best-available cavities was so large compared to y and I" that 2C (which is in this limit) was again impossibly high.
Subsequent development of superconducting microwave cavities may have changed the situation, but perhaps of more interest is the very recent suggestion{36}to operate lasers in the intermediate regime the far infrared.
In far-infrared lasers, y and I"are in the megaHertz range, which readily allows optimisation of y so as to minimise the threshold value of D0.
Undamped relaxation oscillations had already been seen in such lasers, and at the time of writing there is the exciting prospect that the Lorenz system of equations may soon develop an experimental significance in laser physics to match their theoretical impact.
In the interim, however, a number of schemes have been devised in which instabilities and chaos have been predicted in experimentally realisable systems.
Undoubtedly the most significant of these in the context of lasers has been that of inhomogeneous broadening, to which we will return.
First, we discuss the laser with injected signal, which has been predicted{27}to exhibit a number of instabilities and chaos.
Physically, we then have two types of laser response.
There is the"spontaneous' laser action, cavity resonant, and, we will assume, resonant also with the atomic transition on which the population inversion exists.
The second response is a regenerative simplification of the injected signal, which is detuned from resonance.
For a linear driven oscillator, these responses correspond to the complementary function (here a growing exponential because of the gain) and the particular solution, respectively.
In the laser the nonlinearity leads to competition between these two types of behaviour, and gives rise to unstable behaviour as the injected signal is increased from zero (stable self-excited laser, as discussed above) to a value high enough to slave the laser to the injected signal frequency, where the response is again stable.
We will deal only with self-excited instabilities, but predictions of chaos also exist for the more complex case where the injected signal, or the pumping rate, are modulated.
Generally speaking, instability thresholds are lower than in the quasi-Lorenz system, and the restrictions on decay rates less severe.
There is not yet, however, any experimental evidence for these phenomena: injection of a low-power continuous signal is routinely used to induce single-longitudinal mode operation in, for example, high-power CO, lasers, but this application corresponds only to the small-injected signal limit of the system under discussion.
We generalise the quasi-Lorenz system by introducing an injected amplitude y with the same scaling as x, but assumed real and positive, while x and p are now complex, in general, because of the detuning is and  the mistuning (which we scale to I").
The resulting set of equations is For finite y, the above system has the steady-state solution Examination of this solution reveals that it is stable if y exceeds a certain minimum value, Y, sufficient to quench the spontaneous lasing.
-En route from y = 0 to this stable "injection locking" , Lugiato et at.
find, for small y, a pulsation of frequency corresponding to the detuning and of amplitude y, imposed on the y = 0 value I 2C + 1 I of x.
For the parameters C = — 500; is = 8 = 1; Y = Yc = I", this pulsation becomes irregular for y 120, is highly chaotic at y 250, then shows an inverse period-doubling cascade to regular oscillation at y = 300.
Further increase of y leads to a "breathing" behaviour: a slow modulation of the oscillation, which develops into an output consisting of"spikes' followed by quiescent intervals.
The latter increase in duration until they evolve into the stable solution at Y"which is close to 312 for these parameters.
For other parameters, including the experimentally accessible C = — 20, similar behaviour is seen, except that the breathing and spiking seem to be absent.
It should be emphasised that these phenomena are distinct from the Lorenz instability: in fact this domain (YC = I "= -I" ) is absolutely stable for y = 0, the Lorenz limit.
Injection into an already unstable laser stabilises it at high enough y-values: at low values of y the behaviour is, unsurprisingly, irregular.
In fact Lugiato et at.
find empirically that is necessary for chaos: can be much smaller than I"without hindrance.
To conclude this section, we can, at last, refer to an experiment.
As noted, the rate equations (7.4) are stable, but the standard technique of modulating one of the parameters, for example y, extends the phase space sufficiently to allow chaotic behaviour.
This has been achieved in a CO2 laser{5}.
Bistability — the coexistence of stable oscillations at either one-third or one-quarter of the modulation frequency — was observed.
Increasing the modulation depth, the two attractors become strange.
A particularly interesting feature of the results was the appearance of a low-frequency divergence of the spectrum when the two attractors become strange.
The authors attributed this to low-frequency jumping between the two attractors, and suggested that such behaviour may lie at the root of the puzzling low-frequency noise spectra displayed in many nonlinear physical  systems — systems as diverse as electrical resistors, biological membranes and automobile traffic flow.
With the honourable exception of this last case, the homogeneously broadened laser has so far proved a fertile field for instability and chaos only for the theorist.
In contrast, when the laser is inhomogeneously broadened, the experiments were for long in advance of the theory, as we shall see below.
First, however, we examine passive resonators, which are perhaps the simplest of all optical systems, and indeed, in one limit, reduce to a one-dimensional noninvertible map, and thus possess a period-doubling route to chaos.
Passive nonlinear resonator theory, described by equations (7.5) with C> 0 and thus y 0, was originally developed in the context of optical bistability (OB): I x in the state equation (7.6) can clearly be a multivalued function of y, which corresponds to an optical device that can have two or more transmission states for a single-input field, and can thus act as an optical memory device (Fig. 7.2).
7.4 Instabilities in passive nonlinear resonators
Equations such as(7.5) are built on the seminal work of Bonifacio and Lugiato{6}in 1978.
For simplicity, these authors treated the high-finesse case in which the dominant dynamic instabilities arise due to excitation of adjacent longitudinal modes, which are also cavity-resonant.
When Ikeda in 1979 performed a stability analysis starting from the full Maxwell-Bloch equations, with propagation effects included{22}, he discovered an apparently distinct family of instabilities, and indeed chaotic behaviour, which will be the dominant topic of the remainder of this section (as Lugiato {26}has pointed out, these phenomena are not actually distinct from the Bonifacio-Lugiato instabilities, and can be analysed by similar methods).
The simplest approach to the Ikeda instability makes the limit I"00 in the Maxwell-Bloch equations (7.2).
It is then possible (at least in the ring resonator) to integrate the full equation along the characteristic, z = ct + constant, to obtain an explicit relationship between E (0, t) and E (L, j + L/c).
Further simplification ensues if we now let y and take the dispersive or Kerr limit finite.
This reduces the system (7.2) and the cavity boundary condition to a mapping, of the form Note that the amplitude E(t) is complex, so that we have a two-dimensional mapping, which is, in fact, invertible: We thus have a minimal system for chaos.
The scaled parameters A (transmitted input field), B (amplitude feedback fraction) and 8 (cavity mistuning) can all be assumed real.
The fixed points 5 of (7.7) give rise to an 5 2 vs A2 typical of optical bistability (Fig. 7.2).
Their stability is governed by the Jacobian matrix which gives rise to the characteristic equation: Since B 1 in a passive resonator, the only possible instabilities are = + 1.
The plus sign can be seen to correspond to the vertical-slope points of the characteristic of Fig. 7.2 (further analysis shows that the intervening negative slope branches are unstable).
The negative sign involves a perturbation to 5 which reverses each tR, and thus gives rise to an oscillation with period 2tR.
This oscillation is, in many cases, the beginning of a period-doubling cascade to chaos obeying the Feigenbaum scaling relations{13}, but the author is not aware of any proof that the map has this property.
Any of A, B, and 8 can be considered as control parameters, but from a physical point of view it is interesting to use 8 (which can be varied through its full range by translation of one mirror over one wavelength) to minimise the threshold value of A. This can be done analytically, based on (7.8), and Fig. 7.3 shows A2B vs B for = 1 (bistability) and = — 1 (2tR or P2) instabilities.
The choice of ordinate arises from the empirical observation that A2B 1 is required for chaos.
It will be observed that, whereas OB and P2 instabilities have comparable thresholds in low-finesse cavities (small B), in high-finesse cavities (B 1) optical bistability is much easier   to achieve than Ikeda instability.
This fact, and the decay-rate restrictions discussed below, lie behind the paucity of experimental evidence on Ikeda instabilities: only in two all-optical systems (both pulsed rather than continuous-wave) has 2tR oscillation and chaos been observed to date.
The basic P2 instability can be given an attractive physical interpretation in terms of standard nonlinear optics{14}.
The material nonlinearity responsible for nonlinear refraction, and thus bistability, can also generate sidebands on the pump frequency.
Physically, two photons with frequency are scattered to form a pair of photons at , so the process is termed four-wave mixing.
An additional input signal, the probe, detuned from the pump by , will thus experience gain or loss according to the combined effect of the nonlinearity and the mode structure of the cavity.
Clearly, it is most advantageous if both are cavity resonant, i.e. if is a multiple of the cavity's free spectral range.
An even multiple (including zero) means that the pump is itself resonant, and this double resonance lies behind optical bistability and the sideband instabilities analysed by Lugiato and co-workers.
An odd multiple, on the other hand, means that the pump is off-resonance, lying exactly halfway between two modes: the beat note between the pump and the resonant sidebands, which will be self-excited if the nonlinearity is strong enough, has period 2tR, identifying this as the Ikeda instability.
The nice thing about this system is that the above double resonance can be guaranteed: the refractive-index change induced by the strong pump beam actually moves the comb of longitudinal modes with respect to the pump frequency (it is strictly the product of.length and refractive index that determines the mode frequencies).
This "transphasing" of the mode spectrum will alternately give rise to bistable and Ikeda-type double resonances as the pump parameter A is increased: 8 determines the starting position of the comb relative to the pump frequency.
The entire period-doubling cascade can be given a similar interpretation.
As each new period 2 "tR bursts into oscillation, the effective free spectral range of the cavity is halved, because the generalised condition for resonance must be constructive interference after 2" round trips, since only after 2"tR do the cavity's optical properties repeat themselves.
At the 2"tR threshold, these small signal modes are degenerate with the oscillating frequency spectrum, but as A is increased, they transphase in frequency until halfway between the oscillating frequencies.
If the gain there is large enough, these new modes burst into oscillation: if not, transphasing continues to a renewed coincidence with the oscillating frequencies, at which point an inverse period-doubling cascade ensues, leading eventually to a steady-state response.
Figure 7.4 illustrates this process, showing the small-signal gain spectrum as A is increased through the P2 threshold, and the ensuing doubling of the spectrum, followed by transphasing to the verge of 4tR oscillation.
It should be noted that the noise spectrum of the system should be very similar to Fig. 7.4, because of the filtering action of the cavity on any broadband noise source.
These considerations constitute a useful base against which to consider   the complications caused by transverse spatial effects and by finite-medium response time y": there is clearly no reason why the basic gain and transphasing mechanism should not survive the introduction of these complications.
Dealing first with finite time constant, perturbation theory readily leads to the conclusion that the gain spectrum of four-wave mixing becomes Lorenzian, with halfwidth y, and the associated dispersion means that the free spectral range becomes a function of frequency.
The former is usually the more important: clearly if YtR 1, then there will be no significant gain in the Ikeda situation, where the modes straddle the pump frequency: this is the physical origin of the requirement -I "" tR usually quoted for Ikeda instability.
There is no corresponding requirement for bistability, which occurs for , and thus actually benefits from a long time constant, since the gain is : hence materials such as semiconductors and liquid crystals with small are ideal for bistability but useless for Ikeda instability.
Another effect of finite is to raise the degeneracy by which all symmetrically placed pairs of sideband modes reach threshold simultaneously.
On the one hand, the raising of the h = + 1 degeneracy permits self-pulsing at period tR, as described by Bonifacio and Lugiato{7}, whereas the Ikeda degeneracy splits to yield pulsing at 2tR/3, 2tR/S, etc.
The latter phenomena have been extensively analysed in the limit B 0, in which the Ikeda mapping becomes one-dimensional and can be realised in a so-called hybrid system in which the feedback is electronic rather than optical.
In the limit B 0, the complex map can be approximated by the real noninvertible map where I = E. Introduction of a finite value for augments the left side of the above by a term , and the index n gives over to continuous time t.
As stated, this raises the degeneracy caused by the cosine function, and this system is observed{21}to give a variety of waveforms of period coexisting in complex ways with each other and with subharmonics and chaos.
The 2tR/3 oscillation has also been seen, however, in an all-optical system based on ammonia gas{lB}.
There is one interesting situation in which the rule is broken, which can also be interpreted along the above lines.
As decreases, the four-wave gain increases as its bandwidth decreases.
This gain is accompanied by dispersion, just as in a laser, which is such as to reduce the frequency interval between two modes lying either side of the pump frequency (mode-pulling).
These modes can thus give rise to an Ikeda instability (which will now have a period rather than 2tR) provided these modes are resolved into two gain peaks: a high-finesse resonator  is thus required for this version of the Ikeda instability, which gives rise to chaos via a period-doubling cascade in parameter regions corresponding to the upper branch of optical bistability{23}.
Though not so far observed, this version of the Ikeda instability is of interest because it can be derived by mean field methods, which otherwise preclude chaos.
Abraham and Firth{1, 2}have undertaken an analysis of folded (Fabry-Perot) resonators for the case .
They find, in particular, a Feigenbaum period-doubling route to chaos, and are able to show, by an extrapolation technique, that the scaling parameter 6 lies within 1% of the Feigenbaum value 4.669…for any of three control parameters (Table 7.1).
Transverse effects have been examined in a few instances.
The most complete of these is due to Moloney et al.{31}, who find (Fig. 7.5) that the transverse degrees of freedom lead to a Ruelle-Takens route to chaos, via frequency locking of two incommensurate frequencies.
A significant recent advance was the demonstration{28}that the basic "plane-wave" Ikeda map is unphysical, because the 2tR instability has a lower threshold for finite wave vector perturbations than for zero wave vector (plane-wave), with the result that a uniformly excited medium develops an Ikeda oscillation in which neighbouring regions oscillate out of phase.
Thus only in cases where the cavity forces a specific transverse profile are transverse effects trivial.
Very considerable theoretical effort has been directed at instabilities in passive resonator systems, of which the above is only a partial, necessarily distorted, summary{9}.
Sadly, the experimental situation is much more patchy.
The hybrid experiments have been mentioned.
Next came an all-optical experiment using an optical fibre as nonlinear medium{32}, demonstrating 12 and chaos.
Unfortunately, the nonresonant nature of the nonlinearity in this experiment meant that it had to compete with other nonlinear processes.
In particular, stimulated Brillouin scattering actually had a lower threshold, but was ingeniously eliminated by use of a pulse train, rather than continuous pumping.
This complicates the analysis and   reduces the utility of the experiment.
Most recently to date have been experiments on ammonia gas resonantly pumped by CO2 lasers, in which good modulation, and chaos, have been observed in a system which comes close to Ikeda's original proposal{18, 19}.
These experiments are, however, still pulsed, and it would be extremely valuable if a true continuous wave all-optical passive resonator system could be developed, to give the sort of experimental impetus that the xenon and  helium-xenon lasers have given to laser instabilities.
In contrast to the Lorenz model of a homogeneously broadened laser discussed earlier, the situation in high-gain gas lasers with inhomogeneous broadening has been one where the experiments have actually been leading the theoretical development.
As far back as 1969, Casperson discovered that the high-gain xenon laser (wavelength 3.51 m) could, even with steady excitation, produce its output as an infinite train of pulses{11}.
Moreover, these pulses could, depending on the conditions, repeat regularly, alternate in height or be aperiodic.
Casperson pursued two main avenues of approach to a theoretical understanding of these phenomena, viz. coherence effects (finite I") and inhomogeneous broadening.
He did not, at that stage, incorporate both effects, because "the mathematics would be more complicated" .
Only in 1978 did it become apparent that both effects are necessary, but also sufficient, to produce the observed phenomena.
More recently Abraham and co-workers have extended this work to the helium-xenon system, where the helium partial pressure allows the degree of inhomogeneous broadening to be varied as a control parameter, with beautiful results{3}, and Mandel{29}had demonstrated theoretically that the Lorenz-model instability evolves continuously into the Casperson instability as the degree of inhomogeneous broadening is varied.
7.5 Chaos in inhomogeneously broadened lasers
Why is inhomogeneous broadening so crucial?
The answer lies in the saturation behaviour.
A homogeneously broadened system saturates uniformly in frequency, so that the oscillation frequency, which clearly has maximum gain at threshold, retains its primacy as the laser saturates, preventing other frequencies from reaching threshold (providing it is spatially uniform: in actual lasers higher-order transverse and adjacent longitudinal modes appear because they have different spatial structures from the dominant mode).
The situation in an inhomogeneously broadened medium is quite different.
The dominant mode saturates effectively only those atoms whose (Doppler-shifted) resonance frequency lies within about I"of the mode frequency: other atoms are unsaturated, so that the gain actually increases with frequency detuning from the dominant mode: the excited mode burns a hole in the gain spectrum.
Careful design is thus necessary to restrict laser action to a single mode.
Even then, however, an instability can arise due to "mode-splitting" .
As well as the spectral hole burned in the gain, the refractive index contribution of the resonant atoms is also saturated, again over a spectral width -I".
As a result, the dispersion relation close to the operating frequency develops a "wiggle" , which, for strong enough saturation, may turn into an 5-shape.
When this happens, we have three frequencies which all share the same wave vector, and are thus resonant  with the cavity.
Since the spectral hole ensures that the two new sideband frequencies actually have higher gain than the central (originating) frequency, they will grow: self-pulsing develops.
This phenomenon was termed "mode-splitting" by Casperson and Yariv{12}.
The pulsation period will be of order I", but clearly parameter dependent.
Of course, as the sidebands build up, they burn their own holes in the gain and refractive-index spectra, and it is not difficult to envisage the development of pulse shapes as complex as those of Fig. 7.6, or, indeed, period-doubling and chaos in the pulse train: compare the discussion on passive resonators.
Deep modulation at frequencies -I "is clearly only possible if " , so we still require a "bad cavity" , and we may note that the spectral holes form and refill on a time scale which thus plays an important role in the phenomenon: it has been claimed{20}that"population pulsations' are the primary source of the instability.
Experimental evidence for chaos based on the mode-splitting instability was first obtained by Casperson in 1978{10}: the route to chaos was not studied in detail, except that period-two was observed.
In recent years Abraham and co-workers have performed detailed studies of routes to chaos in helium-xenon lasers{15}and have observed, as the laser cavity length is fine-tuned, interspersed bands of chaotic output reached, in certain conditions, by period doubling.
By varying the discharge current (and hence gain) at fixed cavity length, the Ruelle-Takens route to chaos was observed: two initially incommensurate frequencies (at 0.67 mA) lock to a 4: 3 ratio (at 0.89 mA) leading to chaos (at 1.6 mA).
The intermittency route to chaos was also inferred, with pure xenon in the laser tube, from a sequence in which a single frequency (with its harmonics) progressively broadened on increasing the discharge current, just as one would expect for increasingly frequent bursts of noise against a background of steady oscillation.
The chaos itself displays a variety of signatures: Fig. 7.6 displays a "zoo" of time sequences with corresponding spectra, this time in a ring laser.
From a theoretical standpoint, Minden and Casperson{30}have been able to model the xenon-laser data very well, but found it necessary to include such effects as velocity-changing collisions, and population transfer from upper to lower laser level by spontaneous emission, as well as standing-wave effects.
In contrast, most theoretical work has been based, like eqns (7.3), on a single-mode, unidirectional ring laser, with only the simplest decay terms.
Mandel{29}has been able to obtain a number of useful analytic results for such a system, usually assuming = I"and a Lorenzian, rather than Gaussian, velocity distribution function.
Recent numerical work by Shih et al.{33}has demonstrated that when the known parameters for the helium-xenon system are inserted into eqns (7.2), then all three classic routes to chaos can be obtained by careful scans over realistic ranges of the control parameters.
In summary, single-mode inhomogeneously-broadened lasers have provided a rich corpus of both experimental and theoretical work: detailed  quantitative comparison of the two is becoming possible with the development of unidirectional single-mode helium-xenon lasers by the Abraham group.
Historically, one of the earliest frequency-locking phenomena to be studied in laser physics was the locking of three or more longitudinal modes.
When many modes are involved, this phenomenon results in very short pulses — typically picoseconds — which have grabbed most of the attention because of their many applications.
Recently, however, there have been careful studies of the transition from free-running to mode-locked operation of three-mode lasers.
First phase-locking occurs, which causes the appearance of low-frequency "beat-beat" notes in the spectrum (recall that the cavity-mode spectrum is distorted by the atomic dispersion, so that at threshold the modes will not be quite equally spaced).
This "beat-beat" spectrum may show bands of periodic and chaotic response before the modes lock, giving a quiet low-frequency spectrum{3}.
An interesting set of experiments{37}, probably related to the above, have shown the three classic routes to chaos in the "beat-beat" spectrum of a high-gain 3.39 km helium-neon laser, the control parameter in this case being a slight tilt of one laser mirror, which itself causes the initially single-mode laser to oscillate on three modes.
Three-mode lasers, especially in folded resonators, are probably more complicated than theorists would wish, but the class of lasers in which chaos of this type may be observed is probably very large, and such experiments may well prove useful in testing the universality of the "universal" routes to chaos.
This brief survey has been intended to convey the flavour of the work on chaos in lasers and other all-optical systems which has exploded into the literature in the last five years or so.
The theme underlying much of this work is that broadly satisfactory, and reasonably simple, models exist for the huge variety of nonlinear optical processes which have been discovered since the advent of the laser: there is optimism that nonlinear optics can similarly provide simple systems showing the full range of chaotic behaviour.
As we have seen, this optimism is already justified on the theoretical side, and this is providing a fruitful stimulus to the experimentalists.
7.6 Summary
Nonlinear optics is perhaps unique among systems showing chaos in that a fully quantum mechanical description of the phenomena is conceivable: there is the interesting and exciting prospect that the next few years may reveal what, if anything, is meant by "quantum turbulence" , and all-optical systems such as those described or proposed above are likely to be in the forefront of experimental tests of such concepts.