

6 The Lorenz equations
C.Sparrow Department of Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics, University of Cambridge, 16 Mill Lane, Cambridge CB2 1SB, UK
The Lorenz equations, named after Ed Lorenz who first introduced them as a model of a two-dimensional convection{21}, have been important for a number of different reasons at various times in the past 20 years or so.
Initially they were remarkable just because they are a simple three-dimensional nonlinear system of autonomous ordinary differential equations showing chaotic behaviour; though many such systems are now known (as described elsewhere in this volume), in 1963 such systems were almost unheard of.
So much so, in fact, that, despite the beauty of Lorenz's original paper, and the remarkable progress he made in understanding the behaviour of his system, the paper (and the ideas) were largely ignored for nearly ten years.
Also, of course, the equations were of importance because of their connection with the problem from which they were derived: here was the hope that turbulent phenomena could be modelled by simple finite-dimensional systems, but this aspect too was largely ignored.
6.1 Introduction
In the 1970s, with the burgeoning interest in dynamical systems (and the wider acceptance of the notion of chaotic behaviour), the Lorenz equations featured in many papers.
In several cases, important types of behaviour were first investigated in the Lorenz equations although these behaviours have since been recognised as typical of many systems.
For instance Manneville and Pomeau's work on intermittence{24}and the Henon map{18}both appeared in papers on the Lorenz system.
At the same time, a specific geometric model of the equations in a small range of parameter values was developed.
This work was led by Williams{38, 39}and Guckenheimer{14, 17}, though the range of parameter values in question was actually that studied by Lorenz in his original paper.
This geometric  model (a geometrically constructed system which seems to have the same properties as the Lorenz equations though the connection depends on several global properties of the flow which have not yet been proved) has an attracting set, for a range of parameter values, which is a strange attractor, but which is a slightly different strange attractor at every parameter value in the range (see below).
This attracting set, then, is not structurally stable, though it only just fails to satisfy Smale's axiom A{34}.
This discovery probably had an important effect on the search for extensions to axiom A and the notion of structural stability; it seems to have more or less stopped it.
One is actually led to wonder what effect a knowledge of the Lorenz system, at an earlier stage, would have had on Smale's development of these important ideas.
For the present, the equations are still almost the only candidate for a system having a well-understood (topologically and dynamically) strange attractor in a range of parameter values.
Their importance as a model of convection has diminished, it being almost universally accepted that they are a suitable model for the original problem only at relatively uninteresting parameter values, and their claim to physical relevance now rests mainly on their connection with the Maxwell-Bloch equations for lasers, and on convection problems in specially shaped (usually toroidal) regions.
On the other hand, with the increasing recognition that the study of homoclinic and heteroclinic bifurcations is central to the understanding of chaotic behaviour, the Lorenz equations are again generating a lot of interest; this is partly due to the very great number and variety of such bifurcations occurring in the system, and partly because many of these can be precisely analysed in terms of their effects on the periodic orbits and other invariant trajectories in the system.
It is mainly this aspect of the equations which will be discussed below.
More detail and many older references can be found in Sparrow{35}.
Finally, and even as I write, new and deeper understandings of the Lorenz system are in the offing{12}.
Though excessive concentration on these equations can be criticised (since they are not, in many ways, typical of chaotic systems), it remains true that examples of nearly all the types of chaotic behaviour seen in other three-dimensional dissipative systems of differential equations can be found, for some parameter values, in the Lorenz system.
The immense amount of detailed experimental and theoretical work done on the equations often allows these new developments to be seen in a fuller context than is possible with newer and less well understood systems.
The Lorenz equations are: where are three parameters which are normally taken, because of their physical origins, to be positive.
The equations are often studied for different values of in with a and b held constant; Lorenz's original paper{21}took .
6.2 The equations
When , the origin is globally attracting (all trajectories tend towards it), but for there are three stationary or equilibrium points.
These are the origin, which is unstable, and two points .
There is an r-value, at which a Hopf bifurcation occurs at C-.
If , the Hopf bifurcation does not occur for any positive r, and are stable for all otherwise C"+ are stable in and unstable in .
Notice that C+ and C are images of each other under the natural symmetry (x, y, z)(-x, -y, z) of the equations, and that they therefore undergo bifurcations simultaneously.
Also, the z-axis is invariant under the flow, so any periodic orbits in the system can be partially described by an integer n specifying the number of times that they wind around the z-axis.
Such orbits will either be symmetric (i.e. be their own image under the symmetry) or will occur in symmetric pairs, each of which is taken to the other by the symmetry.
It can also be shown that there is a bounded set , which depends on the parameters, which all trajectories eventually enter and thereafter remain within{21, 35}.
This, together with the fact that the flow has a negative divergence,— a- b -1, implies that all trajectories eventually tend towards some bounded set A with zero volume.
The set A also depends on the parameters, and those parameter values at which the topology of A changes are, by definition, the parameter values at which bifurcations occur in the system.
If we can understand the topology and stability of the various components of A, then we will know the long-term behaviour of all trajectories.
This, in the absence of closed-form solutions to the equations, is our aim.
The only bifurcations occurring in the equations which are accessible to simple classical analysis have already been mentioned.
These are the bifurcation at r = 1, when the origin loses stability and the stationary points appear, and the Hopf bifurcation at when C"+ lose stability by absorbing, as r increases, two unstable periodic orbits{25}.
In order  discover more about bifurcations in the system, it is necessary to resort to computer simulation of the equations.
6.3 Homoclinic orbits
It transpires that the most important bifurcations occurring in the equations are associated with the possibility that there may be homoclinic orbits to the origin for some parameter values.
A homoclinic orbit is a trajectory which tends, in both forwards and backwards time, towards an unstable (saddle) stationary point.
Three examples are shown, schematic-ally, in Fig. 6.1.
All these three types of homoclinic orbit actually occur in the Lorenz equations, and the symmetry of the equations ensures that in all three cases there are two homoclinic orbits as shown in Fig. 6.1a rather than the one shown, for clarity, in Figs 6.1b and c.
Recent and extensive numerical computations by Alfsen and Froyland{1}illustrate the amazing wealth of homoclinic orbits in the equations.
They produce a picture showing some of the r and b parameter values (with a fixed at a = 10) for which homoclinic orbits to the origin can be seen.
A schematic version of their diagram is shown in Fig. 6.2; every point on one of the solid lines on this figure represents a pair of r- and b-values for which homoclinic orbits occur.
The point X marked on Fig. 6.2 (at parameter values r 30.475, b = 2.6123) lies at the centre of a logarithmic spiral of r-, b-values at which there are homoclinic orbits to the origin{11}.
At X itself there are heteroclinic orbits (orbits which tend towards one stationary point in forward time and to another in backward time) linking all three stationary points.
The situation at X is shown in Fig. 6.3a.
The homoclinic orbits to the origin that lie close to X spiral a great number of times around C+ or C "before returning to the origin; as you work away from X along the spiral the number of turns around C+ or C" decreases.
Figure 6.3b shows yet another type of homoclinic orbit; this one involves only the stationary points and C".
(Strictly speaking these orbits are heteroclinic but it   makes sense, because of the symmetry, to identify C"+ with C and to think of this situation as a symmetric version of a homoclinic orbit to a single stationary point.)
Homoclinic orbits such as this one occur along the dotted line in Fig. 6.2.
Before looking at the implications of this plethora of orbits, it remains to state that only a few of the homoclinic orbits known to occur in the Lorenz equations are displayed in Fig. 6.2.
The ones shown are only the simplest; each winds only once around the z-axis when projected on to the x-y plane.
There are, in fact, infinitely many other families of homoclinic orbits winding any number of times around the z-axis.
Some idea of the complexity involved can be gained by considering that there is an infinite sequence of X-like points accumulating on the point X in Fig. 6.2.
These are points in r, b parameter space where the three stationary points are connected together by heteroclinic orbits of a more complicated kind than those shown in Fig. 6.3a.
Each such point has its own logarithmic spiral of   homoclinic orbits to the origin around it, and a dotted line of homoclinic orbits to the stationary points C coming out of it.
Each of these points then has another sequence of points accumulating on it where yet more complicated heteroclinic orbits connect the three stationary points, and so on, ad infinitum .
Of course, the various families of homoclinic orbits to the origin cannot cross (at any point in parameter space the two trajectories which tend in backward time to the origin are unique and can be part of at most one homoclinic orbit) and the dotted lines representing homoclinic orbits to the points also cannot cross (for similar reasons).
None the less, the full picture in just this two-dimensional parameter space is almost beyond imagining.
Further details can be found in{11}.
In order to understand why it is that homoclinic orbits are such important features of the Lorenz equations, we will examine the change of behaviour of the system as r passes through a value at which a homoclinic orbit like  that shown in Fig. 6.1a occurs.
The results depend crucially on the symmetry and on the relative sizes of the eigenvalues of the linearised flow near the origin.
6.4 Bifurcations associated with homoclinic orbits
We examine a small region of phase space consisting of a small box, B, around the origin and two thin tubes, 5 and T, around part of the two  branches of the unstable manifold of the origin (see Fig. 6.4).
We assume that at some critical r-value, r*, there is a homoclinic orbit like that shown in Fig. 6.1a, and consider, for r-values close to r*, whether or not there are any trajectories which remain forever within the regions B U 5 U T. Providing that we choose B, 5 and T to be small enough, with r close enough to r*, and that we are only concerned with the topology of trajectories, it is permissible to regard the flow within B as linear, and to think of the map which takes points in the discs D and D "to points in the discs E and E" as a linear transformation.
In other words, if we choose coordinates so that the linearised flow near the origin takes the form we can use these equations to work out the point on the side of B where a trajectory emerges from B if it starts at a point on the top face of B. (We assume that the box B is a cube with faces which are part of the planes .
Then, for a trajectory starting at a point on the side of B, providing and z are small (within D or D", say), we can write for the point at which this trajectory next strikes the top face of B. Here a and b are constants (which may depend on r) and A is a 2 X 2 matrix.
This procedure can be rigorously justified, but roughly speaking the linear flow in B is justified for B small enough, and the affine transformation is justified because the time taken by trajectories to traverse the tubes T or 5 is small compared with the time they spend within B. It is also permissible, for r close to r*, to assume that the eigenvalues}i and the matrix A are constants which do not depend on r, whereas a and b depend linearly on (r-r*).
Let us, then, carry out this program.
For a point on the top of we obtain a point on the side given by with a similar formula, given by the symmetry, for{0.
Since is small compared with c (for thin-enough tubes) the first coordinate is much smaller than the second .
Figure 6.5a shows the thin pointed region through which trajectories leave B if they start inside the rectangle ABCD on the top face of B. Combining eqn (6.4) with (6.3) we obtain where (0, n*) is the point on the top face of B where the unstable manifold of the origin returns to the stable manifold of the origin when r = r*.
We can determine the sign of a and p* experimentally; for the case usually studied (a = 10, b = 8/3, and r* 13.926), both are negative.
Also, for the same case, we determine the sign of the elements of A which multiply the larger of the two coordinates from eqn (6.4).
This leads to a series of return maps, for r-values like   those shown in Fig. 6.5b.
This figure shows the top face of the box B; trajectories started within ABCD return to the lower shaded region, RB'C ", and trajectories started within ADEF return to the upper shaded region LE'F" .
The closer to AD (which lies on the stable manifold of the origin) a trajectory starts, the closer to one of the points R or L it will return; R is the point where the right-hand branch of the unstable manifold of the origin first strikes the top face of B, and L is the equivalent point for the left-hand branch.
The most important feature of these maps is that stretching occurs in the a-direction and that there is contraction in the a-direction.
The existence of expanding and contracting directions is an essential prerequisite for chaotic behaviour in dissipative systems of this sort.
However, looking more closely at Fig. 6.5b, we see that in the cases and  there is no chance that there are any trajectories which remain forever within the region of interest except for the homoclinic orbit itself at r = r*; for all other trajectories the modulus of the a-coordinate increases on each pass through the top of B and so all trajectories eventually wander out of the region of validity of our analysis (and, in fact, spiral into C1 or C2).
The case is more interesting.
The expansion and contraction imply the existence of four regions, shown schematically in Fig. 6.6a, which are mapped by the flow into the four shaded regions of   Fig. 6.6a.
Each of the shaded regions is much longer in the a-direction and much narrower in the p-direction than the original regions from which they came.
Figure 6.6b shows us the possible routes for trajectories to pass through the four shaded areas.
For instance, if we want a trajectory that goes then we start in region 1; to get to region 3 we must be in the right-hand "third" of region 1; if we are going to go on from region 3 to region 4, we must be in the right-hand "third" of that "third" ; and, to go on to region 2, in the left "third" of that "third" , etc.
For any infinite sequence of symbols 1,2,3 and 4 allowed by Fig. 6.6b we can find a vertical line of points (arrived at by taking away"two-thirds' of an interval an infinite number of times) from which trajectories pass through the four shaded areas in the prescribed sequence.
In addition, there will be vertical lines of points that generate finite sequences which represent trajectories that eventually strike the top face of B on the line = 0 (and thereafter tend towards the origin and never strike the top face of B again).
All these vertical lines, from which trajectories remain within B U 5 U T for all future time, form a Cantor set, and trajectories that start between lines eventually leave our small region of interest.
If we now consider where trajectories came from, we can divide the four shaded areas into horizontal bands, each of which corresponds to some finite history.
For example, if we are in region 1 (Fig. 6.6a) and came from region 2, we know we are in the lower horizontal band, which -is the intersection of region 1 and .
We can repeat this process indefinitely, arriving at a Cantor set of horizontal lines which represent the possible histories (allowed by Fig. 6.6b) of trajectories that remained within our small region of interest for all past time.
The points that lie on the intersections of the horizontal and vertical Cantor sets will be points through which trajectories pass that do not leave our small region of interest in either forwards or backwards time.
Trajectories passing through any other points leave the region of interest, or have come from outside it, or both.
Each point lying on an intersection will have a unique symbolic representation (which is infinite to the left, but which may terminate on the right) in terms of symbols 1, 2, 3 and 4.
Conversely, each sequence of symbols, infinite on the left, will correspond to one point, providing that the sequence can be generated by following the arrows in Fig. 6.6b.
This last proviso actually tells us that we only need two symbols, T and S, to describe points.
If we write T for 3 or 4, and S for 1 or 2, then any infinite sequence of Ts and Ss has one and only one representation in Is, 2s, 3s and 4s which obeys the Fig. 6.6 rules.
For example, STTTSST…must be 1344213…
Thus, the points that lie in our "invariant set" (the set of all points lying on intersections of the vertical and horizontal lines), each of which is taken by the return map to another such point, correspond one to  one with symbolic sequences, infinite on the left, of Ts and Ss.
The way we have chosen the symbols T and S also means, conveniently, that trajectories threading their way through the top face of the box B according to some sequence of Ts and Ss, make the same sequence of passes through the tubes, T and S.
We can tell how trajectories look by examining their corresponding sequence.
Periodic trajectories (a countable infinity) will have repeating sequences; trajectories that terminate in the origin (an uncountable infinity) will have terminating sequences; trajectories that are asymptotically periodic (in either forwards or backwards time an uncountable infinity) will have aperiodic sequences.
Notice that there will not be quite so many trajectories as points on the top face of B since trajectories will, in general, intersect this plane in a large (possibly infinite) number of points.
When considering points, we have some central mark in the sequence to tell us where we are, and with trajectories we do not.
For points, each application of the return map moves the central mark one place to the right.
As an example, consider the symmetric "period 2" periodic orbit represented by the doubly infinite sequence…
TSTSTSTS…
There is only one such orbit.
This orbit intersects the top face of the box B in two points, one of which lies to the left of the stable manifold of the origin and which is represented by the doubly infinite sequence (with mark)…
TSTSTSTS…, the other of which lies to the right of the stable manifold of the origin and is represented by the doubly infinite sequence (with mark)…
TSTSTSTS…
Each application of the return map moves the mark one place to the right.
Hence, as we follow the orbit around, we oscillate between one point and the other.
We call the collection of trajectories that remains within B U S u T forever a "strange invariant set" .
It is invariant because the flow takes it into (and on to) itself.
The set is created in the bifurcation that occurs as r passes through r*, and we can now mention some of the interesting properties that lead us to call it "strange" .
(1) No single trajectory, nor any subset of the strange invariant set, is stable; we can find trajectories, as close as we like to any trajectory in the strange invariant set, which leave B U S u T in both forwards and backwards time.
(2) Even if we restrict our attention to those trajectories in our strange invariant set, we can see that almost all pairs of trajectories started at points close together on the top face of the box B will not remain close together as we follow them around.
This is called "sensitive dependence on initial conditions" , a phenomenon which persists even when the strange invariant set becomes attracting (see below) and which gives the typical "chaotic" , "turbulent" or "pseudo-random" behaviour which we associate with a "strange attractor" .
We can see  why this phenomenon should occur.
Two points on the top face of B are close together if the parts of their symbolic descriptions near the central mark are the same.
As we follow trajectories starting at two close-together points, we move to points with the same symbolic descriptions but with the central mark moved further and further to the right.
Eventually we can expect the central mark (which tells us which region we are in at the moment) to have moved to parts of the two sequences which are quite different.
This argument will only fail to apply to two close-together points on the same vertical line (= constant); such points will have converging futures (but distinct pasts).
(3) There is a very real sense in which the strange invariant set is a single object and not just the sum of its parts.
It contains an uncountable infinity of dense trajectories; these are trajectories which pass as close as we like to all trajectories in the strange invariant set.
(We can construct doubly infinite sequences of Ts and Ss which contain every possible finite sequence of Ts and Ss; the trajectories corresponding to these sequences pass as close as we like to any other trajectory in the invariant set.)(4) Periodic orbits are dense in the strange invariant set.
Since periodic orbits can contain any finite number of symbols which repeat, it is clear that we can find a periodic orbit which passes arbitrarily close to any other trajectory in the strange invariant set.
The strange invariant set that we have been discussing is very similar to Smale's horseshoe example, introduced in his seminal (1967) paper.
Our use of"symbolic dynamics' to describe the set also follows Smale.
It seems, then, that associated with the existence of a homoclinic orbit in the flow, there is a bifurcation which produces a remarkable collection of periodic orbits and other trajectories.
Notice in particular that we have not used, anywhere in our analysis, the "shape" of the tubes T and S, so we can expect a similar analysis to hold for all homoclinic orbits to the origin which occur in the Lorenz equations.
Returning to Fig. 6.2 for a moment, whenever the parameters are altered so that one of the solid lines (representing homoclinic orbits to the origin) is crossed, there will be a bifurcation similar to that described above.
It is also possible to analyse, in a very similar way, the behaviour close to homoclinic orbits involving the stationary points C+ and C{10}, and, indeed, the behaviour close to the special point X on Fig. 6.2, which represents parameter values at which all three stationary points are connected by heteroclinic orbits{11}.
In the former case, the fact that the linearised flow near C+ and C has a complex pair of eigenvalues alters the results considerably.
On the one hand the behaviour is more complicated very close to the critical parameter value, with infinitely many  periodic orbits in existence on both sides of the bifurcation, some of which may be stable{10,15,31,32}.
On the other hand, it is argued in{10}that, if we look only at parameter values reasonably far from the critical value, it will usually be the case that the cumulative effect of the whole sequence of complicated bifurcations occurring near the critical parameter value is just to add a single symmetric periodic orbit to the system.
The analysis for parameter values near point X is much harder, involving elements of all the other analyses mentioned so far, but it is at least possible to confirm that Fig. 6.2 is qualitatively correct{11}.
For parameter values , and r increasing from 1, numerical simulations of the Lorenz equations show the following behaviour:(1) For 1{r{13.926, all numerically computed trajectories spiral into the stable stationary points C+.
The right+hand branch of the unstable manifold of the origin spirals into C and the left-hand branch into C. (2) At r 13.926 there is a homoclinic orbit like that shown in Fig. 6.1a and for r}13.926 the right-hand branch of the unstable manifold of the origin spirals into C and vice versa.(3) 13.926{r{24.06.
All numerically computed trajectories eventually spiral into C+ or C but some spend a considerable time wandering near the strange invariant set (which was produced in the bifurcation that occurred as r passed through its homoclinic value) before doing so.
The time spent wandering increases rapidly as r approaches 24.06. (4) r}24.06.
Some trajectories wander forever near the strange invariant set which has become a strange attractor.
For r{24.74 it is still possible to find some trajectories which spiral into C+, but, at r = rH 24.74, C+ lose stability and in r}24.74 all numerically computed trajectories wander forever near the strange attractor.
6.5 Strange attractors
It is clear from our analysis in the previous section that we do not expect the strange invariant set produced at r 13.926 to be stable and we do not expect it to show up in numerical simulations; the behaviour described in (2) and (3) above (r}13.926) cannot be predicted from the purely local analysis.
However, we can understand it in similar terms if we numerically (as opposed to analytically) compute return maps on a suitable plane.
A suitable plane at these parameter values turns out to be the plane , which includes C+, and the return map obtained, for r-values just less than and just greater than , is shown schematically in   Fig. 6.7.
For r{24.06 (Fig. 6.7a) the return map looks similar to Fig. 6. 5b for r2 r*.
Providing we assume that there is still contraction in one direction and expansion in the other (which we can no longer prove but which appears to be true) the same analysis will hold.
As r increases towards r 24.06 the strange invariant set seems to spread out so that the doubly hatched regions on Fig. 6.7a decrease in size.
Trajectories which start within BCEF continue to wander near the strange invariant set until they eventually fall into one of these doubly hatched regions outside BCEF (from whence they spiral into C+ or C); so, as r approaches 24.06, trajectories wander for longer and longer.
Of course, trajectories started very near the origin, which first strike the return plane close to R or L, spiral at once into C+; this is how one determines experimentally the precise parameter value at which the strange set becomes attracting.
For r}24.06, return maps, for suitable choices of initial rectangle  BCEF, look like that shown in Fig. 6.7b.
The doubly hatched regions are absent and any trajectory started within BCEF returns to a point within BCEF and so continues to wander near the strange set forever.
Figure 6.8 shows a typical trajectory for r = 28.0.
The supposed expansion in directions perpendicular to AD still ensures that there can be no stable periodic orbits, but an analysis similar to that in the previous section does not have quite the same result.
This is because the images RB'C "and LE'F" of ABCD and ADEF no longer stretch right across the original rectangles, so we cannot guarantee the existence of a trajectory corresponding to every sequence allowed in Fig. 6.6b.
Some trajectories have been lost from our strange invariant set.
The normal method of analysing this strange attractor is to construct a model which has the properties we like to think (and do think) that the actual Lorenz system has, and then to reduce this model to a one-dimensional mapping of an interval by "factoring out" the contracting direction{17,27,35}.
Such an analysis leads to the conclusion that in every neighbourhood of every r-value we can find uncountably many different Lorenz attractors, each containing slightly different periodic orbits and trajectories.
We will not attempt this analysis here but instead will offer an  intuitive (and practical) argument for why this should be so.
Once the invariant set is attracting, there is the possibility that the unstable manifold of the origin, which first strikes the return plane at R or L and which then wanders chaotically around the strange attractor forever, may eventually strike AD and then tend back towards the origin.
In other words, homoclinic orbits are possible.
The chaotic nature of the motion suggests that in any neighbourhood of any r-value there will be many (countably many) r-values for which this occurs, though the different homoclinic orbits involved will happen only after the unstable manifold has made very different sequences of passes through the return plane.
Each such homoclinic orbit can be analysed locally in the same way as outlined in section 6.4.
This time some of the constants have a different sign and the analysis suggests that each such homoclinic orbit will remove a strange invariant set of periodic orbits and trajectories from the system.
The analysis still only concerns a small region contained within thin tubes around the homoclinic orbit.
The fact that trajectories which wander out of the region may later return (after wandering chaotically near the strange attractor) is of no concern; we are concerned only with trajectories that remain forever within the small region, and a strange collection of these is removed.
This argument, though less precise, cannot replace the usual arguments which are needed to justify our assumption that there will be countably many homoclinic orbits in any r-interval.
However, it does have one great advantage.
Even if it eventually transpires that the Lorenz equations do not satisfy the conditions necessary to justify the rigorous analysis (but see{33}), it is none the less true that a great many (infinitely many) homoclinic orbits do occur in the system though perhaps not distributed densely through all r-intervals.
Our intuitive arguments will still apply to these homoclinic orbits and give some understanding of the way in which the structure of the attractor changes.
Before moving on, it is sensible to relate the contents of the last two sections to Fig. 6.2.
The homoclinic orbit marked r* in that figure is the one at which the strange invariant set is first created as described in section 6.4.
The parameter value rA, which is the accumulation point of an infinite sequence of homoclinic orbits occurring as r decreases, is the parameter value at which the strange set becomes an attractor.
When b = 8/3, the remarks of this section apply for r-values 24.06{ r{28 but cease to apply when the spiral of homoclinic orbits about X in Fig. 6.2 is crossed.
We have only looked, in this chapter, at a small subset of the parameter values that have been examined by researchers in recent years.
As a consequence, it has only been possible to describe a few of the phenomena which have been observed.
6.6 Other parameter values
From a purely phenomenological point of view, the most obvious omission is a description of the various stable periodic orbits observed, together with the period-doubling windows which normally accompany them{7, 22,35}.
For example, as r is increased above an r-value near 30 (a, = 10, b, = 8/3), the chaotic behaviour is interrupted by parameter intervals in which stable periodic orbits are seen.
See, for example, Fig. 6.9.
For large-enough r-values (r}312) there is a stable symmetric periodic orbit which winds just once around the Z-axis and which then persists for all larger r-values (Fig. 6.9c).
This behaviour (alternating windows of stable and chaotic behaviour) is typical of most chaotic systems of ordinary differential equations, and raises the usual questions.
In the context of the Lorenz equations and the previous sections of this chapter, there are two related ways to explain this onset of stability.
First, the changeover from the strange-attractor regime to the stable periodic orbit regime is associated with passing through the top of the spiral of homoclinic orbits in Fig. 6.2; the usual parameter value b = 8/3 lies just above the point X of Fig. 6.2.
Secondly, if we look at return maps, as r passes through the critical region they start to change so that they resemble Fig. 6.10.
The folds in the return maps prevent the relatively simple analysis of the strange attractor from remaining true, since points which are separated by the expansion in one direction can, if they are later on the opposite sides of the fold in the map, be forced back together again by the contraction in the other direction.
Hence stable orbits are possible.
The first point definitely implies the second, but it must be said that other mechanisms exist in the equations for introducing folds into the return maps, so that a similar transition is observed even for b-values which do not mean that increasing r involves passing through the spiral of Fig. 6.2.
We have also not mentioned the many different styles of analysis which have been developed for special parameter ranges.
These include:(1) The study of one-dimensional maps derived from the system.
These may be useful as heuristic guides (but not rigorous ones) in some parameter ranges, e.g. larger b (o = 10){29}or the limit r, r 00{5, 6}, or as the basis of the rigorous treatment of the strange-attractor parameter range{17,27,35}.
(2) The method of averaging applied in the limit r 00{4, 28, 35}.
This theory enables one to predict that for reasonably large b-values (including b = 8/3) there will be a single stable symmetric orbit for large enough r, but that for smaller b (b{2?) there will be, in addition, an infinite sequence of homoclinic orbits to the origin (and other complicated behaviour) which never terminates as .
(3) The theory of knottedness of orbits in the equations{3}.
(4) Various pieces of analysis designed to approximate, in some   analytic fashion or other, the strange attractor regime{13,26}.
(5) Various statistical studies of the equations in chaotic regimes, including the determination of fractal dimensions{19,23,30}.
(6) As mentioned above, various studies of special properties of the system for particular parameter intervals in the chaotic/stable  periodic regimes.
These include intermittency{24}and noisy periodicity{22}, both of which occur widely in other systems.
What we have done is to concentrate on two particular themes.
One of these is the study of the strange attractor regime and the creation of the attractor through a homoclinic bifurcation.
This deserves special mention because, on the assumption that various conditions which appear to be satisfied by the return maps are actually satisfied, this attractor is probably the only well understood strange attractor known in a system of "natural" three-dimensional differential equations; we have strong reasons to suppose that there can be no stable orbits in a relatively large parameter range, as opposed to the normal"chaotic attractors where one merely cannot observe them but has no arguments to suggest they cannot exist (they may be of extremely high period or have very complicated basins of attraction see{8}).
Our other theme, the more general study of homoclinic orbits and bifurcations, is perhaps of even greater importance because it can be applied to other systems of equations as well{2,9, 10,20}.
We have only really looked closely at the local analysis of one particular kind of homoclinic orbit (in section 6.4); such local analyses are interesting in their own right, but are relatively well known{37}.
The real usefulness of these studies comes, though, when the global implications are considered.
These  global considerations do rely on numerical computation to a large extent, are nonrigorous, and do not provide predictions of actual behaviour at actual parameter values.
But consider:(1) It is possible to follow periodic orbits numerically with changing parameter (even if they are unstable); every orbit so far examined in the Lorenz equations can be traced, at least in one direction, to a homoclinic bifurcation.
This seems to be generally true in most other systems of chaotic equations as well.
(2) It is frequently possible to determine how many periodic orbits of what topological type are created or destroyed in each such bifurcation.
This may either be done precisely (as with our homoclinic orbits to the origin) or more loosely, as explained in section 6.4 (for other types of homoclinic orbit).
(3) It is frequently possible that if one homoclinic orbit occurs at one parameter value, and another occurs at another parameter value, then certain general properties of an intermediate sequence of homoclinic orbits can be determined.
This theme is developed in detail, for the Lorenz equations, in{35}, and for a very different system of equations in{10}.
(4) It happens that many systems of equations, particularly those of some physical relevance, have simple behaviour for extreme values of a parameter.
In the case of the Lorenz equations we know the behaviour in r{1 and for r large.
(5) Putting all of the above four points together, it is possible to develop a type of book-keeping for periodic orbits.
Such an exercise can span huge parameter ranges in which quite different behaviours are observed (but all of which are intimately tied up with the existence of periodic orbits: even the strange attractor is densely packed with unstable orbits).
If this book-keeping adds up — all orbits which are created must either be destroyed or persist for all parameter values — all is well and good.
If not, new bifurcations must be searched for.
In the case of the Lorenz equations, several new phenomena have been located in this way{10, 35}, and the technique is showing promise in other systems{10}.
(6) Finally, and importantly, the study of homoclinic orbits can be undertaken relatively easily and cheaply on a computer.
We have, then, arrived at the beginning rather than at the end of a story.
It is probably fair to say that continued detailed study of the Lorenz equations will go on throwing out new ideas of general applicability, despite their rather special properties (e.g. symmetry).
Regardless of the physical relevance (or otherwise!) of some of these studies, this process will be worth while as long as the study of chaotic ordinary differential  equations remains the Pandora's box it is today.
And in the Lorenz equations, it is easier to make connections between apparently unrelated things than in less well known, less well studied and less well understood systems.
It only remains to guide the interested reader to some other, more measured, introductions to the Lorenz equations, not so far referred to in this chapter.
Guckenheimer and Holmes develop the theory of the strange attractor in a very thorough and comprehensible way in their book{16}, and reference{36}is probably also worth while for a slightly different emphasis.
I have made few attempts in this chapter to give the first references to ideas or discoveries.
Rather, I have concentrated on those I know and on those that I think are easiest to read.
More references can be found in{35}.
I apologise to any who are offended.
It is with more pleasure that I thank all those who have helped my ideas about the Lorenz equations to develop; they are many, but I must mention particularly Peter Swinnerton-Dyer, Bob Williams and Paul Glendinning.
Acknowledgements and Apologies