

In this book we shall assume, for working purposes, that a semantic theory is truth-conditional.
Apart from the fact that it avoids the above dilemmas, by claiming only the narrowest scope for semantics, such a theory recommends itself to the pragmaticist for the following reasons.
First, it is the only kind of theory now available that is precise and predictive enough to make investigable the nature of a semantics/pragmatics boundary, or the interaction between the two components.
Secondly, it is arguable that most other theories, e.g. those based on semantic components, can be subsumed within it, in so far as they are built on consistent and logical lines.
Thirdly, it is perhaps still the kind of theory with the most support in linguistic and philosophical circles, despite many dissenters and many unresolved problems.
Finally, many of the issues in pragmatics have arisen historically from this particular vantage point, and to understand them one must at least at first approach from the same direction.
But ultimately, the pragmaticist may do well to remain agnostic, whatever semantic theory is assumed for working purposes.
The point here, however, is that whatever kind of semantic theory is adopted, many aspects of meaning in a broad sense simply cannot be accommodated if the theory is to have an internal coherence and consistency.
From what we now know about the nature of meaning, a hybrid or modular account seems inescapable: there remains the hope that with two components, a semantics and a pragmatics working in tandem, each can be built on relatively homogeneous and systematic lines.
Such a hybrid theory will almost certainly be simpler and more principled than a single amorphous and heterogeneous theory of semantics.
So the notion that pragmatics might be the study of aspects of meaning not covered in semantics certainly has some cogency.
But we need to know how the broad sense of meaning, on which the definition relies, is to be delimited.
This broad sense should include the ironic, metaphoric and implicit communicative content of an utterance, and so it cannot be restricted to the conventional content of what is said.
But does it include all the inferences that can be made from (a) what is said and (b) all the available facts about the world known to participants?
Suppose that Moriarty says that his watch broke, and from this Sherlock Holmes infers that he perpetrated the crime: although the information may have been indirectly conveyed, we should be loath to say that Moriarty communicated it.
For communication involves the notions of intention and agency, and only  those inferences that are openly intended to be conveyed can properly be said to have been communicated.
To help us draw a line between the incidental transfer of information, and communication proper, we may appeal to an important idea of the philosopher Grice (1957).
Distinguishing between what he calls natural meaning (as in Those black clouds mean rain), and non-natural meaning or meaning.nn (equivalent to the notion of intentional communication), Grice gives the following characterization of meaning-nn (10) S meant-nn z by uttering U if and only if:(i) S intended U to cause some effect z in recipient H (ii) S intended (i) to be achieved simply by H recognizing that intention (i) Here, S stands for speaker (in the case of spoken communication; for sender or communicator in other cases); H for hearer, or more accurately, the intended recipient; "uttering U" for utterance of a linguistic token, i.e. a sentence part, sentence, or string of sentences or sentence parts (or the production of non-linguistic communicative acts); and z for (roughly) some belief or volition invoked in H.
Such a definition is likely to be opaque at first reading, but what it essentially states is that communication consists of the "sender" intending to cause the "receiver" to think or do something, just by getting the "receiver" to recognize that the "sender" is trying to cause that thought or action.
So communication is a complex kind of intention that is achieved or satisfied just by being recognized.
In the process of communication, the "sender's" communicative intention becomes mutual knowledge to "sender" (S) and "receiver" (H), i.e. S knows that H knows that S knows that H knows (and so ad infinitum) that S has this particular intention.
Attaining this state of mutual knowledge of a communicative intention is to have successfully communicated.
A simple illustration may help to clarify the concept: it distinguishes between two kinds of "boos" , or  attempts to frighten someone.
Suppose I leap out from behind a tree, and by sheer surprise frighten you.
I have caused an effect in you by "natural" means.
But now suppose that you know I am behind the tree, you are expecting me to leap out, and I know you know all that: I can still (maybe) frighten you by leaping out, just by getting you to realize that I intend to frighten you.
Only the second is an instance of communication (meaning-nn) in Grice's sense.
Grice intended his definition of communication to cover such non-verbal cases, but we will be concerned here (and henceforth) only with those cases where linguistic behaviour is part of the means whereby the communicative intention is recognized.
A puzzle that immediately arises is how this complex reflexive communicative intention is meant to be recognized by the recipient.
Surely, one could argue, it can only be recognized by knowledge of some convention that U means z; but in that case we can do away with talk of complex intentions and construct an account of communication based directly on the notion of conventional signal.
But this misses Grice's essential insight, namely that what the speaker means by U is not necessarily closely related to the meaning of 0 at all.
Indeed U may have no conventional meaning, which allows for the creation of new terms, nonce expressions, and thus ultimately for some aspects of language change (for an explanation of how these communications may be understood, see Schiffer, 1972: Chapter V) But crucial for pragmatics, Grice's theory explains how there can be interesting discrepancies between speaker-meaning (Grice's meaning-nn) and sentence-meaning.
For example, Linguistic, is fascinating said ironically may be intended by the speaker to communicate "Linguistics is deadly boring" .
Further, there appear to be general conventions about the use of language that require (or, perhaps, merely recommend) a certain degree of implicitness in  communication, with the consequence that it is virtually ensured that what the speaker means by any utterance U is not exhausted by the meaning of the linguistic form uttered (see Chapter 3 below).
How then is the full communicative intention to be recognized?
By taking into account, not only the meaning of U, but also the precise mechanisms (like irony, or general assumptions of a certain level of implicitness) which may cause a divergence between the meaning of U and what is communicated by the utterance of U in a particular context.
Much of this book is concerned with spelling out these mechanisms which, like other aspects of linguistic knowledge, we use daily in an unconscious way.
If we now adopt Grice's meaning-nn as the scope of meaning in the definition of pragmatics in (9), we shall include most of the phenomena that we want to include, like the ironic, metaphoric and indirect implications of what we say (elements 5, 6 and 7 in Table I.I), and exclude the unintended inferences that intuitively have no part to play in a theory of communication.
It should be added that there are a number of philosophical problems with Grice's theory (see e.g. Schiffer, 1972), but they do not seem to vitiate the value of the central idea.
We now have some sketch of the scope of meaning that is referred to in the definition, namely all that can be said to have been communicated, in Grice's sense, by the use of a linguistic token in a context.
But can we give as a definition of pragmatics nothing but the complement of, or the residue left by, semantics in the field of meaning?
Is there no conceptual integrity to the scope of pragmatics itself?
We might try to find such a conceptual unity by making the distinction between sentence-meaning and utterance-meaning, and hope then to be able to equate semantics with the study of sentence-meaning and pragmatics with the study of utterance-meaning.
The distinction between sentence and utterance is of fundamental importance to both semantics and pragmatics.
Essentially, we want to say that a sentence is an abstract theoretical entity defined within a theory of grammar, while an utterance is the issuance of a sentence, a sentence-analogue, or sentence-fragment, in an actual context.
Empirically, the relation between an utterance and a corresponding sentence may be quite obscure (e.g. the utterance may be elliptical, or contain sentence-fragments or "false-starts" ), but it is customary (after Bar-Hillel) to think of an utterance as the pairing of a sentence  and a context, namely the context in which the sentence was uttered.
It is important, but in practice exceedingly difficult, to maintain this distinction at all times in the study of meaning.
As an index of the difficulty, one may note that linguists frequently oscillate between assigning notions like presupposition, illocutionary force, truth condition to sentences or utterances, although important theoretical consequences follow from the choice.
One may claim that the confusion here results from the need for yet further distinctions: thus Lyons (1977a) advocates distinctions between text-sentences and system-sentences, sentence-types and sentence-tokens, utterance-types and utterance-tokens, and utterance-acts and utterance-products.
It is unlikely, though, that we can handle all these if we cannot make the first distinction systematically (and the alert reader can no doubt find mistakes of this sort within this book).
For expositional reasons, we shall need to use the word utterance in various ways in this book, but where it is used to contrast with sentence it should be taken in the sense advocated by Bar-Hillel, as a sentence (or sometimes string of sentences) paired with a context.
And this is the sense relevant to the proposal that semantics is concerned with sentence-meaning, and pragmatics with utterance-meaning.
Many authors accept this equation implicitly, but there are a number of problems with it.
In the first place, in the (rare) cases where sentence-meaning exhausts utterance-meaning (i.e. where the speaker meant exactly what he said, no more, no less), the same content would be assigned both to semantics and pragmatics In other words, we would need to restrict the notion of utterance-meaning in such a way that we subtract sentence-meaning, and in that case we are back to a definition of pragmatics by residue.
But there are other problems: for there re aspects of sentence-meaning which, at least on truth-conditional r other narrow semantic theories, cannot be accounted for within semantic theory.
Such aspects are conventional but non-truth-conditional elements of sentence-meaning, e.g. what we shall call conventional implicatures, and (at least on many theories) presuppositions, and perhaps even aspects of illocutionary force (concepts expounded in the Chapters below).
On the assumption of a truth-conditional semantics, such aspects of sentence-meaning would have to be dealt with in pragmatics, and so there can be no direct equation of sentence-meaning and semantics.
On the same assumption, there is another overwhelming problem for the proposal: for it is not sentences but rather utterances-that make definite statements, and thus can sensibly be assigned truth conditions (as philosophers have long noted; see e.g. Strawson, 1950; Stalnaker, 1972).
The argument rests in part on the pervasive nature of deixis (see Chapter 2 below) in natural languages, for sentences like (II) are true or false only relative to contextual parameters, thanks to the fact that I, now and the tense of am are variables given specific values only on particular occasions of utterance (i.e. (II) is true only when spoken by certain speakers, those who are sixty-three, or true of individuals only at certain times, when they are sixty-three):(11) I am now sixty-three years old These facts seem to establish that truth conditions must be assigned to utterances, i.e. sentences with their associated contexts of utterance, not to sentences alone (or, if one likes, truth conditions include context conditions).
So again, it makes no sense to equate semantics with the study of sentence-meaning.
There is another formulation of essentially the same proposal: semantics should be concerned with meaning out of context, or non-context-dependent meaning, and pragmatics with meaning in context.
The strong version of this, apparently held by Katz (1977), assumes that there is some given, natural level of context-independent meaning, and that sentence-meaning can be described independently and prior to utterance-meaning.
But as we have argued, and will illustrate below, this does not seem to be the case.
For, if one accepts a truth-conditional semantics then one is forced to state truth conditions on sentences-in-contexts, or if one prefers (as Katz would) that semantics is concerned with aspects of meaning assigned by convention to linguistic forms, then one includes context-dependent aspects of meaning within semantics.
A weaker version of the same proposal would be to consider that semantics is an abstraction away from context-dependent utterances, in so far as this is possible (as suggested by Carnap, 1959: 13; Lyons, 1977a: 591).
In any case, it does not seem that the distinction between sentence-meaning and  utterance-meaning can be relied upon to clarify the distinction between semantics and pragmatics.
We are left with the unrefined definition that pragmatics is concerned with the study of those aspects of meaning not covered in semantics.
Despite many advantages, such a definition fails to draw attention to the unifying characteristics of pragmatic phenomena.
Let us turn to another definition that would give the context-dependent nature of such phenomena more centrality:(12) Pragmatics is the study of the relations between language and context that are basic to an account of language understanding Here the term language understanding is used in the way favoured by workers in artificial intelligence to draw attention to the fact that understanding an utterance involves a great deal more than knowing the meanings of the words uttered and the grammatical relations between them.
Above all, understanding an utterance involves the making of inferences that will connect what is said to what is mutually assumed or what has been said before.
The strengths of such a definition are as follows.
It recognizes that pragmatics is essentially concerned with inference (Thomason, 1977): given a linguistic form uttered in a context, a pragmatic theory must account for the inference of presuppositions, implicatures, illocutionary force and other pragmatic implications.
Secondly, unlike the definition in (8), it does not make the distinction between semantics and pragmatics along the encoded/unencoded line; this is important because, as we shall see, there is still controversy over whether such pragmatic implications as presuppositions or illocutionary force are or are not encoded or grammaticalized in linguistic forms.
Thirdly, it includes most aspects of the study of principles of language usage, for there seems to be a general principle of the following kind: for each systematic set of constraints on the use of language, there will be a corresponding set of inference-procedures that will be applied to language understanding (see Levinson, 1979a).
The weaknesses are, unfortunately, equally clear.
First, pragmatics will then include the study of the interaction between linguistic knowledge and the entirety of participants' knowledge of the world (or "encylopaedic knowledge" ).
For example, in order to understand the little story in (13), one needs to know the following assorted facts: presents are usually bought with money; piggy-banks are used to hold money; piggy-banks are generally made of a dense material like metal  or plastic; money inside a container of dense material will generally rattle, etc.
Jill wanted to get Bill a birthday present, so she went and found her piggy-bank; she shook it, but there was no noise; she would have to make Bill a present This example comes from work in artificial intelligence (Charniak, 1972) which is concerned with the attempt to translate the significance of ordinary utterances into an explicit representation that might be used by a computer to produce "intelligent" responses.
The immense difficulties of such translations have served to emphasize just how great a role assumed knowledge plays in the understanding of utterances.
However, this interpretive dependence on background assumptions has been used as an argument against the possibility of any systematic study of language understanding: if the set of potentially relevant assumptions is coincident with the total set of facts and beliefs held by participants, then to study this interpretive process will be to study the total sum of human knowledge and beliefs (Katz & Fodor, 1963).
The argument is clearly fallacious: just as rules of logical deduction can be stated which will apply to an indefinitely large set of propositions, so it is quite possible that the principles that underlie the interaction between utterances and assumptions (however particular they may be) can be simply and rigorously stated.
Nevertheless, if pragmatics is to be considered a component within linguistic theory (a question to which we shall return), it may be that to include such principles is indeed to include too much.
But little serious thought has been given to this problem.
Another difficulty facing this definition or scope for pragmatics, is that it calls for some explicit characterization of the notion of context.
In an earlier definition, where pragmatics was restricted to encoded aspects of context, one could claim that the relevant aspects of context should not be specified in advance but rather discovered by a survey of the world's languages.
Here though, unless one wants to claim that context is whatever (excluding semantics) produces inferences, some characterization of context seems required.
What then might one mean by context?
First, one needs to distinguish between actual situations of utterance in all their multiplicity of features, and the selection of just those features that are culturally and linguistically relevant to the production and interpretation of  utterances (see e.g. Van Dijk, 1976: 29).
The term context, of course, labels the latter (although context-description might have been a more appropriate term, as Bar-Hillel (1970: 80) suggests).
But can we say in advance what such features are likely to be?
Lyons boldly lists the following (1977a: 574), over and above universal principles of logic and language usage:(i) knowledge of role and status (where role covers both role in the speech event, as speaker or addressee, and social role, and status covers notions of relative social standing),(ii) knowledge of spatial and temporal location,(iii) knowledge of formality level,(iv) knowledge of the medium (roughly the code or style appropriate to a channel, like the distinction between written and spoken varieties of a language),(v) knowledge of appropriate subject matter,(vi) knowledge of appropriate province (or domain determining the register of a language).
Ochs (1979c), in an extended discussion of the notion, notes "The scope of context is not easy to define one must consider the social and psychological world in which the language user operates at any given tame" (p. 1), "it includes minimally, language users' beliefs and assumptions about temporal, spatial, and social settings; prior, ongoing, and future actions (verbal, non-verbal), and the state of knowledge and attentiveness of those participating in the social interaction in hand" (p.5).
Both Lyons and Ochs stress that context must not be understood to exclude linguistic features, since such features often invoke the relevant contextual assumptions (a point made nicely by Gumperz (1977) who calls such linguistic features contextualization cues).
Certainly, in this book, we shall need to include participants' beliefs about most of the above parameters, including the place of the current utterance within the sequence of utterances that makes up the discourse.
Other authors have been more coy: "I have left the central concept of this paper, namely pragmatic context, in rather thorough vagueness, and this for the simple reason that I see no clear way to reduce the vagueness at the moment" (Bar-Hillel, 1970:80).
Although, along the lines suggested by Lyons or Ochs, we may be able to reduce the vagueness by providing lists of relevant contextual features, we do not seem to have available any theory that will predict the relevance of all such features, and this is perhaps an embarrassment to a definition that seems to rely on the notion of context.
Another line of attack on a definition of this sort would start by questioning the notion of language understanding.
How is this to be construed?
A reasonable, and perhaps the only plausible, response would be to say that to understand an utterance is to decode or calculate all that might reasonably have been meant by the speaker of the utterance (cf.
Strawson, 1964).
Here the notion of speaker-meaning is best explicated, once again, by reference to Grice's concept of meaning-nn, for we are interested only in the inferences overtly and intentionally conveyed.
So the definition really amounts to: pragmatics is the study of the role context plays in speaker- (or utterance-) meaning.
But since we have failed to produce a clear notion of context, what we include in context is likely to be whatever we exclude from semantics in the way of meaning relations.
And so we seem to be back to the idea that pragmatics concerns whatever aspects of meaning are not included in semantics.
(In which case, it may be objected, the problematic concept of context has been gratuitously introduced.)
Certainly the two definitions ((9) and (12)) are not far apart; but it might be claimed that at least the one that focuses on the nature of context makes clear that one of the goals of a pragmatic theory should be to explicate that nature.
Let us now turn to one of the definitions most favoured in the literature, albeit mostly in an implicit form.
This definition would make central to pragmatics a notion of appropriateness or felicity:(14) Pragmatics is the study of the ability of language users to pair sentences with the contexts in which they would be appropriate Such a definition should have a nice ring to it, from the point of view of those who wish to place pragmatics on a par with other aspects of linguistic inquiry.
For if pragmatics is to be considered an aspect of linguistic competence in Chomsky's sense, then like other aspects it  must consist of some abstract cognitive ability.
Further, such a view provides a nice parallel with semantics: for just as a semantic theory is concerned, say, with the recursive assignment of truth conditions to well-formed formulae, so pragmatics is concerned with the recursive assignment of appropriateness conditions to the same set of sentences with their semantic interpretations In other words, a pragmatic theory should in principle predict for each and every well-formed sentence of a language, on a particular semantic reading, the set of contexts in which it would be appropriate.
Such a view enjoys much support, not only among linguists (see e.g. Van Dijk, 1976: 29; Allwood, Andersson & Dahl, 1977: 153; Lyons, 1977a: 574) but also among philosophers (originally Austin, 1962 and Searle, 1969).
But unfortunately it is beset with many problems.
First, as we shall see, most definitions of pragmatics will occasion overlap with the field of sociolinguistics, but this definition would have as a consequence exact identity with a sociolinguistics construed, in the manner of Hymes (1971), as the study of communicative Competence.
Secondly, it requires a fundamental idealization of a culturally homogeneous speech community or, alternatively, the construction of n pragmatic theories for each language, where n is the number of culturally distinct sub-communities.
For example, in a village in South India, where there may be say twenty distinct castes, a single honorific particle may have just one meaning (e.g. speaker is inferior to addressee) but have twenty distinct rules for its appropriate usage: members of one caste may use it to their cross-cousins, others only to their affines, etc. (for the actual details see Levinson, 1977).
Thirdly, speakers of a language do not always comport themselves in the manner recommended by the prevailing mores-they can be outrageous, and otherwise "inappropriate" , So such a definition would make the data of pragmatics stand in quite an abstract relation to what is actually observable in language usage, whereas for many linguists one of the major contributions of pragmatics has been to direct attention once again to actual language usage.
Fourthly, it seems to be a fact that pragmatic constraints are generally defeasible, or not invariable.
So suppose we attempt, for example, to phrase accounts of the pragmatic notion of presupposition in terms of appropriateness conditions, we shall find that they wrongly predict conditions of usage.
For instance, the verb regret seems to presuppose that its complement is true, and  so we could try the following characterization: the sentence John doesn't regret cheating can only be used appropriately in contexts where it is known (or believed) that John cheated.
But unfortunately we can then easily imagine a context in which that sentence might be appropriately used, in which it is not assumed that John cheated: for example, you thought he had cheated, asked me whether he now repents, but I tell you he never did, and persuade you accordingly, and then I say so John doesn't regret cheating (Gazdar, 1979a: 105).
The problem is quite general: when the pragmatic implications of an utterance do not match the context, then in general the utterance is not treated as in any way infelicitous or inappropriate or bizarre-rather the pragmatic implications are simply assumed not to hold.
But the use of the notion of appropriateness-conditions would in that case simply make the wrong predictions.
Finally, and decisively, there is another problem with the use of the notion of appropriateness as a primitive or basic concept in pragmatics.
For, there is a widespread phenomenon that Grice has called exploitation: in general, if there is some communicative convention C that one does A in context Y, then suppose instead one does B in Y, or does A but in context Z, one will not normally be taken to have simply violated the convention C and produced nonsense.
Rather, one will generally be taken to have exploited the conventions in order to communicate some further pertinent message.
For example, if I normally doff my cap only to my superiors, but on an occasion doff my cap to an equal, then I can effectively communicate an ironic regard, with either a joking or a hostile intent (the non-linguistic example is intended to draw attention to the great generality of the phenomenon; for a study of a particular linguistic practice and the jokes thus made available, see the study of the openings of telephone calls by Schegloff (1979a)).
Irony is a good example of this exploitation and the difficulties such usages pose for a pragmatic theory based on appropriateness, for ironies take their effect and their communicative import, and thus their appropriateness, precisely from their inappropriateness.
So the problem is in general that, in being grossly inappropriate, one can nevertheless be supremely appropriate!
True, one may need some notion of "normal practice" (in preference perhaps to appropriateness) even to describe such phenomena, but it would be a mistake to limit pragmatics to the study of that normal practice or appropriateness.
Pragmatics should be  much concerned precisely with such mechanisms whereby a speaker can mean more than, or something quite different from, what he actually says, by inventively exploiting communicative conventions.
We must conclude that, despite its initial attractions, the proposal that pragmatics be based on a notion of appropriateness should be discarded: language usage is too elastic to allow a pragmatic theory to be based on such a concept.
If instead one accepts that the goal of a pragmatic theory is to predict the meaning, in the broad Gricean sense, of an utterance in a specified context, then none of these difficulties arises.
At this point, someone searching for a simple definition of pragmatics is likely to be exhausted.
One possibility is to retreat to an ostensive or extensional definition, i.e. simply to provide a list of the phenomena for which a pragmatic theory must account (cf.
Stalnaker, 1972).
Such a definition might run as follows:(15) Pragmatics is the study of deixis (at least in part), implicature, presupposition, speech acts, and aspects of discourse structure This list would certainly provide a reasonable indication of some central topics in pragmatics, but the definition scarcely helps those unfamiliar with these topics and has other more serious drawbacks.
For in common with all extensional definitions, it provides no criteria for the inclusion or exclusion of further phenomena that may come to our attention; at best one can say that what warrants pragmatic treatment for some new topic is simply linguists' consensus based on intuitive "family resemblance" to more familiar pragmatic topics.
But surely such intuitive resemblance must be based on some underlying implicit common themes our difficulty is that when we try to spell these out we arrive at the various problems experienced in our earlier attempts at definition.
At this point, we might step back and attempt some conceptual clarification from other angles.
Katz & Fodor (1963) tried to delimit the scope of semantics by a boundary drawing exercise: the "upper bound" of semantics was provided by the borders of syntax and phonology, and the "lower bound" by a theory of pragmatics, understood as a theory of contextual disambiguation.
Using the same strategy, we could say that the upper bound of pragmatics is provided by the borders of semantics, and the lower bound by sociolinguistics (and perhaps psycholinguistics too).
Indirectly, we have already  explored this way of thinking in our consideration of the proposal that pragmatics is "meaning minus semantics" , and the idea that some distinction from sociolinguistics is necessary was responsible for some of the dissatisfaction with a number of the definitions above.
We have already seen the difficulties of drawing a neat dividing line between semantics and pragmatics; given the cross-cutting criteria of conventionality and non-defeasibility (see again Table I.I), the best strategy seems to be to restrict semantics to truth-conditional content.
Assuming that this is accepted (and many linguists would resist it), we can turn our consideration to the lower bound, the border between pragmatics and sociolinguistics.
Here things are even more problematic.
Let us take two paradigmatic kinds of sociolinguistic phenomenon, and ask how they fall with respect to two of our definitions of pragmatics, namely, the most restrictive and the broadest definitions.
Consider honorifics, most simply exemplified by the polite singular pronoun of address in European languages (like vous vs. tu in French — let us call this the V vs. the T pronoun).
There are a number of sociolinguistic investigations of such honorifics and their usage (e.g. Brown & Gilman, 1960; Lambert & Tucker, 1976).
If we take the view that pragmatics is concerned only with grammatically encoded aspects of context (see definition (8) above), then we might propose a tidy division of labour between pragmatic and sociolinguistic accounts of honorifics: pragmatics would be concerned with the meaning of honorifics (e.g. with the specification that V encodes that the addressee is socially distant or superior), while sociolinguistics would be concerned with the detailed recipes for usage of such items (e.g. the specification that amongst some segment of the speech community, V is used to aunts, uncles, teachers and so on, or whatever the local facts are).
Such studies would be exclusive but complementary.
Now, however, consider what happens if we take pragmatics to be the study of the contribution of context to language understanding: suppose normally an aunt gives her nephew T, but on an occasion switches to V, then in order to predict the intended ironic or angry meaning, a pragmatic theory must have available the detailed recipe for usage that tells us that V is not the normal usage, and thus not to be taken at face value.
So on this broader scope for pragmatics, the neat division of labour collapses pragmatic accounts of language understanding will at least need access to sociolinguistic information.
Taking another paradigmatic kind of sociolinguistic phenomenon, namely the variable phonological realizations associated with social dialects (see e.g. Labov, 1972a), let us ask how our definitions of pragmatics treat such facts.
On the most restrictive view, that pragmatics is concerned with linguistically encoded aspects of context, such facts would seem to lie outside the purview of pragmatics.
Such an exclusion would rely on the restricted sense of encoding that required, inter alia, that the significances in question are (a) intentionally conveyed (and we can now say, meant-nn) and (b) conventionally associated with the relevant linguistic forms.
For, as we noted, the association of particular accents (realized by proportions of phonological variables) with particular social or geographical communities is generally not part of an intentional message (Labov (1972a) argues that such variables are only very partially under conscious control), nor are such social significances associated with linguistic forms by arbitrary synchronic convention so much as by regular historical and social process.
However, if we take the broader scope of pragmatics represented by the definition that relates context to language understanding, there may well be cases where sociolinguistic variables would be of relevance to language understanding.
Gumperz (1977), for example, has argued that such variables can be used to invoke domains of interpretation, e.g. to mark transitions from chat to business.
Or, consider the case of a comedian telling a joke about a Scotsman, an Irishman and an Englishman — he may well rely on mimicked features of accent to track which protagonist is talking.
In short, drawing a boundary between sociolinguistic and pragmatic phenomena is likely to be an exceedingly difficult enterprise.
In part this can be attributed to the diverse scopes that have been claimed for sociolinguistics (see Trudgill, 1978: Introduction), but in part it comes about because sociolinguists are interested in inter-relations between language and society however these are manifested in grammatical systems: sociolinguistics is not a component or level of a grammar in the way that syntax, semantics, phonology and, quite plausibly, pragmatics are.
Another angle from which we might attempt conceptual clarification of the issues is to ask: what are the goals of a pragmatic theory?
The tea goal is used here in the special way current in linguistic theorizing, and is to be distinguished from the ultimate goals or motivations that might prompt interest in a theory.
Those ultimate  motivations will be the subject of the next section, but here we are interested in exactly what it is that we expect a pragmatic theory to do.
One abstract way of thinking about this is to think of a pragmatic theory as a "black box" (an as yet unexplicated mechanism), and to ask: what should be the input to such a theory, and what should be the output (or: what is the theory meant to predict, given what particular information)?
We can then think of a theory as a function in the mathematical sense, which assigns one set of entities (the domain) to another set of entities (the range), and the question is, what are these sets of entities?
Thinking the same way about syntax, we can say that a given set of rules (a syntactic analysis) is a function whose domain is the set of possible combinations of morphemes in the language L, and whose range has just two elements, denoting the grammatical and the ungrammatical in L; or thinking about semantics, we might say that a semantic analysis of L has as its domain the set of well-formed sentences of L, and as its range the set of semantic representations or propositions representing the meaning of each of those sentences.
It is by no means so obvious what the input and output of a pragmatic theory should be.
Two authors, at least, have been explicit on this subject.
Katz (1977: 19) suggests that the input should be the full grammatical (including semantical) description of a sentence, together with information about the context in which it was uttered, while the output is a set of representations (or propositions) which capture the full meaning of the utterance in the context specified.
Since a sentence plus its context of use can be called an utterance, Katz's suggestion amounts to the idea that a pragmatic theory is a function whose domain is the set of utterances and whose range is the set of propositions.
Or symbolically, if we let $ be the set of sentences in language L, C the set of possible contexts, P the set of propositions, and U the cartesian product of S x C — i.e. the set of possible combinations of members of S with members of C, and we let the corresponding lower case letters stand for elements or members of each of those sets (i.e. s e S, c e C, p e P, u e U):(16) f(u) =p (or:f (s, c) = p) i.e. f is a function that assigns to utterances the propositions that express their full meaning in context Gazdar (1979a: 4-5), on the other hand, wishes to capture the ways in which utterances change the context in which they are uttered; he shows that Katz's formulation is incompatible with that goal, and therefore suggests instead:(17) f(u) c (or:f (s, c) c) i.e. f is a function from utterances to contexts, namely the contexts brought about by each utterance (or: f assigns to each sentence plus the context prior to its utterance, a second context caused by its utterance) The idea here is that the shift from the context prior to an utterance to the context post utterance itself constitutes the communicational content of the utterance.
It suggests that pragmatic theory as a whole should be based on the notion of context change (see some applications in Chapters 4 and 5 below).
Both these formulations are consistent with the definitions of pragmatics as "meaning minus semantics" or as the contribution of context to language understanding.
Our other definitions might require slightly different formulations.
For example, where pragmatics is construed as the study of grammatically encoded aspects of context, we might want to say:(18) f(s)=c where c is the set of contexts potentially encoded by elements of S i.e. f is a theory that "computes out" of sentences the contexts which they encode Or, alternatively, where pragmatics is defined as the study of constraints on the appropriateness of utterances, we could say:(19) f(u)=a where A has just two elements, denoting the appropriate vs. the inappropriate utterances i.e. f is a theory that selects just those felicitous or appropriate pairings of sentences and contexts — or identifies the set of appropriate utterances Or, where pragmatics is defined ostensively as a list of topics, we could say:(20) f(u)=b where each element of B is a combination of a speech act, a  set of presuppositions, a set of conversational implicatures, etc. i.e. f is a theory that assigns to each utterance the speech act it performs, the propositions it presupposes, the propositions it conversationally implicates, etc.
Clearly, there are other possibilities, and it is far from obvious, at this stage of the development of the subject, just which of the many possible formulations is the best.
But as the subject develops we can expect researchers to be more explicit about exactly how they expect a pragmatic theory to be formulated.
Let us sum up the discussion so far.
We have considered a number of rather different delimitations of the field.
Some of these seem deficient: for example, the restriction of pragmatics to grammatically encoded aspects of context, or the notion that pragmatics should be built on the concept of appropriateness.
The most promising are the definitions that equate pragmatics with "meaning minus semantics" , or with a theory of language understanding that takes context into account, in order to complement the contribution that semantics makes to meaning.
They are not, however, without their difficulties, as we have noted.
To some extent, other conceptions of pragmatics may ultimately be consistent with these.
For example, as we noted, the definition of pragmatics as concerned with encoded aspects of context may be less restrictive than it seems at first sight; for if in general (a) principles of language usage have as corollaries principles of interpretation, and (b) principles of language usage are likely in the long run to impinge on grammar (and some empirical support can be found for both propositions), then theories about pragmatic aspects of meaning will be closely related to theories about the grammaticalization of aspects of context.
So the multiplicity of alternative definitions may well seem greater than it really is.
In any case, we embarked on this definitional enterprise with the warning that satisfactory definitions of academic fields are rarely available, and the purpose was simply to sketch the sorts of concerns, and the sorts of boundary issues, with which pragmaticists are implicitly concerned.
As was suggested at the outset, if one really wants to know what a particular field is concerned with at any particular time, one must simply observe what practitioners do.
The rest of this book will largely be concerned with an overview of some of the central tasks that pragmaticists wrestle with.
Before proceeding to a discussion of the motivations that lie behind the growth of the field in recent years, it would be as well to clarify the role that pragmatics might be seen to play within linguistic theory as a whole.
There is no doubt that some workers see pragmatics as a running commentary on current linguistic methods and concerns, and its role as the juxtaposition of actual language usage with the highly idealized data on which much current theorizing is based.
Viewed in this way, attempts to delimit pragmatics in the ways explored above would make little sense; pragmatics would not be a component or level of linguistic theory but a way of looking afresh at the data and methods of linguistics.
In that case, pragmatics would be a field more akin to sociolinguistics than semantics.
It is therefore worthwhile seeing that, whatever the merits of this view, there is a need for a kind of pragmatic theory that can take its place beside syntax, semantics and phonology within an overall theory of grammar.
The need for a pragmatic component in an integrated theory of linguistic ability can be argued for in various ways.
One way is to consider the relation of the Pragmatics-semantics-syntax trichotomy to the competence-performance dichotomy advanced by Chomsky (see Kempson, 1975: Chapter 9).
In Chomsky's view, grammars are models of competence, where competence is knowledge of a language idealized away from(especially) irregularity or error and variation; to this, Katz influentially added idealization away from context (see Lyons, 1977a: 585-91, for discussion of kinds of idealization).
On such a view, in so far as pragmatics is concerned with context, it can be claimed that by definition pragmatics is not part of competence, and thus not within the scope of grammatical descriptions.
But suppose now we require that adequate grammatical descriptions include specifications of the meaning of every word in a language, and such a requirement has normally been assumed, then we find words whose meaning-specifications can only be given by reference to contexts of usage.
For example, the meaning of words like well, oh and anyway in English cannot be explicated simply by statements of context-independent content: rather one has to refer to pragmatic concepts like relevance, implicature, or discourse structure (this claim will be substantiated in the Chapters below).
So either grammars (models of competence) must make reference to pragmatic information, or they cannot include full lexical descriptions of a language.
But if the lexicon is not complete, then neither is the syntax, semantics or phonology likely to be.
There are other arguments that have been made along the same general lines, to the effect that to capture regular processes (e.g. syntactic regularities) one must refer to pragmatic concepts (see e.g. Ross, 1975), arguments that will arise from time to time in the Chapters below.
Another more powerful kind of argument goes as follows.
In order to construct an integrated theory of linguistic competence, it is essential to discover the logical ordering of components or levels.
For example, Chomsky has elegantly argued that syntax is logically prior to phonology, in that phonological description requires reference to syntactic categories, but not vice versa ; syntax is thus autonomous with respect to phonology, and phonology (non-autonomous with respect to syntax) can be envisaged as taking a syntactic input, on the basis of which phonological representations can be built up.
Accepting for a moment this kind of argument, the question is, is it possible to argue that there is some accepted component of grammar that is non-autonomous with respect to pragmatics (i.e. some component requiring pragmatic input)?
If so, pragmatics must be logically prior to that component, and so must be included in an overall theory of linguistic competence.
It seems fairly clear that it is possible to make this argument in a convincing way.
For example, we have already noted the argument (and see Chapter 2 below) that if semantics is to be truth-conditional, then the truth conditions can only be assigned to utterances, not sentences — in other words, contextual specifications are a necessary input to a semantic component, and thus pragmatics is (at least in this respect) 16 prior to semantics.
Gazdar (1979a: 164-8) assembles a number of detailed arguments to this effect (and philosophers have long noted further such arguments — see e.g. Donnellan, 1966; Stalnaker, 1972; Kaplan, 1978; etc.).
One of these, due to Wilson (1975: 151), will have to suffice here, and holds not just for truth-conditional semantics but for virtually any semantic theory independent of pragmatics.
Consider the following sentence:(21) Getting married and having a child is better than having a child and getting married Good arguments will be given in Chapter 3 to suggest that the word and of itself does not mean (have the semantic content) "and then" , but is neutral with respect to a temporal dimension.
So, there is no difference in semantic content between p and q and q and p, or between "getting married and having a child" and "having a child and getting married" .
How then are we to explain that (22) does not mean the same as (22)?(22) Having a child and getting married is better than getting married and having a child We have to provide a pragmatic account, along the following lines.
The "and then" reading of both ands in the first sentence can be shown to be systematically "read in" to conjoined reports of events by a pragmatic principle governing the reporting of events tell them in the order in which they will or have occurred.
If this is accepted, then the semantic content of (21)(and identically for (22)) would only allow the interpretation that A is better than A (where A is composed of p and 4 or q and p, neutral with respect to ordering).
But such a reading is either necessarily false or meaningless, and in any case semantically anomalous.
The sentence can only be assigned the right truth conditions, or alternatively be given the correct semantic representation, if the pragmatic significance of and in this sentential context (namely the "and then" interpretation) is taken into account before doing the semantics.
This amounts to a concise argument that semantics is not autonomous with respect to pragmatics, and that pragmatics provides part of the necessary input to a semantic theory.
But if pragmatics is, on occasions, logically prior to semantics, a general linguistic theory simply must incorporate pragmatics as a component or level in the overall integrated theory.
There are a number of convergent reasons for the growth of interest in pragmatics in recent years.
Some of these are essentially historical: the interest developed in part as a reaction or antidote to Chomsky's treatment of language as an abstract device, or mental ability, dissociable from the uses, users and functions of language (an  abstraction that Chomsky in part drew from the post-Bloomfieldian structuralism that predominated immediately before transformational generative grammar).
In looking for the means to undermine Chomsky's position, generative semanticists were then attracted to a considerable body of philosophical thought devoted to showing the importance of the uses of language to an understanding of its nature (work by Austin, Strawson, Grice and Searle in particular).
To this day, most of the important concepts in pragmatics are drawn directly from philosophy of language.
Once this broader scope for mainstream American linguistics was established, pragmatics soon took on a life of its own, for the issues raised are interesting and important in their own right.
1.3 Current interest in pragmatics
But there have also been powerful motivations of a different kind.
In the first place, as knowledge of the syntax, phonology and semantics of various languages has increased, it has become clear that there are specific phenomena that can only naturally be described by recourse to contextual concepts.
On the one hand, various syntactic rules seem to be properly constrained only if one refers to pragmatic conditions; and similarly for matters of stress and intonation.
It is possible, in response to these apparent counter-examples to a context-independent notion of linguistic competence, simply to retreat: the rules can be left unconstrained and allowed to generate unacceptable sentences, and a performance theory of pragmatics assigned the job of filtering out the acceptable sentences.
Such a move is less than entirely satisfactory because the relationship between the theory of competence and the data on which it is based (ultimately intuitions about acceptability) becomes abstract to a point where counter-examples to the theory may be explained away on an ad hoc basis, unless a systematic pragmatics has already been developed.
Alternatively, pragmatics and other linguistic components or levels can be allowed to interact.
Arguments between these two positions have never been fully articulated, and because of their highly theory-dependent nature are dealt with, in this book, only in passing.
(But see Gordon & Lakoff, 1975; Ross, 1975; Gazdar & Klein, 1977; Lightfoot, 1979:43-4)
On the other hand, concurrent developments in semantics have isolated intractable phenomena of a parallel kind: presuppositions, speech acts and other context-dependent implications, together with troublesome phenomena like honorifics and discourse particles that had long been given short shrift in the work of generative grammarians Further, thought about the nature of the lexicon, and how one might construct a predictive concept of "possible lexical item" , has revealed the importance of pragmatic constraints (see Horn, 1972; McCawley, 1978; Gazdar, 1979a: 68ff).
It is these issues, arising from the study of meaning, with which this book is centrally concerned.
In addition to these particular problems that seem to require pragmatic solutions, there are also a number of general motivations for the development of pragmatic theory.
One of the most important of these is the possibility that pragmatics can effect a radical simplification of semantics.
The hope is based on the fact that pragmatic principles of language usage can be shown systematically to "read in" to utterances more than they conventionally or literally mean.
Such regularly superimposed implications can then become quite hard to disentangle from sentence or literal meaning; in order to prise them apart, the theorist has to construct or observe contexts in which the usual pragmatic implications do not hold.
For example, it seems perfectly natural to claim that the quantifier some in (23) means "some and not all" :(23) Some ten cent pieces are rejected by this vending machine and that would be the basis of the natural interpretation of a notice with this message, attached to the machine.
But suppose I am trying to use the machine, and I try coin after coin unsuccessfully, and I utter (23); I might then very well communicate:(24) Some, and perhaps all, ten cent pieces are rejected by this vending machine and indeed I could say this without contradiction.
Faced with these facts the semanticist must either hold that some is ambiguous between the readings "some and not all" , and "some and perhaps all" , or allow a pragmatic account of the different interpretations (Parallel  arguments can be made for the word all, and indeed most of the lexical items in a language.)
This pragmatic account would explain how principles of language usage allow addressees to "read in" the "not all" implication.
Since such a pragmatic account is available, as will be seen in Chapter 3, we can let the semantics just provide a reading compatible with "some and perhaps all" .
Not only will such a division of labour approximately halve the size of the lexicon (by accounting for different interpretations of words by a general external principle), it will also immeasurably simplify the logical base of semantics — the word some can be equated directly with the existential quantifier in predicate logic (while the reading "some and not all" taken as basic leads to serious internal contradictions: see Horn, 1973 and Chapter 3 below).
In this way, by unburdening semantics of phenomena that are resistant to semantic treatment but tractable to pragmatic explanation, there is considerable hope that pragmatics can simplify semantic theories.
Another powerful and general motivation for the interest in pragmatics is the growing realization that there is a very substantial gap between current linguistic theories of language and accounts of linguistic communication.
When linguists talk of the goal of linguistic theory as being the construction of an account of a sound-meaning correspondence for the infinite set of sentences in any language, one might perhaps infer that such a grand theory would eo ipso give an account of at least the essentials of how we communicate using language.
But if the term meaning in this correspondence is restricted to the output of a semantic component, those interested in a theory of linguistic communication are likely to be greatly disappointed.
For it is becoming increasingly clear that a semantic theory alone can give us only a proportion, and perhaps only a small if essential proportion, of a general account of language understanding.
The substantial gap that remains to be bridged between a semantic theory (together with a syntactic and phonological theory) and a complete theory of linguistic communication will be demonstrated throughout this book.
Where are we to account for the hints, implicit purposes, assumptions, social attitudes and so on that are effectively communicated by the use of language, not to mention the figures of speech (e.g. metaphor, irony, rhetorical questions, understatement) that have preoccupied theorists of rhetoric and literature?
These communicated inferences can be quite diverse in kind.
Consider, for example, the following  extracts from recorded conversations, where the responses to an utterance indicate that for participants the utterance carried the implications (or something like them) indicated in brackets:(25) A: I could eat the whole of that cake [implication: "I compliment you on the cake" ]B: Oh thanks (26) A: Do you have coffee to go?[implication: "Sell me coffee to go if you can" ]B: Cream and sugar?((starts to pour))(27) B: Hi John A: How're you doing?
B: Say, what're you doing [implication; "I've got a suggestion about what we might do together" ]A: Well, we're going out.
Why?
B: Oh I was just going to say come out There are also cases where the location of a verbal exchange in a particular kind of activity seems to warrant specific inferences:(28)(In a classroom) Teacher: Johnnie, how do you spell Ann?
Johnnie: A, N, N ((intervening material)) Teacher: Okay, Isobel, do you see a name on that page you know?
Isobel: Ann Teacher: That's the one that Johnnie just named [implication: "That doesn't count" ](29)(Beginning of a telephone conversation) Caller:((rings)) Receiver: Hello Caller: Hello [implication: "I know who you are, and you can tell from my voice who I am" ]Receiver: Oh hi [implication: "Yes, I know who you are" ]
Each of these, or examples like them, will be treated in the pages below, together with more familiar examples of pragmatic implication.
The point here, though, is that the existence of a great range of such implications, some of which have only the most tenuous relationship  to the semantic content of what is said, emphasizes the need for a theory or theories that will complement semantics in order to give a relatively full account of how we use language to communicate.
Finally, another very important general motivation for the recent merest in pragmatics is the possibility that significant functional explanations can be offered for linguistic facts.
Most recent linguistic explanations have tended to be internal to linguistic theory: that is to say, some linguistic feature is explained by reference to other linguistic features, or to aspects of the theory itself.
But there is another possible kind of explanation, often more powerful, in which some linguistic feature is motivated by principles outside the scope of linguistic theory: for example, it seems possible that the syntactic processes known as island constraints (Ross, 1967) can be explained on the grounds of general psychological principles (see e.g. Grosu, 1972).
This mode of explanation, by reference to external factors (especially causes and functions), is often called functionalism (see egg.
Grossman, San & Vance, 1975).
Now the possibility exists that language structure is not independent (contrary to Chomsky's well-known views) of the uses to which it is put.
That is to say, it may be possible to give powerful functionalist explanations of linguistic phenomena by reference to pragmatic principles.
Indeed, to many thinkers such explanations seem to be obviously of the right kind (cf.
Searle, 1974; Givon, 1979a, 1979b).
For example, one might observe the fact that nearly all the world's languages have the three basic sentence-types: imperative, interrogative and declarative (Sadock & Zwicky, in press).
On the grounds that these seem to be used paradigmatically for ordering, questioning and asserting, respectively, one might argue that it is pointless to search for internal linguistic motivations for these three sentence-types: they recur in the languages of the world because humans are, perhaps, specifically concerned with three functions of language in particular— the organizing of other persons' actions, the eliciting of information, and the conveying of-formation.
(Such an explanation is of course suspiciously post hoc: we would need independent evidence that these three activities are indeed predominant in social life.)
Or one might note that most languages have some, and many languages have elaborate, ways of encoding relative social status between participants again, a functional explanation in terms of universal (or near universal) principles of social organization seems called for (see e.g. Brown & Levinson, 1978).
Indeed, one might hope for still more in the way of functional explanation much of the syntactic machinery of a language seems to be concerned with the linear re-organization of material in sentences (as in passive or topicalized constructions), a re-organization which does not seem substantially to affect the (truth-conditional) semantic content.
What, then, is the purpose of such elaborate derivational machinery?
It may be that it exists essentially for the purpose of meshing sentence-construction with pragmatic principles; for example, for "foregrounding" and "backgrounding" informational content (or, in the terms preferred in this book, for eliciting certain pragmatic implications).
One of the motivations for research in pragmatics might then be to establish the effects of the uses of language on language structure.
But such research required a fundamental clarification of the explicans, i.e. the functional matrix that is to produce explanations of linguistic structure.
Unfortunately, many recent examples of such work have utilized explanatory principles that have been left quite vague (see M. Atkinson, 1982).
It is important, therefore, that there be sufficiently well-defined pragmatic principles and structures to make such functional explanations precise and testable.
How, therefore, should we think of the uses of language, in a way that could provide functional accounts of linguistic structure?
We might turn to traditional approaches to the "functions of speech" (see the summary in Lyons, 1977a: 50-6).
Perhaps the most thoughtful of these is Jakobson's (1960) modification of earlier schemes (see especially Buhler, 1934).
He suggests that the functions of speech can be to focus on any of the six basic components of the communicational event: thus the referential function focuses on the referential content of the message, the emotive function on the speaker's state, the conative function on the speaker's wishes that the addressee do or think such-and-such, the metalinguistic function on the code being used, the phatic function on the channel (establishment and maintainance of contact), and the Poetic function on the way in which the message is encoded.
Any such scheme, though, is of dubious utility to the pragmaticist in search of functional principles the categories are of vague application, they do not have direct empirical motivation, and there are many other rival schemes built upon  slightly different lines.
Perhaps the only clear utility is to remind us that, contrary to the preoccupations of many philosophers and a great many semanticists, language is used to convey more than the propositional content of what is said.
Certainly, very few linguists have produced analyses of linguistic facts that make use of gross functional categories of this sort (but cf.
Halliday, 1973).
A very similar sort of enterprise has been engaged in by philosophers interested in the notion of speech act (addressed in Chapter 5): either by examining a special set of verbs called performative verbs, or by more abstract conceptual analysis, they arrive at classifications of the basic purposes for which language can be used (see e.g. Searle, 1976).
Again, such schemes seem to be far too broad to relate to detailed aspects of linguistic structure.
How else, then, might we proceed?
One possibility, which has scarcely been explored, would be to take some large sample of the world's languages and ask what basic pragmatic distinctions are needed to describe their grammatical structures.
(The procedure requires, of course, acceptance of the view that not all encoded features of meaning are semantic simply by definition.)
We would note that many languages have, in addition to the three basic sentence-types mentioned above, others that appear to be similarly circumscribed in use: exclamatives that are used paradigmatically to express surprise, imprecatives to curse, optatives to express a wish, and so on(again, see Sadock & Zwicky, in press).
Some languages would motivate distinctions that, from the point of view of European languages, are quite exotic.
For example, to describe the lexicon, morphology and syntax of Javanese one would need to distinguish three levels of respect to addressees and two levels of respect to referents (Geertz, 1960; Comrie, 1979b); to describe the particles of a number of South American Indian languages one would need to distinguish between sentences that are central versus those that are peripheral to the telling of a story (Longacre, 1976a); to describe the third person pronouns of Tunica one would need to distinguish not only the sex of the referent, but also the sex of the addressee (so there would be two words for "she" depending on whether one is speaking to a man or a woman; Haas, 1964), while in  some Australian languages the pronouns encode the moiety or section (kinship division) of the referent, or the kinship relation between referents (e.g. there are sometimes two words one of which means "you-dual of the same moiety" and another "you-dual in different moieties from each other " ; Dixon, 1980: 2-3; Heath et al.1982); to describe the Quileute demonstratives one needs to make a distinction between objects visible and not visible to the speaker (Anderson & Keenan, in press); and so on .
From this profusion of language-specific material one then might be able to build up some idea of just which aspects of the context of utterance are likely in general to exert functional pressures on language.
Further, taking features that are directly and simply encoded in one language, one may well be able to find the same features encoded in more subtle and less visible ways in either the structure or the use of other languages.
For example, although we do not have in English the grammaticalization of the levels of respect that exist in Javanese, we do have means of expressing degrees of respect, largely by choices in the use of expressions: thus (31) would generally be a more polite request than (30):(30) I want to see you for a moment (31) I wondered if I could possibly see you for a moment So by taking at first just the grammaticalized or encoded features of context in the world's languages, we would have both something like a "discovery procedure" for relevant functions of language, and a constraint on the relatively vacuous theorizing that often attends speculation about the "functions of speech" .
We can then go on to ask how in other languages without such grammatical means, the same functions are achieved (if indeed they are).
Such a way of proceeding has much to recommend it, but scant progress has been made in that direction.
To all such approaches to the uses of speech, a strong objection might be made along the following lines: rather than look for a series of static functions or contextual parameters, one should attend directly to the single most important dynamic context of language use, namely conversation, or face-to-face interaction.
The centrality of this functional matrix for language use hardly needs arguing: face-to-face interaction is not only the context for language acquisition, but the only significant kind of language use in many of the world's  communities, and indeed until relatively recently in all of them.
Those interested in functional explanations of linguistic phenomena ought then to have a considerable interest in the systematics of face-to-face interaction.
The question is how best to approach the study of such interaction.
There are perhaps two basic lines of attack: straightforward empirical analysis, and analysis-by-synthesis.
It is the first kind of approach that has so far yielded the most insight, but it is worth considering the possibility of the analysis of interaction by synthesis.
Interaction, in the abstract sense intended here, can be understood as the sustained production of chains of mutually-dependent acts, constructed by two or more agents each monitoring and building on the actions of the other (in this sense the mathematical theory of games studies one kind of interaction; see Luce & Raiffa, 1957).
Such an approach might begin by adopting Goffman's (1976) distinction between systems-constraints and ritual-constraints, where the first labels the ingredients essential to sustaining any kind of systematic interweaving of actions by more than one party, and the second those ingredients that, while not essential to the maintaining of interaction, are nevertheless typical of it they are, if one likes, the social dimensions of interaction.
Concentrating on systems-constraints, one may then ask what necessary and jointly sufficient conditions must be met in order for that highly co-ordinated kind of inter-dependent behaviour that we call interaction to "come off" .
Suppose, for example, we had as our task the programming of two robots in such a way that they could systematically aid one another in an open range of tasks: what properties beyond the specific abilities required for the tasks would they need to have?
(It may be helpful to think in terms of some specific cooperative task, like the production of a building or a machine.)
First, it is clear that they would need to be mutually oriented; they would each need to be aware of what the other was doing at any time.
Secondly, they would need to be aware of the interactional domain (e.g. their scope for movement, and the properties of objects around them), and be constantly updating this as it was affected by their actions.
Thirdly, they would need, in some sense, to be rational to have an effective means-ends reasoning that told them how to implement each desired goal.
Fourthly, each would need to be able to produce acts conditional on the other producing acts, thus securing the chains of interdependent acts typical of interaction.
This would seem to require the  ability to reconstruct from each other 's behaviour the probable goal that the behaviour was intended to achieve (otherwise, the interdependent actions would not be likely to culminate in the achievement of the joint task).
Fifthly, there would need to be some specific relation between their overall goals (if interaction is agonistic, or in the terminology of the theory of games, zero-sum, then their goals must be inversely related; if interaction is cooperative then there must be some specific shared goals).
Sixthly, each robot would have to know that the other had these properties, and know that each knew that, otherwise they could hardly rationally plan actions dependent on the other's plans.
It is just possible that these properties would be sufficient, together with the abilities required by specific tasks, to engender a coordinated interdigitation of actions that would (remotely) resemble human interaction.
The purpose of this thought experiment is to draw attention to the fact that a number of pragmatic phenomena can be explicated by reference to just these sorts of features: for example, as we shall see, deixis can be thought of as based on the assumption of mutual orientation, presupposition on the assumption of shared knowledge of a domain and its updating, speech acts on the making explicit, for other participants, of one's interactional goals, conversational implicature on the assumption of interactional co-operation, and so on .
Thus, if such an approach were developed, one might hope that all the essential concepts for the analysis of pragmatic phenomena would be traceable to the fundamentals of interaction (for an actual computer simulation of conversation along these lines see Power, 1979).
In fact, though, such an approach is still likely to be much too abstract to provide systematic functional accounts of the minutiae of linguistic structures.
For a start, it would need to be complemented by the study of ritual-constraints, the social and cultural constraints on interaction.
Amongst these, there are cross-situational constraints enjoining appropriate social decorum, while there are others appropriate just to specific interactional moments or specific kinds of cultural events.
It might be thought that such social constraints would be likely, simply by being social, to be culturally variable, and thus of no great interest to a general (or universal) pragmatic theory.
However, this does not seem necessarily to be the case.
For example, there are clear pan-culture principles governing the production of "polite" or socially appropriate interaction, and these can be shown  to have systematic effects on the linguistic structure of many languages (Brown & Levinson, 1978; Leech, 1980).
It is also clear that there are highly specific ritual constraints of a universal, or near universal nature for example, nearly all cultures seem to have greeting and parting routines (see Ferguson, 1976).
More speculatively, it is also likely that in all cultures there are social events demarcated as formal events (Irvine, 1979; J. M. Atkinson, 1982), and that some aspects of formality have universal linguistic realizations.
Here again there has been very little systematic exploration, although such universal features of the organization of interaction are good candidates for potentially important functional pressures on linguistic structure.
Whatever the attractions of universal features of interaction for the explanation of universal pragmatic phenomena, there are also clear language-specific pragmatic phenomena, as in the domain of social deixis and elsewhere, where functional accounts of language structure would need to relate these to culture-specific aspects of interaction.
Finally, where there are important divisions between kinds of culture and society, one might well expect systematic differences between the associated languages for example, it is likely that literacy has systematic effects on the lexical, syntactic and semantic structure of languages, even if these have never been spelt out (see Goody, 1977).
Here it is evident that an interest in language usage motivated by functionalist approaches to linguistics would take us well beyond the confines of pragmatics (as sketched in the definitions above) into the domain of sociolinguistics and beyond.
However, in so far as such social features are part of the meaning of utterances, they ought also to be treated in pragmatics; yet within pragmatics, these social constraints on language usage and their systematic effects on language structure, have been very much understudied, perhaps as a result of the philosophical and linguistic bias (no doubt reflected in this book) towards what Buhler (1934) called the representational, and Jakobson (1960) the referential, function of language.
The other more promising line of investigation is to explore directly the nature of conversational interaction.
The basic concepts of conversation analysis, as employed in a branch of ethnomethodology, are the subject of Chapter 6.
Here it will suffice to note that this kind of investigation, employing techniques quite alien to the dominant tradition in linguistics, has revealed that conversational interaction has an elaborate and detailed structure of which we  have very little conscious awareness.
In this area, at least, the would-be functionalist is offered the kind of rich and intricate structure that may match the detailed organization of linguistic structure, and so can be claimed plausibly to stand in a causal relation to it.
For example, the probable universal existence of tag-questions (under a functional definition) can perhaps be related to the universal operation of rules of turn-taking that allow as one option the ending of current speaker's turn by a selection of a next speaker.
But, as yet, few linguists have applied the insights from conversation analysis to functionalist studies of linguistic structure.
Finally, there is another kind of empirical approach to the study of interaction, and its effects on linguistic structure, that might be claimed to have a distinct advantage.
This is the study of the acquisition of language by children.
During the early stages of acquisition, children establish an interactional matrix for language learning, and then slowly learn to utilize linguistic means for promoting interaction.
We are thus enabled to distinguish more easily the would-be functionalist's explicans (interactional structure) from the explicandum (language).
A second advantage is that children's "errors" or incompetences reveal to us what adult competences in verbal interaction must involve.
Thirdly, just as cross-linguistic comparisons can reveal general functions of language by contrasts between what is encoded in one language and not in another, so comparisons across stages of acquisition can be revealing in the same way (Ochs, 1979a).
There has been much recent work by psychologists and linguists on these early stages of acquisition that has direct relevance to pragmatics, but is not reviewed in this book (see e.g. Ervin-Tripp & Mitchell-Kernan, 1977; Snow & Ferguson, 1977 Ochs & Schieffelin, 1979; and the critical account of such work in M. Atkinson, 1982).
Abstract discussions about the scope of pragmatics like those we have reviewed above, may well leave the reader with little feeling for the nature of pragmatic phenomena, Here an extended example may help to clarify the kinds of facts with which pragmatic theories are concerned.
Let us take a simple three-sentence exchange  between two parties, and ask what information it provides us with above and beyond what might be given by the semantic content of the component sentences.
More specifically, we can ask what implications are carried by the sentences about the contexts in which they are being used.
The example is constructed — the reader is warned because good reasons for preferring naturally occurring conversational data will be given in Chapter 6.
Here is the exchange:(32)(i) A: So can you please come over here again right now (ii) B: Well, I have to go to Edinburgh today sir (iii) A: Hmm.
How about this Thursday?
It is not difficult to see that in understanding such an exchange we make a great number of detailed (pragmatic) inferences about the nature of the context in which (32) can be assumed to be taking place.
For example, we infer the facts in (33):(33) l.
It is not the end of the conversation (nor the beginning) 2.
A is requesting B to come to A at (or soon after) the time of speaking; B implies he can't (or would rather not) comply; A repeats the request for some other time 3.
In requesting, A must (a) want B to come now,(b) think it possible that B can come,(c) think B is not already there,(d) think B was not about to come anyway,(e) expect that B will respond with an acceptance or rejection, and if B accepts, then A will also expect B to come,(f) think that his (A's) asking may be a possible motive for B to come,(g) not be, or be pretending not to be, in a position to order B to come 4.
A assumes that B knows where A is; A and B are not in the same place; neither A nor B are in Edinburgh; A thinks B has been to A's place before 5.
The day on which the exchange is taking place is not Thursday, nor Wednesday (or, at least, so A believes) 6.
A is male (or so B believes); A is acknowledged by B to have a higher social status than B (or to be playing the role of a superior) Obvious to the point of tediousness though some of these inferences may be, 26 they are not, on a reasonable circumscription of semantic theory, part of the semantic content of the three sentences.
Rather, they reflect our ability to compute out of utterances in sequence the contextual assumptions they amply: the facts about the spatial, temporal and social relationships between participants, and their requisite beliefs and intentions in undertaking certain verbal exchanges.
But if the inferences are not (or not all) part of the "literal" meaning or conventional content of what is said, from what sources do they arise?
One possibility is that the sentences simply invoke mental associations, in the way that hearing, say, the word prognosis might make one think of hospitals But here that does not seem to be the case.
The inferences are systematic, they are decodable by different interpreters in the same way, and without most of them the exchange cannot be understood; most of them must therefore be part of what is communicated, in Grice's strict sense of meant-nn.
But above all, we can trace each of these inferences to the facts that trigger them, namely, aspects of the form and juxtaposition of the utterances themselves, and we can go on to specify the regular principles that, given such aspects of utterances, produce the inferences in question.
The Chapters below will each be concerned with particular principles of this kind, but let us here just identify the aspects of the utterances that trigger each of the inferences.
14 Computing context: an example
First, we know ((33) 1) that it is not the end of the conversation because utterance (iii) is not a possible closing utterance: for one thing, it requires a response from B, and for another it is not a token of one of the regular closing forms that persons use in conversation (Okay, see you later or the like).
That is, some turns at talking come in pairs, such that one part of the pair requires the second part in response, while conversations have overall structures with well-bounded beginnings and endings.
In short we have strong expectations about the structure of conversation which warrant many different kinds of inference (see Chapter 6).
We also incidentally know that it is not the beginning (although that, being known in advance by  participants, is not part of what is communicated), because there is no token of a conversational opening (like hello), and the particle so with which utterance (i) begins has the function of tying the present utterance back to prior utterances.
We know the facts in (33) 2 in a rather more complicated way.
Whereas the interrogative form of the first utterance might be claimed to encode a question, that is not all that is intended: it would be strikingly uncooperative if B were to say yes (meaning just "yes I am able to come" ) and then not go to A. Somehow, the interrogative form can also convey a request, and this interpretation is strongly reinforced here by the presence of the word please (see Chapter 5).
Much more difficult is to see how B's response in (ii) can be understood as a request refusal, for there is no overt relation at all between its semantic content and that function.
The implication relies on some very general expectation of interactional co-operation, which allows one to assume that if one utterance calls for a response (and the request in (i) does so), then one may assume (other things being equal) that a following utterance is a relevant response (see Chapters 3 and 6).
Such an assumption is strong enough that when one comes across a response that is apparently irrelevant (as (ii) overtly appears to be), an inference is triggered that would preserve the assumption of relevance.
Here, in (ii), the utterance provides the clue: B has to go to Edinburgh; thus if A and B are both far from Edinburgh (and mutually know this), so that it will take the rest of the day to travel and do things there, then B is busy today; sob is indirectly producing a reason why he or she can't easily come to see A, and in so doing can be understood to be refusing A's request.
In actual fact there is just one overt trigger for this inference: the particle well in English serves to warn the recipient that some inferencing must be done to preserve the assumption of relevance.
It can be plausibly claimed that, like so and many other words, well has no semantic content, only pragmatic specifications for usage.
(See Chapter 3; an alternative account of this inference and the role of well can be constructed using the notion of dispreferred response in Chapter 6.)
In (33) 2 we also have the inference that utterance (iii) counts as a repeat request.
To account for this, we would need first of all to explain how the form how about VERBing is more or less restricted to usages in suggestions (again, this looks like a linguistic form that has pragmatic rather than semantic content, a problem discussed in Chapter 5).
So A is suggesting that someone do something on  Thursday.
Again, in order to preserve the assumption of relevance, an inference must be made about who is to do what: since the last mention of someone doing something involved B going to A, that is presumably what A intends, and may thus be taken to have meant.
Here we seem to be implicitly relying on a further assumption, namely an assumption of topical coherence: if a second utterance can be interpreted as following on a first utterance, in the sense that they can be "heard" as being concerned with the same topic, then such an interpretation of the second utterance is warranted unless there are overt indications to the contrary (again, see Chapters 3 and 6).
Finally, the particle hmm is not dismissable as just a "performance error" or a "filled pause" ; it has specific interactional functions, best explicated in terms of the system for taking turns at speaking in conversation, where it can be seen to be (amongst other things) a turn-holding device (see Chapter 6).
We come now to the inferences in (33) 3.
What are the sources for these?
We have already seen that indirectly the question in utterance (i) must be understood as a request.
Now it simply follows that, if A is requesting B to come, and A is behaving rationally and sincerely, we may assume all the facts in (a)-(g).
Why?
Partly because if we explicate the concept of requesting, it will be found to be constituted of the very speaker beliefs and wishes listed in part in (a)-(g)(see Chapter 5).
But of course it would be possible to go through the behavioural motions of requesting without having any of the requisite beliefs and intentions.
Therefore one is warranted in making the inference from the behaviour to the beliefs and intentions of the speaker only by a general assumption of sincerity, or cooperativeness (see Chapter 3).
If A knows in advance that B can't come, then he is being deceptive; but if he knows that B knows that he knows that B can't come, then he cannot be interpreted as requesting at all(utterance (i) might then be a joke, or if B is in an incapacitated (say, inebriated) state, perhaps a gibe).
The inferences in (33) 4 are easier to account for.
The word here denotes the (pragmatically bounded) place where the speaker (A) is at the time of speaking; if B does not know (or cannot find out) where A is, here is uninterpretable in the sense that B cannot comply with the request to go there.
So A would be less than fully co-operative or rational if he did not think that B knew (or could find out) where he was.
We also know that A and B are not in the same place (or at least are at some distance from one another).
We know this because  the word come (at least with the tense and aspect in (i)) denotes either motion towards the speaker at the time of speaking (as in Come to breakfast, Johnny) or motion towards the addressee's location at the time of speaking (as in I'm coming, Mummy).
Note that as with here, the meaning of come can only be explicated by reference to pragmatic or contextual parameters (speakers, addressees, times and places of speaking).
In utterance (i), come cannot denote movement towards the addressee, because the subject of come is you, and the addressee can hardly move to where the addressee already is.
So it must denote movement towards the speaker; but again, the addressee can hardly move towards the speaker if there is no significant distance between them; therefore A and B are not in the same place.
Here we might note that they are also not in Edinburgh: we know this for B because B claims to have to go to Edinburgh, and go here means movement away from the place of the speaker at the time of speaking; we know it for A also, because if A is in Edinburgh, then B's having to go to Edinburgh can hardly be an excuse for B not going to A today.
We make all these inferences on the basis of the deictic words, come, go and here (not to mention now), together with reasonings about the nature of our physical world (see Chapter 2).
A natural interpretation (by an observer or analyst) of this deictic set-up is that A and B are talking on the telephone.
Finally, we know that (A believes that) B has been to A's present location before because of the word again: this can be claimed to be a pragmatic rather than a semantic implication just because, unlike semantic implications, those associated with again are not normally negated by the negation of the main verb.
We are inclined therefore to say that again presupposes, rather than semantically entails, that some event referred to happened before as well (see Chapter 4).
The implication (33) 5, that the day of speaking is other than Wednesday or Thursday, is also due to deixis (explained in Chapter z), for the word Thursday in utterance (iii) is used in a deictic way that invokes pragmatic parameters (there are other usages that do not, e.g. Pay day is Thursday).
Here the modifier this picks out a particular Thursday in relation to the speaker's location in the week: this Thursday means the Thursday of the week in which the speaker is speaking.
But on Thursday, the Thursday of this week cannot, by pragmatic convention, be referred to as this Thursday; we must  instead say today.
By the same token, we cannot say this Thursday on Wednesday, because we ought to say tomorrow.
So the exchange in (32) takes place neither on Wednesday nor on Thursday.
(There may be some different restrictions on usage here in different varieties of English, and there are also some interesting ambiguities; see Chapter 2 below and Fillmore, 1975.)
Finally, we have the inferences in (33) 6 that A is male, and of apparently higher social status than B. These are based most soundly on the vocative item sir, for that is what that word seems to mean.
Again, on a truth-conditional theory of semantics, those meanings cannot be captured we would not want to say that B's assertion in (ii) was false if B had simply misidentified A and assumed mistakenly that A was a male superior (that would make truths relative to whomsoever they are addressed).
Further, in an intuitive way, the meanings of sir here are not part of the content of what is asserted; they are background assumptions about the context, specifically the kind of person B is addressing.
We may therefore say that sir conventionally implicates that the addressee is male and socially higher in rank than the speaker (see Chapter 3)
There are no doubt many other pragmatic inferences that can be wrung from an exchange as short and insignificant as this.
But these will serve to indicate the general nature of the phenomena that pragmatics is concerned with.
The point is that we can compute out of sequences of utterances, taken together with background assumptions about language usage, highly detailed inferences about the nature of the assumptions participants are making, and the purposes for which utterances are being used.
In order to participate in ordinary language usage, one must be able to make such calculations, both in production and interpretation.
This ability is independent of idiosyncratic beliefs, feelings and usages (although it may refer to those shared by participants), and is based for the most part on quite regular and relatively abstract principles Pragmatics can be taken to be the description of this ability, as it operates both for particular languages and language in general.
Such a description must certainly play a role in any general theory of linguistics.
Deixis
2.0 Introduction
The single most obvious way in which the relationship between language and context is reflected in the structures of languages themselves, is through the phenomenon of deixis.
The term is borrowed from the Greek word for pointing or indicating, and has as prototypical or focal exemplars the use of demonstratives, first and second person pronouns, tense, specific time and place adverbs like now and here, and a variety of other grammatical features tied directly to the circumstances of utterance.
Essentially, deixis concerns the ways in which languages encode or grammaticalize features of the context of utterance or speech event, and thus also concerns ways in which the interpretation of utterances depends on the analysis of that context of utterance.
Thus the pronoun this does not name or refer to any particular entity on all occasions of use; rather it is a variable or place-holder for some particular entity given by the context (e.g. by a gesture).
The facts of deixis should act as a constant reminder to theoretical linguists of the simple but immensely important fact that natural languages are primarily designed, so to speak, for use in face-to-face interaction, and thus there are limits to the extent to which they can be analysed without taking this into account (Lyons, 1977a: 589ff).
The importance of deictic information for the interpretation of utterances is perhaps best illustrated by what happens when such information is lacking (Fillmore, 1975: 38-9).
Consider, for example, finding the following notice on someone's office door:(I) I'll be back in an hour Because we don't know when it was written, we cannot know when the writer will return.
Or, imagine that the lights go out as Harry has just begun saying:(2) Listen, I'm not disagreeing with you but with you, and not about this but about this Or, Suppose we find a bottle in the sea, and inside it a message which reads:(3) Meet me here a week from now with a stick about this big We do not know who to meet, where or when to meet him or her, or how big a stick to bring.
The many facets of deixis are so pervasive in natural languages, and so deeply grammaticalized, that it is hard to think of them as anything other than an essential part of semantics.
If semantics is taken to include all Conventional aspects of meaning, then perhaps most deictic phenomena are properly considered semantic.
However, by at least some of the views that we reviewed in Chapter 1, deixis belongs within the domain of pragmatics, because it directly concerns the relationship between the structure of languages and the contexts in which they are used.
But all such categorizations are theory-dependent, and on the view that we have adopted for convenience, namely that pragmatics concerns those aspects of meaning and language-structure that cannot be captured in a truth-conditional semantics, the grammatical category of deixis will probably be found to straddle the semantics/pragmatics border.
The important point, wherever the pragmatics/semantics boundary is drawn, is that deixis concerns the encoding of many different aspects of the circumstances surrounding the utterance, within the utterance itself.
Natural language utterances are thus "anchored" directly to aspects of the context.
The topic of deixis, or as philosophers usually prefer, indexical expressions (or just indexicals), may be usefully approached by considering how truth-conditional semantics deals with certain natural language expressions.
Suppose we identify the semantic content of a sentence with its truth conditions, then the semantic content of (4) Letizia de Ramolino was the mother of Napoleon will amount to a specification of the circumstances under which it would be true, namely that the individual known as Letizia de Ramolino was in fact identical to the individual who was the mother  of Napoleon.
The truth of (4) in no way depends on who says it, but simply on the facts of history.
But now suppose we try to analyse:(5) I am the mother of Napoleon We cannot assess the truth of this sentence without taking into account who the speaker is; for (5) is true just in case the person uttering the sentence is indeed identical to the individual who is the mother of Napoleon, and false otherwise.
In which case, in order to assess the truth of (5) we need to know, in addition to the facts of history, certain details about the context in which it was uttered (here, the identity of the speaker).
The expression I is not of course the only such troublesome feature of English; the following examples all present us with the same sort of problems (with the relevant deictic expression italicized, a convention followed throughout this Chapter):(6) You are the mother of Napoleon (7) This is an eighteenth-century man-trap (8) Mary is in love with that fellow over there(9) It is now 12.15 The sentences are true, respectively, just in case the addressee is indeed the mother of Napoleon, the object currently being indicated by the speaker is indeed an eighteenth-century man-trap, Mary is indeed in love with the fellow in the location indicated by the speaker, and at the time of speaking it is indeed 12.15.
In each case the context-dependency can be traced to specific deictic expressions or indexicals.
Sentences that contain such expressions, and whose truth values therefore depend on certain facts about the context of utterance (identity of speakers, addressees, indicated objects, places and times, etc.), are not of course in any way special or peculiar.
For just about every utterance has this context-dependency, due in no small part (at least in many languages) to tense.
For, roughly, the following utterance will be true (10) There is a man on Mars just in case at the time of speaking there is a man on Mars, whereas  (11) will be true just in case at some time prior to the time of speaking (10) would have been true:(11) There was a man on Mars There has been considerable philosophical interest in expressions that have this context-dependent property, like demonstratives, first and second person pronouns, and morphemes indicating tense.
It was Peirce who first termed such expressions indexical signs, and argued that they determined a referent by an existential relation between sign and referent (see Burks, 1949) Peirce's category in fact included rather more than the directly Context-dependent expressions that are now called deictic or indexical, and his particular system of categories has not been put to much effective use in linguistic pragmatics (but see e.g. Bean, 1978).
Part of the philosophical interest in this area arose from the questions of whether (a) all indexical expressions can be reduced to a single primary one, and thence (b) whether this final pragmatic residue can be translated out into some eternal context-free artificial language.
Russell, for example, thought that the reduction in (a) was possible, by translating all indexicals (or as he preferred, egocentric Particulars) into expressions containing this, where the latter referred to a subjective experience.
The pronoun I would thus be rendered "the person who is experiencing this" (for severe difficulties with such a view, see Gale, 1968).
Reichenbach argued, also in support of(a) and with an ultimate view to (b), that all indexicals involve an element of token-reflexivity, i.e. refer to themselves, so that , for example , I means "the person who is uttering this token of the word I" .
This view may be initially attractive, but it has many difficulties (Gale, 1968).
Further, while there are indeed token-reflexive or self-referring expressions in natural languages, as in (12) and, arguably, in (13)(see Chapter 5):(12) This sentence contains five words (13) I hereby apologize these pose formidable problems for logical analysis, and nothing is gained by assimilating indexicals to token-reflexives if this can possibly be avoided.
From a linguistic point of view, the question in (b), whether ultimately deictic expressions can be translated into  context-independent terms without loss of meaning, is perhaps a philosophical red-herring.
Natural languages, after all, just do have indexicals, and it is the task of linguistic analysis to model these directly in order to capture the ways in which they are used.
It is worth pointing out, however, that there are some good arguments to the effect that ultimate reduction is impossible (Bar-Hillel, 1970: 77-8; Lyons, 1977a: 639-46).
However, if it is intended, as part of a general programme of semantic analysis, to extend logical techniques to handle sentences containing indexicals, provision must somehow be made for their context-dependency.
The syntax and semantics of classical logics (say, first order predicate calculus) make no such provision.
How should indexicals be accommodated, so that the notion of logical consequence, as it applies for example to the inference from (14) to (15), can also be applied to the inference from (16) to (17)?(14) John Henry McTavitty is six feet tall and weighs 200 pounds (15) John Henry McTavitty is six feet tall (16) I am six feet tall and weigh 200 pounds (17) I am six feet tall Clearly, in order for (17) to be a valid inference from (16), the referent of I must somehow be fixed — the inference doesn't follow if (16) and (17) are said by different speakers.
There are various different ways in which logics can be relativized to contexts of utterance in order to achieve this.
Suppose, as is now common in logical semantics, we view a proposition as a function from possible worlds to truth values (i.e. as an abstract assignment of the value true to just those states of affairs which the proposition correctly describes — see Allwood, Andersson & Dahl, 1977: 20-3 for elementary exposition).
Then one way in which we can accommodate context-relativity is to say that the proposition expressed by a sentence in a context is a function from possible worlds and that context to truth values.
A context will here be a set of pragmatic indices, coordinates or reference points (as they are variously called) for speakers, addressees, times of utterance, places of utterance, indicated objects, and whatever else is needed.
Sentences can therefore express different propositions on different occasions of use.
Thus the inference from (16) to (17) will be valid only if the speaker index and the time index are held constant (see e.g. Montague, 1968; Scott, 1970; Lewis, 1972).
Another way of handling indexicals is to think of the specification  of the content of an utterance as a two stage affair: the "meaning" of an utterance is a function from contexts (sets of indices) to propositions, which are in turn functions from possible worlds to truth values (Montague, 1970; Stalnaker, 1972).
On this view pragmatics (at least in part) is about how, given a sentence uttered in a context, that context plays a role in specifying what proposition the sentence expresses on this occasion of utterance.
Semantics is then not concerned directly with natural language at all, but only with the abstract entities propositions, which sentences and contexts jointly pick out.
What this approach makes especially clear is that while we might want to say that the meaning of (17) remains constant across different occasions of utterance, the proposition that it expresses if Joe Bloggs utters it is different from the one it picks out if Sue Bloggs utters it.
It also makes clear that sentences in the abstract do not in general express definite propositions at all; it is only utterances of them in specific contexts that express specific states of affairs, where the contexts achieve this by filling in the pragmatic parameters that indexicals are variables for.
On this view, pragmatics is logically prior to semantics; that is, the output of the pragmatic component of the theory is the input to the semantic component.
However, as we remarked in Chapter 1, to identify pragmatics wholly with the truth-conditional apparatus that will handle indexicals is to leave us with no term for all those aspects of natural language significance that are not in any way amenable to truth-conditional analysis.
Where indexicals can be routinely treated truth-conditionally, we will therefore continue to think of the theory that handles them as part of semantics.
However, it is clear that not all aspects of deixis can be treated truth-conditionally, as we shall see below, and there are considerable problems even for the apparently tractable cases.
So we shall postpone consideration of just where the semantics/pragmatics borderline cuts across the field of deixis until 2.3 below.
Before leaving philosophical treatments of indexicals, we should just point to a subject of deep theoretical importance which lies well beyond the scope of this book — namely, the connection of indexical reference to the fundamentals of reference in general.
Initially, philosophers interested in reference (with some notable exceptions) did not pay a great deal of attention to indexicals (Bar-Hillel, 1970: 76); then they began to treat them as very special kinds of expression  requiring contextual co-ordinates or indices, as sketched above.
Now they have begun to wonder whether many kinds of referring expressions are not in fact covertly indexical in at least some usages.
Quine's (1960) views on ostension, and Strawson's (1950) treatment of referring expressions broached this issue (see Bar-Hillel, 1970: 84; Atlas, 1975b).
Searle's (1969) treatment of reference as a particular species of action (rather than as some mysterious correspondence, however indirect, between words and sets of objects) also indirectly advanced the view that indexicals are closely linked to other kinds of reference.
That children early in language acquisition produce isolated acts of reference, seems to support the view of reference as a speech act (see Chapter 5) that is prototypically "demonstrative" (Lyons, 1975; Atkinson, 1979).
Since demonstrative pronouns typically involve a gesture, it seems easy to assimilate such acts of reference to general theories of action; if one can then show that other kinds of referring expression are related to demonstratives, the case for viewing reference in general as a species of action is made plausible.
In this connection, Lyons (1975) proposes that deictic reference is ontogenetically prior to other kinds of reference, and provides the basis for their acquisition (but see Tanz, 1980).
However, it is only recently that the connection of reference in general to indexicals has begun to concern those philosophers with an investment in logical semantics.
Donnellan (1966) began by noting a distinction between two usages of definite descriptions (inter alia, noun phrases in English with the determiner the):(18) The man drinking champagne is Lord Godolphin (19) The man who can lift this stone is stronger than an ox The first would most naturally have a referential use, where the description might in fact be wrong (e.g. the man is actually drinking lemonade) but the reference succeed in any case; the second would most naturally have an attributive use where the speaker would not have any particular individual in mind (we could paraphrase (19) as "whoever can lift this stone is stronger than an ox" ).
But in many cases an utterance is potentially ambiguous between these two usages.
It is the speaker's intention and the addressee's successful location of the intended referent that matter in the first usage, not the exact aptness of the description, so that we could call this usage speaker reference (as opposed to semantic reference; Donnellan, 1978; Kaplan, 1978).
Indeed, just as with a demonstrative, so with the definite description in (18), the addressee is invited to look up and identify the referent.
But then it is a small step to begin thinking of (18) as very similar to (20), and thus Containing demonstrative or indexical elements:(20) That man ((the speaker indicates the man drinking champagne)) is Lord Godolphin And so it begins to look as if definite referring expressions may in general be used either in speaker reference or in semantic (or attributive) reference, and it is only the context of use that tells us which way to understand them (Donnellan, 1978; Kaplan, 1978).
If this is so, then the role of pragmatics (in the indexical sense) in fixing the proposition that a sentence expression, is greatly increased.
However, none of these Philosophical approaches does justice to the complexity and variety of the deictic expressions that occur in natural languages, and we should now turn to consider linguistic approaches and findings.
Given the undoubted importance of deixis to philosophical, Psychological and linguistic approaches to the analysis of language, there has been surprisingly little work of a descriptive nature in the area, with a Consequent lack of adequate theories and frameworks of analysis.
In the absence of significant theories, in this section a series of tentative categories are advanced, together with some illustrations of their application.
The most important of the earlier linguistic works in this area are Buhler, 1934: 79-148; Frei, 1944; Fillmore, 1966; Lyons, 1968; but much of this has been summarized and systematized in Lyons, 1977a, 1977b and Fillmore, 1971b, 1975, and it is to these latter works that most of what follows is directly indebted.
There is also, though, a growing body of literature on the acquisition of deictic terms by children, most of which is referenced  in Wales, 1979 and Tanz, 1980, while a useful collection of cross-linguistic observations can be found in Anderson & Keenan, in Press.
The traditional categories of deixis are person, place and time.
Briefly, as we shall devote a section to each below, these categories are understood in the following way.
Person deixis concerns the encoding of the role of participants in the speech event in which the utterance in question is delivered: the category first person is the grammaticalization of the speaker's reference to himself, second person the encoding of the speaker's reference to one or more addressees, and third person the encoding of reference to persons and entities which are neither speakers nor addressees of the utterance in question.
Familiar ways in which such participant-roles are encoded in language are of course the pronouns and their associated predicate agreements.
Place deixis concerns the encoding of spatial locations relative to the location of the participants in the speech event.
Probably most languages grammaticalize at least a distinction between proximal (or close to speaker) and distal (or non-proximal, sometimes close to addressee), but many make much more elaborate distinctions as we shall see.
Such distinctions are commonly encoded in demonstratives (as in English this vs. that) and in deictic adverbs of place (like English here vs. there).
Time deixis concerns the encoding of temporal points and spans relative to the time at which an utterance was spoken (or a written message inscribed).
This time, following Fillmore (1971b), we shall call coding time or CT, which may be distinct from receiving time or RT, as example (1) made clear.
Thus, just as place deixis encodes spatial locations on coordinates anchored to the place of utterance, so time deixis encodes times on co-ordinates anchored to the time of utterance.
Time deixis is commonly grammaticalized in deictic adverbs of time (like English now and then, yesterday and this year), but above all in tense.
To these traditional categories, we should now add (following Lyons, 1968, 1977a, and Fillmore, 1971b, 1975) discourse (or text) deixis and social deixis.
Discourse deixis has to do with the encoding of reference to portions of the unfolding discourse in which the utterance (which includes the text referring expression) is located.
Instances of discourse deixis are the use of that and this in the following:(21) Puff puff puff: that is what it sounded like (22) This is what phoneticians call creaky voice Finally, social deixis concerns the encoding of social distinctions that are relative to participant-roles, particularly aspects of the social relationship holding between speaker and addressee(s) or speaker and some referent.
In many languages, distinctions of fine gradation between the relative ranks of speaker and addressee are systematically encoded throughout, for example, the morphological system, in which case we talk of honorifics; but such distinctions are also regularly encoded in choices between pronouns, summons forms or vocatives, and titles of address in familiar languages.
Deictic systems in natural languages are not arbitrarily organized around the features of just any of the many different kinds of medium and context in which languages are used.
Rather there is an essential assumption of that basic face-to-face conversational context in which all humans acquire language, or as Lyons (1977a: 637-8) has put it rather more precisely: The grammaticalization and lexicalization of deixis is best understood in relation to what may be termed the canonical situation of utterance: this involves one-one, or one-many, signalling in the phonic medium along the vocal-auditory channel, with all the participants present in the same actual situation able to see one another and to perceive the associated non-vocal paralinguistic features of their utterances, and each assuming the role of sender and receiver in turn There is much in the structure of languages that can only be explained on the assumption that they have developed for communication in face-to-face interaction.
This is clearly so as far as deixis is concerned.
Further, it is generally (but not invariably) true that deixis is organized in an egocentric way.
That is, if (for the purposes of semantic or pragmatic interpretation) we think of deictic expressions as anchored to specific points in the communicative event, then the  unmarked anchorage points, constituting the deictic centre, are typically assumed to be as follows:(i) the central person is the speaker,(ii) the central time is the time at which the speaker produces the utterance,(iii) the central place is the speaker's location at utterance time or CT,(iv) the discourse centre is the point which the speaker is currently at in the production of his utterance, and (v) the social centre is the speaker's social status and rank, to which the status or rank of addressees or referents is relative.
Now there are various exceptions to this: for example, some languages have demonstratives organized in part around the location of other participants than speakers.
There are also various derivative usages, in which deictic expressions are used in ways that shift this deictic centre to other participants, or indeed to protagonists in narratives — Lyons (1977a: 579) calls this deictic projection, Fillmore (1975) shifts in points of view.
The processes involved in such shifts are essential to an understanding of the diachronic development of various deictic words (see e.g. the remarks on come below) and to usages in non-conversational discourse (see Fillmore, 1981), but are beyond the scope of this Chapter.
It may help readers to visualize this unmarked deictic centre if they can imagine a four-dimensional space, composed of the three dimensions of space plus that of time, in which a speaker stands at the centre.
Radiating out from the speaker are a number of concentric circles distinguishing different zones of spatial proximity; through the speaker passes a "tame line" , on which events prior to his present utt rance, and events prior to those, can be linearly arranged, and similarly events at points and spans in the future; while the discourse to which the speaker contributes unfolds along this same time line.
To capture the social aspects of deixis, we would need to add at least one further dimension, say of relative rank, in which the speaker is socially higher, lower or equal to the addressee and other persons that might be referred to.
Now when speaker and addressee switch participant-roles, the co-ordinates of this entire world switch to the space-time-social centre of the erstwhile addressee, now speaker.
Such a picture makes the acquisition of deictic terms seem a miracle, and children do indeed have trouble with them (Tanz, 1980).
It is essential to distinguish different kinds of usage of deictic expression.
Indeed by deictic expression we mean those linguistic units or morphemes that have a deictic usage as basic or central, for most  such expressions have non-deictic usages.
In addition to deictic vs. non-deictic usages of deictic expressions, we shall need to distinguish distinct kinds of deictic usage.
Following Fillmore (1971b), let us first distinguish two kinds of deictic usage, namely gestural usage and symbolic usage.
Terms used in a gestural deictic way can only be interpreted with reference to an audio-visual-tactile, and in general a physical, monitoring of the speech event.
As a rough-and-ready guide, one can think of these gestural usages as requiring at least a video-tape of the speech event if the proper interpretation is to be available from a recording.
Instances would be demonstrative pronouns used with a selecting gesture, as in:(23) This one's genuine, but this one is a fake or second or third person pronouns used with some physical indication of the referent (e.g. direction of gaze), as in:(24) He's not the Duke, he is.
He's the butler There are usually a few words in a language that can only be used gesturally: for example there are presentatives like French voici, and toasts like British English cheers.
In contrast, symbolic usages of deictic terms require for their interpretation only knowledge of (in particular) the basic spatio-temporal parameters of the speech event (but also, on occasion, participant-role and discourse and social parameters).
Thus it is sufficient to know the general location of the participants in order to interpret:(25) This city is really beautiful and to know the set of potential addressees in the situation in order to interpret:(26) You can all come with me if you like and to know when the interaction is taking place in order to know which calendar year is being referred to in (27) We can't afford a holiday this year We could formulate the distinction thus: gestural usages require a moment by moment physical monitoring of the speech event for their interpretation, while symbolic usages make reference only to  contextual coordinates available to participants antecedent to the utterance.
It will then follow that the following are gestural usages, though the sense of gesture is here, of course, vocal:(28) Harvey can only speak about this loud (29) Don't do it now, but NOW!
These two kinds of deictic usage contrast with the non-deictic usage of the same words or morphemes.
Some examples will help to make the three-way distinction clear; in the following the a cases are gestural usages, the b cases symbolic usages, and the c cases non-deictic usages:(30) a.
You, you, but not you, are dismissed b.
What did you say? c.
You can never tell what sex they are nowadays (31) a.
This finger hurts b.
This city stinks c.
I met this weird guy the other day (32) a.
Push not now, but now b.
Let's go now rather than tomorrow c.
Now, that is not what I said (33) a.
Not that one, idiot, that one b.
That's a beautiful view c.
Oh, I did this and that (34) a.
Move it from there to there b.
Hello, is Harry there? c.
There we go (Note that, in most cases, the three kinds of sentences only favour the three kinds of interpretation.)
Here are some further contrasts between just two of the usages, each labelled a, b or c as before:(35) a.
((In response to: "Who wants another?" ))
I do b.
((In response to: "Wilt thou have this woman to thy wedded wife?" ))
I will (36) b.
I did it ten years ago c.
Harry had done it ten years ago (37) b.
John lives opposite c.
John lives opposite Bill (38) b.
We can't see the chimp because it's behind the tree c.
When Harry's front axle buckled, he was behind a truck A few brief comments on each of these: in (35a) the pronoun I is used gesturally to self-nominate from a group, in (35b) it just has the symbolic usage; in (36b) the word ago places the time at which the  action occurred relative to the time of speaking, in (36c) the time is relative to the time at which the events in the narrative occurred.
In (37b) opposite (and equally nearby, around the corner, etc.) is understood as relative to the place of utterance, in (37c) it is relative to Bill's location.
In (38b) behind locates the chimp on the opposite side of the tree from the participants, in (38c) it locates Harry at the rear end of the truck.
These are perhaps the most important distinctions in the use of deictic terms, but they are not the only ones.
As we shall see when we consider discourse deixis, within non-deictic usages we shall need to distinguish anaphoric from non-anaphoric usages.
All the c cases above are, in their most natural interpretations, non-deictic but also non-anaphoric usages.
An anaphoric usage is where some term picks out as referent the same entity (or class of objects) that some prior term in the discourse picked out.
Thus, in the following, he can naturally be interpreted as referring to whoever it is that John refers to:(39) John came in and he lit a fire We will return to anaphora, but just note here that it is perfectly possible, as Lyons (1977a: 676) points out, for a deictic term to be used both anaphorically and deictically.
For example, in:(40) I was born in London and have lived there ever since there refers back to whatever place London refers to, but simultaneously contrasts with here on the deictic dimension of space, locating the utterance outside London.
Note that it is also quite possible for the gestural usage to combine with the non-deictic anaphoric usage too:(41) I cut a finger: this one Here this one refers to whatever a finger refers to, but simultaneously must be accompanied by a presentation of the relevant finger.
Clearly the proliferation of different kinds of usage of deictic terms is a source of considerable potential confusion to the analyst.
The following summary of distinctions may help to keep them clear:(42) Different usages of deictic terms 1.
deictic: a. gestural b. symbolic 2. non-deictic: c. non-anaphoric d. anaphoric These difficulties are compounded when the phenomenon of deictic projection, or shifts from the egocentric centre, are taken into account; and they are further multiplied by the interaction of the semantics of non-deictic categorizations of (especially) space and time with deictic modifiers.
We shall now take up each of the five major categories of deixis in turn: person, time, place, discourse and social deixis, in order to illustrate the complexities that arise.
An appreciation of these complexities will indicate how involved and unexplored the phenomenon of deixis really is and how the philosophical approaches to indexicals can handle only a small proportion of these problems.
As speakers switch, so the deictic centre, on which the rest of the deictic system hangs, is itself abruptly moved from participant to participant.
The difficulties that a Martian or child might have with such a system are neatly illustrated in the following Yiddish story: A melamed [Hebrew teacher]discovering that he had left his comfortable slippers back in the house, sent a student after them with a note for his wife.
The note read: "Send me your slippers with this boy" .
When the student asked why he had written "your" slippers, the melamed answered: "Yold!
If I wrote "my" slippers, she would read "my" slippers and would send her slippers.
What could I do with her slippers?
So I wrote "your" slippers, she'll read "your" slippers and send me mine".
(Rosten, 1968: 443-4) Although person deixis is reflected directly in the grammatical categories of person, it may be argued that we need to develop an independent pragmatic framework of possible participant-roles, so that we can then see how, and to what extent, these roles are grammaticalized in different languages.
Such a framework would note that the speaker or spokesman can be distinct from the source of an utterance, the recipient distinct from the target, and hearers or bystanders distinct from addressees or targets, and that sometimes such distinctions are grammaticalized in non-obvious ways (see  Levinson, in prep.).
The Yiddish joke above depends, of course, on the distinction between source and speaker, which becomes immediately pertinent if one reads aloud.
2.2.1 Person deixis
However, the basic grammatical distinctions here are the categories of first, second and third person, If we were producing a Componential analysis (for which see Lyons, 1968: 470-81) of Pronominal systems, the features that we seem to need for the known systems would crucially include: for first person, speaker inclusion (+ 5); for second person, addressee inclusion (+ A); and for third Person, speaker and addressee exclusion (-S, A)(see Burling, 1970: 14-17; Ingram, 1978).
It is important to note that third Person is quite unlike first or second person, in that it does not COrrespond to any specific participant-role in the speech event (Lyons, 1977a: 638).
Pronominal systems, which are the most obvious manifestations of person, generally exhibit this three-way distinction (Ingram, 1978).
But some pronominal systems exhibit as many as fifteen basic pronouns (ignoring honorific alternates) by superimposing distinctions based on plurality (dual, trial and plural), gender and so on.
Here it is important to see that the traditional category of plural is not symmetrically applied to first Person in the way it is to third: we does not mean plural speakers in the same way that they means more than one third person entity (Lyons, 1968: 277).
In addition, in many languages, there are two first person "plural" pronouns, corresponding to "we-inclusive-of-addressee" and "we-exclusive-of-addressee." 
This distinction is not manifested in English directly, but it is perhaps indirectly: for the Contraction from let us to let's only seems felicitous if the us is understood inclusively, as illustrated below (Fillmore, 1971b):(43) Let's go to the cinema (44)?
Let's go to see you tomorrow Other languages have PrOnominal systems much richer than the English one: in Japanese, pronouns are distinguished also with respect to sex of speaker, social status of referent and degree of intimacy with referent, so, for example, the second person pronoun  kimi can be glossed "you, addressed by this intimate male speaker" (Uyeno, 1971: 16-17; Harada, 1976: 511); and village Tamil has up to six singular second person pronouns according to degree of relative rank between speaker and addressee (Brown & Levinson, 1978: 3206).
We shall return to some of these facts below when we consider social deixis, Here we should simply note that these various distinctions are often encoded in verbal inflections in an isomorphic manner.
Sometimes, though, morphological agreement can make further distinctions not overtly made by the pronouns themselves.
A simple example of this occurs in languages that draw their polite second person singular pronoun from their plural one, where there will be no overt distinction between second person singular polite and second person plural pronouns.
Here, finite verbs will agree in both cases with the superficially plural pronoun.
But with nominal predicates the distinction is morphologically marked: such predicates agree with the real-world number of the referent (Comrie, 1975).
So, in French,(45) is ambiguous as to whether there is one or more addressees, but (46) can only be addressed to a single addressee: Vous parlez francais?(46) Vous etes le professeur?
In a similar sort of way, as Fillmore (1971b) notes, the editorial we of, for example, the New Yorker takes plural verb agreement (thus we are not we am), but in the reflexive the underlying singularity shows through in phrases like as for ourself.
Finally, as we have noted, pronouns are often used non-deictically; but the actual variety of uses can be shown to be far greater than one would easily imagine (Watson, 1975; Sacks, 1976).
In addition to pronouns and agreeing predicates, person or participant-role is marked in various other ways.
As is well known to anthropologists, kinship terms, and other kinds of title or proper name, often come in two quite distinct sets, one for use in address (as vocatives in second person usage) and the other for use in reference (i.e. referring to individuals in third person role).
Even when the lexemes are the same, they may be used very differently in address and reference (see e.g. Beck, 1972: 290ff for Tamil usage), or only a sub-set of the reference terms may be used in address.
The latter is the case with English kin terms — one can say both Henry is my uncle and Henry is my cousin, but only Hello, Uncle! not, in modern  standard English, Hello, Cousin!
Further, in some Australian languages there are up to four distinct sets of primary (as opposed to special supplementary) kin terms:(a) a set of vocative terms,(b) a set of terms which have an implicit first person possessive feature (i.e mean "my mother's brother" , etc.),(c) a set of terms which have a second person possessive feature (i.e. mean "your mother's brother" , etc.) and (d) a set of terms which have third person possessive features (i.e. mean "his or her mother's brother" , etc.).
Some Australian languages even have "triangular" kin terms, such that a term X denoting an individual x is only usable if x is (say) the speaker's father and the addressee's grandfather, Such suppletive sets of terms therefore encode person-deictic features in what are essentially terms for reference, not address (see Heath et al., 1982).
Vocatives in general are an interesting grammatical category, again underexplored, Vocatives are noun phrases that refer to the addressee, but are not syntactically or semantically incorporated as the arguments of a predicate; they are rather set apart prosodically from the body, of a sentence that may accompany them.
Vocatives can be divided into calls, or summonses, as in (47), and addresses, as in (48)(Zwicky, 1974):(47) Hey you, you just scratched my car with your frisbee (48) The truth is, Madam, nothing is as good nowadays The distinction is precisely that between gestural and symbolic usages, applied in this domain.
Summonses are naturally utterance-initial, indeed conversation-initial (see Schegloff, 1972a), and can be thought of as independent speech acts (see Chapter 5) in their own right.
Addresses are parenthetical and can occur in the sorts of locations that other parentheticals can occupy.
Not all summons forms can be used as addresses (e.g. hey you in (47) cannot occur in the slot occupied by Madam in (48)), although it may be that all addresses can be used as summonses (Zwicky, 1974: 791).
Vocative forms in different languages appear to be highly idiosyncratic and complex.
Note that greetings, partings and various "ritual" formulae (e.g. bless you said after a sneeze) can be thought of as vocative in nature.
A further point to note in connection with person deixis, is that where face-to-face contact is lost, languages often enforce a distinct mode of, for instance, self-introduction.
Thus, whereas in a  face-to-face meeting I can say I'm Joe Bloggs, on the telephone I must say This is Joe Bloggs or Joe Bloggs is speaking with third person verb agreement (but see Schegloff, 1979a); in contrast in Tamil we would have to say on the telephone the equivalent of Joe Bloggs am speaking, with first person verb agreement.
In conclusion, it should be noted that the two basic participant roles, speaker and addressee, are not the only ones that can become involved in grammatical distinctions.
Various languages (e.g. the Philippine language Samal) have demonstratives (discussed below) that specify location near other participants — in this case attending but not speaking parties, and present but non-participating parties.
The Australian language Dyirbal has an entirely separate alternative vocabulary to be used in the presence of "taboo" kinsmen, whether or not they are participants (Dixon, 1972: 32ff).
Moreover it is common in many languages (e.g. German; Hymes, 1974: 56) for mother to say to father, in the presence of little Billie, something like:(49) Can Billie have an ice-cream, Daddy? taking the point of view, for the purpose of vocative selection, of the audience.
These distinctions make it important that we do not confuse, as is often done in the linguistic and philosophical literature, the categories of addressee and hearer.
(Incidentally, note that as so often in the analysis of deixis, these various examples involve the overlapping organizations of the five basic categories of deixis: thus greetings usually involve temporal, person and discourse deixis; demonstratives both space and person; vocatives both person and social deixis; and so on.)
In addition to speaker, addressee and audience (third person, being, of course, definable in terms of the first two), there are a number of further distinctions in person deixis that probably need to be made.
We know that, interactionally, important distinctions are often made between overhearers, unratified vs. ratified participants, those of the latter who are addressees and those who are non-addressed participants, and so on(see Goffman, 1976: 260; Goodwin, 1979a, 1981).
Also, as we have noted, we sometimes need to distinguish speaker from source and addressee from target.
Thus if the air-hostess announces (50) You are to fasten your seat-belts now she is the speaker or spokesman, but not the source of the instructions, and this seems to be encoded in the use of the infinitive form.
In Chinook, in formal Ceremonies, neither the source (e.g. a chief) nor the target (e.g. the spirits) were necessarily present (Hymes, 1974: 56).
In time many of these distinctions will perhaps be found reflected in the grammatical categories of some language or another (see Levinson, in prep.).
Both time and place deixis are greatly complicated by the interaction of deictic co-ordinates with the non-deictic conceptualization of time and space.
To understand these aspects of deixis in depth it is first necessary to have a good understanding of the semantic organization of space and time in general, but these topics lie beyond the scope of this book (see though, Leech, 1969; Fillmore, 1975; Lyons, 1977a: Chapter 15).
Briefly, though, the bases for systems of reckoning and measuring time in most languages seem to be the natural and prominent cycles of day and night, lunar months, seasons and years.
Such units can either be used as measures, relative to some fixed point of interest (including, crucially, the deictic centre), or they can be used calendrically to locate events in "absolute" time relative to some absolute origo, or at least to some part of each natural cycle designated as the beginning of that cycle (Fillmore, 1975).
It is with these units, calendrical and non-calendrical, that time deixis interacts.
2.2.2 Time deixis
Like all aspects of deixis, time deixis makes ultimate reference to Participant-role.
Thus as a first approximation (but see below), now can be glossed as "the time at which the speaker is producing the utterance containing now" .
It is important to distinguish the moment of utterance (or inscription) or coding time (or CT) from the moment of reception or receiving time (or RT).
As we noted, in the canonical situation of utterance, with the assumption of the unmarked deictic centre, RT can be assumed to be identical to CT (Lyons (1977a: 685) calls this assumption deictic simultaneity).
Complexities arise in the usage of tense, time adverbs and other time-deictic morphemes wherever there is a departure from this assumption, e.g. in letter writing, or the pre-recording of media programmed In that event, a decision has to be made about whether the deictic centre will remain on the speaker and CT, as in (51), or will be projected on the addressee and RT, as in (52)(Fillmore, 1975):(51) a.
This programme is being recorded today, Wednesday April 1st, to be relayed next Thursday b.
I write this letter while chewing peyote (52) a.
This programme was recorded last Wednesday, April 1st, to be relayed today b.
I wrote this letter while chewing peyote Linguistic conventions may often specify the proper usage in situations where RT is not coincident with CT.
For example, the Latin "epistolary tenses" used past tense for events including CT, pluperfect for events prior to CT — in other words the deictic centre was projected into the future, the recipients' RT (Lakoff, 1970: 847).
But we shall have to skirt these issues here (see Fillmore, 1975).
There are a number of aspects of "pure" time deixis, where there is no direct interaction with non-deictic methods of time reckoning.
These include tense (to be discussed below), and the deictic time adverbs like English now, then, soon, recently and so on.
We can improve on our previous gloss for now, by offering "the pragmatically given span including CT" , where that span may be the instant associated with the production of the morpheme itself, as in the gestural use in (53), or the perhaps interminable period indicated in (53) Pull the trigger now!(54) I'm now working on a PhD Now contrasts with then, and indeed then can be glossed as "not now" to allow for its use in both past and future.
Then is sometimes claimed to be necessarily anaphoric in nature, and to have no gestural deictic usage, but rather complex usages show this is not so — consider, for example, the following said pointing at a 1962 model Chevrolet (Nunberg, 1978: 33)):(55) I was just a kid then As an initial step towards seeing how time deixis interacts with cultural measurements of time in an absolute or non-deictic way, consider words like today, tomorrow, yesterday.
Such terms presuppose a division of time into diurnal spans.
Roughly, then, today glosses as "the diurnal span including CT" , yesterday as "the diurnal span preceding the diurnal span that includes CT" , and so on.
However, as Fillmore (1975) notes, these have two kinds of referent: they can  either refer to the entire span itself, as in (56), or to a point within the relevant span, as in (57):(56) Tomorrow is Wednesday (57) Dennis hit Murphy with a baseball bat yesterday Note that the deictic words yesterday, today and tomorrow pre-empt the calendrical or absolute ways of referring to the relevant days.
Thus the following, said on Thursday, can only be referring to next Thursday (or perhaps some more remote Thursday), otherwise the speaker should have said today:(58) I'll see you on Thursday The same holds if it is said on Wednesday, due to pre-emptive tomorrow.
Languages differ in how many such deictic names of days there are: the Amerindian language Chinantec has four named days either side of today; Japanese names three days back from today, and two ahead; Hindi has the same word for yesterday and tomorrow (i.e. it glosses as "the relevant day adjacent to the day including CT" ); and so on(Fillmore, 1975).
Further aspects of the interaction of calendrical reckoning and time deixis arise when we consider complex time adverbials like last Monday, next year, or this afternoon.
These consist of a deictic modifier, this, next, last, etc., together with a non-deictic name or measure word.
Now, interpretation of such adverbials in English is systematically determined by (a) the calendrical vs. non-calendrical (and specifically deictic) modes of reckoning, and (b) the distinction between common noun units, like weeks, months, years, and proper name units, like Monday, December, and perhaps afternoon, which cannot be used as measures (Fillmore, 1975).
Thus this year is ambiguous between the calendrical unit that runs from January I to January I and which includes CT, and the measure of 365 days that begins on the day including CT.
In general, the phrase this X, where  "X" ranges over the terms week, month, year, will refer to the unit X including CT, and will be ambiguous between the calendrical and non-calendrical interpretations.
Similarly, next X will refer to the unit X which follows the unit of the same order which includes CT, and so on.
In contrast, this Y, where "Y" is a proper name for a unit included in the larger calendrical span Z, will often mean "that unit Y which is included in the larger span Z which includes CT" .
Hence, this August does not necessarily mean the month that we are now in, in the way that this week ordinarily means the week that we are now in.
Rather, this August means the August of the calendar year that includes CT; and this morning means the morning of the diurnal unit that includes CT.
Thus I can say this morning either during the morning or the afternoon, and refer to the same span; whereas in Chinantec, I must use a different word for referring to the morning in the morning (i.e. when the span includes CT) from the one I use to refer to the morning in the afternoon (i.e. when the span referred to excludes CT, but is within the same larger diurnal span as CT — Fillmore, 1975: 47).
In the application of next to calendrical names of days, an ambiguity arises: next Thursday can refer either to the Thursday of the week that succeeds the week that includes CT, or that Thursday that first follows CT.
Note that on a Friday or a Saturday, these will coincide; and given the rule that today and tomorrow pre-empt calendrical day names, on Wednesday and Thursday, next Thursday can only mean the Thursday of next week.
It follows that, if one starts the week on Monday, next Thursday is ambiguous only on Monday and Tuesday (Fillmore, 1971b).
The example nicely raises the issue of the degree to which a general linguistic theory is committed to giving an account of language understanding: for here we have a complex interaction between deictic words (clearly a linguistic problem) and a culture's temporal reckoning systems (not so clearly a linguistic problem), and the pre-emptive usage of deictic words (which lies somewhere in between).
On the wider programme for pragmatics which we reviewed in Chapter z, namely that pragmatics should provide (in connection with the rest of linguistic theory) a full account of language understanding, inferences like this must be fully explained.
Finally, we should turn briefly to tense, although the complexities  of this subject lie well beyond the scope of this book.
In those languages that unequivocably exhibit it, tense is one of the main factors ensuring that nearly all sentences when uttered are deictically anchored to a context of utterance.
Confusion over whether some sentences like the following are tenseless or "eternal" in part stems from a deep equivocation over the term tense.
(59) Two and two is four (60) Iguanas eat ants Let us, following Lyons (1977a: 682), distinguish the semantic or theoretical category of tense, which we may call metalinguistic tense or M-tense for short, from the verbal inflections that a traditional grammar of a particular language may call that language's tenses, which we may call L-tenses.
M-tense can be given a purely deictic and strictly temporal interpretation, but it is an empirical question as to what extent L-tenses can also be treated in the same way.
Then we may say that (59) and (60) are L-tensed, but M-tenseless and non-deictic (although they may be non-deictic in different ways; see Lyons, 1977a: 680).
Now, we may investigate the properties of M-tense systems in isolation from their partial and imperfect realization in L-tense systems, as is done in tense logics (see Reichenbach, 1947; Prior, 1968).
Obviously, though, if M-tense and L-tense get too far apart, M-tense may be of little use to the analysis of language.
In an M-tense system we can easily distinguish past (events completed prior to CT), from present (events whose span includes CT), from future (events succeeding CT); we can further distinguish points from spans (Lyons, 1977a: 683); and we can also make first approximations to complex tenses like the Pluperfect, by representing events that are prior to other events, which are themselves prior to CT (Reichenbach, 1947: 288ff; see also Allwood, Andersson & Dahl, 1977: 121ff).
Thus (61) will be true, on this account, just in case there is some reference time (say, another event) prior to CT, such that at that reference time,(62) would have been true (while (62) is in turn true, just in case(63) would have been true at some point prior to the CT of (62)):(6z) John had seen Mary (62) John saw Mary (63) John sees Mary But such M-tenses do not match up simply with L-tenses, for L-tenses nearly always encode additional aspectual and modal features too (see Comrie, 1976a; Lyons, 1977a: 703ff, 809ff).
For example, L-future-tenses probably invariably contain a modal element, and the nearest M-tense correlates of L-tenses are to be found in the distinction between past and non-past (Lyons, 1977a: 678).
Any theorist who wants to claim that, for example, the English L-present and L-future coincide with the M-present and M-future, will find catalogues of insuperable odds in Huddleston, 1969; Lakoff, 1970; Lyons, 1977a: 809ff; and the references they cite.
Nevertheless a pure deictic M-tense system seems to be an integral component, together with aspectual, modal and other notions, of most L-tense systems.
Clearly, just what M-tense concepts are needed for linguistic description will differ from language to language.
Further, we can expect interactions between pure deictic M-tense concepts and cultural divisions and measures of time to show up in L-tenses.
Thus, in the Peruvian language Amahuacan, there is an L-tense affix (call it "T" ) which means different things at different times of the day: john kicked-T Bill said in the afternoon means "John kicked Bill in the morning" , but said in the morning it means "John kicked Bill yesterday" .
In other words "T" seems to mean that the event described took place in the largest unit of the daylight span that precedes the unit which contains CT, whether or not night intervenes.
(For this, and other "exotic" elements of time deixis, see Fillmore, 1975.)
It is sometimes claimed that there are languages without true tenses, for example Chinese or Yoruba, and this is correct in the sense that such languages may lack L-tenses morphologically marked in the verb, or indeed systematically elsewhere (Comrie, 1976a: 82ff; Lyons, 1977a: 678-9).
But we can confidently assume that there are no languages where part of an M-tense system is not realized somewhere in time-adverbials or the like, not to mention the implicit assumption of M-present if no further specification is provided (Lyons, 1977a: 686).
Finally, we should mention that time deixis is relevant to various other deictic elements in a language.
Thus greetings are usually time-restricted, so that(64) Good morning can only be used in the morning, and so on .
Curiously, while (64) can only be used as a greeting (at least in British English),(65) can only be used as a parting:(65) Good night so that we have here an interaction of time and discourse deixis.
Place or space deixis concerns the specification of locations relative to anchorage points in the speech event.
The importance of locational specifications in general can be gauged from the fact that there seem to be two basic ways of referring to objects — by describing or naming them on the one hand, and by locating them on the other (Lyons, 1977a: 648).
Now, locations can be specified relative to other objects or fixed reference points, as in:(66) The station is two hundred yards from the cathedral (67) Kabul lies at latitude 34 degrees, longitude 7° degrees Alternatively, they can be deictically specified relative to the location of participants at the time of speaking (CT), as in (68) It's two hundred yards away (69) Kabul is four hundred miles West of here In either case it is likely that units of measurement, or descriptions of direction and location, will have to be used, and in that case place deixis comes to interact in complex ways with the non-deictic organization of space (see Leech, 1969; Fillmore, 1975: 16-28; Lyons, 1977a: 69Off; and references therein).
2.2.3 Place deixis
There are, though, some pure place-deictic words, notably in English the adverbs here and there, and the demonstrative pronouns this and that.
The symbolic usage of here, as in (70), can be glossed as "the Pragmatically given unit of space that includes the location of the speaker at CT" .
(7°) I'm writing to say I'm having a marvellous time here  The gestural usage must be glossed a little differently, as "the pragmatically given space, proximal to speaker's location at CT, that includes the point or location gesturally indicated" .
Note that we cannot eradicate the modifier "pragmatically given" in these definitions: an utterance of (71) may have quite different implications of precision if said to a crane operator in contrast to a fellow surgeon.
(71) Place it here Again, we have the interaction between "encyclopaedic knowledge" and linguistic knowledge, which together determine the exact location in question.
This is another point at which philosophical treatments of indexicals offer us no help.
The proposition picked out by the utterance of (71), as with the referent of next Thursday, depends on complex interactions between deictic and non-deictic factors.
The adverbs here and there are often thought of as simple contrasts on a proximal/distal dimension, stretching away from the speaker's location, as in:(72) Bring that here and take this there But this is only sometimes so, for although there basically means "distal from speaker's location at CT" , it can also be used to mean "proximal to addressee at RT" .
Thus, in non-anaphoric uses,(73) How are things there? does not generally mean "how are things at some place distant from the speaker" , but rather "how are things where the addressee is" .
The gestural usage of there favours the first interpretation, the symbolic usage the second.
There are also of course anaphoric usages of there (cf. (40) above), and this explains why there is no necessary pragmatic anomaly in:(74) We're there where there refers to the place we previously mentioned as our goal (Fillmore, 1971b: 226).
The demonstrative pronouns are perhaps more clearly organized in a straightforward proximal-distal dimension, whereby this can mean "the object in a pragmatically given area close to the speaker's location at CT" , and that "the object beyond the pragmatically given area close to the speaker's location at CT" (Lyons (1977a: 647) suggests the derivative glosses "the one here" , "the one there" , respectively).
But the facts are complicated here by the shift from that to this to show empathy, and from this to that to show emotional distance (Lyons (1977a: 677) calls this empathetic deixis; see Fillmore, 1971b: 227 and R. Lakoff 1974 for the intricacies of English usage).
There is also a systematic neutralization of the proximal-distal dimension when it is not especially relevant, so that I can say, searching through a tin of needles for a number 9, either:(75) This is it!(76) That's it!
Some languages have demonstratives with three and four way distinctions on the proximal-distal dimension, so that the North West American language Tlingit, for example, has demonstratives glossable as "this one right here" , "this one nearby" , "that one over there " , and "that one way over there " , while Malagasy has a six-way contrast on the same dimension (Frei, 1944: 115; Anderson & Keenan, in press).
However, care must be exercised in the analysis of unfamiliar languages, as demonstratives are often organized with respect to contrasts between participant-roles rather than simply to distance in concentric circles from a fixed deictic centre (the speaker's location at CT).
Thus in Latin, and Correspondingly in Turkish, hic (Turkish bu) means "close to speaker" , iste (Turkish su) means "close to addressee" , and ille (Turkish o) means "remote from both speaker and addressee" (Lyons, 1968: 278-9; cf.
Anderson & Keenan, in press).
Similarly, in the Philippine language Samal, we have a four way distinction based on four kinds of participant role:(i) close to speaker,(ii) close to addressee,(iii) close to audience (other members of Conversational group),(iv) close to persons present but outside the COnversational group that consists of speaker, addressee(s) and audience.
This system (specifically a switch from the demonstrative that encodes (ii) or (iii) to that encoding (iv)) provides nice ways of slighting people by cutting them, demonstratively, out of the conversation (Fillmore, 1975: 43) There are thus systems of  demonstratives that are not organized primarily, or only, around the speaker's location.
There are also systems (e.g. in Australian and New Guinea languages) that distinguish the three dimensions of space, having demonstratives that gloss as "the one above the speaker" , "the one below the speaker" , "the one level with the speaker" as well as distinguishing relative distance from participants (see e.g. Dixon, 1972: 262ff re Dyirbal).
Some systems combine additional "exotic" deictic parameters like "upriver/downriver from speaker" or "visible/non-visible to speaker" to produce enormous arrays (up to thirty or more items) of demonstrative terms (see Anderson & Keenan, in press).
The demonstrative determiners combine with non-deictic terms for spatial organization to yield complex deictic descriptions of location.
The non-deictic conceptual organization of space includes all those distinctions between surfaces, spaces, enclosures, containers and so on, and between fronts, backs, tops, sides, of objects, not to mention widths, lengths, heights, etc.
Thus:(77) This side of the box can mean "the surface of the box that can be called a side which is nearest to the location of the speaker at CT" , but:(78) This side of the tree simply means "that area of the tree visible from the point where the speaker is at CT (or the space between that area and that point)" .
The difference between the glosses for (77) and (78) depends clearly on boxes, but not trees, having intrinsic sides (the difference is perhaps even clearer with an object like a car, which has an intrinsic orientation, so that its bottom remains its bottom even when the vehicle is turned over, and its front remains its front even when going backwards).
The difference between (77) and (78) is not the same difficulty we met earlier, in the ambiguity of:(79) The cat is behind the car where behind can have either a deictic usage (i.e. the car intervenes between the cat and the speaker's location), or a non-deictic usage (i.e. the cat is at the intrinsic rear-end of the car).
But the ultimate source of the difficulty is the same: some objects have intrinsic orientations, with fronts, sides, etc., and these allow both the deictic  selection of some oriented plane and the non-deictic reference to some such oriented plane.
As a result the deictic/non-deictic ambiguity is very general, and plagues the recipients of expressions like:(80) Bob is the man to the left of Mark where Bob may be to Mark's own left (non-deictic), or to the left from the speaker's point of view (deictic).
There are, as has been noted, fairly close connections between deictic determiners, third person pronouns, and the definite article (Lyons, 1968: 279, 1977a: 646ff; Hawkins, 1978).
All three categories are definite, and definiteness may perhaps be an essentially deictic notion.
Lyons suggests that this x retains a pronominal element, as well as containing an adverbial element similar to here.
On this analysis, the x differs from this x and that x only in that this x is marked "+ proximal" , that x is marked "-proximal" , and the x is unmarked for proximity, i.e. it is a neutral deictic term (Lyons, 1977a: 653-4).
Finally, let us consider some motion verbs that have built-in deictic components, English come vs. go makes some sort of distinction between the direction of motion relative to participants in the speech event (the exposition here follows Fillmore, 1966, 1975: 50ff).
As a first approximation, we may note that (81) He's coming seems to gloss as "he is moving towards the speaker's location at CT" , while (82) He's going glosses as "he is moving away from the speaker's location at CT" .
The suggested gloss for come would in fact be roughly correct for Spanish venir or Japanese kuru, but it will not handle English usages like:(83) I'm coming since this cannot mean "the speaker is moving towards the location of the speaker" , but rather means "the speaker is moving towards the location of the addressee at CT" .
(Such a usage may have diachronically arisen from a polite deictic shift to the addressee's point of view.)
In Japanese one must here say the equivalent of I go.
Taking this into account, we may suggest that English come glosses as "movement towards either the location of the speaker, or towards the location of  the addressee, at CT" .
However this won't quite do either — one can say:(84) When I'm in the office, you can come to see me where come glosses as "movement towards the location of the speaker at the time of some other specified event" (let us call this time reference time).
Such a usage is still ultimately deictic, in that it makes reference to participant-role, but it is not directly place-deictic (in that there is no anchorage to the location of the present speech event).
In narrative, we sometimes dispense with even this last vestige of deictic content, using come relative to the locations of protagonists rather than participants, but this non-deictic usage we shall ignore.
Our third approximation to a gloss for come is therefore: "motion towards speaker's location, or addressee's location, at either CT, or reference tame" .
Our analysis is still incomplete, however, as there is a deictic usage of come that is based not on participants' actual location, but on their normative location or home-base.
Hence the possibility of saying, when neither speaker nor addressee is at home:(83) I came over several times to visit you, but you were never there So we must append another clause to our gloss, namely: "or motion towards the home-base maintained at CT by either speaker or addressee" .
Very similar remarks throughout can be made for go, and also for verbs like bring and take (see Fillmore, 1975: 50ff).
A number of Amerindian languages encode reference to home-base in a more systematic way.
Thus in Chinantec, there are four expressions to choose from if one wants to say "Pedro moved to X" , depending on the following criteria:(i) one verb form is used if the speaker 5 is at X at CT, and X is S's home-base;(ii) another is used if S is at X, but X is not S's home-base;(iii) a third is used if S is not at X, but X is S's home-base;(iv) a fourth is used if S is not at X, and X is not S's home-base (Fillmore, 1917b: 16).
Further complexities in place deixis arise if the speaker is in motion — it then becomes quite possible to use temporal terms in order to refer to deictic locations, as in:(86) I first heard that ominous rattle ten miles ago (87) There's a good fast food joint just ten minutes from here This raises the issue about whether time deixis or place deixis is more  basic.
Lyons (1977a: 669) inclines to a view that, since place-deictic terms like this and that can be used in a temporal sense (especially to refer to proximal and distal parts of an unfolding discourse), place deixis is more fundamental than time deixis.
Such a view is favourable to localism, the theory that attempts to reduce non-spatial to spatial expressions (Lyons, 1977a: 718f).
But the usage in (86) and (87) can be used to reverse the argument, and in general each domain (space and time) provides fertile ground for metaphors about the other (see Chapter 3 below).
In addition, deictic locations always have to be specified with respect to the location of a participant at coding time, i.e. place deixis always incorporates a covert time deixis element, while the converse is not true.
Discourse, or text, deixis concerns the use of expressions within some utterance to refer to some portion of the discourse that contains that utterance (including the utterance itself).
We may also include in discourse deixis a number of other ways in which an utterance signals its relation to surrounding text, e.g. utterance-initial anyway seems to indicate that the utterance that contains it is not addressed to the immediately preceding discourse, but to one or more steps back.
(Such signals are deictic because they have the distinctive relativity of reference, being anchored to the discourse location of the current utterance.)
The only detailed accounts of this area of deixis are, again, to be found in Fillmore, 1975 and Lyons, 1977a: 667ff.
Since discourse unfolds in time, it seems natural that time-deictic words can be used to refer to portions of the discourse; thus analogously to last week and next Thursday, we have in the last paragraph and in the next Chapter.
But we also have place-deictic terms re-used here, and especially the demonstratives this and that.
Thus this can be used to refer to a forthcoming portion of the discourse, as in (88), and that to a preceding portion, as in (89):(88) I bet you haven't heard this story (89) That was the funniest story I've ever heard Considerable confusion is likely to be caused here if we do not immediately make the distinction between discourse deixis and anaphora.
As we noted, anaphora concerns the use of (usually) a pronoun to refer to the same referent as some prior term, as in:(90) Harry's a sweetheart; he's so considerate where Harry and he can be said to be co-referential, i.e. pick out the same referent.
Anaphora can, of course, hold within sentences, across sentences, and across turns at speaking in a dialogue.
Deictic or other definite referring expressions are often used to introduce a referent, and anaphoric pronouns used to refer to the same entity thereafter.
It is important to remember, however, that deictic and anaphoric usages are not mutually exclusive, as was remarked in connection with example (40) above.
Nevertheless, in principle the distinction is clear: where a pronoun refers to a linguistic expression (or chunk of discourse) itself, it is discourse-deictic; where a pronoun refers to the same entity as a prior linguistic expression refers to, it is anaphoric.
It follows that there is a close, but quite unexplored, relation between discourse deixis and mention or quotation; thus in the following example (from Lyons, 1977a: 667):(91) A: That's a rhinoceros B: Spell it for me it refers not to the referent, the beast itself, but to the word rhinoceros.
Here, it is not doing duty for a use of rhinoceros but rather for a mention of it.
Further, the property of token reflexivity, as in the following usage of this, is just a special case of intra-sentential discourse deixis:(92) This sentence is not true Fillmore (1917b: 240) hopes that a theory of discourse deixis will resolve the well-known paradoxes associated with sentences like (92)(if it's false, it's true; and if it's true, it's false), and indeed with token reflexivity in general.
2.2.4 Discourse deixis
A number of significant problems for the distinction between anaphora and discourse deixis have been thrown up by the very considerable body of work on pronominalization (see Lyons, 1977b; Lyons, 1977a: 662ff for a review; and for recent work, see e.g. Heny & Schnelle, 1979).
Firstly, there are the so-called pronouns of laziness (Geach, 1962: 125ff), as in Karttunen's well-known sentence (see Lyons, 1977a: 673ff):(93) The man who gave his paycheck to his wife was wiser than the man who gave it to his mistress  where it is not co-referential with his paycheck, but refers to what a repetition of that NP would have referred to (namely the paycheck of the man whose mistress got it) if it had occurred in place of it.
One could perhaps say that the pronoun here refers successfully via a discourse-deictic reference to a prior NP.
Secondly, in an exchange like the following (from Lyons, 1977a: 668):(94) A: I've never seen him B: That's a lie the pronoun that does not seem to be anaphoric (unless it is held that it refers to the same entity that A's utterance does, i.e. a proposition or a truth value); nor does it quite seem to be discourse-deictic (it refers not to the sentence but, perhaps, to the statement made by uttering that sentence).
Rather, such a usage seems to fall in between: Lyons (1977a: 670) calls such usages impure textual deixis.
Thirdly, Lyons points out that if one thinks of anaphora as reference to entities already established in the domain of discourse, then the ways in which they are referred to in anaphoric reference commonly make use of the order in which they were introduced by the discourse itself.
For example, the Turkish translation of (95) might be glossed as (96), where the proximal demonstrative anaphorically refers to the first referent introduced, and the distal demonstrative to the second:(95) John and Mary came into the room: he was laughing but she was crying (96) John and Mary came into the room: this was laughing, but that was crying In that case, there are good arguments for considering that anaphora ultimately rests on deictic notions (Lyons, 1977a: 671).
Such a conclusion would have important repercussions for the philosophical worries about the deictic nature of reference which were sketched in section 2.1.
To return to straightforward issues in discourse deixis, there are many words and phrases in English, and no doubt most languages, that indicate the relationship between an utterance and the prior discourse.
Examples are utterance-initial usages of but, therefore, in conclusion, to the contrary, still, however, anyway, well, besides, actually, all in all, so, after all, and so on.
It is generally conceded that such words have at least a Component of meaning that resists  truth-conditional treatment (Grice, 1975; Wilson, 1975; Levinson, 1979b).
What they seem to do is indicate, often in very complex ways, just how the utterance that contains them is a response to, or a continuation of, some portion of the prior discourse.
We still await proper studies of these terms, but one kind of approach will be sketched in the next Chapter under the rubric of conventional implicature, another will be indicated in Chapter 6 in discussion of the conversational uses of well (see Owen, 1981), and a third may be found in Smith & Wilson (1979: 180), elaborated in Brockway (1981).
Some languages also have morphemes that mark such clearly discourse notions as main story line.
For example, in the Amerindian language Cubeo, the main protagonists and their actions in a story are tagged by a particle in such a systematic way that a concise and accurate precis is obtained if just those sentences containing the particle are extracted (see Longacre, 1976a for many such cases in this and other Amerindian languages; and Anderson & Keenan, in press, re the so-called fourth person category in Algonquian languages, really a discourse-deictic category).
It is also well known that languages like Japanese and Tagalog have topic markers distinct from case markers.
Thus the Japanese sentence (97) ano-hon-wa John-ga kat-ta That book-topic John-subject bought means roughly "as for that book (or, talking of that book), John bought it" , where wa marks the topic, ga the grammatical subject (where topic and subject are identical, only wa is used; Gundel, 1977: 17).
In some languages the grammatical encoding of topic is so prominent, that it is not clear that the notion of subject has the same purchase as it does in the analysis, for example, of Indo-European languages (Li & Thompson, 1976).
A great deal of the discussion of such topic markers has been concerned with the sentence-internal organization of information as given (or the topic) vs. new (or comment about the topic — see Gundel, 1977 for a review).
But it is clear that a major function of topic marking is precisely to relate the marked utterance to some specific topic raised in the prior discourse, t.e.
to perform a discourse-deictic function.
The same function seems to be performed in English, and in other relatively fixed word-order languages, by word-order changes.
Thus  left-dislocated sentences (Ross, 1967) like the following seem to mark the topic of the sentence by movement into initial position:(98) That blouse, it's simply stunning (99) Vera, is she coming down then?
Studies of actual usage seem to show that items placed in this position really do correlate with discourse topic, or what the participants are talking "about" , although not always in simple ways (Duranti & Ochs, 1979).
The issues that surround the topic/comment distinction are at present quite ill understood, and discussion has been confused by terminological chaos (see Gundel, 1977; Lyons, 1977a: 500ff), although the subject is clearly of considerable importance to pragmatic theory.
The remarks in this section only sketch out a province for which a proper theory of discourse deixis might provide an account.
The scope, as indicated, may be very large, ranging from the borders of anaphora to issues of topic/comment structures.
Social deixis concerns "that aspect of sentences which reflect or establish or are determined by certain realities of the social situation in which the speech act occurs" (Fillmore, 1975: 76).
Fillmore, unfortunately, then proceeds to water down the concept of social deixis by including, for example, much of the theory of speech acts (see Chapter 5).
Here we shall restrict the term to those aspects of language structure that encode the social identities of participants (properly, incumbents of participant-roles), or the social relationship between them, or between one of them and persons and entities referred to.
There are of course many aspects of language usage that depend on these relations (see e.g. Brown & Levinson, 1978, 1979), but these usages are only relevant to the topic of social deixis in so far as they are grammaticalized Obvious examples of such grammaticalizations are "polite" pronouns and titles of address, but there are many other manifestations of social deixis (see Brown & Levinson, 1978: 183-92, 281-5; Levinson, 1977, 1979b).
2.2.5 Social deixis
There are two basic kinds of socially deictic information that seem to be encoded in languages around the world: relational and absolute.
The relational variety is the most important, and the relations that typically get expressed are those between:(i) speaker and referent (e.g. referent honorifics)(ii) speaker and addressee (e.g. addressee honorifics)(iii) speaker and bystander (e.g. bystander or audience honorifics)(iv) speaker and setting (e.g. formality levels) We can talk of honorifics just where the relation in (i) -(iii) concerns relative rank or respect; but there are many other qualities of relationship that may be grammaticalized, e.g. kinship relations, totemic relations, clan membership, etc., as made available by the relevant social system.
The first three kinds of honorific were clearly distinguished by Comrie (1976b), who pointed out that traditional descriptions have often confused (i) and (ii): the distinction is that in (i) respect can only be conveyed by referring to the "target" of the respect, whereas in (ii) it can be conveyed without necessarily referring to the target.
Thus the familiar tu/vous type of distinction in singular pronouns of address (which, following Brown & Gilman (1960), we shall call T/V pronouns) is really a referent honorific system, where the referent happens to be the addressee.
In contrast, in many languages (notably the S. E. Asian languages, including Korean, Japanese and Javanese) it is possible to say some sentence glossing as "The soup is hot" and by the choice of a linguistic alternate (e.g. for "soup" ) encode respect to the addressee without referring to him, in which case we have an addressee honorific system.
In general, in such languages, it is almost impossible to say anything at all which is not sociolinguistically marked as appropriate for certain kinds of addressees only.
In practice, though, the elaborate speech levels' of the S. E. Asian languages are complex amalgams of referent and addressee honorifics (see Geertz, 1960 and Comrie, 1976b re Javanese; Kuno, 1973 and Harada, 1976 re Japanese).
The third kind of relational information, that between speaker and bystander, is more rarely encoded in bystander honorifics.
(The term bystander here does duty as a cover term for participants in audience role and for non-participating overhearers.)
Examples include the Dyirbal alternative vocabulary, referred to above, used in the presence of taboo relatives (see also Haviland, 1979 re Guugu  Yimidhirr), and certain features of Pacific languages, like aspects of the "royal honorifics" in Ponapean (Garvin & Reisenberg, 1952: 203).
To these three kinds of relational information we may add a fourth, namely the relation between speaker (and perhaps other participants) and setting (or social activity).
Although most languages are used differently in formal settings, in some the distinction formal/informal is firmly grammaticalized, for example in Japanese by so-called masstyle, and in Tamil by a high diglossic variant (see below).
Note that while the first three kinds of information are relative strictly to the deictic centre, here specifically the social standing of the speaker, formality is perhaps best seen as involving a relation between all participant roles and situation (but see Irvine, 1979; J. M. Atkinson, 1982).
The other main kind of socially deictic information that is often encoded is absolute rather than relational.
There are, for example, forms reserved for certain speakers, in which case we may talk (after Fillmore, 1975) of authorized speakers.
For example, in Thai the morpheme khrab is a polite particle that can only be used by male speakers, the corresponding form reserved for female speakers being kha (Haas, 1964).
Similarly, there is a form of the first person pronoun specifically reserved for the use of the Japanese Emperor (Fillmore, 1971b: 6).
There are also in many languages forms reserved for authorized recipients, including restrictions on most titles of address (Your Honour, Mr President, etc.); in Tunica there were pronouns that differed not only with sex of referent, but also with the sex of the addressee, so that there were, for example, two words for "they" , depending on whether one was speaking to a man or a woman (Haas, ibid.).
Having reviewed the main kinds of social-deictic information that are grammaticalized by different languages, we may now consider where in grammatical systems such distinctions are encoded.
Note that only the first kind of relational information, i.e. that on the speaker-referent axis, imposes intrinsic limitations on the ways in which such information can be encoded — namely in referring expressions, and morphological agreements with them.
For good sociological reasons, such referent honorifics are found for actors, their social  groups, their actions and belongings (see e.g. Geertz, 1960 and Horne, 1974: xxi re Javanese).
We find, perhaps, pale shadows of these latter in the English "elevated" terms residence (for "home" ), dine (for "eat" or "eat a meal" ), lady (for "woman" ), steed (for "horse" ) and so on.
Expressions referring to the addressee, though, are particularly likely to encode speaker-referent relationships, due no doubt to the addressees direct monitoring of the speaker's attitude to him or her.
Hence the world-wide distribution through quite unrelated languages and cultures of the T/V distinction in second person singular pronouns (Head, 1978; Levinson, 1978; for the sociolinguistics, see Brown & Gilman, 1960 and Lambert & Tucker, 1976).
The fact that the form of the polite or V pronoun is often borrowed from the second person plural, or third person singular or plural, pronouns, introduces considerable complexities into agreement systems (Comrie, 1975; Corbett, 1976; Levinson, 1979b).
As we noted, nominal predicates tend to agree with actual number and person, finite verbs with the morphological person and number encoded in the polite form of the pronoun, with language-specific decisions on predicates of intermediate kind.
The other way in which addressees are typically referred to, namely by titles of address, also causes agreement problems — a decision has to be made between second or third person agreement, and, where relevant, between which titles of address can co-occur with which degree of respect encoded in verbal agreements (Levinson, 1979b).
In languages with honorifics, honorific concord can thus become an intricate aspect of morphology, which cannot always be treated formally without reference to the socially deictic values of particular morphemes.
These are some of the most important, and most ignored, examples of the direct interaction between pragmatics and syntax.
Finally, let us note that titles of address and all vocative forms seem invariably marked for speaker-referent relationship: there is no such thing, it seems, as a socially neutral summons or address (see Zwicky, 1974: 795 re English).
The other kinds of socially deictic information, however, can be encoded just about anywhere in the linguistic system.
Addressee honorifics (including dishonorifics and intimacy markers), for example, turn up in lexical alternates or suppletive forms (in e.g. Javanese; Geertz, 1960), in morphology (in e.g. Japanese; Harada, 1976), in particles or affixes (in e.g. Tamil; Levinson, 1979b), in  segmental phonology (in e.g. Basque; Corum, 1975: 96), in prosodics (in e.g. Tzeltal honorific falsetto; Brown & Levinson, 1978: 272), and in many cases a mixture of these (in e.g. Javanese, Japanese, Madurese, Korean).
Similarly, bystander honorifics are encoded in Dyirbal and Guugu Yimidhirr by an entirely distinct vocabulary as we noted (Dixon, 1972: 32ff; Haviland, 1979), and in other languages by particles and morphology.
Formality levels are encoded morphologically in Japanese, but in Tamil by differences across all the levels of the grammar, including phonology, morphology, syntax and lexicon.
Cases like the latter are usually termed diglossic Variants (Ferguson, 1964), although not everything so called has either the strict co-occurrence rules distinguishing levels or the restrictions in use that formal Tamil has.
Some such levels are restricted to the medium, oral or written; but formal Tamil is used in both writing and formal address or speech making.
The linguist interested in delimiting the scope of an overall linguistic theory may be concerned that the description of social deixis will simply merge into sociolinguistics, and on this ground wish to exclude consideration of social deixis from formal descriptions of language altogether.
This would be unfortunate.
In the first place, as noted in section 1.2, a boundary can be drawn between deictic issues and wider sociolinguistic ones.
For social deixis is concerned with the grammaticalization, or encoding in language structure, of social information, while sociolinguistics is also, and perhaps primarily, concerned with issues of language usage.
Despite the fact that certain approaches seem to conflate the meaning and the use of social-deictic items (see e.g. Ervin-Tripp, 1972), the possibility of regular ironic usages of, for example, honorifics to children, argues for the existence of prior and well-established meanings independent of rules of usage.
Social deixis is thus concerned with the meaning and grammar (e.g. the problems of honorific concord) of certain linguistic expressions, while sociolinguistics is also concerned, inter alia, with how these items are actually used in concrete social contexts classified with reference to the parameters of the relevant social system (Levinson, 1979b).
Thus, social deixis can be systematically restricted to the study of facts that lie firmly within the scope of structural studies of linguistic systems, leaving the study of usage to another domain.
A second reason why grammarians should not simply ignore social  deixis is that, while the study of English may suffer no obvious penalties for such neglect, there is scarcely a single sentence of, for example, Japanese, Javanese or Korean, that can be properly described from a strictly linguistic point of view without an analysis of social deixis.
The neglect of the subject as a whole is no doubt simply due to the disproportionate amount of recent linguistic work that has been done on English or closely related languages.
This Chapter has been very largely concerned, first, with the presentation of some useful analytical distinctions, and, secondly, with a review of some of the many intricacies of deixis in familiar and less familiar languages.
The lack of theoretical discussion reflects the present state of our understanding: we have, on the one hand, only the rather simple philosophical approaches to indexicals (covering just some aspects of person, time and place deixis), and, on the other hand, amass of complicated linguistic facts, to which some preliminary order has been brought by the work of Fillmore and Lyons in particular.
A central question that remains, though, is whether the study of deixis belongs to semantics or to pragmatics.
However, even if linguists could all agree on how the pragmatics/semantics boundary should be drawn, there would be no simple answer to this question.
Montague (1974) held that the study of any language containing indexicals was, eo ipso, pragmatics.
But this has the consequence, as we noted, that natural languages will only have a syntax and a pragmatics, and no semantics.
So if the semantics/pragmatics distinction is to do any work at all, we can try and shift the study of indexicals into semantics.
And since at least some aspects of deixis make a difference to truth conditions, we may hope that this shift will coincide with the decision to restrict semantics to the truth-conditional aspects of meaning.
However, we shall be disappointed, for there are aspects of deixis that are clearly not truth-conditional.
The semantics/pragmatics border will then cut across what is, from the point of view adopted in section 2.2, a unified linguistic field.
But if we proceed to draw the line, where exactly will it fall?
As we saw in section 2.1, we cannot state the truth conditions of sentences with indexicals without reference to the deictic function of indexicals; but if we allow truth conditions to be relativized to speakers, addressees, times, places, indicated objects, etc., then it looks as if many aspects of deixis can be accommodated within truth-conditional semantics.
It is a version of truth-conditional semantics, though, in which not sentences, but only utterances in context, can be assigned the propositions they express.
Without such a move, the current attempts to define the notion of logical consequence more or less directly on fragments of natural language (as initiated by Montague, 1974) would make little sense as a general semantic programme.
There are, though, many obstacles to the accommodation of deixis within semantics by simply providing a list of indices or contextual points of reference relative to which truth conditions can be stated.
For example, no attempt has been made to deal with the distinctions between gestural, non-gestural, and the various non-deictic usages of deictic words.
For gestural usages, we seem to need, not just a list of abstract coordinates, but a complete monitoring of the physical properties of the speech event.
For example, it will be insufficient to have merely a single deictic index for time of utterance, yet how many time indices we need seems to depend on the utterance itself:(100) Don't shoot now, but now, now and now!
The possibility of an indefinitely long list of necessary indices or co-ordinates thus has to be faced.
In answer to this, Cresswell (1973: 111ff) produces, by a technical sleight of hand, a formulation which avoids specifying the necessary indices in advance.
But this hardly solves the problem of knowing how to obtain the relevant indices just when we need them.
A second problem is that utterances like (101) Harry can only speak this loud are token-reflexive to the physical properties of the utterance itself, so that not only do the enormous technical problems of dealing with token-reflexives in a logical manner have to be solved, but all the physical properties of an utterance will also have to be available as indices (requiring, again, an indefinite number of indices).
These problems alone would not make the prospects for the straightforward treatment of deictic sentences within truth-conditional semantics look very hopeful.
It may be more helpful to admit that what we are dealing with here are very complex pragmatic ways in which a sentence and a context of utterance interact to pick out a proposition, by reference to the audio-visual monitoring of the speech event as it unfolds.
But whatever is ultimately decided about where person, place and time deixis belong, there is little doubt that most aspects of discourse deixis and social deixis will lie outside the scope ofa truth-conditional semantics.
The reason for this is quite simply that these aspects of deixis mostly make no difference to truth conditions.
If I say either of the following,(102) Vous etes Napoleon (103) Tu es Napoleon the conditions under which they will be true will be identical.
The utterer of the first may pragmatically presume that the addressee is socially superior or socially distant, but (102) does not entail that.
If what (102) entailed was:(104) You are Napoleon and you are socially superior to (or socially distant from) me, the speaker Then (105) would have to have one reading under which it meant (106), which it clearly does not have:(105) Vous n'etes pas Napoleon (106) You are Napoleon, and you are not socially superior to (or socially distant from) me, the speaker Exactly the same, and additional, arguments can be shown to hold for the complex honorifics of "exotic" languages.
Such aspects of language have conventional but non-truth-conditional meanings.
Similarly, it is generally agreed that the discourse-deictic words like moreover, besides, anyway, well, etc., in utterance-initial position, do not make any difference to truth conditions (Grice, 1961, 1975; Wilson, 1975).
Here again, then, it seems that there are linguistic items that have conventional meanings, but no (or only partial) truth-conditional content.
If we subscribe to a truth-conditional semantics, we shall therefore be forced to find a place for such meanings in pragmatic theory.
Attempts have been made to assimilate such meanings to various pragmatic concepts, for example pragmatic presupposition (Keenan, 1971), or, as we shall find in the next Chapter, conventional implicature.
But the general conclusion must be that most aspects of discourse deixis, and perhaps all aspects of social deixis, lie beyond the scope of a truth-conditional semantics.
Deixis is therefore not reducible in its entirety, and perhaps hardly at all, to matters of truth-conditional semantics.
3 conversational implicature
3.0 Introduction
The notion of conversational implicature is one of the single most important ideas in pragmatics (we shall often refer to the notion simply as implicature as a shorthand, although distinctions between this and other kinds of implicature will be introduced below).
The salience of the concept in recent work in pragmatics is due to a number of sources.
First, implicature stands as a paradigmatic example of the nature and power of pragmatic explanations of linguistic phenomena.
The sources of this species of pragmatic inference can be shown to lie outside the organization of language, in some general principles for cooperative interaction, and yet these principles have a pervasive effect upon the structure of language.
The concept of implicature, therefore, seems to offer some significant functional explanations of linguistic facts.
A second important contribution made by the notion of implicature is that it provides some explicit account of how it is possible to mean (in some general sense) more than what is actually "said" (i.e. more than what is literally expressed by the conventional sense of the linguistic expressions uttered).
Consider, for example:(I) A: Can you tell me the time?
B: Well, the milkman has come All that we can reasonably expect a semantic theory to tell us about this minimal exchange is that there is at least one reading that we might paraphrase as follows:(2) A: Do you have the ability to tell me the time?
B:[pragmatically interpreted particle]the milkman came at some time prior to the time of speaking Yet it is clear to native speakers that what would ordinarily be communicated by such an exchange involves considerably more, along the lines of the italicized material in (3):(3) A: Do you have the ability to tell me the time of the present moment, as standardly indicated on a watch, and if so please do so tell me B: No I don't know the exact time of the present moment, but I can provide some information from which you may be able to deduce the approximate time, namely the milkman has come (see R. Lakoff, 1973a; Smith & Wilson, 1979: 172ff for a discussion of such examples).
Clearly the whole point of the exchange, namely a request for specific information and an attempt to provide as much of that information as possible, is not directly expressed in (2) at all; so the gap between what is literally said in (2) and what is conveyed in (3) is so substantial that we cannot expect a semantic theory to provide more than a small part of an account of how we communicate using language.
The notion of implicature promises to bridge the gap, by giving some account of how at least large portions of the italicized material in (3) are effectively conveyed.
Thirdly, the notion of implicature seems likely to effect substantial simplifications in both the structure and the content of semantic descriptions.
For example, consider:(4) The lone ranger jumped on his horse and rode into the sunset (5) The capital of France is Paris and the capital of England is London (6)??
The lone ranger rode into the sunset and jumped on his horse (7) The capital of England is London and the capital of France is Paris The sense of and in (4) and (5) seems to be rather different: in (4) it seems to mean "and then" and thus (6) is strange in that it is hard to imagine the reverse ordering of the two events.
But in (5) there  is no "and then" sense; and here seems to mean just what the standard truth table for & would have it mean — namely that the whole is true just in case both conjuncts are true; hence the reversal of the conjuncts in (7) does not affect the conceptual import at all.
Faced with examples like this, the semanticist has traditionally taken one of two tacks: he can either hold that there are two distinct senses of the word and, which is thus simply ambiguous, or he can claim that the meanings of words are in general vague and protean and are influenced by collocational environments.
If the semanticist takes the first tack, he soon finds himself in the business of adducing an apparently endless proliferation of senses of the simplest looking words.
He might for example be led by (8) and (9) to suggest that white is ambiguous, for in (8) it seems to mean "only or wholly white" while in (9) it can only mean "partially white" :(8) The flag is white (9) The flag is white, red and blue The semanticist who takes the other tack, that natural language senses are protean, sloppy and variable, is hardly in a better position: how do hearers then know (which they certainly do) just which variable value of white is involved in (8)?
Nor will it do just to ignore the problem, for if one does one soon finds that one's semantics is self-contradictory.
For example,(10) certainly seems to mean (11); but if we then build the "uncertainty" interpretation in (11) into the meaning of possible,(12) should be an outright contradiction.
But it is not.
(10) It's possible that there's life on Mars (11) It's possible that there's life on Mars and it's possible that there is no life on Mars (12) It's possible that there's life on Mars, and in fact it is now certain that there is Now from this set of dilemmas the notion of implicature offers a way out, for it allows one to claim that natural language expressions do tend to have simple, stable and unitary senses (in many cases anyway), but that this stable semantic core of en has an unstable, context-specific pragmatic overlay — namely a set of implicatures.
As long as some specific predictive content can be given to the notion of implicature, this is a genuine and substantial solution to the sorts of problems we have just illustrated.
An important point to note is that this simplification of semantics is not just a reduction of problems in the lexicon; it also makes possible the adoption ofa semantics built on simple logical principles.
It does this by demonstrating that once pragmatic implications of the sort we shall call implicature are taken into account, the apparently radical differences between logic and natural language seem to fade away.
We shall explore this below when we come to consider the "logical" words in English, and, or, if then, not, the quantifiers and the modals.
Fourthly, implicature, or at least some closely related concept, seems to be simply essential if various basic facts about language are to be accounted for properly.
For example, particles like well, anyway, by the way require some meaning specification in a theory of meaning just like all the other words in English; but when we come to consider what their meaning is, we shall find ourselves referring to the pragmatic mechanisms that produce implicatures.
We shall also see that certain syntactic rules appear at least to be sensitive to implicature, and that implicature puts interesting constraints on what can be a possible lexical item in natural languages.
Finally, the principles that generate implicatures have a very general explanatory power: a few basic principles provide explanations for a large array of apparently unrelated facts.
For example, explanations will be offered below for why English has no lexical item nall meaning "not all" , for why Aristotle got his logics wrong, for "Moore's paradox" , for why obvious tautologies like War is war can convey any conceptual import, for how metaphors work and many other phenomena besides.
Unlike many other topics in pragmatics, implicature does not have an extended history.
The key ideas were proposed by Grice in the William james lectures delivered at Harvard in 1967 and still only partially published (Grice, 1975, 1978).
The proposals were relatively brief and only suggestive of how future work might proceed.
Grice's theory of implicature
Before we review Grice's suggestions it would be as well to make  clear that the other major theory associated with Grice, namely his theory of meaning-nn discussed above in Chapter I, is not generally treated as having any connection with his theory of implicature (cf.
Walker, 1975).
In fact there is a connection of an important kind.
If as we indicated, Grice's theory of meaning-nn is construed as a theory of communication, it has the interesting consequence that it gives an account of how communication might be achieved in the absence of any conventional means for expressing the intended message.
A corollary is that it provides an account of how more can be communicated, in his rather strict sense of non-naturally meant, than what is actually said.
Obviously we can, given an utterance, often derive a number of inferences from it; but not all those inferences may have been communicative in Grice's sense, i.e. intended to be recognized as having been intended.
The kind of inferences that are called implicatures are always of this special intended kind, and the theory of implicature sketches one way in which such inferences, of a non-conventional sort, can be conveyed while meeting the criterion of communicated messages sketched in Grice's theory of meaning-nn.
Grice's second theory, in which he develops the concept of implicature, is essentially a theory about how people use language.
Grice's suggestion is that there is a set of over-arching assumptions guiding the conduct of conversation.
These arise, it seems, from basic rational considerations and may be formulated as guidelines for the efficient and effective use of language in conversation to further cooperative ends.
Grice identifies as guidelines of this sort four basic maxims of conversation or general principles underlying the efficient cooperative use of language, which jointly express a general Co-operative principle.
These principles are expressed as follows:(13) The co-operative principle make your contribution such as is required, at the stage at which it occurs, by the accepted purpose or direction of the talk exchange in which you are engaged (14) The maxim of Quality try to make your contribution one that is true, specifically:(i) do not say what you believe to be false (ii) do not say that for which you lack adequate evidence (15) The maxim of Quantity (i) make your contribution as informative as is required for the current purposes of the exchange (ii) do not make your contribution more informative than is required  (16) The maxim of Relevance make your contributions relevant (17) The maxim of Manner be perspicuous, and specifically:(i) avoid obscurity (ii) avoid ambiguity (iii) be brief (iv) be orderly In short, these maxims specify what participants have to do in order to converse in a maximally efficient, rational, co-operative way: they should speak sincerely, relevantly and clearly, while providing sufficient information.
To this view of the nature of communication there is an immediate objection: the view may describe a philosopher's paradise, but no one actually speaks like that the whole time!
But Grice's point is subtly different.
It is not the case, he will readily admit, that people follow these guidelines to the letter.
Rather, in most ordinary kinds of talk these principles are oriented to, such that when talk does not proceed according to their specifications, hearers assume that, contrary to appearances, the principles are nevertheless being adhered to at some deeper level.
An example should make this clear:(18) A: Where's Bill?
B: There's a yellow VW outside Sue's house Here B's contribution, taken literally, fails to answer A's question, and thus seems to violate at least the maxims of Quantity and Relevance.
We might therefore expect B's utterance to be interpreted as a non-co-operative response, a brushing aside of A's concerns with a change of topic.
Yet it is clear that despite this apparent failure of cooperation, we try to interpret B's utterance as nevertheless cooperative at some deeper (non-superficial) level.
We do this by assuming that it is in fact cooperative, and then asking ourselves what possible connection there could be between the location of Bill and the location of a yellow VW, and thus arrive at the suggestion (which B effectively conveys) that, if Bill has a yellow VW, he may be in Sue's house.
In cases of this sort, inferences arise to preserve the assumption of cooperation; it is only by making the assumption contrary to superficial indications that the inferences arise in the first place.
It  is this kind of inference that Grice dubs an implicature, or more properly a conversational implicature.
So Grice's point is not that we always adhere to these maxims on a superficial level but rather that, wherever possible, people will interpret what we say as conforming to the maxims on at least some level.
But what is the source of these maxims of conversational behaviour?
Are they conventional rules that we learn as we learn, say, table manners?
Grice suggests that the maxims are in fact not arbitrary conventions, but rather describe rational means for conducting cooperative exchanges.
If this is so, we would expect them to govern aspects of non-linguist; 6 behaviour too, and indeed they seem to do so.
Consider, for example, a situation in which A and B are fixing a car.
If the maxim of Quality is interpreted as the injunction to produce non-spurious or sincere acts (a move we need to make anyway to extend the maxim to questions, promises, invitations, etc.),
B would fail to comply with this if, when asked for brake fluid, he knowingly passes A the oil, or when asked to tighten up the bolts on the steering column he merely pretends to do so Similarly, A would fail to observe the maxim of Quantity, the injunction to make one's contribution in the right proportion, if"when B needs three bolts, he purposely passes him only one, or alternatively passes him 300.
Likewise with Relevance: if B wants three bolts, he wants them now not half an hour later.
Finally, B would fail to comply with the maxim of Manner, enjoining clarity of purpose, if, when A needs a bolt of size 8, B passes him the bolt in a box that usually contains bolts of size Jo.
In each of these cases the behaviour falls short of some natural notion of full cooperation, because it violates one or another of the non-verbal analogues of the maxims of conversation.
This suggests that the maxims do indeed derive from general considerations of rationality applicable to all kinds of cooperative exchanges, and if so they ought in addition to have universal application, at least to the extent that other, culture-specific, constraints on interaction allow.
Broadly, this too seems to be so.
However, the reason for linguistic interest in the maxims is that they generate inferences beyond the semantic content of the sentences uttered.
Such inferences are, by definition, conversational implicatures, where the term implicature is intended to contrast with terms like logical implication, entailment and logical consequence which are generally used to refer to inferences that are derived solely from  logical or semantic content.
For implicatures are not semantic inferences, but rather inferences based on both the content of what has been said and some specific assumptions about the cooperative nature of ordinary verbal interaction.
These inferences come about in at least two distinct ways, depending on the relation that the speaker is taken to have towards the maxims.
If the speaker is observing the maxims in a fairly direct way, he may nevertheless rely on the addressee to amplify what he says by some straightforward inferences based on the assumption that the speaker is following the maxims.
For example, consider the following exchange: A (to passer by): I've just run out of petrol B: Oh; there's a garage just around the corner Here B's utterance may be taken to implicate that A may obtain petrol there, and he would certainly be being less than fully cooperative if he knew the garage was closed or was sold out of petrol (hence the inference).
Let us call these inferences that arise from observing the maxims standard implicatures (the term is not Grice's, although he introduces the term generalized implicature for a subset of these implicatures which do not require particular contextual conditions in order to be inferred).
Another way in which inferences may be generated by the maxims is where the speaker deliberately and ostentatiously breaches or (as Grice puts it) flouts the maxims.
Consider for example:(20) A: Let's get the kids something B: Okay, but I veto I-C-E C-R-E-A-M-S where B ostentatiously infringes the maxim of Manner (be perspicuous) by spelling out the word ice-creams, and thereby conveys to A  that B would rather not have ice-cream mentioned directly in the presence of the children, in case they are thereby prompted to demand some.
Both kinds of implicature are of great interest.
Some further examples of each kind, organized under the maxims that give rise to them, may help to make the distinction clear.
Let us start with examples of implicatures that arise directly from the assumption that the speaker is observing the maxims, and which simply amplify the cOmmunicated content in restricted ways (the symbol +> may stand for "the uttering of the prior sentence will generally implicate the following" ).
(21) John has two PhDs +> I believe he has, and have adequate evidence that he has (22) Does your farm contain 400 acres? +> I don't know that it does, and I want to know if it does The first of these provides an explanation for "Moore's paradox" , namely the unacceptability of utterances like (23):(23)??
John has two PhDs but I don't believe he has This sentence is pragmatically anomalous because it contradicts the standard Quality implicature that one believes what one asserts.
The example in (22) simply extends the scope of Quality by viewing truth as a special sub-case of sincerity applied to assertions; when one asks a question, one may standardly be taken to be asking sincerely and hence to be indeed lacking and requiring the requested information.
(As we shall see when we come to consider speech acts in Chapter 5- these kinds of inferences are often talked about as felicity conditions as if they had no connection to implicature at all.)
Normally then, in cooperative circumstances, when one asserts something one implicates that one believes it, when one asks a  question one implicates that one sincerely desires an answer and, by extension, when one promises to do x, one implicates that one sincerely intends to do x, and so on.
Any other use of such utterances is likely to be a spurious or counterfeit one, and thus liable to violate the maxim of Quality.
Quality
This maxim provides some of the most interesting of the standard implicatures.
Suppose I say:(24) Nigel has fourteen children I shall implicate that Nigel has only fourteen children, although it would be compatible with the truth of (24) that Nigel in fact has twenty children.
I shall be taken to implicate that he has only fourteen and no more because had he had twenty, then by the maxim of Quantity ( "say as much as is required" ) I should have said so.
Since I haven't, I must intend to convey that Nigel only has fourteen.
Similarly, reconsider the example introduced as (8) above:(25) The flag is white Since I have given no further information about other colours the flag may contain, which might indeed be highly relevant to the proceedings, I may be taken to implicate that the flag has no other colours and is thus wholly white.
Or again suppose we overhear the following exchange:(26) A: How did Harry fare in court the other day?
B: Oh he got a fine If it later transpires that Harry got a life sentence too, then B (if he knew this all along) would certainly be guilty of misleading A, for he has failed to provide all the information that might reasonably be required in the situation.
Quantity
All these examples involve the first sub-maxim of Quantity, which appears to be the important one, in which the provision of full information is enjoined.
The effect of the maxim is to add to most utterances a pragmatic inference to the effect that the statement presented is the strongest, or most informative, that can be made in the situation; in many cases the implicatures can be glossed by  adding only to the propositional content of the sentence, e.g. "Nigel has only fourteen children" , "the flag is only white" , "Harry only got a fine" .
This maxim is also responsible for producing a large range of standard implicatures.
For example, where possible imperatives will be interpreted as relevant to the present interaction, and thus as requests to implement some action at the present time.
Hence:(27) Pass the salt +> pass the salt now Or reconsider example (i) repeated here:(28) A: Can you tell me the time?
B: Well, the milkman has come It is only on the basis of assuming the relevance of B's response that we can understand it as providing a partial answer to A's question.
The inference seems to work roughly like this: assume B's utterance is relevant; if it's relevant then given that A asked a question, B should be providing an answer; the only way one can reconcile the assumption that B is co-operatively answering A's question with the content of B's utterance is to assume that B is not in a position to provide the full information, but thinks that the milkman's coming might provide A with the means of deriving a partial answer.
Hence A may infer that B intends to convey that the time is at least after whenever the milkman normally calls.
Exactly similar inferences can be made in cases like example (18), and it is clear that such inferences are fundamental to our sense of coherence in discourse: if the implicatures were not constructed on the basis of the assumption of relevance, many adjacent utterances in conversation would appear quite unconnected.
Relevance
Finally, a number of different kinds of inference arise from the assumption that the maxim of Manner is being observed.
For example, by the third sub-maxim of Manner ( "be brief" ), wherever I avoid some simple expression in favour of some more complex paraphrase, it may be assumed that I do not do so wantonly, but because the details are somehow relevant to the present enterprise.
If, instead of(29), I say (30), then I direct you to pay particular attention and care to each of the operations involved in doing (29), this being an implicature of the use of the longer expression:(29) Open the door (30) Walk up to the door, turn the door handle clockwise as far as it will go, and then pull gently towards you But perhaps the most important of the sub-maxims of Manner is the fourth, "be orderly" .
For this can be used to explain the oddity of (6) above, repeated here:(31)??
The lone ranger rode into the sunset and jumped on his horse This violates our expectation that events are recounted in the order in which they happened.
But it is just because participants in conversation may be expected to observe the sub-maxim "be orderly" that we have that expectation.
Presented with (32), we therefore read it as a sequence of two events that occurred in that order:(32) Alfred went to the store and bought some whisky We now see how the semanticist armed with the notion of implicature can extricate himself from the dilemmas raised above in connection with examples (4) -(7).
He need not claim that there are two words and in English, one meaning simply that both conjuncts are true, the other having the same meaning plus a notion of sequentiality.
For the sequentiality, the "and then" sense of and in sentences like (32), is simply a standard implicature due to the fourth sub-maxim of Manner, which provides a pragmatic overlay on the semantic content of and wherever descriptions of two events, which might be sequentially ordered, are conjoined.
Manner
Implicatures that are "triggered" in this unostentatious way, simply by the assumption that the maxims are being observed, have so far been of the greater interest to linguists.
This is because such inferences often arise wherever features of the context do not actually block them, with the result that they can be easily confused with the permanent aspects of the semantics of the expressions involved.
Consequently, a semantic theory can become plagued by a proliferation  of hypothetical senses and internal contradictions in ways we shall spell out below.
Before returning to these implicatures in the next section, let us first illustrate the other major kind of implicatures that Grice had in mind.
The second kind of implicatures come about by overtly and blatantly not following some maxim, in order to exploit it for communicative purposes.
Grice calls such usages floutings or exploitations of the maxims, and they can be seen to give rise to many of the traditional "figures of speech" .
These inferences are based on the remarkable robustness of the assumption of cooperation: if someone drastically and dramatically deviates from maxim-type behaviour, then his utterances are still read as underlyingly co-operative if this is at all possible.
Thus by overtly infringing some maxim, the speaker can force the hearer to do extensive inferencing to some set of propositions, such that if the speaker can be assumed to be conveying these then at least the over-arching cooperative principle would be sustained.
Some examples follow.
This maxim might be flouted in the following exchange:(33) A: What if the USSR blockades the Gulf and all the oil?
B: Oh come now, Britain rules the seas!
Any reasonably informed participant will know that B's utterance is blatantly false.
That being so, B cannot be trying to deceive A. The only way in which the assumption that B is cooperating can be maintained is if we take B to mean something rather different from what he has actually said.
Searching around for a related but cooperative proposition that B might be intending to convey, we arrive at the opposite, or negation, of what B has stated namely that Britain doesn't rule the seas, and thus by way of Relevance to the prior utterance, the suggestion that there is nothing that Britain could do.
Hence, Grice claims, ironies arise and are successfully decoded.
If there was no underlying assumption of cooperation, recipients of ironies ought simply to be nonplussed; no inferences could be drawn.
Quality
Similar remarks can be made for at least some examples of metaphor.
For example, if I say (34) I express a categorial falsehood (i.e. a semantic category, or selectional, violation).
Either therefore I am being non-cooperative or I intend to convey something rather different:(34) Queen Victoria was made of iron The straightforward interpretation is that since Queen Victoria in fact lacked the definitional properties of iron, she merely had some of the incidental properties like hardness, resilience, non-flexibility or durability.
Which particular set of such properties are attributed to her by the utterance of (34) are at least in part dependent on the contexts of utterance: said by an admirer it may be a commendation, conveying the properties of toughness and resilience; said by a detractor it may be taken as a denigration, conveying her lack of flexibility, emotional impassivity or belligerence.
Other Quality floutings include the uttering of patent falsehoods as in (35) A: Teheran's in Turkey isn't it, teacher?
B: And London's in Armenia I suppose where B's utterance serves to suggest that A's is absurdly incorrect.
Or consider rhetorical questions like (36):(36) Was Mussolini going to be moderate? which if the participants believe that whatever Mussolini was, he was not moderate, is likely to convey (37):(37) Mussolini was definitely not going to be moderate Here, by overtly violating the sincerity of a question, once again an implicature is generated by a flouting of the maxim of Quality.
The uttering of simple and obvious tautologies should, in principle, have absolutely no communicative import.
However, utterances of (38) -(40) and the like can in fact convey a great deal:(38) War is war (39) Either John will come or he won't (40) If he does it, he does it Note that these, by virtue of their logical forms (respectively: x (W(x) — W(x)); p V p; p — p) are necessarily true; ergo they share the same truth conditions, and the differences we feel to lie between them, as well as their communicative import, must be almost entirely due to their pragmatic implications.
An account of how they come to have communicative significance, and different communicative significances, can be given in terms of the flouting of the maxim of Quantity.
Since this requires that speakers be informative, the asserting of tautologies blatantly violates it.
Therefore, if the assumption that the speaker is actually cooperating is to be preserved, some informative inference must be made.
Thus in the case of (38) it might be "terrible things always happen in war, that's its nature and it's no good lamenting that particular disaster" ; in the case of (39) it might be "calm down, there's no point in worrying about whether he's going to come because there's nothing we can do about it" ; and in the case of (40) it might be"it's no concern of ours'.
Clearly these share a dismissive or topic-closing quality, but the details of what is implicated will depend upon the particular context of utterance.
(Incidentally, exactly how the appropriate implicatures in these cases are to be predicted remains quite unclear, although the maxim of Relevance would presumably play a crucial role.)
Quantity
Exploitations of this maxim are, as Grice notes, a little harder to find, if only because it is hard to construct responses that must be interpreted as irrelevant.
But Grice provides an example like the following:(41) A: I do think Mrs Jenkins is an old windbag, don't you?
B: Huh, lovely weather for March, isn't it? where B's utterance might implicate in the appropriate circumstances "hey, watch out, her nephew is standing right behind you" .
More naturally, consider (42):(42) Johnny: Hey Sally let's play marbles Mother: How is your homework getting along Johnny? whereby Johnny's mother can remind him that he may not yet be free to play.
Relevance