

2.
Considering Style in Roman Society
It is notoriously difficult to discuss the role of aesthetics in Rome and to ascribe definite aesthetic interests to specific places or social groups: Brendel (1979) and Brilliant (1974).
For mosaics especially, recommendations of appropriate taste or choice of style are few and very general.
Vitruvius (De Arch.
VII i) is predominantly concerned with the architectural aspects of mosaic, e.g. the technicalities of foundations.
Pliny (Hist.
Nat. 30.60.64), meanwhile, echoes much of that discussed by Vitruvius — with only slight differences, e.g. the types of pavements to which particular foundations are applicable.
Even commentaries on those crafts which might be expected to throw some new light on the broader "aesthetic environment" of mosaic, such as Lucian's Dream, are of little assistance.
Inscriptions, within mosaics and elsewhere, provide a richer source of information.
These do require a certain degree of inference, but it is clear that under some conditions such remains can suggest the name of a sponsor, the reason for sponsorship, and the presence of a respected craftsmen or group of craftsmen At Avenches — and probably at Bavay — in France, and at Seriana and  Timgad in North Africa, the names of individual craftsmen are attested (although, as is shown by the inscription from Timgad, even differing ideas of the practice in which the craftsman was involved are apparent).
Dauphin (1980), meanwhile, lists many of the names of clients (and their purchases) inscribed in the mosaics of the Levant.
From Lillebonne and Mienne, France, we have some evidence for a master/apprentice relationship and for the existence of workshops (officinae).
Whereas an epitaph (in stone) from Perinthus, Greece, speaks of a mosaicist's itinerance.
2.1
However, the evidence is nowhere as instructive as, for example, the potters' stamps of second century, Gallic, Samian ware: for the organisation of style, consciousness of individual or specific style, or written marks indicative of one mosaicist's work, the evidence remains slight and difficult to interpret.
For Britain in particular, inscriptions are not very helpful.
Most were intended to be exulting or to act as aids to the recognition of individual figures.
Only at Bignor, Sussex (no. 5, App.
A) is a craftsman (probably a very skilled one judging by the quality of the mosaics) possibly attested, and this certainly, could have been more explicit (pl.37).
Equally, to begin consideration of the archaeological (as opposed to the specifically epigraphic) evidence, there is a dearth of possible workshops or craft areas.
This is true even when those sites which provide evidence for only a small number of mosaics are included.
The most noteworthy — sites at Rudston, East Yorks., North Leigh, Oxon., Water Newton, Cambs., and Wellow, Som.; see App.
B — indicate little more than the immediate place of work during the construction of the pavements of a single building.
In most instances, they appear to have been sites where only tesserae for the repair and maintenance of completed mosaics were knapped and stored.
2.2
It appears that only limited insights into the organisation of style are to be gained from those sources — commentaries, inscriptions, and socio-economic indicators — which reflect upon style.
Given this limitation therefore, one has to rely on an interpretation of the relationships between the mosaics themselves.
Such an interpretation involves us, immediately, with a consideration of style and, by implication, "form" (that which has been included).
Both can be partially addressed in terms of correlates: "subject and technique" or "structure and function" , for example.
However, both of these alternative approaches to investigation have been rejected: the former as too specific and limiting, the latter as insensitive to innovation, intention, creativity and too suggestive of social teleology.
2.3
Form, in fact, covers all inclusions, be they considered in terms of designs, subjects, structures, borders, motifs, characters, technical devices or tesserae.
Style accounts for all kinds of nuance between these, and indeed between these and the factors deemed responsible for their manufacture.
Sometimes, this is the result of observing  one of the above terms (designs, subjects etc.) as it is submerged within another; on other occasions it is the result of observing barely perceptible changes in one of these terms between different mosaics.
Even when avoiding the overlap of these two considerations, there is, clearly, a very large number of possible permutations.
It is with these that the archaeological study of Romano-British mosaics is primarily concerned: the indicators of stylistic affinity upon which are based any suggestions of uniqueness of design, regularity between the interests of clients, the existence of aids to design i.e. pattern books, or the nature of the workforce employed.
The main assumption, below, is that various inferences from style may suggest different levels of stylistic affinity.
These levels can be independent of any specific interest in Romano-British society, but generally it is not meaningful to have them so.
Four levels were considered appropriate for the arguments which follow in parts two, three and four.
From the most general to the most specific levels of affinity these have been labelled (i) Sequential,(ii) Substantial,(iii) Integral, and (iv) Unitary affinity.
2.4
It is important to note that a mosaic can be considered at more than one level — and conceivably at all levels — of affinity.
Usually, numerous levels are relevant to the understanding of a mosaic.
Furthermore, if a mosaic is considered at two non-contiguous levels of affinity e.g. substantial and unitary levels, it need not necessarily be significant at intermediate levels.
(i) Sequential.
At this level there appears to be little cross-association of elements, e.g. all of those inclusions listed under "form" , in section 2.3 (all section numbers refer to the under discussion, unless otherwise indicated).
Between mosaics only one or two of these will be held in common, and are almost certain to be general (design or structure, for example ).
There is an apparent acceptance of format i.e. little conscious manipulation of the elements under consideration: affinities are attributable, therefore, to developments of which the mosaicist and his client might have been oblivious.
Four Levels of Stylistic Affinity
(ii) Substantial.
At this level there will be sufficient cross association of elements to suggest some almost unique relationships.
But these cannot yet be attributed to the activities of an individual mosaicist — although they might well indicate the predilictions of an influential client or close- knit group of clients — and are still most significant when viewed over considerable periods of time.
(iii) Integral.
Here, there are indications between mosaics of some continuity in technique, attesting the presence of an individual style.
The appearance of stylistically close but formally unique motifs (signatures) is a possibility, and identical elements might be present in different mosaics.
In general, one notable but not fully comprehensive style (or two  or more styles which do not correspond) is in evidence: another, "indefinite" style accompanies the individual — such as one might expect with the work of a mosaicist and a number of helpers.
Moreover, the relationship between mosaics need not necessarily be "direct" : a group of mosaics can be included at this level when the style of its members is relatable only by comparison with that of a third pavement (a"distributed relationship).
(iv) Unitary.
At this level of affinity we are presented with the idiosyncrasies of more than one individual style,(where the compatibility of these styles is great), or with one comprehensive style which appears to exclude others.
In such cases a number of craftsmen appear to be working together (to the exclusion of others) on a number of sites and pavements.
A predominant or composite style (an association of styles) seems to orientate itself in respect to a group of mosaics, or to an abstract demand for these mosaics.
Works on a limited number of themes and with several elements unique to the style are conspicuous.
It is easy to blur such distinctions.
It is especially easy to confuse unitary with integral affinity or integral with substantial affinity, as in each general case some pavements will undoubtably be comparable at the more specific level.
However, each level has its proper place and helps in the understanding of the others.
Sometimes the tail-end of a sequence exhibiting sequential affinity, can be seen also to be part of a localised example of integral affinity.
Alternatively, an integral affinity, e.g. integral group (a) of Part Three, section 4.2, can be instrumental in the growth of a sequential relationship (in this instance, of "concentric, circular designs" ).
These principles should become clearer with their application in parts two, three, and four, below.
3.
The Making of a Mosaic
The craft of the mosaicist in Britain was not static over a four hundred year period; however, there are certain aspects of it which are noteworthy throughout.
These provide a useful introduction to the elements of stylistic comparison:(i) The unspecialised production and use of tesserae (ii) The planning of space within a mosaic (iii) The methods of laying and bonding tesserae.
Craftsmen were familiar with the production of tesserae and were capable of piecemeal, but fundamental, improvisations.
They were satisfied, however, with little variety of raw material: take away  the chalk, limestone, shale, sandstone and terracotta tesserae from most sites, and there is very little remaining.
The unspecialised Production and use of Tesserae
3.1 Tesserae Fabrics and Availability
Glass and enamel tesserae, for , are uncommon in Britain — although they do occur more frequently than is sometimes suggested (Boon 1974, 345; Neal 1976, 243).Appendix C lists the twenty-three instances known to the author.
In general, we are reminded that glass was hardly an "everyday product" in antiquity.
It would be tedious to list the types and colours of stone, ceramic etc. used at each site in Britain; if any picture at all emerges it is that mosaicists made good with what was easily obtained, and that the types of stone used for various shades of colour are predictable and limited in number.
Some stone was transported considerable distances, or was altered by heat, but most major sources were local and provided stone which was used in its natural state.
The villa at Box, Wilts., had pavements of white limestone (used for much of the background work), blue-black lias, a dark-grey/ chocolate-coloured pennant stone, red from broken tiles and yellow oolite; all of which would have been procurable within about five miles of the site.
The same approximately true of villas near to Box, for example at Birdcombe Avon.
Here, sandstone furnished a buff colour, pennant stone a blue, liar the white for the tesserae of room 11.
At Kings Weston, Avon, white and blue tesserae were of liassic limestone, yellow were of calcareous sandstone, and greed were of argillaceous limestone.
Other sites, such a-Brantingham, Humbs., tell a similar story: white (hard Yorkshire chalk), blue (blue-grey limestone), green (sandstone), yellow (calcareous sandstone), and dark red (brown sandstone) tesserae were all of local materials.
In very few instances are we considering sites which were especially close to large or varied supplies of stone.
Two exceptions are the Ifold villa, Glos., and the villa at North Leigh, Oxon.
The former, which has the remains at least one mosaic, produced tesserae of lias and Painswick stone, both of which are found in local quarries.
At North Leigh, the quarries of Stonesfield are only one mile distant and will have provided the bulk of the friable stone, while the quarries of oolite at Stuart wood (less than 200 metres away) provided that of higher quality.
However, sites were not usually so well located, and even when distant from sources of suitable stone, there can have been little special movement of material in such small quantities as were required for cs.
At most sites remnants of building stone will have been use
If we conclude that the availability of certain kinds of stone did not seriously affect the execution of a pavement, we will not be far from the truth.
At Lockleys, Herts., for example, six types of stone foreign to the locality were recorded but none of these was used in the pavement of room 2.
The few instances of"long distance transport tend to be early: at Fishbourne, or Angmering, where siltstone of Mediterranean origin was encountered.
It would be an error, certainly, to underestimate the skill of the provincial craftsman when he found it necessary to improvise foreign shades and highlights in local stone.
Although most mosaics comprise three to six basic colours, a work of good quality will include many subtle shades.
It is common, therefore, to note ten or twelve different colours of tesserae in one pavement.
In some, such as the Leadenhall Street mosaic, London, or the Seasons mosaic from Dyer Street, Cirencester, there are over twenty,(both of these mosaics contain glass tesserae: Appendix C).
Such variety has been most clearly appreciated with the restoration of damaged mosaics, e.g. the Orpheus mosaic, Littlecote, Wilts., or in the reconstruction of buried ones, e.g. the Woodchester Orpheus mosaic.
3.2 The colour of Tesserae
Sensitive use of shading is of obvious importance — to appreciate this one could do little better than study the striking differences in the Charioteer mosaic, from Rudston, E. Yorks.,(now displayed in the Museum of Transport and Archaeology, Hull).
Of this work it has been said…
The exceptional quality of the portrait of Spring is immediately apparent when one turns to that of Summer…it is difficult to think that it was produced by the "painter" of Spring: the delineation of the features is insensitive, the colouring inferior"(Smith 1976, 9).
Elsewhere, intelligent use of colour is responsible for the blue shading which fills out me of the canthari surrounding the Tyche medallion at Brantingham, Humbs., or for the red shadow which falls across the shoulder and left cheek of Venus, in the Kingscote mosaic.
An appreciation of strong as well as subtle contrast is important, however: the brilliant effects of the predominantly geometric mosaics at Silchester, Hants., or the famous millefiori effects at the neck and around the bodies of canthari (e.g. Neal 1981, no. 16) are notable.
Whilst considering the colour of tesserae it is also pertinent to mention their preparation, size and shape.
To manufacture tesserae a blade, somewhat like a broad chisel-blade, can be used.
Usually, this is mounted on a block of wood, which can be fixed to a bench or held between the knees.
It is difficult to imagine the mosaicist working without this tool, for it is capable of fracturing the hardest stones, it is easy to carry, and it can be used with very small pieces of material.
3.3 The Preparation of Tesserae
The size of a mosaicist's "cube-stock" would be graded according to the quality/kind of mosaic.
He might begin with between one and four different sizes of tesserae — separated into heaps or placed a partitioned box — and would make more than he intended to use (manufacture continuing as the pavement was laid).
The tesserae would be further split or fragmented on site, as required.
At Westland, Som., for example, tesserae are said to have fallen into three distinctive sizes: 1 cm. sq.; 2.5 cm. sq.; and 3.5 cm. sq.
At Box all tesserae are said to be between 0.6 and 14.4 cm. sq.
Lufton, Som., has two predominant sizes: 0.5 cm. sq.
and 1.5 cm. sq.
Like colour, the size of the tesserae affects the perspective of a mosaic design.
The latter, in fact, can be a little more subtle.
As lighter shades of tesserae appear nearer when viewed from a distance, so do larger tesserae; conversely, small tesserae appear more distant, as do darker shades.
Such considerations are, obviously, of vital importance in figural mosaics which hope to maintain a degree of naturalism.
But they are also of more general significance in the execution of orders, e.g. in the swastika meander of the parent at Lullingstone Kent, or the mosaic of room at Chedworth, Glos.
Here, the apparent width of black and white lines had to be carefully adjusted in order to provide a convincing effect.
At Lullingstone, a balance (which actually spoils the effect of the swastika meander) is struck by using a band of black which is three large tesserae wide, and a band of white three small tesserae wide.
At Chedworth, we find a black band of two tesserae, and a white band of three.
The sizes of Romano-British mosaics range between those of the great pavements at Woodchester, Glos.,(227 sq.
m.) and Horkstow Lincs.,(76 sq.
m.), and the All mosaics from room XLI, Lydney, Glos., and room 9 at Bancroft, Bucks.,(respectively, 1.5 and 3.1 sq.
m.).
The Planning of Space within a Mosaic
3.4 Planning a Mosaic
Usually, a pavement is enclosed by a border which is between 0.5 and 1.0 m. wide, and composed of larger tesserae.
Normally, the whole of a floor is tessellated.
Occasionally, however a border is absent, as at Silchester, in a room of building XIX; in room 8, Colliton Park, Dorchester; and in a house "north of the Newport Road" , Caerwent.Alternatively, it can be of very large blocks, such as are found around a mosaic at Whittington Court, Glos.
Where borders are present, however, they are usually of fairly dark tesserae (deep red is a favourite colour), so producing a stronger "proximity effect" than would lighter shades of large tesserae.
The band "sets off" the main panel.
This can become extreme, however, for there are instances of very large borders which make the mosaic a small panel in the midst of a hem background.
Such wide spaces may have been places for furniture — certainly, a number of different positions from which to view a pavement is desirable.
When looking at a narrative design, the possibilities of obtaining different perspectives are especially significant: it is precisely the lack of a wide border which would have made the story of the Dido and Aeneas mosaic, from Low Ham, Som., so hard to follow.
Because it is not easy to scale up or down most of the designs used in Romano-British mosaics, or in Roman mosaics generally, the room of unusual shape or size frequently received filling panels and other special treatments.
The recently rediscovered mosaic in Littlecote Park, Wilts.,(pI.
71), was almost certainly planned as a  whole but, nevertheless, provides a useful illustration of these considerations.
The panel which carries a wave-chevron pattern (situated between the dividing walls) is perfectly matched with the radial design and the design of a quartered square.
But the work also had to contend with three apses, and here it met with less success: in the apse to Orpheus's right the panel is a poor fit, and throws out the meeting of the guilloche border of the main design with the north-western abutement.
3.5 Adaptations
Very complex room shapes are rare in Britain, but there are some, and their mosaics are usually well designed.
Keynsham, Som.,(Arch.
LXXV (1926), pls.
XII and KIll), provides the best examples.
In room J, there is a skilfully drawn hexagonal mosaic, divided into seven internal hexagons each of which holds interlaced guilloche triangles; in room W, is another hexagonal mosaic-this time divided into six triangles, each of which carries a square.
At Lufton, in room 14, the plunge-bath has an ambulatory (with mosaic work) around an octagonal are of tiles.
This is comparable with the ambulatory found at Holcombe, Devon, which has simpler but accurate mosaic work of swastika pattern.
Other factors, such as access via doorways or accommodation of central features, also had to be taken into account.
Many rooms with elaborate mosaics were heated by hypocaust but, occasionally, some pavements, e.g. room 1, Bancroft, Bucks., had to allow for a central hearth.
More importantly, the planning of a mosaic frequently had to accommodate fountains or impluvia.
The evidence remains very limited but, in room 7, at Bignor, Sussex,(pl. 38), we have a piscina at the centre of a mosaic, and Walters suggests fountains as further enhancements to such rooms.
In such instances allowance has to be made for these features when planning the design, so much so that at Woodchester Orpheus may, for this reason, have been displaced from his usual, central position (pI.
43; although see pI.
53).
Whether or not the subject of a mosaic was chosen by the client, the mosaicist had to rely on a number of aids and methodical practices when organising his work.
These will be considered in this section.
3.6 Aids to Design
Guidelines have been discovered beneath British mosaics on only a few occasions: the author knows of only two unequivocal examples — the painted lines on the penultimate layer of mortar of the mosaic from building XIII, Beeches Road, Cirencester (Neal 1981, no. 26), and the scored circle of the fragmentary mosaic above the Charioteer pavement at Rudston (Smith 1976, 6)— although, in wall painting such practices were also known (plaster on display, Jewry Wall Museum).
The complexity of many designs, however, suggests a more widespread use of such methods than the above finds confirm.
Indeed, in many cases of effective figural design, cartoons (as well as structural guidelines) appear to have been necessary.
The many affinities of arrangement and drawing between British mosaics (which, nevertheless, fail to show instances of identity) tends to support this view, and, further, suggests the use of pattern books (compendia).
Neal, in the tradition of Ippel (Neal 1976, 249), mentions the prefabrication of mosaic and the ease of planning which such books ensure.
In subsequent work (Neal 1981, 21-34) an indication as to other possible aids to design has been given: these could have comprised some of the contents of a pattern book (or what might, more accurately, be called a "manual" ).
According to Neal, two of the patterns which it is most difficult to plan accurately are eight-lozenge star arrangements and arrangements of "juggled" , interlaced squares.
The former requires a "net" composed of a 900 grid of large squares, separated by three right-angled lines, with the space between each line representing one quarter of the width of a square.
The net is then overlaid with another whose diagonal lines are at 450, For this complex procedure the use of set squares and calipers is envisaged (loc. cit., 23).
The latter design, meanwhile, required a net comprising two identical grids of spaced squares, in staggered formation, but with one grid superimposed on and at 450 to the first.
Such general schemes could have been used by craftsmen of little mathematical or geometrical ability.
With slight exceptions — for example, in room N12 at Fishbourne, where the mosaicist has misunderstood the relation of a net to the pattern of lozenges and cones — they would have been instrumental in the making of an acceptable product.
To judge by the standardization of some motifs and figures, moreover, a repertory of set pictures was also available to the mosaicist.
These could be translated into cartoons and the tones and placements of the tesserae fixed accordingly.
As the mosaicist had to understand but not devise geometries it is likely that he could amend illustrated motifs but would copy, as a whole, the arrangements suggested for a mosaic.
Such manuals as there were may have been more bland and technical than is suggested by the antique illustrations reproduced by Smith (1969, pI.
3.6) and Brilliant (1974, pI.
111.9), although this is not to say that such illustrations were never used (note the ignorant copying of inscriptions in the Rudston Venus mosaic: pI.
1O2b).
Work by Tebby (1980 and 1982) supports an assessment of mosaicists as craftsmen of limited geometrical ability.
In turn, this should also remind us of the limitations for the mosaicist of over-ornate sketches.
The "mosaic units phenomenon, observed by Moore, and proposed as a" spontaneous occurrence of order from randomly selected particles "offers further corroboration: certain sizes of tesserae and motifs are shown to provide maximum adaptability of design, because they are proportional to the abstract units most frequently produced by" processes of spontaneous ordering".
In fact, Moore also suggests that mosaics — as seems likely for pavements such as the Aldborough Star mosaic (pI.
35a)— were laid from the centre, outwards.
This, we are told, is to ensure that errors made in the laying of tesserae would be most likely to occur away from the focus of the mosaic.
On the whole, therefore, a rather crude kind of draughtsmanship is implied.
When speaking of laying tesserae, the main distinction to be made is between direct and indirect methods of application: the choice depends on the abilities and preferences of the mosaicist.
The former makes for a flexibility in design and allows for local idiosyncrasies, while the latter are slightly quicker and ensure that the craftsman spends less time working in the room which is to receive the decoration.
The Methods of Laying and Bonding Tesserae
3.7
When using the direct method, tesserae are placed by hand into a layer of fresh mortar spread in small patches across the hardened, penultimate, mortar layer,(hence the possibility of guidelines, see above).
This continues over the entire surface.
Tesserae are applied individually, and the mortar then sets around them.
Thus, the mosaicist must gauge, accurately, the setting of the mortar.
It should be hard enough to secure the tesserae, but it must not harden before the local pattern has been completed.
Mortar is applied to such areas as will be tessellated within a few hours, and certainly within the day (hence giornata, for mortar patches which represent a completed period of work).
In fact, renovation of the mosaics of San Vitale, Ravenna, have revealed tonal and textural differences between neighbouring areas of plaster which indicate the work done in one "shift" .
They may also indicate sections done by different craftsmen.
3.8 The Direct Method
With the direct method, the mosaicist will be working, on site, for an extremely long time.
He is thus encouraged to work quickly, in spite of the likelihood of making errors which are difficult to rectify once the tesserae have become semi-bonded.
There is also a limit to the number of men (usually two or three) who can work on an individual floor — a very important consideration when compared to the other methods, below.
However, here the client has the advantage of observing the progress of the craftsmen, and his wishes can be continually taken into account.
When using this method the tesserae are set, away from the floor which is to be tessellated, on a section of stone or mortar.
This section is then transported to the site.
If it comprises the main design of a work, whose general features have already been completed, it will be fixed as a "tray" — otherwise it will be one of many prefabricated sections.
The initial setting of the tesserae, therefore, can be undertaken in a workshop near to the pavement or, indeed, in the nearest town.
3.9 The Plain Indirect Method
The tesserae are still applied to a bed of mortar, but the client could expect the work in the room which was actually receiving the mosaic to be finished much more quickly than with the direct method.
Work can continue, in a distant workshop, when it might be inconvenient to work on-site.
Speculative sections of mosaic can also be made, in the hope of a commission; a client might even be in  a position to order an already completed mosaic.
With this method, the tesserae are bonded, by means of adhesives, onto a strong but flexible material (parchment, hides, cloth etc.).
Tesserae are fixed in a reverse image of the required design.
On site, this section is then set into a fresh layer of mortar which has been smeared across a hardened mortar layer.
The tesserae are facing downwards, the flexible material is uppermost.
Thus, until the receiving mortar sets around the tesserae, they are invisible.
When the tesserae are set, however, the backing material is torn or scrubbed off, and the required design is revealed (for the first time).
3.10 The Reverse Indirect Method
As with the plain indirect method, the mosaicist can make use of designs produced in a distant workshop, or designs produced by other craftsmen.
He can use stock motifs and patterns and superfluous work can be retained to cater for future demand.
Errors too, in both indirect processes, are more easily rectified than with the direct.
This is especially true if a small area only has been tessellated.
Ironically, most of our evidence for the use of these methods in Roman times come from mosaics where, apparently, such errors have been overlooked.
The indirect processes are, usually, the easiest with which to obtain a tolerable result, but it is difficult to use them well.
They render the production of fine detail a less arduous task, but co-ordination of the various sections of mosaic calls for consider able skill.
When used effectively, however, they lead to a greater accuracy and, without doubt, an increase in the speed with which a pavement is laid.
Mosaics of the Second and Early-Third Centuries
Recent progress in the study of fourth century mosaics has led (almost inevitably perhaps) to a relative neglect of mosaics of the second and third.
Admittedly, there is a larger number of fourth century pavements (differential preservation may be an important factor here): before the 1960's, but for those from Wheeler's excavation at Verulamium, few pre-fourth century pavements were datable at all.
However, a skeleton chronology is now available (see Appendix E, where a list of the pavements under discussion is also provided).
Fishbourne (Cunliffe 1971) is an important site here: although many of its mosaics are very early, and so outside the scope of this paper, it provides invaluable insights into the origins and development of British mosaics at a time (c. 75 A.D.) when the majority of designs were borrowings from the continent and native schemes were just emerging.
Equally important is the accurate terminus post quem for the two octagonal panelled grid designs from Leicester see appendix E).
There are now also dated mosaics from the Gloucester excavations of 1968-1973; from the excavations of the North Hill and Middleborough sites at Colchester (appendix E); and from further excavations in Verulamium,(for example chose which brought to light the now famous Lion and Stag mosaic: pI.
30).
Excavations of a villa at Rapsley, Surrey,(Sy.
Arch.
CoIls.
LXV (1968), 26-7) even revealed a mosaic of the third century.
As a result, it is now possible to consider the stylistic affinities of over one hundred mosaics within a basic chronological context.
A clear indication of sequential affinity, and perhaps of long-term developments of culture and of changes in taste, is provided by a consideration of the use of structure and of some motifs in the composition of a mosaic.
Three groups (there may be more) are conspicuous here:(i) Lozenge pattern designs,(ii) Grid designs, and (iii) Fully centralised, circular or radial designs.
1.
Sequential Affinity
Simple lozenge designs are numerous at Fishbourne, indeed, they are common throughout the empire in the first century A.D. (Blake 1930; Becatti 1961).
All-over patterns, patterns based on squares and cruciforms (e.g. Cunliffe 1971, pI.
LXXVIII), patterns based on octagons (e.g. Cunliffe 1971, LXXVI), and patterns based on grids of squares (e.g. Cunliffe 1971, pI.
LXXVIIa) embody a specific geometrical concern.
This manipulation of lozenge formations features  prominently amongst subsequent developments.
1.1 Lozenge Designs
In the second century reduction and embellishment of patterns based on all-over structures of lozenges (and insets) occurs.
Between the mid and later second century, for example, there appears to be an interest in quincunx arrangements of panels, as elaborations of lozenge formats (thus maintaining considerable lozenge decoration).
These include the larger design of mosaic 6, Verulamium (Wheeler 1936, pI.
XL); the pavement from Silchester, XIV, house 1,(Archaeologia LV (1986), pI.
XII); pavement (A) from insula II, Colchester (pI.
7); and that from Boxmoor (pI.
22).
In such instances, lozenges with plain, dark rhomboids (as filling devices or other simple, individual motifs such as peltae or triangles) are commonly associated with rectangular/strip panels, which often carry simple guilloche and enclose one of the main panels.
The medallions also exhibit rather simple filling devices, for example the rosetted flowers of mosaic IIa from Colchester or mosaic 6 at Verulamium.
In one mosaic, at York,(R.C.H.M. York I (1962), pI.
23a), a guilloche knot is a feature of a medallion.
At Boxmoor a sophisticated "cantharus, which shows few, if any, stylistic parallels in Romano-British mosaic, is notable (in this mosaic," angle pieces' are also conspicuous however, and should be noted as possible precursors of the "L" shapes which become prominent in the residual lozenge patterns of the late-second century; see appendix E).
The breakdown of the rigid square, triangle, and lozenge pattern into involved swastika meander, at Boxmoor is also significant — suggesting this mosaic as the most elaborate (the final?) pattern in the series of quincunx panels.
If so, this series is unlikely to have been conspicuous after the third quarter of the second century.
However, in terms of provenance it is also relatable to the development of the residual lozenge patterns which possess "L" shapes around a central, square panel; like the latter, the distribution of the quincunx arrangements is predominantly eastern, with few examples in the West Country.
Two varieties of regular grid designs are prominent in the second century, one where the panels are of a square or rectangular appearance and another where the panels are octagonal,(see also the grid of hexagonal panels, from Silchester, XIV, house 1, room 27 (Arch.
LV (1896), pI.
XIV).
The former is predominantly of eastern origin, with the most conspicuous affinities visible between mosaics from Colchester (Berryfield), Verulamium XXVII (pI.
13), Colchester, North Hill (pI.
11), and the villa at High Wycombe (pI.
23);(although some examples are known in the western portion of the country, e.g. the mosaic from the site of 13-17, Berkeley Street, Gloucester).
The sequence of octagonal panelled designs meanwhile includes examples from Gloucester, 10-18, Eastgate Street; Great Witcombe, Glos., room 5 (appendix E); and the mosaics from the Black-friars and St. Nicholas Street sites, Leicester (pls. 1 and 5).
If not entirely restricted to the west country, there are no significant remains in the east (i.e. around London, Verulamium, or Colchester).
1.2 Grid Designs
Only one grid in the latter region has more than nine panels: the mosaic from Verulamium (Wheeler's mosaic 1O; pI.
24), with a 4 x 4 arrangement.
However, this still maintains square frames to the medallions, each of which holds a single, floral device.
A list of the most important mosaics in each sequence should include the following:(i) in that of octagonal panelled designs, all of those so described in appendix E but for the mosaics from Fordington High Street, Dorchester; and Dyer Street, Cirencester (these, although showing 3 x 3 arrangements of octagons, suggest, in their decoration, rather different concerns to those illustrated elsewhere);(ii) in the sequence of square and rectangular panelled grid arrangements, the four examples mentioned above, plus other possible examples from the Three Cups Inn site (Barnard's garden), Colchester (pI.
12 b); the mosaic from Silchester XIX, house 2 (Boon 1974, pI.
28); and the mosaics from North Hill, Colchester (Neal 1981, nos. 39 and 40) which combine circular elements with an essentially grid format.
The octagonal panelled grids from Leciester and Great Witcombe share the lightness, clarity of complex design, and austere draughtsmanship, which is typical of this sequence.
The mosaics from Cirencester (the Congregational Church site and Locke's Timber Yard), Gloucester, and Bath, although fragmentary, have a comparable simplicity of decoration: in their filling of medallions with simple guilloche (or thin, dark lines), the filling of medallions with single motifs, and the use of complex but regular geometrical filling devices (alternating with simple floral motifs).
As mentioned above, most of the mosaics with grids of square or rectangular panels also share a number of decorative features.
Most conspicuous is the practice of placing large rhomboids in the rectangular panels which lie adjacent to a central square — in two panels (e.g. pls. 23, 13, and 11) or possibly in all four (e.g. pI.
12b).
In some instances,(e.g. pls. 11, 12b, and in the Berryfield mosaic), a rosette is found in the small squares at the corners of the grid.
Bold, angular borders are also prominent, in the form of thorn pattern (pI.
11) and dentil (Berryfield mosaic).
The mosaic from High Wycombe (pI.
23) has borders of superposed triangles in one of its rectangular panels.
Between mosaics of this format various aquatic devices are also significant.
They are present on at least three occasions: at High Wycombe (miniature dolphins); Berryfield, Colchester (seabeasts chasing fish) and Verulamium (pI.
13: the only occasion on which figures occupy the central panel of such a grid arrangement — in this case, dolphins with their tails entwined with the handles of a cantharus).
There are some notable contrasts, therefore, between the two main varieties of grid design of the mid-late second century.
In the east of the country, the square and rectangular panelled designs suggest rather more movement — if not naturalism —"than those of the west,(and, even in the mosaic with sixteen medallions — mosaic 10, Verulamium: pI.
24 — there is less adherence to the practice of filling with conventional geometrical motif).
In both cases however, decoration is extended in largely regular frameworks, with motifs distributed uniformly across a surface.
Until the slightly  contrasting tendencies become more manifest in the later-second century (with the trend to fully centralised designs etc.) it is this characteristic which makes these designs complementary.
In the second half of the second century, a third sequence is apparent (see appendix E, possibly after 160 A.D.).
A full centralisation of structure and a more flowing and energetic style — often with greater pictorial content — is in evidence.
It exhibits three main facets: a) Centralised lozenge designs with square central panels.
b) Grids of squares and rectangular panels overlying concentric circular designs.
c) Nine panel designs/Irregular saltire designs.
a) Here, "L" shapes usually frame the central square.
Examples of this include the pavements from North Hill, Colchester (pI.
21); Culver Street, Colchester (pI.
23); Victoria Road, Cirencester (pI.
16b); Caerwent, House VII, room 6; Silchester XIV, house 2; Box, Wilts., room 6 (pI.
25); and Rapsley, Surrey,(Neal"1981, no. 65).
Usually, the "L" shapes carry a simple guilloche decoration, although at Box this is replaced by residual panels (if this is how the three small squares which connect each octagon are best described) containing various geometrical devices, and at North Hill the "L" shapes also carry a stencilled "L" shaped line.
Actually, not all of these arrangements are derived from the same basic format (Neal 1981, 91): Box and Rapsley, for example, possess octagonal and not hexagonal panels around the central square.
It seems likely, however, that the intention behind each of these numerous designs was similar.
(This judgement seems equally applicable to the mosaic from Victoria Road, Cirencester, which has a tilted central square and so appears quite different to those with single, regular panels at their centres).
Indeed, the decoration of these mosaics exhibits a consistency which supports such a notion.
The swastika lozenge (at North Hill and Box) or swastika in a tilted square (Culver Street) is a common motif; as are triangles (hollowed at Rapsley and North Hill), reversed and used as fillers for the spaces between lozenges.
The most convincing affinity, however, is the placing — on each occasion — of a floral device in the central panel.
At North Hill, Box and Rapsley, a device with four heart-shaped petals and a number of additions and excrescences is seen: at Culver Street a more stylised four-petalled flower is present.
The importance and possible Italian antecedents of this format are discussed in appendix E (pp. 132-133).
The dating of Romano-British mosaics is not yet sensitive enough to exclude the possibility that the regular grid arrangements (already discussed), the simple"or quincunx-panel lozenge formats, and these centralised designs were not broadly contemporary (that each was possible at the same time, depending on the taste or knowledge of the client or mosaicist).
But this seems extremely  unlikely: it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that we are observing a development of centralised designs from regular grid arrangements.
b) Only three mosaics illustrate this facet comprehensively.
These are from North Hill, Colchester (mosaics B and C: Neal 1981, nos. 39 and 40) and mosaic 7, Verulamium (pI.
20)(three mosaics which also exhibit many other characteristics which are comparable, i.e. the style of borders in their concentric circular fields, and the placement of rosettes in the squares tangent to the main, central square).
There are no other comparable arrangements however, and as a separate facet of this sequence they are relatively uninstructive and more profitably considered at a more specific level of affinity (section 2.2 and 3.3, below pp. 30 and 33).
These North Hill examples are probably contemporary with another mosaic from North Hill which has "L" shapes around a central square (although the former are technically inferior, and are unlikely to be predominantly — if at all— the work of the same mosaicists).
It is suggested, therefore, that the three mosaics with concentric, circular borders associated with a regular grid are also reflections of the trend to centralised and more fluid representation It is especially in such"fluid and curving design, often accompanied by accomplished figural work, that the third facet is conspicuous.
c) Nine panel designs/Irregular saltire designs There is a distinction to be drawn here between those mosaics which exhibit nine-panels by including quarter roundels in each of their four corners, and those which extend decoration found on the "arms of a saltire" to the corners, where it.supports individual motifs.
Into the former category fall the mosaics from Fishbourne, room N7 (pI.
15); Upper Brook Street, Winchester (see appendix E); Vine Street, Leciester (pI.
17); Exchequergate, Lincoln; Victoria Road and Dyer Street, Cirencester (pls. 16b and 8, respectively); and Silchester XXVII, house 1, room 16.
The latter category, meanwhile, comprises the "Lion and Stag" pavement from Verulamium (pI.
30); the"Wrestling Cupids' mosaic from Colchester (pls. 32 and 33); and the mosaic of room 30 at North Leigh (pI.
34).
All of these pavements, however, appear, to a greater or lesser extent, as vigorous and inventive designs, with an ease of draughtsmanship and the suggestion of free movement from or about a central point.
The latter three (two of which have a square central panel, with the North Leigh example having a central roundel) are the most notable in this respect, although the same confidence is also displayed at Fishbourne.
In other instances one finds a tendency to over elaborate, and a heaviness of design (or an empty, lifeless stylisation) is the result.
There are, clearly, some very specific affinities between the Cupids mosaic, the Lion and Stag and the North Leigh pavements (see sections 3.5 and 3.8 pp. 34 and 37),.
These range from similar motifs (and comparable placing of motifs) to the almost identical decoration of similar structural devices.
All of these mosaics do exhibit more general affinities, however.
Conspicuous in the Cupids mosaic, for example, are the seabeasts of the semi-roundels, comparable — if not identical — representations of which are to be seen in the semi-roundels adjacent to the central squares of both the Fishbourne and Cirencester (Dyer Street) mosaics.
A dolphin and a dolphin with a twisted tail are also present in the mosaic from Lincoln, again in two of the semi-roundels; whilst in a comparable position the Winchester mosaic, illustrates a cornucopia (J.R.S. XLIX (1959), pI.
XVI),(although this- could be a misrepresentation of a sea-serpent).
Canthari are also frequent attributes.
Their styles vary: short and squat at Leicester, usually elegant at Fishbourne.
They are also depicted in the mosaics from Victoria Road, Cirencester (in an arm of a semi-roundel), North Leigh, and Winchester (crudely drawn).
The positioning of these motifs, moreover, is virtually identical.
This, again, indicates the possibility of a more specific stylistic affinity between these pavements.
In these pavements from North Leigh, Verulamium and Colchester, chain-guilloche is employed in a similar "framing" role.
Such guilloche also provides an outer border for the Winchester mosaic.
Fishbourne, meanwhile, has a scroll border comparable in its essentials to that which encloses the Cupids mosaic.
1.3 Fully Centralised, Circular or Radial Designs
Together, these mosaics suggest a late-second century development of the elements of centralised and curvilinear design, with the mosaics from North Leigh, Colchester, and Verulamium illustrating the culmination of a late-second century trend.
Eventually, as the pavements from North Hill and Verulamium (mosaic 7) lead one to expect, this should have resulted in the appearance of full radial designs.
Presently, however, there is only one such design,(another mosaic from Middleborough: Mosaic 4 (1981), fig. 3; fig. 157, in Crummy (1984), and this remains in a fragmentary condition.
Enough of it survived to show two canthari, one of which (pI.
17) is comparable to those of the pavement from Vine Street, Leicester.
It is interesting too to consider how the nature and incidence of figural designs relate to these possible sequences of development.
1.4 A Discussion of Figural Work as an Aspect of Sequential Affinity
Of the one hundred or so mosaics under examination only twenty are figured.
Possibly, some have had their complement destroyed e.g. Whitton (P.S.I.A. XXI (1931-3), plan), or North Leigh (pI.
34), but this cannot be taken into account.
When one considers that we are dealing already with the principal mosaics of the period, twenty is very few.
Of these, seven are from rural sites, although Fishbourne accounts for four of these examples due to the inclusion, here, of minor figural works.
The other three mosaics are from High Wycombe (pI.
23), Eccles (Arch.
Cant.
LXXX (1965), frontispiece), and Great Witcombe, room 6 (T.B.G.A.S. LXXIII (1954, pI.
VI).
High Wycombe and Eccles could be earlier than the latter, as they are datable to before c. 175 A.D., whereas it could be of the third century.
The fragmentary remains from Eccles have been interpreted as the figures of two gladiators, although, in light of the subjects of other figural designs in Britain (see below), this might also have been a hunting scene (or could have been of figures other than gladiators; see the drawing of Cupids as gladiators: pI.
32).
It would certainly appear to be of a representative or commemorative character however, which would make it one of the earliest of such scenes in Britain (the most likely candidate for this honour is a possible chariot scene, from Exeter: Bidwell 1979, pI.
XVI).
Other figural mosaics of a relatively early date include that of room N13, Fishbourne which, in a roundel at its centre, has a circular figure with tendrils and other excrescences.
This is only a single, polychrome representation, however; it is comparable in position and effect to the peacock at the centre of the mosaic found in St. Nicholas Street, Leicester (pI.
5a).
The panel from High Wycombe is interpreted by Smith (in Hartley, B.R., Recs.
Bucks.
XVI (1959), 227-54) as the bust of a season.
Certainly, it is unlikely to have been the only figured panel in the mosaic.
If there were more busts, it is difficult to see them (in light of the heavy guilloche"and cornice pattern) as other than insets which would be subsumed by the whole design rather than provide an independent pictorial element.
In contrast, room N7 at Fishbourne, has a mosaic with an expressive format, whose main feature is a lively Cupid seated upon a dolphin.
These figures are in the central roundel, while active seabeasts occupy the semi-roundels.
The mosaic is datable to the later second century, if not the third (appendix E, section 1.3 p. 131).
The figures harmonise more readily with the arrangement of decoration than in many of the earlier examples.
Fourteen of the first twenty mosaics are from town sites (eighteen if nos. 21-24 are included).
The earliest is possibly that from Leicester (no. 3), but equally likely is that from Verulamium (no. 2).
Both of these mosaics could be of the period 140-160; probably, they are contemporary with, or slightly earlier than, the Berryfield mosaic (no. 5), which has seabeasts and dolphins in each of its four semi-roundels.
The Verulamium example (no. 2) certainly appears to be the first figured design in the Chiltern area (prior to the High Wycombe mosaic).
In other regions we see scattered developments, again of figures which appear more or less subsidiary to the whole design.
It is difficult to make a case, however, for any such mosaic in the west country before c. 170.
Those of the west include mosaics from Cirencester (nos. 11, 16 and 17), Dorchester (no. 18), and Great Witcombe (no. 19).
All of these, along with nos. 8 and 10, are candidates for dates after 170.
This contrasts with other regions in the province where there appears to be a small but consistent occurrence of figured mosaics between the middle and late second century.
Elsewhere, there is a change in the character of figural composition between these dates but the use of figures is established before c. 150.
That figural designs began to occur in the west in any numbers (i.e. not counting the very early example from Exeter: Bidwell 1979) in approximately the same period as a further development of figural design is apparent in the southeast, is an interesting possibility: this may also have been contemporary with the first appearance of fully centralised designs.
The change in the character of figural composition in the east is apparent in the nature as well as in the kind of figures depicted: figures together in a scene, groups of figures, and some individual figures.
Generally, these are active — apparently at one instant — and are not just "collected" by the structure of the pavement.
Notable examples are no. 15, no. 20, no. 13 and no. 9.
They are not all scenic (no. 9 shows a single bust of Oceanus, albeit very animated and the focus of the pavement).
However, it remains true to say that there is only one scenic mosaic in the east before c-.
170 — that from Eccles (no. 4; although this too could be later: appendix E, section 1.2 p. 126).
In the west of the province, there are no centrally placed and dominant single figures, or figured scenes.
Instead, we encounter an apparently different concept"of figural decoration.
There are aquatic arrangements (probably influenced by the black and white mosaics, showing marine scenes, which were so popular in Italy, in the second and early-third century: see Clarke 1979) and other such  scenes e.g. the mask of Neptune, fish and dolphins of no. 18.
In addition, there are also examples of a more eclectic but "static" figural sequence, whose composite arrangements are extremely rich in figures but whose figures are linked only conceptually or are envisaged as nothing more than numerous, individual representations.
Here, the mosaics from"Dyer Street, Cirencester (nos. 16 and 17) are notable.
The former shows three hunting dogs, in a central roundel, chasing an unknown prey.
The dogs are slight in respect to the elaborate border-work and the other figured panels.
Masks of Neptune occupy the interspaces between the central and other roundels: an aquatic theme which is enhanced by seabeasts in two of the semi-roundels.
There is also a mask of Medusa in one (perhaps two) of the quarter roundels in the angles.
It is possible that we have here an attempt to combine hunting and aquatic scenes (see note 3), but such a suggestion must be tentative.
It could equally well be the product of several reconstructed remnants (Smith 1975, 280).
Whatever, a composite mentality"to figural design is displayed,(perhaps literally as well as metaphorically).
The latter mosaic from Dyer Street (a 3 x 3 arrangement of octagonal panels) is of a more even blend of figures, although these are yet more elaborate and individualistic (pictures in their own right).
The pavement has fine busts of seasons in all three of its remaining corner panels.
Between Spring and Summer is Silenus"on a donkey; between Summer and Autumn Actaeon — attacked by his own hounds — has blood dripping from his thigh (see appendix C, no. 8); and between Autumn and?
Winter Bacchus reclining on a leopard.
A case can be made here, for the latter as scenes of a "life-cycle" , spaced between the seasons of the year and followed by the ultimate triumph over death (signified by?
Pegasus, in the central panel).
This, again, is tenuous however.
In contrast, leading figured mosaics from other parts of the province have sober designs which usually illustrate an individual scene.
The main — often the only — figure is placed in a panel at the centre.
This is usually a square panel, as can be seen at Aldborough (pI.
35b) and in two pavements from Verulamium (nos. 9 and 15) where the central panel is emphasized in relation to the square border of a mosaic, thus setting-off the pavement and the figured design by balance rather than contrast.
The Aldborough mosaic is probably the earlier of the three.
It shows three single bands framing a three-sprayed tree of medium height, which in turn"frames the heavy figure of a lion resting on its haunches.
This gives the impression of a painting in a frame, an impression also given by the drawing of the central panels in the two mosaics from Verulamium.
In no. 15 indeed, we might be dealing with a prefabricated panel (Neal 1976b, 249; Neal 1981, no. 75): this is suggested by the cutting of the lion's tail by the bordering line.
However, it is possible that such "cutting" was intentional, in order to create the effect of a movement away from the spectator (who is seen to be receiving a privileged view).
Such an interpretation would be more in keeping with the proficient organisation of space throughout the rest of the pavement.
The oblique perspective is, clearly, a notable feature of the mosaics depicting Oceanus' (no. 9) and the Wrestling Cupids (no. 20), i.e. other designs in the east which are probably of the later second century.
In a sense the development of figural work alone suggests strong parallels with the development of the general arrangements of mosaic.
At least three uses of figures are notable:(i) Occasional figures, in a central or peripheral position; conspicuous"in mosaics datable to c. 130-180. (ii) Elaborate figures, often numerous, well drawn and well executed but with a number of possible themes in any one mosaic; predominantly in the west of the province, after c. 170-180. (iii) Figures in a scene; predominantly in the south-east of England, after c. 160-170.
There are no clear parallels between these contrasting uses of figures and the first and second instances of sequential affinity (sections 1.1 and 1.2, above).
Rectangular and square panelled designs appear to show a higher incidence of figured work than do lozenge designs with distributed panels, for example, but this is not especially significant.
Both of these sequences epitomise an experiment with geometries, during which the use of figures was refined, apparently as an adjunct to a general development of arrangements.
It is only with the sequence of "fully centralised, circular and radial designs" that clear parallels are visible.
Here, between c. 160 and 200, a certain sequence of mosaic arrangement does appear contemporaneous with a particular development in the usage of figures (i.e. scenic figural work in the east, and the first appearance of any significant figural work in the west).
In the eastern part of the province a distinct transformation in the nature of figural representation, when coupled with the trends in geometrical development, produces the most significant innovations in second century design.
There are at least two groups of pavements which show more specific similarities than were considered as "sequential" (above).
These should be considered here.
2.
Substantial Affinity
One clear example of substantial affinity is apparent when considering some of the octagonal panelled designs discussed, briefly, above (section 1.2).
These include the mosaics from the Blackfriars site and 50-52, St. Nicholas Street, Leicester (pls. 1 and 5a, respectively); the mosaic of room 5, Great Witcombe; that found at 10-18, Eastgate Street, Gloucester; and the fragment from Locke's Timber Yard, Cirencester (pI.
16a).
The first three are 3 x 3 arrangements, the Gloucester example is a 4 x 4 arrangement, while that of the Cirencester mosaic is conjectural.
A very close stylistic relationship between the former two seems likely (possibly a unitary relationship: see section 4.4), and the Great Witcombe mosaic, in spite of its contrasts with these pavements — in its use of border devices and in its kinds of geometric patterning — can also  be considered a very similar design.
This indicates a yet more specific affinity between these mosaics (when they are examined in isolation).
It is the comparability of these with those from Gloucester and Cirencester which suggests that all might be profitably considered at this level.
2.1 Octagonal Panel led Designs
When discovered the pavement from Gloucester was in fragments, but enough of it survived to permit a convincing reconstruction (Neal 1981, no. 57).
The sixteen octagonal panels were separated by small, tilted squares.
At least one panel contained a border of wavecrest pattern, such as can be seen in a less gracile form in both of the Leicester mosaics.
Three other panels had bands of jagged sawtooth decoration (which is irregular in places), and although this does not appear to have an exact parallel in any of the other mosaics, the geometrical shark's-tooth pattern of the Great Witcombe mosaic and the circular band of thorn pattern in the St. Nicholas Street mosaic indicate similar concerns.
The framework of the grid itself is decorated with simple guilloche, which is present in the Blackfriars mosaic (pI.
4a), although the frame of the mosaic is, here, executed in three-strand guilloche.
In fact, the St. Nicholas Street mosaic is, more comparable.
In terms of guilloche, it is also interesting to note that the Great Witcombe mosaic combines the two: simple guilloche for the axes of the grid, and a three-strand guilloche for its border.
A more specific similarity is the presence in the Gloucester pavement of a variety of eight-petalled rosette which has a small, circular heart projecting four spindly lines to the "petals" .
This certainly fills four of the panels, and will have occupied many more.
At Cirencester a panel containing a sixteen-petalled rosette has a comparable central device, however, the strongest comparisons are to be made with both of the Leicester mosaics, where eight-petalled rosettes similar to those in the Gloucester pavement are placed at the centre of a kaleidoscopic geometric design (pI.
3b) and in tilted squares between octagonal panels (pI.
5b).
At Leicester the rosettes — coloured (from the edges inwards) red, yellow and white — are more finely rendered than those in the Gloucester mosaic.
In the St. Nicholas Street pavement in fact, they are on a square background and are given bulbed tips between every second petal.
The Gloucester examples are simpler, and — to judge by errors elsewhere, for example in the wave-crest pattern (Neal 1981, no. 57) and the saw tooth -much cruder.
The pavement from Locke's Timber Yard, Cirencester preserves only three octagonal panels.
The framework of the mosaic was of simple guilloche (as at Gloucester; St. Nicholas Street, Leicester; and Great Witcombe), with an outer border of four-strand guilloche.
Only one of the small tilted squares is preserved, this supports a guilloche knot (aligned with the axes of the grid framework).
Parallels for this treatment include the tilted squares in the geometric designs of the Great Witcombe and St. Nicholas Street mosaics: the main tilted squares in the former are decorated with guilloche mat.
At Cirencester each of the surviving panels displays a different motif: a pelta with hollowed centre and small, curvilinear, triangular inset; a stylised lotus with four heart-shaped petals; and a sixteen petalled rosette based on an eight petalled device.
The  former has no close parallel in the mosaics under discussion (except perhaps in the Blackfriars mosaic: pI.
1), although the Seasons pavement from Dyed Street (pI.
9) does have a single pelta in a residual triangle.
The closest motif, stylistically speaking, appears in a mosaic from North Hill, Colchester (pI.
21).
The lotus design, however is nearly identical to the flower which is set in the central square of a geometrical device in the St. Nicholas Street pavement (pI.
5a); only differences in the colouring of the tips of the petals (darker in the Cirencester mosaic) and the absence of dividing lines in the calyxes (as are present at Leicester) are notable.
Variants of this device are known in several other mosaics: again, in the Hunting Dogs mosaic (pI.
8); in the central square of one of the mosaics from North Hill, Colchester (pI.
21); and, in a much altered form, in the mosaic from Box, Wilts. (pI.
25).
But none indicates such a clear similarity as does the St. Nichilas Street pavement.
Likewise, the sixteen petalled flower is also present, in a similar style, at Leciester,(in the Blackfriars mosaic:(pI.
1).
A comparable floral device is to be seen in mosaic 7, Verulamium (pI.
20), but a comparison of the motif in the Cirencester pavement"with that from Leicester remains the more convincing.
The meaning of such affinities is obscure, but they appear too regular to be just coincidental.
A person or persons (draughtsman, craftsman, or apprentice) who worked at Leicester could have worked in the west country, but nowhere in the Leicester mosaics is their evidence for work so unaccomplished as that of the Gloucester pavement.
This leaves the possibility of influence at the hands of apprentices or a designer — a possibility for which we have little, if any, evidence.
If the format was chosen by a mosaicist's clients (as seems likely) it is also difficult to attribute to his discretion the occasional regularities in the form and placements of motif.
The true significance of the relationship between these mosaics promises to be more complicated (and more distant) than this: perhaps one factor operates to suggest affinities between mosaics X and Y and another for affinities between Y and 2.
The relationship of the Blackfriars mosaic and the mosaic from Great Witcombe is instructive.
Between the two, many geometrical devices are comparable, but the "drawing" of the central cantharus and the geometric pattern (in the panel to the left of this), at Great Witcombe, are hardly convincing evidence of that hand responsible for the Leicester pavement.
Thus the same designer could be working with different mosaicists, perhaps under the guidance of the client.
Moreover, the Leicester mosaics themselves can hardly be construed as the work of exactly the same group of craftsmen, because the St. Nicholas Street mosaic appears to include work of a standard below that of any in the Blackfriars mosaic (see section 4.4).
To account for the relationship of the Great Witcombe pavement with the St.Nicholas Street mosaic therefore, it seems necessary (on present evidence) to consider at least two of the factors which can affect the transmission of similar characteristics.
It is from this position that the features of the Gloucester and Cirencester pavements are most informative.
In two panels at Leicester (pI.
1) we have the same sixteen-petalled flower as is present at Cirencester (pI.
16b), enclosed by a wave-crest pattern which follows the outline of an octagon (as in the Gloucester example).
Again  different factors are suggested here.
In the first instance, between Leicester and Cirencester, a similar degree of skill is apparent.
With the Gloucester mosaic, however, it seems that a mosaicist has attempted an elaborate design which he has executed without much success.
A design which, on this occasion, must have been suggested to him by his client or-by other craftsmen.
As with the octagonal panelled grid design from Leicester, mosaics B and C from North Hill, Colchester (Neal 1981, Dos.
39 and 40) suggest more specific levels of affinity than are to be considered here.
And as the former were also comparable with the pavement from Great Witcombe, the latter exhibit similar, fairly close parallels with mosaics 7, Verulamium (pls. 20),(closer than those which they share with any other mosaic in this group).
2.2 Nine-Panel Designs superimposed on Circular Arrangements, Mosaics 6, 7 and 10 from Verulamium, and the Mosaic found in Insula 34, Colchester
The pavements from North Hill and Verulamium have similar structures i.e. an arrangement of nine panels superimposed on a circular design comprising stylistically similar bands of wave-crest pattern, thorn pattern or ivy-leaf scroll.
Mosaic C from North Hill and mosaic 7 both have flowers with elongated petals in their central squares.
All three pavements appear to have had rosettes in the small squares which lie tangent to the central square.
It is the affinities which these mosaics share with the three other pavements in this group which are of immediate interest, hoc ever: these represent the main substantial affinities.
Mosaic 10, Verulamium (pI.
24) is a 4 x 4 grid arrangement,(in simple guilloche), of regular squares, each of which holds a circular medallion.
On two sides the grid is flanked by large, rectangular panels of interlaced circles.
The design is well drawn, but there are discrepancies between different renderings of the same floral device,(for example, the "poised" and then "aligned" nature of the four-petalled device on a squared background, which lies next to a medallion containing an eight-petalled rosette).
This is the only example in Britain, of second century date, of a grid composed of squares.
Its eastern location is possibly significant, for the emphasis of full circles and roundels against a squared background is a predominantly south-eastern characteristic.
With such a variety of floral devices it is inevitable that many comparisons with other second century mosaics are possible.
Mention has already been made of the eight-petalled rosette, and its appearance in at least two of the small, tangent squares in North Hill, mosaic B; but this can hardly be considered an important association.
Likewise, four arrangements which each possess four heart-shaped petals on a four-petalled background are comparable to flowers in mosaic A, insula II, Colchester, and in mosaic A from North Hill (pI.
21).
However, it is the presence,(on two occasions in mosaic 10), of a sixteen-petalled flower comparable to those which occupy the central squares of mosaic 7 and North Hill, mosaic C, which is most significant.
This is a rare device, not repeated elsewhere in Britain in the second century.
Admittedly, the two examples in Mosaic 7  are less naturalistic than are the latter two instances, but the drawing of the foremost eight petals is comparable in all cases.
Mosaic 6 from Verulamium (Wheeler 1936, pI.
XL) and the mosaic from insula 34, Colchester (Hull 1958, pI.
VII) are derived from a similar arrangement of eight-lozenge stars enclosing a central square.
At Colchester, however, this format has been developed,(by enlarging the central panel and reducing the eight-lozenge stars, so forming an octagon).
The panel contains a cantharus which is comparable to that in the central roundel of mosaic B, North Hill.7 In the latter, the base and lower body of the cantharus do not survive, so depriving us of valuable comparative evidence.
However, the rim displays the same flanging, and the neck is almost as wide as that of the cantharus in the mosaic of insula 34.
Certainly, both canthari appear "heavy" but are not squat ", and they have similar large" S"-shaped handles with a single volute (where they meet the body of the vessel).
In the rectangular panels, adjacent to the octagon, ivy leaves are set in a kind of "italic circle" supported by four triangles.
These appear to be a stylised cornice pattern, i.e. a partial or simplified representation of the pattern which encloses the central square in mosaic B. There are no hooked leaves in the former — as there are in that of mosaic B — and those which are "erect" do not have the long, thin stem of their more elaborate counterparts.
However, the association of such a device with similar canthari, on two sites in the same town, is important.
Mosaic 6, Verulamium, preserves the remains of four, full eight-lozenge stars.
The central square, and its decoration, were absent when the mosaic was uncovered, but the borders as well as the kind and placement of motif in this work alone suggest affinities with the mosaics from North Hill and insula 34, Colchester.
The border decoration comprises, foremost, a strip of scroll pattern (double-looped, with tendrils round the crests) around single leaves of ivy.
The leaves are turned, alternately, towards and away from the centre of the mosaic, as in the scrolls of mosaics B and C, North Hill.
Also, along two sides of mosaic 6 are strips of thorn pattern (dark on light, as in mosaic B but in contrast to mosaic C, at North Hill).
This is not important in itself, but becomes so when associated, as it is in mosaic 6, with further border decoration i.e. wave-crest pattern, which encloses the whole of the central design,(the closest parallel for this heavily drawn pattern, where the waves stand stiff at their base and roll quickly, to a fine point, is in mosaic C, North Hill).
The pattern is also present in mosaic B and in mosaic 7, Verulamium (pI.
20).
It is the lotus bud motif (or calyx) in the angles of mosaic 6, however, which most clearly suggests a relationship with mosaic B and mosaic 7.
In mosaic B, buds (probably four in number) fill the spandrels around the central medallion.
These buds do not have the stems of those in mosaic 6, but the drawing of the leaves is comparable.
In mosaic 7, two buds occupy opposite angles around the central flower, although here they are more stylised than either of the above examples.
Whereas the octagonal panelled grids from Leicester were probably the first mosaics in their "substantial group" , it seems that mosaics B and C from North Hill, and the more stylised mosaic 7, from Verulamium, post-date the three other mosaics in this group.
It is difficult to imagine the mosaicist responsible for the cantharus in mosaic B working with such conventional geometries as are seen in mosaic 6 and the mosaic from insula 34.
Likewise, the more naturalistic appearance of the central, sixteen-petalled flowers in mosaic 7 and mosaic C, North Hill, when compared with similar, smaller flowers in mosaic 10, suggests that they are later.
However, the significance of all this is unclear: in the southeastern part of the province there appears to be a greater inter-relationship of designs than in the west.
This certainly makes it difficult to account for the development of style within a small, group of six mosaics such as we have here.
Unlike the west, in the east an adequate understanding of any relationship between mosaics of the later second century requires an appreciation of the more stylistically integrated nature of the sample.
A group of pavements which shows this kind of affinity has many traits which are often understood as essential characteristics of a school of mosaic/mosaicists: the sharing of a common mode of representation, the predominance of this mode in a restricted geographical area, and the presence of craftsmen,(perhaps of different abilities) who were working "together" .
From this position, the significance of a school lies in its relationship with the "workshops" responsible for individual mosaics (these appear to be — almost exclusively — the work of the same craftsman/men).
Such workshops (probably comparable to the Roman officinae) imply a high degree of stylistic similarity between products, showing almost identical or "unitary" affinity.
Certainly, the school should not be confused with the workshop — as is frequently the case — if only because it is then difficult to credit the "school" with any real meaning.
3.
Integral Affinities
3.1
It is also profitable in such circumstances to examine the relationship of integral affinities with affinities which are more general e.g. substantial affinities: group ii of section 2.2, above pp. 30-31, is a case in point.
The position of an integral group with respect to groups which might indicate the circulation of illustrations, a consensus between clients as to designs which were preferable, or long term changes in- taste, is also important.
Again, the pavements under consideration here are in the southeastern part of the province.
These are the mosaics from North Hill, Colchester, mosaics A, B, and C; insula IV, house 1, Verulamium,(mosaic 7: pI.
20); High Wycombe (pI.
23); Middleborough, Colchester (pls. 32 and 33); Culver Street, Colchester (pI.
27); North Leigh, Oxon.
(pI.
34); insula XXI, house 4, Verulamium (pI.
30); insula IV, house 8, Verulamium (pI.
26); and the site of the Victoria Inn, Colchester (pI.
29).
3.2
Many general comparisons of mosaic 7, Verulamium, with mosaic B and C, North Kill, have already been made (section 2.2), and in section 4.1 the possibility of a workshop at North Hill is discussed.
Here it is necessary to consider the affinities hinted at in section 2.2 a little more thoroughly.
3.3
The stylised nature of the former has already been commented upon: the heavy guilloche frame, the lifeless (and sometimes inept) drawing of the circular bands of wave-crest and saw-tooth pattern, and the crude rendering of the lotus devices in the central square.
In some respects this mosaic appears also to have been influenced by pavements in the western part of the province.
The presence of one sixteen-petalled flower (compare with that of Locke's Timber Yard: pI.
16a), and rhomboids in series, along two sides of the pavement (as in the border of a mosaic from Berkeley Street, Gloucester: "Neal 1981, no. 54), is notable.
Nevertheless, the lotus motifs and the four rosettes in mosaic 7 occupy identical positions to those of comparable form in mosaic B, North Hill.
Moreover, other than mosaics B and C, North Hill, the former remains the only example in Britain of a nine-panelled grid backed by an arrangement of"concentric, circular borders.
Here, the replacement of ivy-scroll decoration by a circular band of saw-tooth is a contrast with the latter two pavements (the parallels for this type of decoration, again, are found in western England —in the octagonal panelled mosaic from Eastgate Street, Gloucester; Neal 1981, no. 57); but there are still three concentric borders, as in mosaic B, one of which is of simple guilloche.
It is the similarities of technique and of the central flowers and guilloche decoration between these mosaics which are the final indicators of affinity.
The simple guilloche decoration of mosaic 7 appears slightly cruder than that of mosaics B or C. The more complicated three-strand guilloche of the former, however, is not significantly inferior to the four-strand guilloche of mosaic C. The former appears to be "stretched" , but then the latter seems to be cramped (although "loose" ).
There are colour contrasts however: the simple guilloche of mosaic C is said to be grey, red and white (Neal 1981, no. 4O), whereas that of mosaic 7 is clearly brown, red, and white (mosaic on view in Verulamium Museum).
The three-strand guilloche of mosaic 7 is of black, red, brown, and white, whereas the four-strand guilloche of mosaic C is grey, white, pale-blue, and brown with some yellow (Neal 1981, no. 40).
However, between mosaics of different towns there is no reason to suppose that such moderate contrasts themselves are significant.
The similarity of the central flower in mosaic 7 with that in the same position in mosaic C is more compelling.
At least two leaves/petals in the latter are identical to the four axial leaves of the former.
However, the-more subtle use of colour in the latter also produces a less contrived flower.
More than anything else, it seems that the single, thin, black line of tesserae which delineates the eight semi-hidden petals in mosaic 7 is responsible for their angular appearance.
An overall poverty of colour, and the use of  slightly larger (but still well-cut) tesserae in mosaic 7, produce many of the contrasts of this mosaic with mosaic C. The latter, therefore, remains a more accomplished design, but it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that some of the same craftsmen and some identical plans or ideas were employed at Verulamium.
Another mosaic also exhibits affinities with mosaics B and C, North Hill.
This is the mosaic from High -Wycombe (pI.
23), a pavement which has five square and four rectangular panels in a grid formation,(although without a background field of circular, concentric bands).
Instead, large rhomboids occupy two of the rectangles lying adjacent to the central square — in a manner reminiscent of other mosaics from Colchester (pls. 11 and 12b).
Additional, narrow panels, bordered in three-strand guilloche and with occasional representations of small dolphins, are also placed along the two short sides of the main arrangement.
3.4
A closer relationship with the North Hill mosaics is suggested by some similarities of motif and ornamentation.
A third rectangular panel (adjacent to the central square) has a strip of a pattern reminiscent of the "cornice" decoration which encloses the central square in mosaic B. At High Wycombe, this is composed of four erect"leaves' on thick stems.
The same rectangular panel also has a band of superposed triangles.
These are of dark on white, as is a very similar band of triangles in the "top" panel of mosaic C, North Hill (Neal 1981, no. 40).
Furthermore, comparable errors in the execution of these triangles are visible, e.g. the occasional crowding and skewing of motif, especially at the corners of a panel.
Other panels also show some similarities with those of mosaic C. In the two rectangular panels with large rhomboids, single ivy leaves are placed in the angles.
Similar leaves, although with a thick stem and a finer tip, occupy at least two of the spandrels in mosaic C. However, one of the small squares lying tangent to the central square, at High Wycombe, contains an unidentified bust (section 1.4, no. 6) which is unparalleled at North Hill.
Instead, this bust calls to mind the square, figured panel of the mosaic from insula IV, house 8, Verulamium (pI.
26), which shows Oceanus — another figure whose head is slightly turned, to his right, and depicted in an almost sullen manner.
The panel at High Wycombe is also framed by a single black line, as is Oceanus.
It has to be admitted however, that the evidence from the former site is not clear enough, or the obvious affinities specific enough, to posit a direct (i.e. physical link, of travelling craftsmen, or swapping of drawings) link between the two sites.
Such possibilities simply remain intriguing in the light of further evidence for such association,(below).
3.5
The mosaic from room 70 of the Middleborough site, Colchester, is a saltire arrangement with a central, square panel.
Four semi-roundels occupy the spaces between the arms of the saltire.
In the central panel are depicted two wrestling Cupids, watched by a species of large bird; this is enclosed by, a single dark line and is bordered by a chain-guilloche with "tongues" .
This same guilloche also makes  up the border of the saltire, thus enclosing the curved sides of the semi-roundels, all of which appear to have contained a seabeast.
The arms of the saltire are each split into four triangular fields, and carry a variety of geometrical and floral motif.
The floral examples include a large lotus calyx and two ivy leaves joined by a slight fillet.
In other triangles are arrangements of triple peltae and series of small, filled, superposed triangles.
Around the whole design is a border of floral scroll.
Here, therefore, are many contrasts with the mosaics from North Hill.
The arrangement is different (though possibly based on a nine-panelled grid) and the standard of workmanship superior,(pI.
33).
The marine figures cannot be compared with those at High Wycombe, and the quality as well as the subject of the central panel is exceptional.
However, close examination of this mosaic, as well as suggesting a surprisingly close relationship with other pavements in the region (pls. 30 and 34), does reveal some features held in common with the mosaics at North Hill.
Two ivy leaves joined by a looped fillet recall those of North Hill, mosaic B. The fillet or stem has no kink as in mosaic B but the wide base and narrow tips are familiar.
The style of the leaves themselves is probably nearest to the single leaves of ivy in North Hill, mosaic C, although the lotus calyxes of the Middleborough pavement, again, are paralleled in mosaic B.
3.6
The lotus calyxes of mosaic 7, Verulamium (pI.
20), are stylistically closer to those in the Cupids mosaic than are those of North Hill B. The leaves and buds which comprise the floral scroll in the Cupids mosaic however, are more comparable to those of the central square of the latter.
The tongued variety of chain-guilloche — not a common feature — which forms the border of the central square in mosaic C is also of a similar design (if not execution) to that which encloses the central panel which contains the Cupids.
It is the very fine workmanship in this mosaic, however, which indicates further links with the North Hill site.
Mosaic A (pI.
21), an arrangement of four "L" -shaped panels around a central square which contains an elaborate floral device, is again of very high quality and is also datable to the second half of the century (pp. 132-133).
In this mosaic a device of three peltae around a hollow triangle is also reminiscent of three peltae at Middleborough.
These unique arrangements are especially notable.
3.7
The closest structural parallel for mosaic A, in this region, is the mosaic found in Culver Street, Colchester (pI.
27).
This shows a floral device identical to that at the centre of a reassembled pavement now displayed in Colchester Museum (pI.
28b).
This reassembled fragment is important, for in one corner is a pattern of fifteen contiguous triangles (recalling the Middleborough mosaic) and in the other corners squares contain guilloche knots (as in the tilted squares of mosaic A).
Although including the same basic colours, as well as tesserae of a similar size, to those of mosaics B and C, from North Hill, this restored work, obviously, remains untrustworthy as  an indication of any direct, stylistic link between mosaic A and the Cupids mosaic.
Instead, it provides a very interesting suggestion as to the direction and strength of co-operation within such a school.
With regard to mosaic A and the Cupids mosaic, the use of very finely worked tesserae"in both of their central panels, is probably the most significant affinity.
Intricate shading, achieved by the sensitive blending of many tones of five or six basic colours, is notable in both designs.
It is a sensitivity which effects an almost fleshlike appearance on the legs of the Cupids and a velvet-like softness in the petals of the flower in mosaic A. In both instances cubic and narrow slivers of tesserae produce what, in other contexts, could be termed an emblema.
Such special treatment of the central design of a mosaic is also apparent, albeit less notably, in the mosiacs from Verulamium (pls. 26 and 30).
If the mosaics from Middleborough and North Hill, Colchester, A, represent the most significant developments in this groups their chronological position in relation to the other mosaics is important.
It is by no means certain that, as innovative designs, they were the earliest mosaics in this group (section 3.2).
In fact, they seem to post-date North Hill, mosaics B and C and the High Wycombe pavement (appendix E, section 1.3 (pp. 129-130).
The length of the period which separates these mosaics, however, also remains problematical.
Mosaic 7 from Verulamium,(judging by the style of the lotus buds/ calyxes in the central square and those on the arms of the saltire at Middleborough), might be contemporary with the Cupids mosaic; but this is very flimsy evidence on which to base any such assessment.
On the other hand, it seems probable that other mosaics with high quality figured work in a central, square panel are later than the Cupids mosaic.
In the case of the pavement which figures Oceanus (pI.
26), this might also indicate a later date for a comparable structural arrangement from Colchester (pI.
29).
When examining the role of a specific, unitary affinity with regard to a more general affinity, the stylistic comparisons at the more specific level are especially important.
The work of different mosaicists might be visible here, so hinting at their number and therefore the probable diversity of subsequent developments.
In the case of the Middleborough mosaic one is first struck by the apparent homogeneity of style: contrast the mosaics from insula II, Colchester (Hull 1958, pI.
XXIIIb; pI.
7) or room N7, Fishbourne (pI.
15) for example, where obvious differences in quality are to be seen.
On closer inspection, however, the Middleborough mosaic does reveal some inconsistencies.
The acanthus decoration of the floral scroll is heavier to the "bottom left" of the Cupids than elsewhere in the mosaic.
In particular, the single petal which here occupies the corner position is perpendicular, and not directed towards the centre of the work, as are all other petals in such a position.
Also, the device immediately to the right of this — a stylised calyx — when compared with similar devices in other parts of the pavement, is seen to be poorly drawn.
In short, this portion of the floral scroll — and some others (Crummy in Mosaic 2 (1980), 7)— could be the work of a hand different to that responsible for most of the rest.
It is possible that such errors however, are merely indicative of the same craftsman's readjustments.
Other observations should also be mentioned here.
The styles of the lotus buds which occupy opposite arms of the saltire are different — the one at the "bottom left" is broader at the base and more heavily drawn than the other, although they possess identical stems both of which meet a small rhomboid, with equal precision.
Contrasts between the inner (around the central square) and outer bands of chain-guilloche are also notable.
Whereas the inner band shows a generally consistent interlace of colour, one in every four tongues of the latter is darker than the rest.
This might be, technically, unimportant, but it could signify a scheme for marking out the design.
The question would then remain: was the mosaicist planning for his own, future reference or for that of an accompanying mosaicist?
That all work here is of a craftsman's standard (and not that of an apprentice) is indisputable.
If, indeed, more than one craftsman was responsible, it is only just possible to be sure of areas where relevant contrasts occur.
The mosaic from Verulamium (pI.
30), another mosaic with a saltire arrangement, also possesses a central square with high quality figural work.
The square itself is enclosed by a band of four-strand guilloche (compare the chain-guilloche at Middleborough), although, as in the Middleborough mosaic, the saltire itself is defined by chain-guilloche (with bars instead of prominent tongues).
Each arm of the saltire carries an elegant cantharus.
These are each framed by a swallow-tailed black line.
In each of the semi-roundels, adjacent to the central square, are two lotus buds linked by a fillet (in the panels to the left and right of the lion) and half of a sixteen-petalled flower enclosed by simple guilloche (in the panels above and below the lion).
Both the arms of the saltire and the semi-roundels are decorated in a manner quite different to similar panels in the Middleborough mosaic.
3.8
It is the quality and effect of the design in the central panel, however, which provides the closest parallel with the Middleborough mosaic.
The perspective differs a little— as befits the scene — but, as in the latter pavement, the sensitivity of tessellation (seen in the tones of the lion's coat and in the shadow beneath his body) is notable.
Framed by a single, dark line both panels give to the spectator that sense of a privileged view mentioned above.
There is a vitality of subject unknown elsewhere in the province, in the second century (except, perhaps, for the Oceanus mosaic, again from Verulamium).
The apparent movement of both the lion and the Cupids along an imaginary, oblique line is largely responsible for this effect.
Between these two mosaics, however, there are few obvious similarities of motif.
It is this which suggests the presence of Verulamium of at least one craftsman not engaged at Middleborough, for there are some significant additions to the features of the latter.
Wave-crest pattern, following a curved line, is absent from the Cupids mosaic, and has its closest parallels in the saltire design from North Leigh (pl.34).
The floral device enclosed by each of the wave-crest pattern borders in the Lion and Stag mosaic, admittedly, are comparable with the ivy leaves linked by a fillet at Middleborough, but the more significant half-flowers are absent, whereas they are closely paralleled at North Leigh, and in mosaic B (panel B), North Hill (Neal 1981, No.39).
Above all, in the Lion and Stag mosaic, canthari which occupy each arm of the saltire are a more effective decoration than the triangular fields of the Cupids mosaic.
Again at North Leigh, canthari are found in a similar position,(though of a different form).
A surprisingly close parallel for the canthari at Verulamium is afforded, however, by a cantharus from one of the octagonal panels of mosaic B, North Hill (now displayed in Colchester Museum: pl.31).
Like that from Verulamium this has meandering swastika at the neck,—— S —— shaped handles with volutes, and an oval mouth which reveals the inside of the vessel.
The former has five gadroons, compared to the three in the Colchester example but, clearly, they might still be the work of the same mosaicist.
(Another mosaic from Middleborough did feature a cantharus whose mouth pointed towards the centre: pl.28a.
This might have been a radial arrangement of numerous panels around a central hexagon: Mosaic 4 (1981), fig.3).
As with the Cupids mosaic, it is difficult to ascertain whether the Lion and Stag mosaic is the work of more than one craftsman.
There is slightly more to go on with the latter however, and one seems justified in presuming the work of at least two men.
First, the canthari are not identical.
That to the bottom left is badly drawn at the base, the foot is crooked and the gadroons are smaller at the left than to the right.
The remainder is well drawn.
Indeed, its swastika patterning matches that of the two canthari to the "top left" and "top right" .
Only that to the "bottom left" carries a lateral, swastika meander.
The significance of these canthari, therefore, is problematical: all four are of larger tesserae than the tesserae in the central square, the tesserae being more akin to those used for the background filling.
They could be the inconsistent work of an assistant mosaicist.
Secondly, the four-strand guilloche which encloses the central square is well drawn, but slightly inferior to the chain-guilloche.
A similar inconsistency is visible in the curved sections of wavecrest pattern: that to the left of the lion has lightly drawn crests, while those to the right are much heavier.
Thirdly, in other semi-roundels differences are apparent in both motifs and borders.
That the floral device "above" the lion is more lightly shaded than that "below" might seem insignificant, but this is also associated with notable contrasts in the quality of the guilloche (both simple and chained) by which they are enclosed.
Around the top panel, the simple guilloche is interlaced only twelve times, while around the bottom panel it is interlaced seventeen times.
The chain-guilloche too is interlaced more frequently (and, therefore, is more compact) around the bottom panel and the two panels which contain wave-crest pattern, than it is around the top panel.
It is difficult to imagine how the variable work of only one mosaicist could account for such differences: an explanation which merely supposes one mosaicist applying a number of contrasting methods of laying (Part 1, sections 3.8 — 3.10) must be suspect.
Also comparable with the Lion and Stag mosaic is the pavement from North Leigh (pl.34), shown here in a sketch by Hakewill.
The sketch is poor, consequently any comparisons must be fairly general.
However, a saltire design is again apparent.
The borders are elaborate — comprising bands of chain-guilloche, wave-crest pattern, and simple guilloche (all of which are to be seen in the Lion and Stag pavement).
Yet the centre of the mosaic is now dominated by a roundel (the contents of which have not survived), and the canthari, here, are wide at the base and curve, evenly, up to the rim.
The canthari, especially, are a clear contrast with their counterparts at Verulamium, although their positioning, like the positioning of the half-flowers in the semi-roundels, is a notable parallel.
Conversely, sixteen-petalled flowers, of a similar style to those in the semi-roundels of the Lion and Stag pavement, are, at North Leigh, found in a square immediately above the canthari, a position which is free of floral decoration in the former.
3.9
The richness of the border arrangements at North Leigh has already been mentioned.
The quality of the workmanship is impossible to ascertain, but the decoration appears more elaborate than that of the Cupids or the Lion and Stag pavements.
In fact, a strip of cornice pattern,(along one side), as well as a band of superposed triangles which enclose the mosaic, are reminiscent of some of"he border devices in the pavements from North Hill, Colchester.
The cornice pattern of mosaic B, North Hill, lacks the third calyx (seen at North Leigh) and concentrates only on the "erect" and"hooks' leaf.
The border of triangles is equally, if not more, diagnostic however: both at North Leigh and in mosaic C (and at High Wycombe) it encloses a quadrangle.
This suggests some further stylistic affinities for the North Leigh mosaic, which supplement those already observed between the Lion and Stag and Cupids mosaics.
It remains another convincing saltire design, bordered by elaborate chain-guilloche: a mosaic which must have been the work of at least one craftsman who had experience at Verulamium and Colchester.
Another pavement, from Verulamium, also suggests some affinity with the Lion and Stag mosaic.
This is the pavement of insula IV, house 8, which has a bust of Oceanus in a central square, enclosed by a double swastika meander (pl.26).
Eight relieving panels are present: square panels with "squared" eight-petalled rosettes occupy each of the four corners, and four rectangular panels,(each holding a small cantharus), are adjacent to the central square.
To the bottom of the mosaic is a band of four strand guilloche.
3.10
Oceanus is drawn boldly, the shoulders and neck are shaded very effectively, and the hair and face are confidently delineated.
The tesserae are larger than those"of the Cupids or Lion and Stag panels, although small tesserae are used in the face of Oceanus.
The latter — as in the former works — are shaped according to the job they had to do, i.e. rectangular (not cubic) tesserae depict the moustache as it falls either side of the mouth.
Work of such quality remains a  rarity in Roman Britain.10 The eyes and the cheeks are exceptionally well rendered, recalling the treatment of the legs of the Cupids.
The hair of Oceanus also appears to be styled on the same matted locks which comprise the lion's main at Verulamium.
Indeed, the bolder drawing of the Oceanus panel (contrast the confusion of colour around the heads of the lion and stag) is more suitable to this kind of portraiture — a style which depends on the strength and naturalism of the subject.
As another pseudo-emblema of the later second century, therefore, it appears that this panel was the work of a mosaicist employed on the Lion and Stag and, perhaps, on the Cupids mosaic.
The geometric decoration is also instructive.
In some instances further affinities with the latter mosaics are suggested.
The bulky, four-strand guilloche is reminiscent of the guilloche which encloses the central square of the Lion and Stag pavement (such a band, in even heavier form, is present in mosaic C, North Hill).
The use of precise, dark lines, two tesserae wide, throughout the pavement is also familiar.
However this mosaic is important for the other affinities which it suggests.
The canthari adjacent to the central squares have their closest parallel at North Hill (mosaic B) and in the mosaic from insula 34, Colchester.
The presence of a ladle —"on two occasions — is paralleled in a nine-panelled, curvilinear design from Cirencester (pl.16b); indeed, the shape of the cantharus, here, is again comparable with that of those in the Oceanus mosaic.
It is the prominent arrangement of swastika meander however, which appears to be particularly important for any suggestion of a school or group of integrally related mosaic designs.
In addition to the rhomboidal swastika conspicuous in mosaic A, North Hill, swastika meander was a feature of the mosaic found in Culver Street, Colchester (pI.
27).
This pavement is of a similar style to a mosaic found on the site of the Victoria Inn, Colchester (pI.
29)— a mosaic which, when reconstructed, has an arrangement very similar to that of the Oceanus pavement.
As an arrangement of "L" -shapes around a central square, therefore, the Culver Street mosaic, when compared with that from the Victoria Inn, again suggests further, complicated relationships between mosaic A, North Hill, and, indirectly (through the Oceanus mosaic), the Cupids mosaic from Middleborough.
A group comprising at least eleven pavements of the southeastern part of the province can thus be considered a reasonably convincing example of integral, stylistic affinity.
It is possible to imagine a web of direct relationships between mosaics, wherein each mosaic is assumed to be the work of a craftsman who had worked on at least one other mosaic in the group.
Within this group, how-ever, not all pavements need be the work of a single gang of workers (a unitary affinity, indicating a workshop), although some workshops are apparent, i.e. those based on the Lion and Stag/Cupids mosaics, and mosaics B and C, North Hill.
The group represents instead, a combination of such contrasting interests.
In regard to other levels of stylistic affinity (e.g.the substantial group of which the North Hill (B and C) mosaics and the High Wycombe mosaics are a part, or the sequential group of "fully centralised circular or radial designs" — of which every pavement here, but the High Wycombe pavement, is a part), it also offers an insight into the significance of particular tastes and trends for the development of the craft as a whole.
Two unitary affinities have already been mentioned:(i) Pavements B and C, North Hill, Colchester (Neal 1981, nos. 39 and"40), and (ii) The Lion and Stag mosaic (pl.30) and the Middleborough, Cupids mosaic (pls. 32 and 33).
Such affinities are also prominent between other pavements, however:(iii) Two pavements from Verulamium, each of which has a square containing two dolphins with their tails entwined with the arms of cantharus (pls. 13 and 14);(iv) The Blackfriars and St. Nicholas Street pavements, Leicester,(pls. 1 and 5).
4.
Unitary Affinities
The North Hill mosaics and the mosaic (7) from Verulamium (pI.
20) were seen, above, to be comparable at an integral level of stylistic affinity; but the size and shaping of the tesserae in mosaic 7, its large areas of background filling in buff-brown tesserae, and the absence of the most significant border decorations visible in mosaics B and C, suggest that it was the work of an essentially different group of craftsmen.
Mosaics B and C themselves show some notable contrasts: mosaic C has a bead and reel pattern as the innermost of its concentric, circular bands; the thorn pattern in this mosaic is white on black, compared with black on white in mosaic B; and a subsidiary panel of mosaic C which contains a border of superposed triangles, has no parallel in the latter.
Also, in one of its corner squares, mosaic C shows the remains of a floral device which is not, stylistically, comparable with those placed in a similar position in mosaic B. The differences between the motifs in the central squares of both these mosaics has been covered above (section 2.2. pp.30-31) and, clearly, is not unimportant.
4.1
However, on balance, the use here of similar colours (red, yellow, grey, pale-blue, brown) and shapes of tesserae is more significant.
In addition, notable parallels in decoration cannot be ignored: in their concentric, circular bands, both mosaics have wave-crest pattern and a floral scroll; both have thorn pattern in a square formation; and their leaves (of the floral scrolls, or as single leaves in mosaic C and bi-petals in mosaic B) are almost identical.
When such details are examined it seems that, in spite of all their contrasts, these pavements were by the same craftsman/men.
The Middleborough mosaic shows very few inconsistencies of style, so few in fact, that there might be no need to postulate the presence of more than one mosaicist (section 3.5).
If so, the conclusion is inescapable that he also worked on the Lion and Stag mosaic for, although this mosaic does suggest the presence of another mosaicist (section 3.8) it is of a very similar design and style to  the Middleborough example.
4.2
One cannot be so clear when considering other mosaics which appear to owe much to this manner of arrangement and depiction.
The North Leigh pavement (pl.34) and the Oceanus pavement, from Verulamium (pl.26) have, respectively, an arrangement of decorative borders, and a central square with fine figured work, both of which might be indicative of the craft of some of the mosaicists employed above.
However, both also suggest a significant influence absent both from Middleborough and the Lion and Stag pavement.
In the case of North Leigh this can be construed as relatively unimportant, i.e. the style of the canthari, the shape of the central panel, and the border of superposed triangles and cornice pattern.
However, in the Oceanus pavement the arrangements and motifs are considerably different: the only major similarity is the bust of the central panel.
It is safest to assume, therefore, that whereas the Lion and Stag mosaic might be predominantly the work of a craftsmen who was also present at North Leigh, the same proximity of relationship cannot be postulated for the Oceanus mosaic.
Thus a second example of unitary affinity must be restricted to the Cupids mosaic and the Lion and"Stag mosaic, with a possible inclusion of the mosaic from room 30, North Leigh.
Two pavements from Verulamium provide almost identical versions of the same figural scene (pls. 13 and 14).
The scene has two dolphins falling, left and right, from a central cantharus (with whose handles their tails are entwined).
From the cantharus of pl.13 flows what appears to be two jets of a fountain.
This mosaic is the more imposing piece of work, but the fragment might also have been the central display of a comparable arrangement.
Both scenes occupy a square panel enclosed by a single, black line two tesserae wide.
4.3
Further similarities include the three petal-shaped gadroons at the base of each cantharus,(although those in pI.
13 are larger, and extend further up the body, than those of the fragmentary design).
The handles of both canthari have a single volute at the top, and join the bottom of the cup, directly, without further twists,(each handle also joins the cup at approximately 12 cms.
below its rim, a rim which is notably wide and open).
There are some differences, however.
The base of the fragmentary design comprises a half-boss which rests on a small triangle.
In pI.
13 this is replaced by a full boss and an elongated triangle about 20 cms.
long.
The eyes and the fins of the dolphins are also much more clearly and elaborately depicted than in the former.
"The cantharus itself is more rigid, with almost straight sides,.
in pI.
14: its base is also off-centre.
Finally, the tessellation of the latter, although comprising tesserae of much the same size as those in the former, presents perceptible differences in the shape of tesserae (often jagged), and uses fewer tesserae to cover a given area.
It is possible that these differences do not preclude these mosaics as works of the same mosaicist.
But given the ineptitude displayed when dealing with some elementary features, e.g. the placing  of the base of the cantharus, in pI.
14, it is more reasonable to ascribe the latter pavement to an assistant of a more competent mosaicist's workshop.
Along with the mosaics of section 4.2 above, the mosaics from the Blackfriars and St. Nicholas Street sites, Leicester, provide evidence for one of the closest stylistic relationships between any mosaics in second century Britain.
It is profitable to consider another pavement (the Great Witcombe mosaic) in regard to the two Leicester mosaics, but the evidence for further, unitary, affinity here appears to be less convincing.
4.4
A general description of the two Leicester pavements is given in appendix E, section 1.2, p. 127: here it is only necessary to consider more specific detail.
Both pavements have examples of a four-petalled flower"with long, broad leaves which curve to a fine tip,(pls. 1 and 5b).
Down the centre of each petal runs a ridge or vein of cream coloured tesserae (half of the leaf is shaded yellow and half dark red) In the Blackfriars mosaic the device is backed by four broad petals, less angular in appearance than those in the St.Nicholas Street mosaic.
However, these motifs remain rare in Romano-British mosaic, and their occurrence in Leicester, in two pavements of second century date, is important.
Thorn pattern is common to both mosaics.
Frequently, although there are differences of scale, motifs of the Blackfriars pavement are repeated in the latter.
An eight-petalled rosette divided into four by single, black lines is seen at the centre of a geometric spray pattern (pI.
3b) and in the tilted squares of the St. Nicholas Street mosaic (pI.
5a); furthermore, a type of four-petalled flower which occupies a tilted square directly below the peacock (pI.
5a), is also found in a tilted square in the Blackfriars mosaic.
Cornice pattern, as bordering strips, is also common to both mosaics.
It is of better quality in the Blackfriars mosaic although, here too, there is work which appears to be of different standards,(see pls. 4a and 4b).
Contrasts in tessellation within the same mosaic are insignificant however when compared with the contrasts between the mosaics themselves.
The filling of triangular panels with contiguous triangles — a device common to both pavements — is notable here.
In the St. Nicholas Street mosaic some triangles are very crudely executed (pls. 6a and 6b; different qualities of workmanship are noticeable here too), whereas those of the Blackfriars pavement are much finer (pI.
2b) and more elaborate (pI.
2a).
It seems that a less skilled craftsman was employed in the former work — a craftsman (or apprentice) whose contributions are not visible in the Blackfriars mosaic.
Other contrasts between the two pavements include the absence of any "whirling-wheel" or kaleidoscopic pattern in the St. Nicholas Street mosaic, the presence there of a richly coloured figured panel (enclosed by a chain-guilloche) at the centre, and the absence of any floral scroll pattern or stencilled lines.
But whereas these might indicate another mosaicist (in addition to the skilled"assistant mentioned above) they do not contradict the suggestion that this  pavement is very closely related to the Blackfriars mosaic.
It seems probable, therefore, that three workers were employed in making the St. Nicholas Street pavement and only one (possibly two) in the making of the Blackfriars mosaic.
so, it becomes easier to account for the relationship of both of these works to the pavement of room 5, Great Witcombe (see section 2.1, above.
pp. 27-28).
The latter has much in common with both pavements from Leicester, but the kaleidoscopic patterns are not identical to those of the Blackfriars mosaic, while the floral device of the lozenge arrangement (based on four halves of an eight-lozenge star, around a central square) in the St. Nicholas Street pavement is tilted, not perpendicular as is the floral device in the Great Witcombe mosaic.
It seems certain that the blend of characteristics at Great Witcombe is attributable to a mosaicist who had worked on the St. Nicholas Street mosaic.
Whether or not this is the same craftsman who was responsible for much (if not all) of the work in the Blackfriars mosaic, remains unclear.
If it is not, then it is premature to speak of a unitary stylistic affinity between Great Witcombe "and the Leicester pavements: an integral level of affinity is" more appropriate.
It seems appropriate to emphasise four main points when summarising the above discussion:
5.
Summary
(a) Whatever the role of individual mosaicists or groups of mosaicists was in the second century, there appears to be a long term trend in the popularity of certain designs over which control by these mosaicists was negligible.
This is only as one might expect -at all times and in all places — for it is always a problem in art history or archaeology to know to what degree certain persons can be held responsible for the appearance of particular aspects of design (especially where one is dealing with aspects of arrangement, structure, and figural types).
Nevertheless, these trends should not be overlooked: there has been a tendency to stop at the recognition of particular forms of arrangement etc., with little account of the developments which connect them.
This can be ascribed to the absence of any craft-related explanation of the changes.
But such agencies do not seem appropriate precursors of a discussion of the elaboration of lozenge designs, of the trend to scenic or elaborate figural work, or the centralisation of arrangements.
(b) In our ignorance it is best to assume simplicity.
This is especially true of the organisation of mosaicists before 160.
The ideas of clients (or at least, the patronage of a craftsman's indulgence) appear to be important factors in the distribution and development of particular arrangements.
In a land which had been recently "Romanised" , most mosaics were executed in the civitas capitals.
Here, there were workshops (e.g. in Leicester, and also in Verulamium), but these were small scale affairs, with at most four attested products and little indication of any more widespread organisational significance.
Sometimes, the closest parallel for a design is many miles distant.
This suggests that the clients themselves might have provided an impetus to itinerance.
(c) Generally, decoration and arrangement do suggest regional preferences.
These are a major source of definition for the sample before c. 160-170,(and remain an element in the development of designs after this period).
Lozenge patterns and grids of panels are the main constituents of design at this time; however, within these general categories one"can discern a group of mosaics which feature grids of octagonal panels (predominantly a phenomenon of western England) and a group which features squares and rectangles, in a nine-panel arrangement (predominantly an phenomenon of eastern England).
Indeed, the differences enshrined here seem to be responsible for the development of scenic, figural representation in the east and a less unified form of figural representation in the west.
The only clear indication of integral affinity (a possible school of mosaic) is in the east of England, and is datable to c. 160 and later.
This appears to have been composed of two workshops (possibly small affairs) where the products of each occur in both Verulamium and Colchester.
The Colchester products are, generally, the earliest.
Indeed, Smith (1975, 288) suggests that the school originated in Colchester and then transferred to Verulamium, although the similarity of an early pavement at Colchester (the Cupids mosaic) to what would be a considerably later one at Verulamium (the Lion and Stag mosaic) will make this difficult to substantiate.
At present, it seems justifiable to recognize two partially contemporary"workshops.
One of these, which specialised in regular nine-panel arrangements and residual lozenge arrangements, was based in Colchester- Another, which specialised in irregular saltire arrangements and fine figured work, operated on a semi-itinerant basis while the former was still working.
Mosaics of Central South-Western England in the Late-Third and Fourth Centuries
1.
This region has yielded a very large number of mosaics; indeed, the counties of Gloucestershire and Somerset alone have, together, been credited with 237 examples (Mosaic 9 (1984), 9).
This ensures that even a detailed discussion of the evidence is selective.
Fortunately, however, because many of the most important mosaics are "very close stylistically, and because many simple or repetitive geometric designs have been recorded, it is possible to understand the" main characteristics of these mosaics by reference to what is, numerically, a relatively small sample.
The counties mentioned above have provided most of the pavements attributed to the "Corinian School" of mosaicists — a group of mosaics and mosaicists centered on the town of Cirencester (Toynbee 1962, 198; Smith 1965, 1969 and 19849 Although one tenth only of these pavements can be dated on external criteria, both the particular associations of the Orpheus and saltire mosaics, and the more general association of this school with other schools in Britain, helps to suggest an adequate understanding of developments.
The last fifteen years, however, have brought more mosaics to light — most notably in Cirencester itself.
Smith (1969b, in Brown et.al. 1969) suggested a secondary phase for the Corinian group, and recently (Neal 1981, no. 87; T.B.G.A.S. (1982), 272) attention has been drawn to further complexities of its organisation.
In view of these new discoveries and refined interpretations, a review of the stylistic relationships (and their implications) in this region seems necessary.
In appendix F over 70 pavements are listed, including all the most impressive arrangements.
Uninspired designs which, nonetheless, are important in the interpretation of stylistic relationships, are also included, as are many simple mosaics found in association with those thought to indicate more specific affinities.
Seventeen of the listed mosaics are from Cirencester; three are from Gloucester; two are from Caerwent; and one is from London (a mosaic which shows some notable similarities to pavements in the south-west).
The majority, however, are from rural sites, often with several mosaics in the same building.
Six of the listed mosaics are from Chadworth; seven are  from Newton St.Loe; four are from North Leigh; four are from Stonesfield; seven are from Withington; and at least ten (nearer twenty, if fragments are accounted for) from Woodchester.
There are at least three categories of pavements which illustrate this general level of affinity:(i) Simple geometric patterns,(ii) Concentric circular designs, and (iii) Diagonal or rotated linear designs.
The former includes many all-over arrangements of interlaced circles, chequered squares, perspective boxes or relieved meanders.
Number (ii) accounts for all the Orpheus designs and, amongst others, the Bacchus mosaic from Stonesfield.
The latter group includes mosaics which feature saltire designs or designs based on patterns of interlaced squares.
2.
Sequential Affinities
Although the simplicity of these pavements renders them less informative than many other arrangements they do present one of the clearest pictures in Britain of a uniformity in general design.
Such patterns may have become a conventional part of the mosaicist's repertory, indeed, the similarity of these mosaics to some in north-eastern England (part IV) suggests a widespread acceptance of these forms of decoration.
2.1 Simple Geometric Patterns
In the western counties, three of the sites with pavements depicting Orpheus — Newton St. Loe, Woodchester, and Withington-also provide evidence for comparable assortments of geometric mosaics.
At the former, these include pavements of interlaced circles, relieved meanders and a fragmented arrangement of perspective boxes bordered by a relieved meander (pI.
40).
Those at Woodchester are more numerous and are generally more sophisticated, but they repeat the designs of interlaced circles, relieved meanders and perspective boxes (in the corridor, room B, for example: pI.
44), such as are also found at Withington,(pI.
45).
(The simplicity of geometric design at Withington, however, is much are in keeping with that of the mosaics at Newton St. Loe).
Another Orpheus mosaic — from Barton Farm — was not associated with geometric mosaics; only a remnant of border work which comprises relieved swastika meander and an arrangement of perspective boxes survives (pI.
41).
At Stonesfield, however, two pavements at least were associated with another large, figured mosaic featuring concentric, curved bands (pI.
47): one of perspective boxes bordered by chain-guilloche (pavement C), and one with two panels of perspective boxes adjacent to a panel of relieved swastika meander (pavement B).
This formula is also apparent (at least partially) at Chedworth, where a radial arrangement of eight compartments is both adjacent to an extensive, relieved swastika meander"(Goodburn 1979, pI.
6) and associated with mosaics of interlaced circles (room 11: ibid., pI.
7.1) and pelta-pattern (room 14: pI.
58a).
Above all, simple geometric mosaics are found elsewhere in the region, as isolated instances or in contexts where no sophisticated work is known.
At Whittington Court, Glos., where the pavements are much cruder than any of those mentioned above, corridor 11 has an arrangement of perspective boxes, lozenges and chequers (T.B.G.A.S LXXI (1952), pI.
IV).
At North Leigh, Oxon., one of the four geometric mosaics comprises a relieved swastika meander (pl.64) of fairly sophisticated format (such as is visible at Chedworth and  Woodchester, for example).
And at the Beeches Road site, Cirencester, which produced the mosaic depicting a hare (pI.
73), arrangements of meander pattern (Neal 1981, no. 26), guilloche mat (ibid., no. 29), chequered squares (Neal 1981, no. 31) and swastika meander relieved by square panels (ibid., no. 28) were discovered.
In all about forty simple geometric mosaics are known in this region.
Most are from the area to the north-east of Cirencester, although to the south of the town other sites, e.g. Woodchester and Newton St. Loe, are important.
The widely differing quality of these mosaics is probably indicative of many different mosaicists.
Certainly, these designs were employed for a period of at least forty years, and their designers might not always have seen them in the same light.
Here we are considering a very imposing group of Orpheus mosaics and the Bacchus mosaic from Stonesfield, although, strictly speaking, other pavements which do not receive such fervent attention, e.g. the circular arrangement above the "Hare mosaic" (pI.
72), another circular design from Beeches Road, Cirencester (Neal 1981, no.30), and pavement K (pI.
44) from Woodchester, should be included.
As a good case has been made recently (Mosaic 4 (1981), 6) against the authenticity of the Dyer Street Orpheus mosaic (Beecham 1886, f.p. 226), only four Orpheus mosaics can now be credited to this region: the Woodchester mosaic (pI.
43), the Withington mosaic (pI.
46), the mosaic from Barton Farm (pI.
41), and the mosaic from Newton St. Loe (Smith 1969, pl.3.10).
With the Stonesfield mosaic, which in terms of sophistication is second only to the design from Woodchester, this region, however, still boasts five remarkable, concentric circular designs.
2.2 Concentric Circular Designs
The Woodchester mosaic comprises three concentric circular bands which enclose a central octagon.
Birds, trees and branches occupy the innermost band, followed by a procession of mammals in the middle band, and a continuous, circular, acanthus scroll in the outer.
The middle and inner bands are separated by a wreath pattern as well as by the conventional guilloche.
The whole circular design is set within a square formed by the inner border of an arrangement of repeating geometric panels (panels which, themselves, are significant not only for their suggestion of links with the continent (section 4.4) and with other simple, geometric designs, but also for their inclusion of eight circular medallions, each of which is reminiscent of the three, minor concentric circular designs listed above).
In contrast to the Woodchester mosaic, that from Barton Farm has only two circular bands (which on this occasion enclose a central roundel).
The inner band again features birds and trees — and the outer large mammals — but the band of acanthus scroll is absent.
The bands are no longer separated by two borders, only the wreath pattern is present; furthermore, the chain-guilloche which borders the outer band now runs into that which encloses the whole circular design.
The mosaic again appears to have an outer border of swastika meander, slightly relieved by guilloche strips.
Unlike Woodchester, however, such geometric decoration as exists does not serve to emphasize the autonomy of the circular arrangement.
Much the same can be said of the mosaics from Withington and Newton St. Loe, although here other contrasts are also conspicuous.
In the former, the unity of the enclosing frame with the outermost band of the circular design is comparable to that at Barton Farm.
In the latter, a stencilled line is all that defines the form of the circle (within a square frame whose simple guilloche also cross-cuts the spandrels).
Both of these features render the designs more scenic, circular visions than expansive roundels.
This effect is encouraged by the banding (or lack of it) within the circular field.
At Withington a thin line and a border of"wavecrest pattern enclose Orpheus: between these and the outer border of three-strand guilloche lies the only circular band.
Here, is a procession of large mammals, with the birds (seen at Barton Farm and Woodchester) seemingly despatched to two narrow strips which lie either side of the main design.
At Newton St. Loe, meanwhile, where Orpheus is enclosed by a border of simple guilloche, these birds are absent altogether, and the outer border of the single band (which again contains mammals separated by trees) is composed of a broken pattern of triangles.
With the mosaic from Stonesfield the effect of a roundel,"with three or four concentric borders, is maintained.
Like Woodchester, this is a large mosaic; indeed, it consists of two large, circular devices (pl.47).
The larger has an outer band of acanthus scroll, then a band of three geometric borders.
Together, these enclose the central figure of Bacchus, seated upon a leopard.
The smaller circular device, formed by a border of chain-guilloche, encloses a geometric design similar to those of the border of geometric panels at Woodchester (pl.43).
All of these mosaics appear to be of the fourth century, or the very late third,(Smith favours a date before 300 for the mosaic from Newton St. Loe: Smith 1969, 101; although some doubts have been expressed recently: Smith 1983, 326).
In fact, the most convincing evidence is from Barton Farm, where coins provide a terminus post quem of c.293.
From this, and what we know of the demise of the mosaic craft in the mid-late third century, it has been customary -and reasonable — to infer that the Barton mosaic and the comparable mosaic from Woodchester are of the early fourth century, probably before 325.
Further evidence from Woodchester supports this view (Brittania XIII (1982), 206-7); indeed, for the great pavement, a date of between 300 and 320 is suggested (Mosaic 9 (1984), 7).
The date of the Withington and Newton St. Loe mosaics remains unclear, but, on stylistic grounds the author would assign them also to the fourth century (pace Smith 1969, 100): they are probably slightly later than the above pavements (section 4.3) but almost certainly are before 340.
Stonesfield, with its many stylistic parallels with the Woodchester mosaic, likewise, can be assigned to a period between 300 and 340.
The proximity, both geographically and chronologically, of such similar structural arrangements is, clearly, very significant.
The subject of Orpheus entrancing the wild beasts, and the familiar  association of Orpheus with wheels and the revolution of nature, seems to explain the choice of arrangement in four of the above instances (although on numerous occasions elsewhere, e.g. Brading, lOW.
(V.C.H. Hants. (1900), fig. 22); and in France, at Blanzy-les- Fismes and Trinquetaille (the latter is displayed in the Museum of Roman Art, Arles), the animals are either in the same panel as Orpheus or there is no structural separation of these figures).
In the mosaic from Stonesfield, the appearance of Bacchus at the centre of a concentric circular design, is noteworthy.
Although a familiar subject in Britain (see pIe.
77 and 78, from London; Neal 1981, no. 52, from Gloucester), this is the only instance of Bacchus as the focus of such an arrangement.
Given the potential of the design for illustrating the Bacchus theme, this is more than a little surprising.
Elsewhere in the region, we have other instances of the concentric circular arrangement.
Those of the outer panels of the Woodchester mosaic, and that above the Bacchus panel at Stonesfield, have already been noted.
In addition to these, however, another"three examples should be considered.
The first, pavement K from Woodchester, shows the remains of a band of chain-guilloche which is similar to that of the Orpheus mosaic (pI.
44).
Like the minor, circular designs of the latter, it may have possessed a number of concentric bands.
Others certainly did: mosaic 9, building XII, 2, Cirencester (Beeches Road site) has an outer circle of simple guilloche, enclosing a border of crowstep pattern and an inner border of petals (Neal 1981. no. 30).
The circular panel "above" the Hare mosaic (again from insula XII, Cirencester) has three concentric, stencilled lines, each separated from the other by an inner band of simple guilloche and an outer band of three-strand guilloche (pI.
72).
It seems certain that pavement K, Woodchester is of the same period as the Orpheus mosaic, i.e. c. 310-325.
For the two examples from Beeches Road however, dating is a little more hazardous.
The circular arrangement above the Hare was assigned, originally, to the late-third century (Neal 1981, no. 25), but this dating has been amended, and the pavement now assigned to the fourth century (perhaps as late as the second quarter of the fourth century: Cirencester Excavations III, forthcoming).
In the early fourth century, therefore, a remarkable aptitude for the manufacture of circular designs seems to accompany a taste-presumably of clients — for Orphic themes.
It is the combination of these two interests which is responsible for the novelty and success of these mosaics.
In Britain, their influence, certainly, was widespread, and might have provided models for the mosaics at Horkstow: pI.
97; Winterton: Neal 1981, no. 83; and Littlecote: pI.
71.
It is also possible to recognise a third sequence of general affinity: mosaics which have diagonal or rotated, linear arrangements, in the form of saltires (e.g. pI.
65) or rotated, linear arrangements in the form of interlaced squares (e.g. pI.
60).
Sometimes, the interlaced squares are fully rotated (pI.
50), or are featured as one of a set of four pairs of squares (pI.
56).
All of  these designs appear to show a common taste for a specific type of geometric ideal (often the forms of interlaced squares and saltires are joined — in an all-over pattern — as in the pavement from Broad Street, London: pI.
77).
2.3 Diagonal and Rotated Linear Designs
For a relatively complex geometrical format, moreover, these designs are especially numerous in the south-western part of England.
There are also many examples in Hampshire, Sussex and Dorset, but their concentration in and around Cirencester is noteworthy.
Here are several examples (not all instances) of each clearly definable form of design: arrangements of four pairs of rotated, interlaced squares (from the Avenue: pI.
56; from Querns Lane: pI.
49; from the New Market Hall site, Gloucester: Ant.
J. LIV (1974), pI.
V; and from North Leigh: pI.
63b); arrangements of single pairs of rotated squares (from Kingscote: pI.
50; Bromham: pI.
54; Lydney, room L: PI.
79; and Admiral's Walk, Cirencester: pI.
48); arrangements of single, conventional interlaced squares (from Tockington Park: pI.
60; Lydney, room XVIII: pI.
80; and Beeches Road, Cirencester: pI.
73); and saltire arrangements (from Ashcroft House, Cirencester: pI.
65; North Leigh: pI.
61; and Chedworth, room 10: pI.
57a).
Such a concentration of comparable geometrical forms cannot be coincidental.
All the devices listed above are more than extended motifs.
Some pavements, such as that from Kingscote (section 3.4) or the mosaic from Chedworth (Goodburn 1979, 26) are datable to the early fourth century, possibly before 325.
There is then a substantial number, including the mosaics from Tockington Park, rooms 9 and 12 (T.B.G.A.S. XII (1888), 159-169), North Leigh (Wilson and Sherlock 1980), and Ashcroft House (Ant- J. XLIX (1969), 242) datable to the second quarter or the middle years of the century.
Only one or two mosaics can be assigned, tenuously, to a period after c.350, although the original dates for the Lydney mosaics (Wheeler 1936, 65), if even approximately correct, could suggest a relatively late period for mosaics in the region which share the essentials of the arrangement of the pavement of room XVIII.
Some of these works, therefore, will be contemporary with the later Orpheus mosaics, while many others will post-date this period.
as if to emphasise the relative longevity of this sequence, however, it is also possible that some mosaics might pre-date the sequences of simple geometric and Orphic pavements.
This is, admittedly, difficult to substantiate.
It is certain, however, that the sequence includes mosaics whose distribution is more widespread than that of the concentric circular designs, and whose designs are more diagnostic than those of the simple geometric mosaics.
Of the three sequences (where that of simple geometric mosaics comprises regular and repetitive designs, and the concentric circular sequence consists of very imaginative works) this sequence appears to be the nearest thing to a "traditional" form of design.
Indeed, it seems possible that the sequences of concentric, circular design and rotated linear designs share a common root; grids of regularly spaced circles.
Some pavements in the former sequence also suggest a familiarity with the linear geometric principles of the latter.
At Stonesfield, where a design with "L" -shaped pieces occupies the centre of one of the medallions in the Bacchus mosaic, and where a mosaic with a saltire arrangement is associated with a more sophisticated pavement; or at Woodchester, where the border panels of the Orpheus mosaic include  eight with "L" -shaped pieces (for possible connections of this kind of arrangement with that of interlaced squares, see Appendix E, section 1.4 p. 134).
Almost all of those mosaics with saltire or Orpheus designs suggest more specific stylistic affinities than can be considered in this section,(see the discussion of unitary and integral relationships).
Pavements possessing various arrangements of interlaced squares, however, do show general similarities of motif, and share particular structural characteristics, such as are indicative of a substantial relationship.
If these arrangements are part of a tradition of mosaic design, however, they must, nonetheless, have been easily recognizable and, therefore, the subject of some small degree of assent or choice by the client and his mosaicist.
3.
Substantial Affinities
These are two squares, of equivalent dimensions, so interlaced as to produce an eight-pointed star or an eight pointed rosette.
The former occurs when one square is parallel with and another turned at 450 to the border; the latter if both are turned, oppositely, through about 300.
Often the squares are placed in a central position and enclose a figured medallion.
On other occasions they occupy respective quarters of a pavement (in which case there will be not one but four pairs) each surrounding the central medallion which is then subsidiary.
The squares themselves are usually of the same kind of decoration, i.e. cable or simple guilloche, although the colour of their patterns can vary (indeed, this is a favourite method of emphasizing their contrast).
3.1.
Interlaced Squares as a form of Substantial Affinity.
At least nineteen mosaics mentioned in Appendix F appear to have incorporated arrangements of such squares, i.e. nearly 30%.
In some instances, however, e.g. no. 22, from Caerwent, the squares are difficult to discern.
On other occasions the mosaics do not show sufficient affinity to warrant their inclusion, e.g.a possible square Orpheus design from Wellow, Som.: V.C.H. Som.
1 (1906), fig. 71.
The eighteen mosaics under consideration, therefore, are as follows: 1.
Cirencester, Beeches Road, building XII, 1 (mosaic 2): pI.
73. 2.
Cirencester, The Avenue: pI.
56. 3.
A once unprovenance mosaic drawn by Lysons, thought to be from Cirencester, almost certainly a drawing of that in room 1, Halstock, Dorset: pls. 68 and 70. 4.
Cirencester, St. Michael's Fields, building VI, 3: pI.
48. 5.
Cirencester, Querns Lane: pI.
49. 6.
Gloucester, New Market Hall site: Hassall and Rhodes 1974, pls.
IIand III.
7.
Gloucester, 12-36, Eastgate Street: Hurst 1974, pI.
V and Neal 1981, no. 52.  8.
Gloucester, Bon Marche site; at junction of Oxbode and Kings Street: Cra'ster 1961, pI.
V. 9.
Bromham, Wilts.: pI.
54. 10.
Lydney, room L: pI."
79. 11.
Kingscote, Glos.: pI.
50 12.
Tockington Park, Glos., room 12: pI.
60. 13.
Whittington Court, room 111: O'Neill 1952, pI.
1.
14.
Wemberham (Yatton), Avon: pI.
55. 15.
Lydney, room XVIII: pI.
80. 16.
North Leigh: pI.
63a. 17.
North Leigh: pI.
63b. 18.
Low Ham, Som.: pI.
76.
The first of these, from Beeches Road, Cirencester, is better known as the "Hare mosaic" .
A hare squats amongst foliage, in a scene which is enclosed by a roundel supported by two conventionally interlaced guilloche squares.
The surrounding design, of lozenges and perspective boxes (with their fillings of black rhomboids, guilloche twists and chequered triangles), by virtue of the interposition of the squares, blends well with the central roundel.
3.2.
Mosaic no. 2 (pI.
56), also from Cirencester, exhibits a very different arrangement of interlaced squares.
Here they are rotated: four pairs, each carrying a simple guilloche band, occupy a quadrant of a mosaic which has quarter roundels in the angles and half roundels along each border.
The central roundel is enclosed by an octagon framed by the squares, whilst, of the four subsidiary roundels, two have stylised dahlia with guilloche knots at their centres, and two have stylised lotus flowers with chequers.
As in the Hare mosaic, the outer frame of the pavement and the interlaced squares share the same kind of decoration (simple guilloche).
In this pavement — as in others of a comparable design — the squares have assumed an overall structural importance and greatly influence the character of the work.
In contrast, the mosaic from Halstock (pls. 68 and 70), shows interlaced squares as part of an all-over arrangement with saltires.
Stylised lotus and other floral motifs provide the foci.
The filling motifs — petals joined in twos, urn-peltae, squares with guilloche knots and floral scrolls — are all to be found, in various stages of development, elsewhere in the region.
Moreover the squares, when compared to the saltires (with their strong diagonal accent) appear to be a less important, feature of design.
A fourth example, a fragmentary pavement from St. Michael's  Fields, Cirencester, shows two interlaced squares (each with guilloche decoration of different colours) in rotated formation (pI.
48).
A quarter roundel occupies each angle of the pavement and, in the two whose contents were preserved, we have a lotus bud and leaves with tendrils.
It appears that the squares enclosed a central roundel bordered by a band of wave-crest pattern: indeed, they dominate rather than contribute to the structure and must, originally, have greatly influenced determined the effect of the pavement on the spectator.
Each of the eighteen pavements listed above is of one of these four types of arrangement: Type A: Star-like squares as elaborate motif: nos. 13, 14, 15, 16, and 18.
Type B: Rotated, multiple pairs: nos. 2, 5, 7, and 17.
Type C: Star-like squares interlocking with saltires or as subsidiary features: nos. 1, 3, 6, 8, and 12.
Type D: Rotated, single pairs: nos. 4, 9, 10, and 11.
All pavements in group A feature large, enclosing circles.
There could be no clearer indication than this of the blending of the concentric circular geometric and the geometric diagonal or rotated linear designs.
Consequently, it is not surprising to find that none of these mosaics is assignable, confidently, to a period before 330 (or that all but no. 16 could be of the third quarter of the fourth century).
In arrangements of types B and D, the squares contribute to arrangements of which they are the diagnostic features, if not the theme.
As such they must be accounted a certain independence (of both the whole group of pavements with interlaced squares and of the more general group of diagonal and rotated linear designs to which this belongs).
Moreover, this independence (or, more correctly, this integrity) again suggests a particular period of production: probably the early mid-fourth century.
Certainly, they precede mosaics of type A, and are thus indicative of at least two individual phases of development.
Type C may have been present throughout — from the early to the late-fourth century — as elements in a number of contrasting designs (e.g. pI.
72, pI.
59, and pI.
70).
The Hare mosaic is late; the Tockington Park example is probably of the mid-fourth century; while the two pavements from Gloucester and Halstock may be of the early"or mid-fourth century.
Dating remains problematical and even if the implications of the four types are significant, the following insights into chronology are noteworthy.
3.3
As mentioned above, Lydney Park provides a terminus post quem of 367 for the mosaics excavated by Bathurst and King (pls. 79 and 80): a very late date which, recently, has been questioned.
It appears that the mosaic of room LI of the "abaton" — and presumably that of room L — could be earlier than this (Britannia XII (1981), 357; Britannia KIll (1982), 380).
In particular, a coin hoard from the baths suggests a date considerably before 367 for the patching of a mosaic which was already well-worn.
The baths at least, therefore, might predate the abaton — the opposite to what Wheeler concluded -and, more important the mosaics of both structures are assignable to a period before 367.
In the case of those from the bath-house this could mean a date before 325; for those of the abaton, especially that of room L, a later date might be appropriate.
All now remain difficult to assign to a period after c. 340,(a date which corresponds more closely with that of other mosaics possessing single pairs of rotated squares, see below).
The mosaic of room XVIII at Lydney has not yet provided such evidence for revision.
Like the "guest-house" itself, it (and associated mosaics) could be later than those of the abaton or bathhouse.
Indeed, a reasonable case can be made for accepting a date of between 340-370 for this mosaic (if not Wheeler's suggested dates) on the basis of stylistic comparisons with some other pavements with type A arrangements.
At Whittington Court, the crude mosaic of room 3 was assigned, on stratigraphic criteria, to the period 330-360 (T.B.G.A.S. LXXI, 21), with an emphasis of 360 rather than 330.
The pavement adjacent to the famous mosaic from Low Ham is of comparable quality and inspiration (pI.
76) to that at Lydney.
The Virgilian mosaic itself (Toynbee 1962, pI.
235) is datable, probably, to the mid-fourth century and certainly after 330 (Ralegh-Radford and Dewar 1952, 2): a period to which the mosaic of pI.
76 can be assigned also.
(If the mosaic was a product of a school of craftsmen based at Lindinis (Ilchester)— as seems likely — this might also suggest a mid-fourth century date).
Neither the Wemberham mosaic (pI.
55) nor the mosaic from North Leigh (pI.
63a) provides convincing evidence of date, or of details of decoration which are comparable with other mosaics in the region.
The former is undated but retained much of its rather unique floral decoration: an arrangement of star-like interlaced squares (one carrying right-angled "2" pattern, the other carrying chequers) enclosed by two concentric circles (one, again, with right-angled "2" pattern, the other carrying a single thick line).
Comparison with the date of other mosaics exhibiting a similar decoration of "2" pattern, i.e. the Charioteer mosaic, Rudston, Yorks., or the mosaic from Wynford Eagle, Dorset, again suggests a mid-fourth century date.
The latter pavement, from North Leigh, remains only in a sketch by Hakewill.
This shows a central, floral device, enclosed by a circle of simple guilloche,(which, in turn, is enclosed by an arrangement of star-like interlaced squares and an outer circle of crowstep matched with three-strand guilloche).
This mosaic provides even fewer indications of date than does that from Wemberham.
However, by virtue of its association with the saltire mosaic (pI.
61) it is datable to c. 340 (T.B.G.A.S. LXXXIX (1970), 76).
Mention has already been made of the type D arrangement from  room L of the abaton at Lydney.
This mosaic may now be considered as earlier than c. 340, a dating which accords well with that of other mosaics which also possess single pairs of rotated squares.
In comparison, the Kingscote mosaic (pI.
50), for example, exhibits a technical expertise and possesses many fine decorative features — both figural and motival — absent in the former.
But when discovered it was assigned by its excavators to the late-third or early-fourth century (Britannia VIII (1977), 413): a dating subsequently accepted by Neal (1981, no. 63) and Swain and Ling (Britannia XII (1981), 168: where the wall paintings from the same room as the mosaic are considered to be of late-third/early-fourth century date).
Johnson (1982, 47) has recently suggested this mosaic to be the work of an officina based at Lindinis, operative in the middle years of the fourth century.
Neal (loc. cit.) however, attributes to the mosaic "Corinian" affinities — notably, beige coloured background tesserae, as used at Woodchester — and, presumably, would place it at the border of the first and second quarters of the fourth century.
In light of both of these refinements, a third century date seems unlikely.
Perhaps the mosaic is correctly dated if assigned to a period of c. 300-330.
3.4
Another type D arrangement, the mosaic from Admiral's walk Cirencester (pI.
48), is very similar in structure to the Kingscote mosaic.
Indeed, it shares with it some elements of decoration, e.g. a band of wavecrest pattern around the central roundel.
However, the mosaic has motifs in the angles, i.e. a lotus bud, and a vine leaf with volutes, which differ from those at Kingscote,(where, in corresponding positions, one finds a thirty-two petalled floral device and a gadrooned cantharus).
In fact, the former motifs (from Cirencester) bear a greater resemblance to some of those in the mosaic of room XII, Tockington Park (pI.
60), which because of its association with one of the saltire mosaics (Brown et.
al.
1969, 243), cannot be assigned a date of before c. 325.
Thus, although the mosaics from Kingscote and Admiral's walk must be considered almost contemporary, that from Admiral's walk might be later.
*
The style of the mosaic in room L, Lydney, is paralleled most closely by that from Bromham, Wilts.,(pI.
54).
The quality and quantity of ornament is very similar, and, although the cantharus in the angle and the aquatic scenes adjacent to the design are absent, they are known in other mosaics at Lydney, e.g. a cantharus in the mosaic of room XLI (Wheeler 1932, pI.
XIXc), and an aquatic design in the cella (ibid., pI.
XIXa).
Bearing in mind the revised dates for Lydney, therefore, it is plausible to see all four designs of type D as before 350 and, in some instances, as nearer to 320.
For the most distinctive type of arrangement (type B) we have the least external evidence.
The mosaics from Cirencester — from Querns Lane (pI.
49) and the Avenue (pI.
56)— are impressive, as well as comparable, designs.
That from North Leigh (pI.
63b), meanwhile, is poorly recorded, but appears to exhibit the same, easily recognizable, display of four pairs of interlaced squares bordering a diminutive, central panel.
Both of the former two mosaics were attributed to the fourth century (entirely on stylistic grounds), and by virtue of its association with the saltire mosaic (pI.
61) the latter can be assigned a similar date (on grounds which are only slightly more convincing).
Only the pavement from the New Market Hall site, Gloucester, provides unequivocal evidence for a fourth century date, and this mosaic was in a fragmentary condition when discovered (McWhirr 1974, pI.
V).
3.5
It is inconceivable, however, that these pavements which have multiple, rotated configurations of squares are of a very different date from those with single, rotated arrangements.
Between-two mosaics from Cirencester (that from Admiral's Walk: pI.
48, and that from the Avenue: pI.
56) there is a notable similarity of lotus bud and ivy leaf motifs, which occupy the angles of the pavements.
There is even a small band of thorn pattern to the "bottom right" of the latter, which matches that of the former.
This affinity alone suggests that, like some examples of individual arrangements of squares, the multiple configurations are also of the second quarter of the fourth century.
Indeed, the similarity of some motifs in the Cirencester mosaic (pI.
56) to those of the mosaic from Tockington Park (pI.
60) i.e. the heart-shaped petals and the guilloche knot enclosed by a sixteen-petalled rosette, as at North Leigh, suggests a date in the middle of the fourth century.
The latter site could be something of a watershed, possessing as it does an example of a type B arrangement, one of the earliest examples of star-like squares enclosed by a circle, a saltire design, and a simple geometric meander (pI.
64).
These might be indicative of periodic visitations by individual mosaicists.
More likely is the possibility that a group of craftsmen with a varied repertory worked at North Leigh, for a client who had a knowledge of fashionable geometric designs.
Excepting the Hare mosaic, all arrangements of type C show starlike interlaced squares as part of an all-over design with half or full saltires.
Between the latter, moreover, there is a notable similarity of motif, especially between those from Halstock (pI.
70) and Tockington Park (pI.
60)— which have in common pelta-urns with convolutes (in two of the angles at Tockington, on the arms of the saltire at Halstock) and a sixteen-petalled rosette which encloses a guilloche knot (at the centre of interlaced squares in both mosaics).
In addition, the Halstock mosaic bears a close resemblance to the mosaic from Broad Street, London (pI.
77).
This also possesses veneered rhomboids' and rhomboids with filled triangles (both on the arms of saltires) as well as the particular floral device which comprises four heart-shaped petals with convolutes (at the centre of  some of those roundels enclosed by squares).
Moreover, the mosaic from London also depicts Bacchus, riding on a leopard a scene.
This scene is repeated in a mosaic from the New Market Hall site, Gloucester.
As another type C arrangement indeed, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the latter is of a similar period to that of the London mosaic.
Certainly, veneered rhomboids and a distinctive squat urn"with gadroons (Neal 1981, no. 52) are notable features of both.
3.6
More is said of these specific affinities in section 4.8, below.
For the moment, however, it is pertinent to consider the approximate date of each.
The Tockington example has been described, already, as a mosaic of the second quarter of the fourth century, perhaps of c. 340.
In fact, of the four examples with saltires, it might be the last type C arrangement, with the mosaic from the site of Bon Marche, Gloucester,(which shows a comparable simplicity of motif and mediocre draughtsmanship), being attributable to an approximately similar period.
As at Tockington, the type C arrangement at Halstock is associated with another mosaic which displays a saltire design,(although it should be noted that the latter appear to be of a finer standard than the former).
This subtlety and expertise — often reminiscent of the skill employed at Chedworth (pls. 57a and 57b)— suggests "a date nearer the beginning than the end of the second quarter of the fourth century: c. 325 rather than c. 340, i.e. well before those mosaics in Dorset which are attributable to a" Durnovarian"school (Smith 1969, 113-118).
If so, the mosaics from Broad Street and the New Market Hall site must be assigned a date before that of Tockington Park.
Such a datIng of the interlaced square and saltire arrangements (type C arrangements) accords well with what we know of the continental parallels.
To cite the now familiar evidence of mosaics from (soil it is difficult to believe that the mosaic which features Bacchus in a square central panel amid an arrangement of saltires and interlaced squares (Parlasca 1959, pI.
66), i.e. a type C arrangement, is later than c. 320 (it is more likely to be of the later decade of the third century).
The superior quality of this mosaic -like many mosaics in when compared with those in Britain, is self-evident.
It seems premature, therefore, to see this, like the panel of a mosaic in the Palastplatz (Smith 1969, 116), as a result of influence from Britain.
Indeed, it remains a possibility that the mosaics of Gaul influenced the development of pavements in Britain: this is even more applicable to the pavements with type C and B arrangements than it is to the Orpheus mosaics and their associated geometric panels.
Even with this particular aspect (interlaced square designs) of a widespread tradition (diagonal and rotated linear designs) therefore, it is possible to see different degrees of contrivance and appreciation: from the distinctiveness of the arrangements with four configurations of squares, through the apparent acceptance of single rotated and type C arrangements, to the stylisation of the star-like designs enclosed by circles.
Sometimes, where a rather mundane design was requested, e.g. the mosaic from the Bon Marche site, Gloucester, the mosaicist's client will have been ignorant of its  significance.
On other occasions, where distinctive types of design were produced, e.g. the mosaics of type B, both client and craftsman will have been unaware of the mosaic's wider and more general relationships.
It would have been possible to have considered the Orpheus mosaics and a group of saltire mosaics, at the level of substantial affinity: in both instances there are similarities of content and decoration, where these similarities are not strong enough to suggest the presence of even a single craftsman who worked on more than one of the comparable mosaics.
However, as a consideration of the full list of Orpheus and saltire mosaics in section 3, and then again in section 4, would have been repetitive, mosaics which are closely related (but not sufficiently close to be considered as related at this level of affinity) will be examined in the preamble to a discussion of two putative, "integral groups" .
4.1 Integral Affinities
A list of the pavements of these two integral groups, whose-main features are (a) Orpheus mosaics, and (b) saltire arrangements, includes the following:(a)(i) Woodchester, mosaic A (Orpheus mosaic: pI.
43)(ii) Woodchester, mosaic H (Bonum Eventum mosaic: pI.
44 and Smith 1969, pI.
3.14)(iii) Withington, mosaic D (Orpheus mosaic: pI.
46)
(iv) Barton Farm (Orpheus mosaic: pI.
41)
(v) Stonesfield (Bacchus mosaic: pI.
47)
(vi) Chedworth, room 5 (Seasons mosaic: pI.
58b and Smith 1977, pI.
6.
VIIIb)
Many well-set, geometric mosaics can also be considered, along with these elaborate mosaics: these are mainly of the designs visible in pls. 44 and 45 (at Woodchester and Withington)— some of which are, again, conspicuous at Stonesfield.
(V.C.H. Oxon.
I (1939), pI.
XXIV) and in the border of the Orpheus mosaic from Barton Farm (pI.
41).
At Chedworth, however, the simple geometrics of rooms 11 and 14 appear to be of a different quality to those portrayed in Lysons' engravings of plates 44 and 45; although here (and also at North Leigh: pI.
64) the pattern of swastika meander, relieved by squares, is characteristic of mosaic D, Woodchester.
In all, at least thirty-five geometric and other simple designs have to be examined in this section, and this does not include those from Newton St. Loe, or other relatable but debased designs, e.g. that of room 22, Chedworth or the radial arrangements of Lydney (Wheeler, 1932, pI.
XIXb) and Cirencester, XII, 2,(mosaic 9).
These are all examined in relation to the six elaborate mosaics listed above.
(b)(i) Ashcroft House, Cirencester (pI.
65).
(ii) Halstock, Dorset; room 2 (pI.
69).
(iii) Halstock, room 1 (pI.
70).
(iv) Broad Street, London (pI.
77).
(v) Bishopstone,"Herefs.
(V.C.H. Herefs.
I (1908), fig. 14).
(vi) Chedworth, Glos; room 10 (pI.
57a and 57b).
(vii) Cirencester, XIV, 2 room 4 (Neal 1981, no. 22).
(viii) Tockington Park, room 9 (pI.
59).
(ix) Tockington Park, room 12 (pI.
60).
(x) New Market Hall site, Gloucester (Neal 1981, no. 52).
(xi) North Leigh, Oxon; room 1 (pI.
61).
(xii) North Leigh.
(pI.
63b).
(xiii) The Avenue, Cirencester (pI.
56).
(xiv) Querns Lane, Cirencester (pI.
49).
(xv) Cirencester, VI, 1, room 3 (pI.
48).
(xvi) New Market Hall site, Gloucester (Ant.
J. LIV (1974), pI.
V. (xvii) Kenchester, Herefs.
(Jack 1916, pI.
23).
As in group (a) the pavements of group (b) are associated with some simple geometric patterns.
Here, however, the latter are fewer, with notable examples at Tockington Park (T.B.G.A.S. XII,(1888), pls.
V and VIII); Cirencester, building XIV, 2, corridor 5 (Neal 1981, no. 23); and Frocester Court, Glos.,(T.B.G.A.S. LXXXIX (1970), PI.
II).
Indeed, the large number of relatively sophisticated geometric arrangements, is notable.
As defined above (part I, section 2.4), integral affinity relates pavements which appear to be the work of at least one of the same group of craftsmen.
Sometimes, two pavements can exhibit an identity of many features — suggesting an almost identical workforce; on other occasions, e.g. where large numbers of mosaicists were employed (perhaps four or five craftsmen), the similarity of one pavement to another may not be immediately clear, and so relies upon an interpretation of technique and small details of design.
In addition to this direct, A-B, individual relationship, however, another type of relationship is possible at this level of affinity.
This is of the form A-BC (which would be meaningless at levels of more general affinity, and is excluded by the homogeneity of style at the unitary level), where some of the mosaicists responsible for mosaic A worked on B, and some of the mosaicists responsible for B worked on 6, but where few mosaicists worked on both A and C. At each step in such a "distributed relationship" some craftsmen are "lost" .
However, their characteristic methods have been observed and can be (i) recorded at subsequent steps in the sequence, or (ii) noted as the stylistically distinct but corporately ambiguous boundary of the "integral group" .
(Indeed, such a "fuzziness of boundary — where a number of pavements can be part of other groups (even integral groups)— seems an essential trait of the" school"of mosaic).
If the mosaics from Newton St. Loe are to be included at all in group (a), it will be as one step in a distributed relationship with the other Orpheus mosaics.
Numerous features of these pavements contrast with those of the main Orpheus designs: -(i) The animals in the Newton St. Loe Orpheus mosaic are agitated, not "entranced" as at Woodchester and Barton Farm.
Indeed, the trees which separate them are of different varieties and are, generally, more gracile than those at Woodchester (Neal 1981, no. 87).
(ii) Also, at Newton St. Loe, the animals are paired, not in procession, as in the other mosaics.
4.2
Thus, the trees which separate the beasts — on only five occasions, as omissions occur — at Newton St. Loe are situated between confronting pairs.
(iii) Furthermore, Orpheus himself is drawn very differently here, compared to the figure at Barton Farm (at Woodchester Orpheus does not occupy the central roundel, for Withington see below).
In the former he plays — with two fingers — a very large lyre with sound-box or rest; he looks to his left with a "cross- eyed" gaze, and his cloak falls, rather than blows, behind.
At Barton Farm, Orpheus looked to his right and runs very thick fingers across what appears to be more a grille than the strings of a lyre.
There are more telling differences, however:(iv) Errors of draughtsmanship are visible in the Newton St. Loe mosaic which contrast with the accurate execution of the Orpheus panels in all other Orpheus mosaics in the region.
The central "roundel" is not round; the outer, stencilled, circular band is squashed and poorly centred (thus effecting the irregular drawing of the band of superposed triangles); and it appears that two trees and one animal have been omitted.
(v) The mosaic also lacks the accomplished interlace (which is a feature of the Withington mosaic), the bordering panels (or traces of them, as in the border of perspective boxes at Barton Farm), and even a suggestion of the elegant concentric banding or colourful procession of birds visible in the other mosaics. (vi) Moeover, a close inspection of the panel containing Orpheus, at Newton St. Loe (pI.
39), shows the tesserae to be widely spaced (frequently with grout-filled gaps of c. 0.5 cms) and of greatly different sizes.
In the Barton pavement this is not so: in sensitive areas, e.g. the face of Orpheus, the tesserae are well selected and are half the size of those in a comparable position in the former.
It is difficult to believe, therefore, that any mosaicists employed in making the Orpheus mosaics at Woodchester or Barton Farm could have worked at Newton St. Loe.
As for the possibility that the Orpheus and other mosaics from Withington might be the midway step of a distributed relationship (between the former two and the latter)— this, too, seems unlikely.
Admittedly, the animals in the Withington mosaic are lively; but they are running not springing (as at Newton St. Loe), and are moving in one direction only.
Also associated with the Orpheus mosaic at Withington are geometric pavements, which feature interlaced circles (mosaic F), chequers (mosaic B), perspective boxes (mosaic C), and relieved swastika meander (mosaic E)— all of which are at present at Newton St. Loe (Rainey 1973, pI.
12b; plan in Som.
County Museum).
But, as Neal has noted (1981, no.87), these are very simple patterns on which it is difficult to base any conclusions regarding authorship.
Mosaics from the latter site, moreover, also included features which not only are without parallel at Withington but which recall other pavements, from Somerset and Dorset.
Examples of these are the confronting pairs of animals in the mosaics from Wellow, Som.
(V.C.H. Som.
I (1906), fig. 71) and Nunney, Som.
(ibid., fig. 77).
At Nunney, there is evidence (poorly recorded) of another Orpheus mosaic, where in a band bordering a -central square are confronting pairs of large mammals.
A bust of a female Tyche) was also depicted at Nunney, at the centre of a mosaic adjacent to the Orpheus mosaic.
Such a bust was a feature of the strip of mosaic between rooms 3 and 4 at Newton St. Loe (where it was bordered by a scroll pattern, comparable to the decoration either side of the chirho monogram in a pavement from Frampton, Dorset (Lysons I (1813), iii, pI.
V).
A third feature of the mosaic of room 5, Newton St. Loe, is absent from the geometric mosaics which are associated with other Orpheus mosaics in the western part of the country.
This is a border of superposed, right-angled triangles,"which recalls those of pavement B, Pitney (V.C.H. Som.
I (1906), fig. 86) and the pavement from Olga Road, Dorchester (P.D.N.H.A.S. XXI (1900), f. p. 162).
Indeed, at Newton St. Loe, when considering the absence of some conventional attributes of the western Orphic and associated geometric pavements (and the presence of some notably contrasting characteristics), it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the mosaics were influenced as much by developments to the south as to the north.
The presence of superposed triangle borders and trees (like those of the Newton St. Loe Orpheus), at Withington, are notable here.
When considering the skewed draughtsmanship of a possible "Durnovarian" addition, at Withington (Smith 1969, 113), it is as well to remember the poor drawing of the design at Newton St."Loe.
It appears that styles obtaining in the south could have affected both of these mosaics, not only as subsequent amendments but as original contributions.
Recently, in fact, a school of mosaicists serving thee area around Ilchester has been proposed (Mosaic 8 (1983), 5; where the term officina is preferred).
It may be premature to assign the Newton St. Loe mosaic to such a school: indeed, given the vagueries of stylistic relationships in this region it might be rash.
Certainly, however, the Newton St. Loe Orpheus mosaic is not a convincing candidate for inclusion in integral group (a).
The mosaic appears to be part of a mixing of style, subject and arrangement which is probably of mid-fourth century date.
This is not unreasonable when one considers the period of another mosaic, depicting Orpheus, i.e. the Littlecote mosaic (pI.
71), which is dated to c. 360 (Walters and Phillips 1980, 6).
However, in the sequence proposed by Smith (1969, 100): Newton St. Loe Withington Barton Farm Woodchester the Withington pavement was placed after the Newton St. Loe mosaic, and both were considered as works of the late-third century.
The Barton Farm Orpheus, because of its association with the sealed coin of Allectus (Powell 1919, 71; T.B.G.A.S. LXX (1951), 51-4) was the pivot of the sequence; while the great pavement from Woodchester was the latest and finest mosaic of the group.
Not only is the Newton St. Loe pavement dated a good 30-40 years earlier than has been suggested above, the Withington mosaic is later than the former and earlier than the Barton Farm and Woodchester examples (as an increasing elaboration of design is accepted as the criterion by which these developments are best understood).
4.3
In the Withington mosaic (pI.
46) numerous features contrast with those of the mosaics of Barton Farm and Woodchester. (i) Instead of an inner, concentric band containing birds, the former has two narrow bands along two sides of the guilloche frame.
(ii) The trees, at Withington, also show more branches (each of which has a large calyx at the tip),"and the animals run around the inner roundel in an almost frenzied motion.
(iii) The absence of an inner, concentric band produces a more open arrangement, wherein the trees are taller, the animals less restricted, and where the design suggests a radial movement (which, with regard to the"fully radial arrangements of mosaics showing Orpheus, at Littlecote and Winterton, Lincs., both dated to periods after 350, is not without chronological significance).
However, in the absence of much evidence for the quality of tessellation at Withington (some fragments of mosaic D are preserved in the British Museum), significant stylistic affinities still indicate that one or two craftsmen working here had also worked on the Barton Farm and Woodchester mosaics, i.e. suggesting an integral relationship.
(i) The elaborate form of the large guilloche circle and its skilfully executed junction with the frame of the mosaic is reminiscent of the circle of chain-guilloche at Barton Farm.
Both mosaics also possess outer borders of relieved swastika meander. (ii) There are similarities between the birds in both mosaics, especially the peacock which, in both instances, is shown (as at Woodchester) with a long, closed tail.
Other squat, duck-like birds are comparable to those at Barton Farm; indeed, whereas the animals in these mosaics appear to be of quite different styles, it seems that the draughtsman responsible for the birds at Barton Farm was also responsible for those at Withington.
This is precisely the degree of stylistic affinity which is missing when one compares the Orpheus mosaics of Withington and Newton St. Loe.
For the former, it suggests an integral relationship with those from Barton Farm, Woodchester and Stonesfield.
The latter pavements, admittedly, share a number of features which, together, indicate a much greater degree of affinity: similar acanthus scroll and arrangement of designs at Stonesfield and Woodchester, or the almost identical styles of the animals at Woodchester and Barton Farm.
The latter similarities, in fact, can be interpreted as unitary affinities (section 5.1).
At Withington it is possible that we are dealing with a part of this workforce.
As mentioned above, the pavements of this integral group — and also the pavements of Newton St. Loe — still pose two important problems:(i) What is the chronological distance between them, and (ii) in what order were they laid.
(i) Without external evidence of date, the period of a mosaic is always arrived at by an extrapolation from the style of other pavements.
This is a procedure founded upon a general estimate of the rate of development of stylistic features.
In other regions, e.g. Dorset or North Yorks., a period of c. 20-30 years usually appears long enough to account for the major part of a feature's development,(this is possibly the working life of an individual craftsman).
There are no indications that such a formula is inapplicable to the mosaics of Woodchester, Barton Farm, Stonesfield and Withington.
Indeed, considering the dating  of later, Orpheus mosaics in the north of England (part IV, section 3.2, where the radial arrangement of the Tyche mosaic from Brantingham, is also dated to a period after 330) and the date of the Barton pavement, i.e. c. 300-320, such duration seems likely.
The implication that a period of twenty or"so years separates the Woodchester and Withington pavements (Smith 1969, 100) seems reasonable.
(ii) The question of the order of these developments is more problematical.
Because there is.little, if any, evidence of mosaics of the late-third century in Britain, it has been customary to assign the first mosaics of this diagnostic Orpheus sequence to this period (see above).
The sequence usually begins c. 275 and, through successive elaborations of the original Orphic design, is seen to reach a climax at Woodchester.
The sequence can be extended as far back as 275 only by including the Newton St. Loe Orpheus as the first, innovative mosaic.
The Withington mosaic is considered an elaborate version of this format (datable to c. 290) leading to the Barton mosaic (with its numismatic evidence) of c. 300, and thence to the other pavements in the group.
The possible movement of a mosaicist from this region to Trier is also a conventional explanation (if a partial one) of the eventual fate of the mosaicists who worked on the finest and final pavement, at Woodchester: in the Palastplatz in Trier a panel similar to one of the geometric panels of the ambulatory of the Woodchester Orpheus was found (Parlasca 1959, pI.
50).
This could, however, suggest too late a date for the work at Trier (for it is very unlikely to have been after 325), indeed, Parlasca (1975, 77) thinks the mosaicist could have travelled in the opposite direction.
In other areas too, it seems that the case for Woodchester as the final pavement of a sequence of elaborations "cuts with a double-edged blade" : at the beginning of the sequence, for example, it is difficult to understand how a twenty-five year long period of development had no other local influence.
It seems that the case for elaboration, and thus for the Withington-Barton Farm-Woodchester order of development, must stand or fall on the implications of the stylistic inter-relationships of the pavements themselves.
There is insufficient evidence to include the Newton St. Loe pavement within this group; it begs the question, therefore, to describe it as the example upon which subsequent pavements were based.
In turn, this seriously questions the position of the Withington mosaic as a mosaic of the late-third century (other mosaics in the area of Withington, e.g. Chedworth, Spoonley Wood, Whittington Court and Stonesfield, are almost certainly well into the fourth century), and precursory to that at Barton Farm.
A different principle of development — indeed, a reversal of the principle of increasing elaboration — seems more probable.
The high degree of stylistic affinity maintained between the pavements from Woodchester, Barton Farm and Stonesfield (section 5.1) does suggest the work of much the same group of craftsmen.
It is improbable that such a standardized arrangement of geometric mosaics as accompany the Orpheus pavements  at Withington and Newton St. Loe were laid before the formation of this workforce.
Moreover, if the Withington mosaic is to be associated with the work of this group (at the integral level) it must be as a parallel or subsequent development.
If such an exclusion of the Withington mosaic is accepted, It still remains a matter of conjecture as to which of the three closely related mosaics was earliest.
A principle of "stylisation" would suggest the Woodchester mosaic to be the earliest: a plan of designs and their arrangement, which was subsequently the "blueprint" for the Stonesfield, Barton Farm and other pavements.
Recently,(Mosaic 9 (1984), 7) a date of 300-320 has been proposed for the Woodchester mosaic.
There is no more evidence for the use of pattern books as regulators of design than there is for the existence of central workshops servicing definable territories.
However, to the examples in Britain of pavements which suggest a reliance on plans or drawings, e.g. the Virgilian mosaic from Low Ham (Smith 1969, PI.
3.5, and form of "possible drawing: pl.3.6) and the Venus mosaic from Rudston, E. Yorks.,(part IV, section 3.3), can be added the" ceiling"designs of Hinton St. Mary, Dorset (Painter 1976, 50) and Horkstow (pI.
97).
From this viewpoint, we are reminded that the complexity and clear definition of designs such as those of Woodchester, Barton and Stonesfield, would have been hard to maintain without the use of some kind of illustration.
The repetition of many geometric patterns at Withington and Newton St. Loe is notable.
At Woodchester and, to a lesser extent, at Stonesfield, we find such a variety of motif and patterning that the pavements themselves could well mirror a page (or the page) of design: at Woodchester especially, they comprise an array from which all other instances of closely related pavements could have been taken.
If the Woodchester mosaics are the earliest examples of integral group (a), all the pavements of Woodchester, Barton and Stonesfield will be chronologically close, and are probably datable to the first twenty years of the fourth century (in the sequence Woodchester Barton-Stonesfield-?
Chedworth).
This, of course, relies on a liberal interpretation of the coins from Barton Farm.
The context of these coins (in a 6 "layer of dead vegetable matter, rubble and sand, on top of a 12" concrete foundation, i.e. not within the 3"cement bed of the pavement), however, does support such an interpretation.
Furthermore, this scheme of developments, where it accounts more satisfactorily for the relationship of the Barton, Woodchester and Stonesfield mosaics with the stylised and scattered members of integral group (a)— see below — also implies an initial stimulus to mosaic building.
Indeed, although the evidence is only circumstantial, the history of mosaics in this region is one of apparently wealthy villa owners commissioning groups of capable craftsmen.
It is worthwhile recalling here that the great pavement at Woodchester is the largest domestic mosaic north of the Alps.
Therefore, if any mosaic in the region is to be considered a focus of widespread foreign contacts this must surely be it.
A large number of the mosaics which appear to indicate fairly  specific affinities with the mosaics of sites mentioned above are geometric pavements.
As such, however, they are amenable to duplication, and care must be taken, therefore, when considering the closeness of their relationship with the geometric mosaics depicted in pls. 44 and 45.
It is important to differentiate between those mosaics which appear to be of a similar quality and character, as well as of the same, general appearance.
If this is not appreciated there is a danger of including pavements whose designs are not sufficiently diagnostic to permit specific stylistic comparison (or mosaics which are stylised and, therefore, stylistically removed from the main members of the group).
4.4 Other mosaics of Integral Group (a)
Some patterns, e.g. chequers, strips of swastika meander, and guilloche mat are common enough in the region but, nonetheless, can be difficult to relate to comparable forms from Withington and Woodchester.
In building XII, 2, Cirencester, for example, mosaics appear to be crude imitations of geometric patterns observed elsewhere.
Admittedly, the repetition of such similar patterns together cannot be coincidental but, as with the mosaics from Newton St. Loe, this repetition is not always best explained by the presence of the same craftsmen at a different site.
Other patterns do provide, however, an opportunity to recognize such integral stylistic affinity.
Of these, relieved swastika meanders (as all-over designs), some concentric, circular arrangements, and patterns of interlaced circles are the best examples.
The latter, outside Woodchester and Withington, are less common than might be expected: some notable examples occur at Rockbourne (Morley-Hewitt 1978, pI.
III) and Rudston, E. Yorks.,(Neal 1981, no. 70), and at Holcombe, Devon, a scheme is based on interlaced circles (P.D.A.E.S. 32 (1973-4), pI.
XXVIII).
Within the region however, the only convincing examples are at Chedworth, Glos., room Il (Goodburn 1979, pi.
7.1) and Bancroft, Bucks.,(Green 1975, pls.la and lb).
The latter, again, might be too crude to be included; even at Chedworth the workmanship is inferior to that of the elaborate mosaic of room 5,(pi.
58b).
Interlaced circles also adorn the border of a saltire mosaic from Cirencester (pi.
65).
This may offer some evidence for a possible overlap of integral groups (a) and (b): for the Ashcroft mosaic is certainly one of the most impressive saltire arrangements (the constituents of group (b)).
Like the mosaic from Chedworth, the Ashcroft mosaic is not accurately dated, but in its stylistic relationship with other saltire pavements it too appears to be of the early-fourth century (section 4.8), probably between the years 320 — 340, i.e. of a comparable period to the mosaics of Chedworth, phase 4.
Some affinities between mosaics with concentric, circular arrangements have already been discussed (section 2.2).
In most instances these are not close or significant enough to merit comparison at this level of affinity: the mosaic of room LXIV, Lydney (Wheeler 1932, pi.
XIXb); mosaic 9, of building XiI, 2, Cirencester (Neal 1981, no. 30); and that of the panel above the Hare mosaic (pi.
72).
Mosaic 9 may, in fact, share some quite specific features with mosaic K, Woodchester (pi.
44), but the stylisation of these in the former — as in the simple, geometric mosaics with which it is  associated — suggests considerable stylistic distance.
The quality of workmanship in the panel above the hare is nearer to that of the mosaics at Chedworth (room 5) and at Barton Farm but, in this instance, the canthari have no braiding at the "waist" , there is an almost continuous scroll pattern with convolutes, and the circular bands are very compressed (none of which is a feature of the circular arrangements at Barton Farm, Stonesfield, or Woodchester).
It is only because of their similarity with the mosaic found at Kingscote (pI.
50) that some of these mosaics can be considered seriously as part of integral group (a).
The Kingscote mosaic (see section 3.4) appears to date to the early years of the fourth century, while the technique employed (especially in the head of Venus) is reminiscent of that in the figure of Orpheus at Barton Farm (pI.
42).
Coloured backgrounds, a feature of the Kingscote mosaic, are also used at Chedworth (room 5) and Woodchester (Neal 1981, no. 63).
In addition, the Kingscote pavement shares with mosaic 9 a similar arrangement and a border of relieved swastika meander; and like the Lydney mosaic it has a circular band of scroll pattern, while"the curving scrolls with petals and volutes are best mirrored in both of the panels which lie above the Hare mosaic.
In spite of these affinities, however, it should be remembered that the Kingscote mosaic itself is assigned only tentatively to integral group (a): it could overlap with, or be considered part of, integral group (b).
Johnson (loc. cit.) indeed, makes a good case for the mosaic as a product of a group of mosaicists based at Ilchester — an argument which, even if not accepted in detail (section 4.8), reminds us of the important affinities between this mosaic and others to the south.
The Kingscote mosaic itself, like those of rooms 5, 11 and 14 at Chedworth, could lie at a stylistic crossroads'.
It would be ambitious, therefore, on the basis of their similarities with this mosaic, to include the basic concentric circular arrangements from Cirencester or Lydney.
With relieved swastika meanders however, some examples of affinity with comparable mosaics from sites possessing Orpheus pavements is apparent.
The mosaics of room 24, North Leigh (pI.
64) and room 5, Chedworth, possess meanders which are more elaborate than those of mosaics B and D at Woodchester or mosaic E at Withington.
Further, the bordering strips of acanthus scroll and relieving squares of guilloche mat (at Chedworth), or the swastika-peltae with guilloche knots (at North Leigh) are prominent features of other mosaics at Woodchester.
At North Leigh the relieving insets of guilloche etc. appear to be simpler than those at Chedworth.
The guilloche of the outer border also seems to be of thicker strands than the three-strand guilloche of the latter.
The Chedworth mosaic also possesses an outer border of continuous swastika meander.
Set against these differences however, is the presence, in both, of crowstep pattern and swastika-peltae (in the central panel at Chedworth), as well as an arrangement of concentric.
borders and rectangular strips of decoration adjacent to the main design.
It is difficult to believe  therefore, that one of these mosaics was not influenced by the other.
Moreover, given the striking similarity between the seasons, octagonal arrangement from Chedworth and mosaic H from Woodchester (Smith 1969, 101), it seems almost certain that the seasons mosaic was the product of craftsman who had worked at the latter site.
Members of integral group (a): Woodchester, all mosaics listed in appendix F Withington, all mosaics listed in appendix F Stonesfield: a pavement featuring perspective boxes a pavement of perspective box design, with a panel of relieved swastika meander the Bacchus mosaic Barton Farm Orpheus mosaic (with lozenge pattern border) North Leigh, room 24: all-over relieved swastika meander Chedworth: room 5: seasons mosaic and adjacent panel of relieved swastika meander room 11: pattern of interlaced circles room 14: pattern of interlocking peltae Kingscote mosaic, Venus mosaic Ashcroft Houses, saltire pavement with border pattern of interlaced circles
Due in part to light shed by recent discoveries (Ant.
J XLV (1965), pI.
XXXIlIa; T.B.G.A.S. LXXXIX (1970), pI.
II) it now seems reasonable to postulate a second group of integral affinities for the region.
4.5 Integral Group (b)
In general there appears to be little significant overlap, either stylistically or in terms of distribution, between pavements of groups (a) and (b).
A saltire mosaic is known from Stonesfield (Rainey 1973, pI.
16a) but, if drawn accurately, this would appear to be a stylised version of more elegant examples.
The saltire mosaic from Ashcroft Houses, Cirencester, also suggests some affinity with the geometric decoration of mosaics at Woodchester and Withington (see above), and yet, set against such comparisons, is the complete absence from the latter sites of arrangements of interlaced squares or saltires.
Many mosaics of group (b) appear to be later than those of group (a), although in some instances mosaics of each might be contemporary (i.e. at Chedworth and North Leigh), and, occasionally, group (a) mosaics appear to be later (if a later, fourth century, date for the Withington mosaic is accepted) than some of group (b).
There can be little doubt that many of the mosaics in group (b) are very closely related.
It is probably the most convincing integral group in the country, for although many of the similarities between the mosaics are no more (and frequently less) significant than those of Woodchester and Stonesfield, there are many more moderate affinities between what are fairly sophisticated arrangements.
When considered in the context of levels of affinity obtaining between other mosaics in Britain, the degree of similarity in the group is exceptional.
One of the most easily recognizable arrangements is that of four pairs of interlaced squares (type B in section 3).
These occur twice at Cirencester (The Avenue: pI.
56; and Querne Lane: pI.
49), where they possess frames and"squares of simple guilloche, single petals of ivy (or lotus bud in the Avenue mosaic) to decorate the angles, and a motif based on four heart-shaped leaves.
Other examples, from the New Market Hall site, Gloucester (Ant.
J. LIV (1974), pI.
V) and from a room at North Leigh (pI.
63b) are also-probably related to the former at an integral level of affinity.
At North Leigh an important saltire mosaic was discovered (see below), and the one remaining flower of the Gloucester mosaic is reminiscent of those in two of the semi-roundels of pI.
56.
Some features of another mosaic, again from Cirencester, can also be compared with those of the pavement from the Avenue.
These are the lotus bud in the angles and the thorn pattern border of the pavement from Admiral's walk (pI.
48).
4.6
However, together, these pavements are too few and too poorly recorded to be considered the diagnostic mosaics of this group.
It is from Chedworth, a site which provides evidence of some mosaics of integral group (a), that one of the earliest saltire designs is known.
In contrast to the comments (above) on pavements with four pairs of interlaced squares, this mosaic can be considered one of the first examples of a distinctive saltire arrangement: an arrangement which has pelta-urns (with bases facing away from the central roundel) on each arm.
4.7
Such designs are also known from other sites in the region, i.e. building XIV, 2, room 4, Cirencester (Neal 1981, no. 22), North Leigh, room 1 (pls. 61 and 62), and Tockington Park, Glos., room 9 (pI.
60).
There are other saltire designs, indeed there are other mosaics which share stylistic traits with the saltire arrangements, but all of these will be considered below.
In room 10 at Chedworth, a square mosaic enclosed by a relieved swastika meander has a central roundel which contains a cantharus.
The roundel is "supported" by the intrusion of large triangles into the field, three of which contain distinctive motifs.
Between these triangles lie the four arms of the saltire, all of which seem to have been divided into three zones: two lozenges enclosing pentagonal devices with two heart-shaped petals, and a pentagonal area which contains a pelta-urn.
One of the most notable features of this mosaic is its.
variable quality of draughtsmanship and execution.
Along one of its sides the swastika meander breaks down into a confused key pattern.
The craftsman was, presumably, attempting a relieved meander of three linked swastikas at each corner, but this is never achieved (although the work to the "right" is fairly neat: pI.
57a).
Excavation beneath this mosaic has shown the mortar beneath the central -roundel to be of a different character to that used elsewhere in the pavement (Goodburn pers. comm.): the overall picture, therefore, suggests two workmen, or (less probably given the remarkable variety of the meander) one workman using "acquired" sections of prefabricated mosaic.
Of the motifs, the presence of a bird (apparently pecking at a sprig) is significant, for it does not occur in any other saltire mosaic in the region.
Indeed, in group (b) figured work in general is uncommon.
It is to"be seen in designs from Broad Street, London (pI.
77) and the New Market Hall site, Gloucester (Neal 1981, no. 52), but this is, clearly, of a different character.
Other notable motifs are the single buds which occupy two of the supporting triangles (the style of these is reminiscent of some leaves of the floral scroll of the Kingscote mosaic: pI.
50), and the cantharus which, apparently, has three gadroons, "S" -shaped handles with volutes and a braided waist.
The pelta-urns have a hollow body and a small, filled triangle at the base.
The middle point of the peltae are drawn-up to make lotus forms and two compact volutes of at least three bands.
The outer points of the peltae are drawn to a greater height than are the central features, and terminate in a volute with tendrils.
In the mosaic of building XIV, 2, Cirencester, the pelta-urns are of a comparable form to those at Chedworth.
Here, however, the peltae themselves do not appear to be hollow, and the volutes have only one band.
These motifs provide the best measure of affinity between this and the Chedworth mosaic, for the all-over arrangement frequently includes simplified motifs, e.g. fillings of guilloche mat and filled triangles, and includes features such as the flower with four heart-shaped petals, which are not comparable to motifs in the Chedworth mosaic.
Such comment, concerning motif, is also applicable to the pavement of room 9, Tockington Park.
Here, borders of wave-crest and thorn pattern are featured, along with a pyramid of small triangles in the half tilted-squares, and swastika lozenges on the arms of the saltire.
The peltae are hollow, as at Chedworth, although they are drawn now even less gracefully than their counterparts from building XIV, 2, Cirencester.
The arms of the pelta-urn are taken only so high as the central lotus form.
The four, independent, heart-shaped leaves of the central roundel, meanwhile, are similar to those of the central roundel of the pavement of interlaced squares (pI.
56).
Another pavement from Tockington Park (pI.
60), in fact, helps to emphasize the consistent but often indirect relationship between the mosaics of this group.
It exhibits other features found in the Avenue mosaic (e.g. the fan-flower of sixteen petals with a guilloche knot at its centre, and the lotus buds which occupy the angles of the pavements), and which are here associated with pelta-urns with volutes of two or three bands,(i.e. motif stylistically closer to those at Chedworth).
The all-over saltire pavement at North Leigh (pls. 61 and 62) shares some features of the mosaic of room 9, Tockington Park (pI.
59).
However, an examination of the floor (it rests in situ) shows that Hakewill's drawing is not entirely accurate (the pelta-urns for example , are too elongated); The pelta-urns now visible at North Leigh are more akin to those of the all-over pattern from Cirencester (see above)— another mosaic with guilloche mat filled tilted squares and at least one roundel which encloses a flower of four heart-shaped petals.
Stylistically, the pavement from North Leigh appears to be halfway between those of building XIV, 2, Cirencester (the all-over pattern) and the mosaic of room 9, Tockington Park.
Moreover, the panel at the top of the saltire arrangement of pI.
61 is instructive as to date.
The central device here (four peltae with tendrils, grouped around a guilloche knot) is paralleled in a fragmentary pavement at Frocester Court (T.B.G.A.S. LxxXIX (1970), pI.
II), dated to post 340.
The North Leigh mosaic, considering the sophistication of its design, might be earlier.
There are no such useful comparisons for the Chedworth mosaic.
However, the association of this saltire mosaic with a mosaic (of room 5) which is assignable to integral group (a), points to a date before c. 340 (and in view of the special features of this saltire mosaic, i.e. the figural work, and the work of different technical qualities, it could be nearer to 320).
Overall, therefore, this suggests a sequence of developments which begins at Chedworth, includes the mosaics of building XIV, 2, Cirencester and North Leigh, and becomes stylised after the work at Tockington Park.
Another saltire arrangement exhibits the motif of four peltae around a guilloche knot: the saltire mosaic from Ashcroft Houses, Cirencester (pI.
65).
On this occasion the peltae do not "hug" the guilloche knot (as they do at Frocester Court), and the tendrils are more elaborate.
As this mosaic also includes border work reminiscent of some patterns seen at Woodchester and Chedworth, it might, therefore, be earlier than the Frocester mosaic (dated to c. 340 or later), and the mosaic from North Leigh, room 1.
4.8
However, it is difficult to relate this mosaic with the sequence of saltire arrangements already discussed.
Admittedly, each arm of the saltire is divided into two lozenges (each decorated with simple floral motifs) and a pentagon, but here the motif which occupies the latter is more of a "squat urn" than a pelta-urn.
This device has four gadroons and short tendrils dropping from its small handles; the base comprises a bulb and triangle (pI.
67)— in contrast to the single triangle of the pelta-urns discussed above.
This notable motif occurs in a very similar form in another pavement from the New Market Hall site, Gloucester (Neal 1981, no. 52), where Bacchus sits on a leopard amid an arrangement of interlaced squares and half-saltires.
On this occasion the urn has two short sprays which terminate in single leaves, yet, stylistically, it remains similar to that of the Ashcroft House mosaic.
Interestingly, the Bacchus and Leopard mosaic also displays some affinity with the pavement of single, rotated interlaced squares (from Cirencester VI, 3: pI.
48).
As well as a comparable curved stretch of wavecrest pattern, in one of its angles it also has a single petal motif which is almost identical to that possessing voluted tendrils at Cirencester.
In addition to these modest connections with the pavement from Gloucester, however, the latter also possesses a structure and character which are remarkably similar to those of the mosaic from Kingscote (PI.
50): a mosaic which shows some affinities with the  mosaic of room 5, Chedworth (see section 4.4 pp. 66-67).
The date of the Kingscote mosaic (section 3.4 pp. 56-57) indeed could be comparable to that of the mosaic of room 10, Chedworth.
It appears that a string of connections can be made between the saltire pavements of the Ashcroft site and Chedworth.
Clearly, these are tenuous: they rely consistently on small stylistic similarities between consecutive pavements.
However, they almost certainly signify a distributed relationship with those mosaics of the sequence which includes the North Leigh and Tockington Park saltire arrangements.
Indeed, some of the features which suggest this string of connections also lead one to a second, main sequence of saltires — a sequence which has many traits in common with each of the pavements so far discussed, and which puts the development of this integral group into perspective.
As with the Bacchus and Leopard mosaic and one mosaic of building VI, 3, Cirencester, the period of the pavements of this second sequence is unclear.
The latter might be comparable in date to the Kingscote mosaic, but as that itself can only be assigned tentatively to c. 325, this association must be considered inconclusive.
4.9
Stylistically, a preliminary examination is revealing.
Both the floral scroll of the Kingscote pavement, and the squat urns of both the Ashcroft and Bacchus and Leopard mosaics, are paralleled in mosaics from Halstock, Dorset.
In the mosaic of room II (pI.
69) two strips of scroll decoration — down the longest sides of the pavements — are drawn lightly and feature heart-shaped petals.
These petals are not exactly comparable to those at Kingscote, but they are similar to that in one of the angles of the mosaic from VI, 3, Cirencester,(pI.
48).
More notable, however, is yet another minor variation of the squat urn.
The base comprises a single filled triangle (unlike the example from Ashcroft House) and at the rim possesses neither the handles of the Ashcroft mosaic, nor the sprays of the Bacchus and Leopard mosaic: instead, it has an arrangement of two small ivy leaves, linked by tendrils to a small rhomboid.
However, the similarity between these motifs is sufficiently close to suggest the work of the same craftsman.
Moreover, this mosaic, unlike the Ashcroft House mosaic, also features a variety of pelta-urn, pyramids of triangles, and guilloche knots flanked by two petals: all motifs conspicuous in the sequence of saltire mosaics which included the designs of XIV, 2, room 4, Cirencester, and North Leigh, room 1.
The pelta-urns appear nearer to those of room 10, Chedworth, for they have comparable volutes and lotus forms, although they lack the simple triangular base.
The flowers of another mosaic from Halstock (pI.
70) also emphasize similar relationships.
They include the fan-flower with a guilloche knot at its centre (as in the Tockington Park pavement: pl.60).
The high standard of workmanship at Halstock might indicate that the pavements here were, however, somewhat earlier than those at Tockington Park or North Leigh.
Although a very elaborate and well executed mosaic however, the saltire pavement — which in one form or another possesses most of the motifs typical of this integral group — is  certainly not an isolated example of such richness.
At Bishop-stone, Herefs.
(V.C.H. Herefs. 1 (1908), fig. 14) an arrangement of four saltires, forming a square field, supports a large, central, tilted square, which, in turn, encloses a single pair of interlaced squares and a roundel.
Here, strips of scroll pattern along the borders are reminiscent of the Halstock mosaic (pI.
70).
In two angles of the tilted squares squat urns with tendrils are resent — in style, most akin to those of the pavement from Ashcroft Houses (pI.
65).
Also worthy of note are the sixteen-petalled flowers with guilloche knots at their centres (occupying"two of the four roundels at the centre of the saltire), the swastika lozenges, the lozenges with two heart-shaped petals, and,— as at the New Market Hall site, Gloucester, Halstock (pI.
69) and Broad Street, London (pI.
77)— the presence of"veneered rhomboids
In fact the latter mosaic — an arrangement of star-like inter-laced squares and saltires — has many motifs which are common in other saltire mosaics.
The most convincing affinity however, is that of the squat urns,(which occupy at least three of the half-roundels along the borders) with those of the Bacchus and Leopard mosaic and the pavement from Halstock.
Those of the latter mosaic appear a little finer, with neat tessellation and delicate tendrils flowing from the rim.
Those of Bacchus mosaic however, are virtually identical to those at Broad Street.
This suggests the work of the same mosaicist: a craftsman who, if not solely responsible for the mosaics in Gloucester and London, was part of a group which had a very specific repertory.
This again raises the possibility (and the problem) of itinerance, for considerable distances separate these sites.
Given the variety of motif etc. in the Broad Street, Halstock, Bacchus and Leopard and Bishopstone pavements, it is difficult to imagine how they could have grown out of the Chedworth — Tockington sequence.
And yet these mosaics do show some notable similarities to the latter.
Both sequences indeed, seem to contribute to (or are represented by) a number of pavements which share the features of each, i.e. those with four configurations of interlaced squares (from Querns Lane and the Avenue); the Kingscote mosaic and the mosaic of building VI, 3, Cirencester; and the Ashcroft mosaic.
Some mosaics from each of the two main sequences have to be considered as approximately contemporary: these sequences, although developing partly in parallel, do seem to overlap, stylistically, at Chedworth.
It seems reasonable to conclude, therefore, that the North Leigh and Tockington mosaics originated with the arrival in Gloucestershire of craftsmen responsible for the mosaics at Halstock and Broad Street, London.
At least three examples of unitary affinity are apparent in this region and, therefore, three workshops may have existed in the early/mid-fourth century (all of which might have been partially contemporary).
5.0 Unitary Affinities
The first includes the pavements of Woodchester, Stonesfield, Barton Farm and probably the Seasons mosaic of Chedworth.
Between those of the former two sites (assuming the drawings of the mosaics are accurate) there are numerous indicators of a close stylistic  relationship.
(a) At Stonesfield, the decoration of the roundel (pI.
47) includes an acanthus scroll which is similar in style (and also originates from a mask of Neptune) to that at Woodchester.
Like many of the small circles of the geometric border at Woodchester, the decoration which encloses the roundel at Stonesfield also includes bands of thorn pattern.
"In the spandrels of this roundel the large birds (in their positioning at least) further recall the Woodchester mosaic and its four reclining nymphs. (b) Both mosaics also include an outer band of swastika meander relieved by only four narrow strips of guilloche mat.
At Stonesfield, the roundel which contains the large geometric panel is bordered by four lozenge swastikas, comparable to those in four of the Woodchester geometric panels.
(c) Chain-guilloche, series of swastika-peltae with guilloche knots, or four-strand guilloche are either present in the large mosaic at Woodchester or in the smaller, geometric panels of adjacent rooms: these are all repeated at Stonesfield, e.g. in mosaics B and C (V.C.H. Oxon I (1939), pI.
XXIV), where the main elements of the arrangements (perspective boxes and relieved swastika meander) are also present at Woodchester in mosaics D and B.
The Barton Farm mosaic is almost certainly by this group of craftsmen.
It also features perspective box/lozenge patterns, series of "mirrored" peltae (as at Stonesfield), and a border of swastika meander relieved with one short strip of guilloche mat.
The large mammals, especially the leopard and the tiger, are strongly reminiscent of the Woodchester Orpheus mosaic (in drawings the latter are often suggested to be finer but they are of comparable quality to those of the Barton mosaic).
It also possesses a circular wreath as one of its concentric bands, and the spandrels of the arrangement are filled with graceful acanthus sprays.
In contrast, the Chedworth Seasons mosaic is not certainly of this group, although many similarities with the mosaics of Woodchester make such an attribution attractive.
In addition to repeating the format of mosaic H, Woodchester, it includes almost identical representations of cupids (pI.
58b; Goodburn 1979, pI.
6; for the Woodchester mosaic see Lysons 1797, pI.
XIX).
Further, many features of its geometric and border decoration are familiar: continuous swastika meander, relieved, all-over swastika meander, and — most significantly — strips of acanthus scroll (with red, black and yellow leaves) which are almost identical to those enclosing the central roundels at Woodchester and Stonesfield.
Thus, at least four sites provide evidence for the existence of a workshop which specialised in the design of complex, concentric circular schemes and simple geometric designs.
Its most likely period of operation is between 300 and 325, whereafter some of its craftsmen appear to have been employed at Withington, and.
in the designing of mosaics which also share the features of other workshops, i.e. the Kingscote and Ashcroft Houses mosaics.
Two other examples of unitary affinity have been mentioned already, in the discussion of integral affinity (above).
The first includes pavements from Halstock (pls. 69 and 70), Broad Street, London (pI.
77) and probably those of the New Market Hall site, Gloucester (Neal 1981, no. 52) and Bishopstone, Herefs.
(V.C.H. Herefs.
I (1908), fig. 14).
The pavement of the Ashcroft Houses site  (pI.
65) might also be included.
All of these mosaics include examples of"squat-urns' (Bishopstone and Ashcroft) or bowls (Gloucester, London, and Halstock).
In addition, all but the Ashcroft mosaic feature a variety of "veneered rhomboid" — a diagnostic motif in Romano-British mosaic which suggests, for four pavements at least , the presence of the same craftsman,(similar rhomboids are visible, in stylised form, in the Hare mosaic (pI.
73); and of the fragmentary remains from Wiggington, Oxon.,(Neal 1981, no.78), a border pattern of adjacent calyxes similar to that of the Broad Street mosaic, is notable).
The origin of such an organised body presents problems, as the short discussion of types of interlaced square arrangement (section 3.6) intimates.
Further to the possibilities mentioned there however, note should be made also of features of many mosaics at Bignor, Sussex (Lysons (1817), vol.
III): features such as the bowls with tendrils and heart-shaped petals (in the spandrels of the circular arrangement in plate 38, and in the arrangement of interlaced squares, pI.
36).
It is too much to suggest that the "T R" of the Bignor mosaics (pI.
37) influenced the mosaics of this western workshop: many special and indeed alien (to Britain) features of the former, e.g. the subject of Ganymede and Zeus (pI.
38) or the series of gladiators (Lysons 1817, pI.
XVI; Rainey 1973, pI.
lOb), guarantee that further inquiry quickly devolves into open speculation.
It is difficult to maintain in this instance, however, that the arrangements of saltires in general, and the schemata of the Bignor mosaics in particular , preceded the development of such designs in other provinces.
The second of these examples includes the pavements from chedworth, room 10; Cirencester, XIV, 2, room 4; North Leigh, room 1, and Tockington Park and Frocester Court.
The presence in the Ashcroft mosaic of the same four-peltae device as is visible in the mosaics of Frocester and North Leigh suggests that it also might be included, but in its neat execution and possession of a form of "squat-urn" it is better to consider it a product of the former unitary group.
The main features of the remaining pavements are as follows: sixteen-petalled flowers with guilloche knots at their centres; flowers with four heart-shaped petals where the interspaces of the petals are drawn out into stylised lotus buds; and, most characteristically, pelta-urns with filled triangle bases, lotus tips, and tendrils with volutes.
The workshop probably has its origins a little later than the saltire/interlaced square workshop already mentioned; indeed, it could have been a product of the latter's contact with the later phases of the "Orpheus workshop" in c. 325.
5.3
Contrary to the belief that the fourth century mosaics of this region are the products of consecutive phases of the same school of mosaicists, it now seems reasonable to assume one specific and one more general trend of mosaic building, with many chronological as well as stylistic overlaps.
The specific trend features mosaics of circular-concentric configuration, whereas the general one features  mosaics of relatively complex, strictly axial geometries.
A third group of pavements, classified at the level of sequential affinity, i.e. pavements of simple geometrical designs, are distributed between both of the former.
6.0 Summary
An important feature of the general trend is the number of mosaics which exhibit designs of interlaced squares (section 3.1).
These are widely distributed within the region.
Between the forms which accommodate features diagnostic of an individual workshop and those which show only a structural similarity to other mosaics in the region, a picture of the developments of patterns in the wider context of south-western England emerges.
At the integral level of stylistic affinity — the level at which "schools" of mosaicists are assumed Co be discernable — two separate schools are recognised.
One, which includes mosaics of the more specific trend, features many neatly executed arrangements from each of only a handful of sites.
These arrangements, which range from splendid pavements with naturalistic displays to simple geometric mosaics, include most of those attributed to the original Corinian school (Smith 1965).
However, the mosaics of Newton St. Loe are now excluded, and as a consequence of rejecting the principle of increasing elaboration of Orpheus designs, the Withington mosaics are postulated as pavements of the second quarter of the fourth century,(section 4.3).
This school, datable to 300-350, overlaps with a second school which includes most pavements of the more general trend, datable to c. 320-350 (section 4.9).
Unlike the former however, the latter probably comprised two workshops, one of which was composed of itinerant craftsmen ranging over much of southern England.
In decoration and linear format, this school appears to represent more of a native tradition; whilst the former, apparently based upon a single workshop (and its subsequent contraction) appears to be organised more deliberately.
Fourth Century Mosaics from Yorkshire and Humberside
There are far fewer mosaics of fourth century date in this region than there are in the West Country.
Moreover, many mosaics in the west are among the most impressive in Britain — the Woodchester Orpheus mosaic, the Stonesfield Bacchus mosaic, and the Chedworth Seasons mosaic are notable even in a continental context — whereas those from Yorkshire and the banks of the Number are more limited (if often ambitious) designs.
With such differences in the quantity and quality of mosaics one might expect different levels of stylistic affinity — and combinations of these levels — to be prominent.
Indeed, a close examination of the mosaics from Yorkshire and Humberside seems to reveal notable contrasts with the west in the number and importance of individual workshops as well as in the significance of planned developments (i.e. strategies of mosaic building desired by clients or, apparently, followed by mosaicists).
In particular, the evidence suggests more numerous and more significant substantial affinities, and a dearth of the close but extensive relationships (integral affinities) which are usually indicative of"schools' of mosaicists.
Individual sites, meanwhile, appear to show very little stylistic diversity between their mosaic remains: each pavement is usually relatable to a specific instance of unitary affinity, which in turn suggests the existence of many, small, relatively independent workshops.
Also of note is a sequential or gradual development of designs featuring a distinctive geometric (comprising concentric, linear bordering, swastika meanders, and simple, single motifs).
Thirty-one mosaics are listed below which together account for almost all significant remains of fourth century mosaic in the north east.
The mosaic from Roxby, Lincs.,(Fowler 1818, no. 3), has not been included as it shows more certain affinities with pavements in southern Lincolnshire and the area around Water Newton, Cambs.,(Smith 1969, 108).
Other omissions include small fragments of mosaic and mosaics which were very poorly recorded.
These will be discussed only with reference to pavements of the main sample.
1.1
The latter included at least six mosaics from Aldborough; five from York; five from Rudston, East Yorks.; four from Winterton, Lincs.; and four from Brantingham, Humbs.
Some sites however, e.g. Malton, North Yorks.; Hovingham, North Yorks.; Beadlam, North Yorks.; and Dalton Parlours, West Yorks.; provide remains of only one significant mosaic.
1.
The "Muses mosaic" : pI.
81, after Smith 1852, PI.
XVIII; see Neal 1981, no. 3. 2.
The "Wolf and Twins mosaic" : pI.
85, now in Leeds City Museum; see Smith 1977, pI.
611a. 3.
Remains from Borough Hill: pI.
82, after Smith 1852, pI.
XIX. 4.
Fragments of guilloche; pI.
81, after Smith 1852, pI.
XII; see Neal 1981, no. 4. 5.
Corridor mosaic: pI.
84, after Smith 1852, pI.
XIV.
6.
Various fragments: pI.
83, after Smith 1852. 7.
Beadlam, North Yorks.: Neal 1981, no. 9.
Aldborough
8.
Room I: Neal 1981, no. 88. 9.
Room II: pI.
99, now in Museum of Transport and Archaeology, Hull; see Y.A.J. XXXVII (1948-51), fig.
IV.
10.
The "Tyche mosaic" : "pls. 98 and 99a; for full drawing see Neal 1981, no. 12. 11.
Corridor fragment: Neal 1981, no. 13. 12.
Dalton Parlours, West Yorks.: pI.
96: design of mosaic in apse of the larger room now displayed in Yorkshire Museum, York; for plan see Y. Phil.
Soc.
Proc.
I (1849-54), pI.
7. 13.
Harpham, Labyrinth mosaic and other fragments: pls. 86 and 87; T.E.R.A.S.XIII (1907), fig. 3. 14.
Horkstow, Humbs.: pI.
97; Fowler 1818, no.2. 15.
Hovingham, North Yorks.: pI.
88, after drawing in Yorkshire Museum, York; Mosaic 7 (1982), pI.
IV.
16.
Malton, North Yorks.: pI.
89; Y.A.J. XLI (1963-6), pI.
IX.
Brantingham, Humbs.
17.
The "Venus mosaic" : pls. 102 and 103; Stead 1980, pI.
XII.
18.
The "Geometric mosaic" : pI.
93; Stead 1980, pI.
XV.
19.
Interlaced circles: Stead 1980, pI.
XIa. 20.
The "Aquatic mosaic" : pI.
100a; Stead 1980, pI.
XIV.
21.
The "Charioteer mosaic" : pI.
91; Neal 1981, no. 69. 22.
Sturton, Lincs.; pavement A: Fowler 1818, App.
II, no. 10.
Rudston, East Yorks.
23.
The "Orpheus mosaic" : Stead 1976, pI.
24; Neal 1981, no. 83. 24.
The "Fortuna mosaic" : Stead 1976, pI.
23a; Neal 1981, no. 84. 25.
The "Providentia mosaic" : Stead 1976, pI.
21; Neal 1981, no. 85. 26.
The "Geometric Pavement" : Neal ibid., no. 86.
York 27.
The "Seasons mosaic" : pls. 94 and 95a; R.C.H.M. York I (1962), pI.
24. 28.
Fragment showing a seabeast: pI.
95b; fragment on view in Yorkshire Museum.
29.
Cherry Street mosaic: R.C.H.M. York I (1962), pI.
23a.
This is probably the same mosaic as that recently uncovered on the Clementhorpe site, York: pI.
104; Britannia VII (1976), 382. 30.
Micklegate Bar mosaic: R.C.H.M. York I (1962), pI.
23c; Rainey 1973, pI.
5. 31.
Fragments from the Ebor Brewery site: pI.
105; Britannia V (1974), 236.
Winterton, Lincs.
At least two notable instances of sequential affinity are in evidence.
First, is a group of pavements with radial arrangements, often with much figural detail.
Secondly, is a group of predominantly geometric pavements possessing linear, banded arrangements, little (if any) figural detail,! and deliberate placement of a few, plain motifs.
2.
Sequential Affinities
Four mosaics have a radial arrangement: the mosaics from Horkstow (a very large pavement which, in fact, shows two very different radial designs: pI.
97), a fragmentary, octagonal design which lies "above" the Charioteer mosaic at Rudston (Neal 1981, no. 69), the Brantingham Tyche mosaic (ibid. no. 12), and the Orpheus mosaic discovered at Winterton (Stead 1976, pI.
24).
2.1 Radial and Richly Figured Designs
As at Winterton, at Horkstow the pavement illustrates an Orphic theme.
In the latter, Orpheus occupies his usual position, at the "hub" of the design.
The mosaic comprises eight compartments each of which is separated by"spokes' of simple guilloche.
The compartments are further divided, laterally, into four sub-compartments, making thirty-two in all.
The outermost enclose figures of large mammals, the next pairs of birds, the third small mammals, and the innermost are shaded, longitudinally, into five bands.
Contrasts of this arrangement with that from Winterton are clear.
In the latter only eight large compartments, each of which frames a large mammal and a stylised tree, are present.
The drawing of Orpheus himself also differs considerably between the two.
At Winterton (Fowler 1818, no. 2) he, evidently, played a very large? lyre and did not face the spectator.
The spandrels at Horkstow are figured whereas at Winterton they contain a heart-shaped cantharus.
Also, the technique of the mosaicist(s) at Winterton is less sophisticated than that of the Horkstow craftsmen.
There are, in fact, many more differences in style and form of design between these pavements; see sections 3.7 and 5.1.
However, the presence of two radial versions of an important fourth century theme is undoubtedly significant.
As postulated by Smith (1969, 103), this may be indicative of influence from the west country.
It is vital, however, at this stage, to stress influence rather than "involvement" .
The curving and continuous design of Orpheus mosaics, admittedly, is rare outside of Britain (though see Stern 1955, fig. 14), and here most instances are concentrated in the south-west of the country.
But the misunderstanding of the beasts and their characteristics in the north east — especially of the placidity demanded by the Orphic theme — coupled with a radial as opposed to a concentric circular structure, does not suggest any direct, physical links between the mosaicists of the two regions.
Such similarities are more likely to reflect prevailing ideas of design — the sentiments of the client perhaps.
The prevalence of figural work and the generally rich iconography of the other mosaics at Winterton, and in other parts of the great pavement at Horkstow, bear testimony to the importance of such sentiments.
The second radial design from Horkstow is slightly smaller than the Orphic arrangement, although it is bordered by a very wide strip of eight-strand guilloche which renders both panels of approximately equivalent dimensions.
From the hub of the design radiate four spokes of simple guilloche, which traverse an inner, circular band and eventually meet the rim of the wheel.
The whole is supported at each spandrel by kneeling figures, apparently fulfilling the role of Atlas.
The use, in pavements, of designs which were probably intended  for ceilings or vaults has been considered by Painter (1976), with regard to the mosaic from Hinton St. Mary, Dorset.
At Horkstow we might have another example of such usage — an interpretation supported by the cosmic imagery, the role of the kneeling figures, and the inclusion of a guilloche border which otherwise diminishes the design's radius.
Again, therefore, the importance of radial designs is clear.
They appear important in their own right and not simply as adjuncts to the Orphic theme.
Likewise, the symbolism of the Orphic story could be replaced by an iconography which although different, still represents the world in terms of pacification and support.
The Brantingham Tyche mosaic (Neal 1981, no. 12) has, at its centre, an irregular octagon from whose angles radiate eight spokes.
These connect with eight semi-roundels bordered by an octagonal band.
All the interlace of this arrangement is executed in simple guilloche.
Such a bust of Tyche is known from Whatley, Som.,(Rainey 1973, pI.
15a) but here she occupies a roundel which is enclosed by a plain rectangular panel.
Moreover, busts of figures are common in the north-east; occurring, for example, at York (pls. 94 and"95), Malton (pI.
89), and Rudston (pI.
91).
It seems, therefore, "that however much a" civic deity"at the centre of such a radIal format might be interpreted in terms of worldly peace or counsel Tyche was simply a figure which was very amenable to this form of representation.
Like the Tyche mosaic, the fragmentary design from Rudston (Neal 1981, no. 69) is octagonal and possesses eight compartments.
In his reconstruction, Neal envisages a large central roundel connected to the outer octagon by eight short spokes, although the exact configuration of the centre of this mosaic remains conjectural.
It is unprofitable to speculate as to the theme or subject — only the feet and parts of the lower bodies of two figures, as well as what might be a phallus or cornucopia, remain.
The arrangment was probably similar to that of mosaics from Pitney, Som.,(V.C.H. Som.
I (1906), fig. 84), Chedworth, Glos.,(Smith 1977, pI.
6VIIIb) and Bramdean, Hants.,(Smith, C.R. 1852, pI.
XXI), i.e. mosaics from western and southern England.
However, it is impossible, on the basis of the meagre evidence at our disposal, to attribute subjects conspicuous in these mosaics e.g. dancing cupids, to the Rudston example.
It does seem reasonable, however, to date the Rudston mosaic to the same period as the adjacent Charioteer panel, i.e. the second quarter of the fourth century (Stead 1980, 137).
The colouring of the mosaics was almost identical and, although the guilloche of the former is simpler, they are both enclosed by the same outer border of white "T" shapes on a red background.
If this is correct, the Rudston octagonal design is then assigned to a period similar to that of the four radial arrangements already discussed i.e. c.330-360 (see section 3.2).
Broadly contemporary with these radial designs is a trend towards simple, geometric representation of a character which, if not restricted to the region, is particularly well exploited here.
There is the possibility of some influence from craftsmen working to the south, around Water Newton, who specialised in the manufacture of  geometric designs, but their work was based largely upon lozenge configurations and cannot have been a major source of inspiration.
Only at Winterton (Neal 1981, no. 86) and at Sturton (Fowler 1818, App.
II, no. 10) can this influence have been significant.
2.2 Banded Geometric Designs and Meanders
In western England, three of the four concentric, circular Orpheus mosaics (Part III, section 2.2) were associated with numerous simple, geometric pavements.
However, the northern geometric deigns, again, appear to owe little to the latter.
Only the arrangement of interlaced circles, from Rudston (Stead -1980, pI.
XIa) shows any significant similarity to the western designs (chequered decoration — a feature common to mosaics of both regions — is insufficiently diagnostic to be considered a major index of affinity).
At least eight mosaics can be assigned to this group of banded geometric designs and meanders: the Harpham labyrinth mosaic (pI.
86); a corridor fragment from Aldborough (pI.
84); the pavement of room I and the corridor mosaic, from Brantingham (Neal 1981, nos. 88 and 13); various fragments from Aldborough (pI.
83); the Hovingham mosaic (pI.
88); the Rudston geometric mosaic (pI.
93), and the mosaic discovered at Beadlam (Neal 1981, no. 9).
As all of these mosaics are to be discussed as part of an examination of substantial affinities (below, sections 3.4 and 3.5) it will suffice, here, to provide summary descriptions only.
The Harpham labyrinth of grey/blue lines encloses a four-petalled flower.
Each quadrant of the labyrinth comprises four main meanders.
At Aldborough, the corridor mosaic displays numerous panels, but especially significant are those of all-over chequers in three colours and that with a band of crowstep pattern which encloses two swastikas.
The latter might, originally, have been a four-swastika meander around a central band.
In other fragments from Aldborough there is more evidence for the use of chequers (pI.
82) and central bands framed by simple borders.
The fragments illustrated in pI.
83 furnish further evidence of the latter, and, in addition, of a meandering, swastika design.
A continuous, regular swastika meander is a feature of the Rudston Geometric pavement (pI.
93), where a border of crowstep pattern encloses a design of four swastika-peltae arranged around a small, chequered square.
It is with the mosaics from Brantingham,(room I and the corridor), the Beadlam mosaic, and the mosaic from Hovingham, however, that many of the typical attributes of this geometric trend are most easily observed.
In the latter two, concentric, plain bands and bands of crowstep pattern border four-swastika meander arrangements.
Bands of crowstep, chequers, simple guilloche, and concentric borders (around a central band) are also features of the two Brantingham mosaics.
Patterns of swastika meander — especially the variety based on four adjacent swastikas — in conjunction with concentric, linear borders, are not common outside the region, although some notable parallels do exist.
First is the mosaic from building XII, 2, Cirencester (Neal 1981, no. 28) which has at least two panels of four-swastika arrangement (and which, incidentally, belongs to the same building as another labyrinth design: Neal 1981, no. 27).
This mosaic is also datable to the fourth century.
The mosaic from Middle  Brook Street, Winchester (P.P.H.F.C. XVIII (1959), p1.
II), again, has four-swastika meander arrangements, enclosing simple squares — a format which is repeated as an all-over design in the pavement found in Mr. Templeman's garden, Dorchester (Hutchins 1863, 692).
The most convincing parallel, however, is provided by the mosaic from room II, Rockbourne, Hants,(Morley-Hewitt 1969, pI.
III), where a border of crowstep pattern encloses a mixed (or failed?) meander of swastika and greek key, to the west of which lies a four-swastika meander design.
In a nearby room, there is yet another swastika meander arrangement, which encloses a small, radial", geometric device bordered on two sides by chequers (on view in situ).
Both of these designs can be dated to the fourth century,(Morley-Hewitt 1969, 2) and so might be contemporary with the northern sequence (see section 3.2 pp. 85-86).
It is the design of room II, however, which is of special importance.
The emphasis of such arrangements is the most notable aspect of the northern geometric sequence.
Indeed, arrangements of four related motifs (or figures) accompanied by simple, concentric banded decoration had a particular appeal for clients in this region (the pavement from Malton, pI.
89, could represent a mixture of such sentiments).