

Agriculture and Food
EC meeting results in inadequate fishing limits
A meeting of European Community fisheries ministers has resulted in measures that are go only halfway to meet those recommended by scientists as the minimum needed to save the fish stocks of Europe.
According to recommendations made last year by the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES), efforts to conserve stocks by reducing the size of the catch have not worked.
ICES recommends that that the size of fishing fleets be reduced by 30 per cent, effectively lowering catches by 20 per cent .
The Commission's recommendations to fisheries ministers however, continued to propose quotas.
The largest cuts — which were proposed for the North Sea cod and haddock — amounted to only 15 per cent.
A proposal to ban fishing for cod and haddock for 10 days each month was supported by Britain but rejected by Belgium, Denmark, France and Germany.
The proposal to ban all drift nets more than 2.5 kilometres long in EC waters and on EC vessels was also opposed, as was a proposal to increase the mesh size of trawler nets to 120 mm.
ICES and commission scientists say that the continued use of small mesh will greatly accelerate the decline of fish stocks.
Experts have recommended that fishermen are paid not to fish, mirroring recent developments in agriculture.
The Community's "structural funds" — designated for restructuring uneconomic industries and supporting depressed regions — represent a potential source of funding for such a scheme.
The European Parliament meeting voted in favour of increased funding for laying-up of fishing boats, whether permanent or temporary.
However, member states can still refuse to pay.
Britain has consistently refused to consider such payments on the grounds that risk is part of the fisherman's job.
Commission officials, however, have argued that if given no alternative, fishermen will carry on fishing until there are no fish stocks left.
New Scientist 5 January
Agriculture and Food
US report calls for stricter seafood regulations
The National Academy of Sciences has launched a report recommending that the US government step up its regulations on seafood.
The report has been offered as a blueprint for reshaping the industry.
Over the last ten years, seafood consumption in the US has risen by over 60 per cent.
Regulations, however, have failed to address the mounting risks to consumers from pollution and chemical waste, which share the water with the seafood.
Consumers, the report found, were not well informed regarding risks to health, and the mounting practice of eating raw fish was described as "disturbing" .
Most reported incidents of food poisoning are caused by bacteria, parasites or viruses found in sewage.
The long-term effects of consuming fish contaminated with substances such as PCBs, dioxins or mercury are not certain, but they include the risk of fetal malformation and increased vulnerability to cancer.
Current Department of Agriculture inspection methods — feeling, smelling and looking at the food — were judged inappropriate as, in the case of fish, they cannot not detect the toxins.
Instead, the report recommends careful monitoring of the waters in which the fish is caught, including harvest-time testing.
Since much seafood is imported, the regulatory requirements of other countries need to be examined too.
At present, three federal agencies hold responsibility for seafood safety, along with the administration of each state.
The report recommends setting up a new centralized inter-agency, inter-state programme which would be responsible for funding, monitoring and giving advice.
Other proposals included a strengthening of Food and Drug Administration guidelines on contamination, more stringent and far reaching regulations on chemical pollution from the Environmental Protection Agency, the improvement of tests for toxins and germs and increased research into the long-term effects of industrial chemicals.
Washington Post 9 January Observer 13 January
Agriculture and Food
Organic food not good for you, says report
A report commissioned by the Growers for Advanced Crop Treatments (Gro-Act) has argued that the idea that organic produce is "better for you" is a fiction.
The study has argued that naturally occurring toxins can be more dangerous than man-made pesticides, and has presented scientific data showing that glycoalkaloids, nerve-damaging toxins that occur naturally in potatoes, are present in the same levels in organic crops as in their treated fellows.
The report also argues that fungi which infect organic produce, such as mycotoxins, can constitute a more potent carcinogen than agro-chemicals.
Professor George Lunt of the University of Bath, who wrote the report, argued that in the case of organic food, anecdotal data was more commonly used than factual data.
He claimed that there was no evidence to prove that organic produce was any more nutritional or tasty than treated produce.
Lunt later conceded that this was because there had been no comparative studies, and urged scientific tests to establish the levels of natural toxins in organic products and their effects on humans.
Organic farmers said the report represented no new findings.
Independent 26 January
Agriculture and Food
Wild game from Chernobyl may put humans at risk
Research has indicated how radioactive contaminants may be being introduced into the human food chain via the migration of wildfowl through the Chernobyl region.
Since the human evacuation of the Chernobyl area, Pripyat Marsh, on the flightpaths of varieties of waterfowl that winter in southern Europe, has become a sanctuary for vast numbers of migrant birds.
The 15,000 kilometre marsh surrounds the reactor and its cooling reservoir.
Livestock in the area had been closely monitored but little attention had been paid to wild fowl.
The birds could pose a serious health risk for people who eat them in north Africa and southern Europe.
It is not known exactly where the birds end up, although some of them are likely to be eaten as game by African farmers.
Lehr Brisbin, of the Savannah River Ecology Laboratory in South Carolina, believes that radiocaesium, which accumulates in those tissues eaten by humans, could be present in quantities hundreds of times higher than the average in the area.
Restrictions imposed on the slaughter and movement of 8,000 out of a total of 300,000 North Welsh sheep following fall-out from the Chernobyl disaster have been lifted.
The ban remains in place on 410 Welsh farms, notably in Snowdonia.
New Scientist 22/29 December
Agriculture and Food
Councils unprepared for effects of BSE
The Dundas Chemical Company, which collects animal carcasses from farmers in the Scottish counties of Dumfries and Galloway, has begun charging for its services since the BSE resulted in the collapse of the market.
The company now charges £20 for collection of a cow carcass and has refused to pick up sheep.
This has meant that dead animals are left by the roadside for the council to collect, and the local slaughterhouses have been receiving sick animals as some farmers try to use it as a replacement for the knacker's yard.
Stewartry District Council has no provision for this situation, and environmental health experts are concerned that on-farm burial of carcasses may constitute a health risk, particularly if the animals are buried near water supplies.
A request from Shetland farmers to ban all imports of dairy cattle to save their stocks from BSE infection has been turned down by the Shetland Island Council.
The council say that the ban is not necessary.
Scottish Environment News December
Agriculture and Food
Sewage sludge stores up trouble
The results of a long-term study presented at the annual conference of the British Institute of Geographers have shown that the use of sewage sludge as a fertilizer can have damaging effects on the soil that can last for thousands of years.
The study also reveals that heavy metals, in particular cadmium and zinc, present in the sludge, are taken up by plants and can be absorbed into the food chain far more easily than previously thought.
From 1942 to 1961, two consecutive fields were treated variously with farmyard manure, fertilizers and sewage sludge.
Thirty years later, scientists from Rothamsted Experimental Station found the heavy metals persisting in the soil — 85 per cent of them in the top ten inches.
Metals such as zinc, copper, cadmium and lead are believed to stay in the soil for "almost geological lengths of time" .
In experiments carried out on the land, crop yields of beet and clover were half of those on the field treated with manure.
Clover roots had become deformed in adapting to the polluted soil and had lost their ability to fix nitrogen.
Microbiological activity in the soil was halved.
In Britain, most sewage sludge comes from cities and is contaminated with industrial waste from which toxic metals can not be economically removed.
Scientists have called for an urgent review of recently set government safety limits which are now thought to be inadequate.
These are the highest within the EC, having been set at the top of the EC recommended range.
Independent 9 January Times 3 January
Conservation: Land
Berne Convention forces British government to think again
The British government has pledged to review planning procedures which allow development of important wildlife sites.
The pledge was made in the face of criticism at the Strasbourg meeting of the member states of the Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats.
This has 24 member states, with observers from the Soviet Union and Africa, and representatives from a range of conservation groups.
In particular, it promised to look again at the case of Canford Heath in Dorset, where a recent court judgement upheld the decision by Poole Borough Council to build houses on the heath in the face of vociferous opposition from conservation groups, led by the World Wide Fund for Nature [see ED no.
XX].
The heath is both a site of special scientific interest (SSSI) and an "endangered natural habitat" under the Berne Convention.
It is home to a number of very rare species, including the nightjar, Dartford warbler, sand lizard and smooth snake.
The WWF is considering making an appeal against the High Court ruling, and asking for a European Court action against the government, in the light of the fact that the proposed development could breach the European Birds Directive.
WWF's conservation officer, Simon Lyster, demanded changes to the Wildlife and Countryside Act, which sets the rules governing development on SSSIs, in favour of a greater presumption against development.
"For Canford Heath, though, we must have emergency action before the bulldozers move in.
The Environment Secretary should halt this plan now."
* The British government was also criticized at Strasbourg for allowing Scottish fishermen to cull up to 5,000 seals annually.
Under the convention, seals can only be killed if they pose a risk to fish or fishing equipment.
The government has resisted pressure to introduce a tight licensing system, as operated in Norway and Northern Ireland, arguing that it would be unworkable. * The convention meeting was particularly critical of Greece's environmental record, citing widespread damage as a result of uncontrolled tourism development.
In Zakynthos's Laganas Bay, the proliferation of hotels and nightclubs is threatening the largest single population of the marine turtle, caretta caretta.
Ninety per cent of tourists in the area are British.
Independent 7, 12 January
Conservation: Land
European delegates plan forest protection at Strasbourg
The problems of acid rain, atmospheric pollution and climate change were among the problems discussed at a conference of forestry experts from 30 European nations on Dec. 18-19. with the aim of developing a common policy which will safeguard the forests of Europe.
This is to be achieved in part by extending the network monitoring the health of the continent's forests, which was established after the 1979 Geneva Convention on Transboundary Pollution, which came into effect in March 1983.
A conference on the protection of the world's forests is to be held in Paris in September 1991.
Several resolutions aimed at co-ordinating research were adopted, including: the formation of a European information bank, a research programme into mountain forests, a European information bank and an invitation to research institutes to contribute to a study of forest ecosystems at a European reserve.
Le Monde 21 December
Conservation: Land
China limits timber consumption
According to the Chinese Ministry of Forestry, there has been an increase in the land given over to trees in recent years.
But timber consumption continues to exceed growth rate and, in a move to break this cycle, China is to execute a plan to reduce the present level of consumption and limit the use of timber for the next five years.
Xinhua News Agency, Peking 21 December (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Conservation: Land
European fund invests in French land
There is growing public support for buying and protecting wildlife areas, according to the Paris-based European Fund for the Preservation of Nature, which has amassed sufficient funds to go ahead with its first purchases of land for conservation, in Brittany and Normandy.
Set up to protect wildlife across Europe, the organisation expands upon the tradition of Britain's National Trust.
Its debut initiative is to preserve 323 hectares south of Brest in Brittany.
The coastal cliffs, open water, sandy shore and grassland are important breeding grounds for birds, otters and other endangered mammals.
Vauville is the second area for conservation.
Situated west of Cherbourg, it is a popular "pit stop" for migratory ducks.
Links made with a state body, the Conservatoire du Littoral, will help ensure that coastal land bought in France by the EFPN remains protected.
Parliamentary approval would be needed in the event of any proposed "development" .
European 14-16 December
Conservation: Land
WWF launches "panda points" to support French campaigns
The French section of the World Wide Fund for Nature has set up a fundraising campaign to help support a series of projects aimed at safeguarding threatened species.
The Duke of Edinburgh, WWF president, and the French Environment Secretary, Brice Lalonde, inaugurated a series of "collection points" in Parisian airports.
Within France, the WWF has concentrated on acquiring fragile habitats, including large areas in the Brenne marshes, the Crau plains, the Camargue and the dry grasslands of Lorraine.
It is launching appeals to save threatened wetlands in the valleys of the Saone, Rhine and Loire, which it describes as "the last wild river in Europe" .
Its largest acquisition in France last year consisted of 800 hectares of the Orx marshes, abandoned agricultural property in the Landes region.
Le Monde 20 December
Conservation: Land
Development threatens Slovakia's mountains
Czechoslovakian ecologists are launching a campaign to prevent large areas of national park land in Slovakia's Tatra mountains from being developed by an American company as a sports and tourism complex.
The development is being carried out under the aegis of the Slovak republican government.
Opponents to the development believe that it is intended as a means of attracting the winter Olympics to the area.
They claim that the plans of the newly-established Tatra Development Corporation will result in widespread deforestation, and to large areas being blighted by the construction of motorways to service the hotels, entertainment and sports facilities planned for the site.
They also accuse the government of entering into a private deal with the US company, and have called for the project to be opened to tender by local and foreign companies, with guarantees of a minimum 51 per cent stake for Czechoslovak companies.
Dr Mikulas Huba, head of the Slovak Parliamentary Committee for Nature and Environmental Protection, has accused the government of being prepared to sell off the entire Tatra range to Americans without formal authority.
European 11-13 January
Conservation: Land
Why Rainham's defenders are failing
Environmentalists trying to defend Rainham Marshes failed to win over local opinion in the face of a sophisticated public relations campaign by the developers.
This is the conclusion drawn by a study carried out by researchers at University College, London.
The Music Corporation of America (MCA) plan to develop the 1,600 acre site — two-thirds of which is designated as a site of special scientific interest (SSSI)— for its Universal City studios and theme park.
The marshlands, situated on the north bank of the Thames estuary east of London, are wetlands of prime importance for migrating birds.
Enthusiastic support for the project among the local populace, many of whom see it as a source of potential employment, helped tip the balance over a rival site outside Paris, the researchers said.
MCA were particularly effective in winning over the local media, notably the freesheet newspapers.
Times 5 January
Conservation: Species
Khmer Rouge goes green
Western intelligence sources in Cambodia have claimed that Pol Pot, de facto leader of the Khmer Rouge, has issued a directive telling Cambodians not to kill animals for any reason.
According to the reports, the Khmer Rouge has begun fencing off animal sanctuaries in areas where wildlife is most threatened.
Pol Pot has said that animals are an important part of Cambodia's heritage and must be protected.
Ta Mok, one of Pol Pot's lieutenants who was known as "the butcher" during Khmer Rouge rule in 1975-78, has warned that anyone found contravening environmental directives in the area under his jurisdiction will be sentenced to labour on building the reserve fence.
Cambodia's 21-year war decimated the wildlife population.
Much was seized for food by a starving population, and much became the casualty of unexploded mines and bombs.
Elephants have become rare, and the kouprey, a wild forest ox and one of the world's rarest species, is now thought to have become extinct in the country — although it has been spotted in Laos.
The kouprey is the national animal of Cambodia.
Times 28 January
Conservation: Species
Insects suffer from lack of study
A biologist at Cornell University, Quentin Wheeler, has warned that large numbers of insect species are becoming extinct without ever having been studied, due in part to a shortage of entomologists.
Many of the unknown species under threat are believed to be in the world's remaining rainforests.
At present, there are some 750,000 classified species of insect.
However, on the basis of recent intensive research in areas of South American forest, entomologists have suggested that the true worldwide figure could be anything from 10 million to 50 million species.
On the basis of current figures, Wheeler has pointed out that there are 97 species of flowering plant for every botanist, but 425 species of insect for each entomologist.
If world insect species totals are as high as 50 million, this would extend to 28,345 species per insect specialist.
New Scientist 12 January
Conservation: Species
Adder, allis shad, mussel protected
The adder, allis shad fish and freshwater pearl mussel are the latest additions to those species receiving full legal protection under the 1981 Wildlife and Countryside Act.
Anyone causing them wilful death or injury will now face a fine of up to £2,000.
The amendments have been made on the basis of recommendations by the Nature Conservancy Council in its first five-yearly review of UK species under the auspices of the Act, carried out in 1986.
The adder (vipera berus) has suffered from the loss of its habitat, much of it sandy heathland, and from deliberate killing by people afraid of its poisonous reputation.
It has declined in number to around 20,000, scattered in colonies across the country.
According to herpetologist Tom Langton, its persecution was unjustified.
"People are more likely to be struck by lightning than bitten by an adder.
They will not attack, but if disturbed or cornered they will defend themselves.
Give them respect and distance."
Other reptiles, including slow worms, smooth snakes and lizards are already on the protected list.
The freshwater pearl mussel has suffered from over-zealous pearl hunters, particularly in Scotland, where an ancient law permits tinkers to fish for them.
The mussels are found only in fastflowing freshwater rivers which are largely free of pollution.
As well as Scotland, a few colonies survive in Wales and southwest England.
Searching for the pearls, which are found in only one per cent of the mussels, but which can fetch anything from £10 to £400, has been a traditional occupation in rivers such as the Spey.
In recent years, however, increasing numbers have been killed by opportunist visitors, who have failed to respect the local custom of leaving the young mussels to live and breed.
Their protection need not mean the end of the pearl hunting tradition, as the mussels can be opened, and any pearls removed, without killing them.
The allis shad, a member of the herring family, was once commonplace in the Severn and Wye valleys, where is ascends to spawn in spring, but its numbers have recently declined dramatically.
Pressure from Scottish fishing interests has led the government to abandon for the moment plans to add the basking shark to the protected species list.
Their livers are sold to provide a specialized high-quality oil for aviation instruments.
Approximately 100 are caught off British coasts each year.
Guardian 4 January Times 4 January Independent 4, 5 January
Conservation: Species
South Pacific bird conservation strategy agreed
A conservation strategy to protect the bird life of the South Pacific islands has been endorsed by the International Council for Bird Preservation.
It will cover a scattered network of islands over 25 million square kilometres of ocean, and is to be co-ordinated by the South Pacific Regional Environment Programme — an intergovernmental body.
Many of the bird species in this region are threatened with extinction, notably from the loss of their forest habitats, hunting, and the introduction of alien predators such as rats, cats, stoats and mongoose.
Among those in imminent danger are the silktail and Ponape mountain starling, the San Cristobal mountain rail, and the Marquesas and Society Island pigeons.
The conservation strategy will focus initially on building up an information database on the region's bird life, and on conducting further surveys, with a view to making information available to locally-based researchers.
It will also seek to reverse deforestation in Papua New Guinea, Vanuatu, Fiji, New Caledonia and the Solomons.
In all of these islands, current estimates suggest that all trees suitable for the birds will have been lost within 10 years.
Colonies of seabirds, which are used as guides by local fishermen in Kiribati, Tuvalu and French Polynesia, are also to be the target of conservation efforts.
* The ICBP has estimated that 10 of the 17 species of birds on New Zealand's Chatham Islands face extinction as a result of predators and habitat losses.
New Scientist 5 January
Conservation: Species
China imposes tough measures on wildlife violators
A meeting of the Chinese State Council has voted to impose severe measures on those who destroy wildlife.
The protection of wildlife was said to be germane to both China's economic and ethical development.
An appeal has been launched for government officials to improve their understanding of the importance of preserving nature, and to enforce local restrictions on the poaching, purchasing and smuggling of wildlife.
Severe punishment, regardless of rank, was urged.
In China, poachers of rare animals such as pandas are often sentenced to death.
China declared its support for the international ban on the importation of African ivory in June last year.
News Agency, Peking in English (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) European 25-27 January
Conservation: Species
Przewalski's horses to return to Mongolia
The world's rarest horse, Equus przewalskii, is set to be reintroduced to its Mongolian homeland after a successful captive breeding programme, which has produced around 1,000 of the animals.
The tahki, as it is known in Mongolia, is thought to have become extinct in the wild.
Mongolian scientists are working with international experts on a 10-year reintroduction programme.
In order to prevent interbreeding with domestic horses, the tahki will be restricted to a specially-designated world heritage area.
Until the population has grown sufficiently, they will be contained within fenced-off zones.
They will be monitored to ensure that they can adapt to the local climate.
* Mongolian wolves illegally imported into Hungary face death if they are returned to Mongolia, where they are regarded as highly dangerous.
The 98 wolves were brought into the country alive by fur traders.
Hungary has appealed to foreign zoos to find them a home.
A Hungarian government spokesman has warned that they would probably be killed at the airport if they were returned to Mongolia.
New Scientist 12 January Guardian 3 January Financial Times 3 January
Conservation: Species
 "Living fossil" saved from traders
The coelocanth fish, regarded as a "living fossil" surviving from geological prehistory, has been placed on Appendix 1 of the Convention on Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), thereby effectively banning all trafficking of the fish.
The move followed a campaign by the Worldwide Fund for Nature and the International Union for the Conservation of Nature, whose joint TRAFFIC network had reported a growing trend of collecting coelocanth specimens for scientific experiments, particularly in the Far East.
The first recorded specimen of the fish was caught off the east coast of South Africa in 1939.
WWF News, November/December
Conservation: Species
Spix's Macaw down to one
A search for the world's rarest bird, Spix's macaw, has concluded that only one bird remains in the wild.
All suitable habitat was surveyed after Brazilian and British scientists warned of the bird's disappearance.
The Spix's macaw's deep blue plumage has led to its being prized by collectors around the world, who will pay up to £29,000 for a single specimen.
The Brazilian government, wildlife trade watchdog agencies and breeders have offered their support to a breeding programme now in operation at Sao Paulo Zoo.
The zoo has eight Spix's macaws and eight more birds have been found inside Brazil.
More examples of the species are being sought.
Conservationists are trying to prevent the lone remaining bird from being trapped, whilst the last Spix's macaw has paired up with a blue-winged macaw, a different bird altogether.
WWF News January
Conservation: Species
Hare today and gone tomorrow?
British hares have been dying in increasing numbers from a mystery disease which resembles myxomatosis, which was introduced deliberately to control rabbits in the 1950s.
The spread of the disease has been linked to the prevalence of oilseed rape crops.
Bristol University zoologists and the government's veterinary investigation unit have combined forces to investigate the disease.
Times 9 January
Energy
 "Californian syndrome" rampant in Europe, says report
A report by Cambridge Energy Research Associates forecasts that the geographical location of power stations, and not the international threat that they pose through global warming and acid rain, will determine the development of the power industry through the 1990s and beyond.
Strong opposition from local populations has put an effective halt to further building of nuclear or hydro-electric facilities in many European countries.
The building of new reactors would require new technology which could assure the public of its safety, and the expansion of hydro-electric power would require the public to change its mind about the value of wilderness areas.
Many operators are now building power stations outside the areas that object to them, and importing the power.
This phenomenon has become known as the "Californian syndrome" after having been "diagnosed" in the US's greenest state.
The report gives examples of the syndrome, now becoming common in Europe.
Italy's state-owned electricity industry is currently negotiating a plan to build a new 13,000 megawatts of capacity in the Soviet Union.
One quarter of the power would be exported to Italian consumers.
French power companies are planning similar stations in Hungary, also with a view to supplying electricity to France.
Financial Times 30 January
Energy
Wind power makes waves in the Netherlands
The Dutch government has set a target of producing 1,000 megawatts of electricity by the year 2000 thorough wind power generation.
This would be sufficient to provide 10 per cent of the country's electricity needs — enough to power a city the size of Amsterdam.
Encouraged by advances in technology, and subsidies of up to 40 per cent on installation costs, numerous landowners are setting up wind farms on their land.
his has provoked complaints from conservationists, who claim that the blades of the high-tech windmills kill thousands of birds every year, from local people suffering from the noise caused, and from motoring organizations, which allege that the movement distracts drivers and causes accidents.
The government has responded by planning offshore wind farms on the Ijsselmeer.
Ornithologists have warned, however, that this could kill waterfowl in numbers "too horrible too contemplate" .
Observer 13 January
Energy
Government backs "green coal" test
The Department of Energy is to fund a feasibility study into a coal-fired power station which would minimize pollution.
The plant would use integrated gasification combined cycle technology to generate electricity at a relatively low cost while cutting back on emissions of sulphur dioxide pollutants…
This might be a way forward for coal power, which is currently losing out to gas both on the pollution and cost fronts.
At present, gas is up to one-third cheaper to generate.
If the study is successful, work may begin on a 650 megawatt plant.
Times 4 January
Energy
Government abandons thermal energy research
The Department of Energy has dropped schemes to generate electricity for south-west England from "hot rocks" on grounds of cost.
It had already invested £33 million in drilling projects to assess the feasibility of pumping cold water four miles below the surface into fractured hot rock and drawing it up sufficiently heated to generate power.
A further £50 million would be required for further research, however.
The director of the project, which employed 60 people near the Cornish town of Penryn, had claimed that "hot rock" energy could provide power to meet all the south-west's requirements over the next 20 years.
He acknowledged that it could prove up to four times more expensive than wind or wave power.
Guardian 8 January
Energy
Texaco takes Dutch government to court
Texaco, the giant American oil company, is taking the Dutch government to court over its decision to build a conventional coal-fired power plant near to Rotterdam.
The company had made proposals for a coal gasification plant which it claims would be far more environment-friendly.
It is the first to take a European government to court over an ecological issue.
Texaco claims that the Hague parliament had been misled by the Dutch Economic Affairs Minister's claim that the coal gasification was impractical and uneconomic.
Texaco, however has claimed that more than 5 million tones of coal have been successfully gasified worldwide, including 1.1 million tons at the company's own gas power planet in Daggett, California.
According to Texaco, plants running on combined cycle gas turbine (CCGT) are at least 10 percent more efficient, and therefore release less carbon dioxide.
Emissions of nitrous oxides and sulphur dioxide — the main causes of acid rain — are reduced by 90 per cent, the company claims.
Sulphur residues from the process can also be collected and sold.
The Dutch government's National Environment Plan includes a statement that "research into coal gasification will be encouraged" .
New Scientist 22/29 December
Energy
Chinese energy initiatives
New Chinese energy initiatives include the restoration of a 2,000 year old aqueduct system and introducing solar energy installations in schools.
The underground aqueduct system in the Turpan depression was abandoned many years ago in favour of a modern water system.
The latter, however, has failed to meet the growing needs of local peasantry and so the old technology is being restored.
Advantages of the ancient method of water transportation include a stable water-flow with little vaporisation and energy consumption that is almost negligible.
All new school buildings in northern China, where the weather is cold and bright, will henceforth have built-in solar energy installations.
Although outside temperatures in Liaoning province can become as low as minus 20C degrees, temperatures in the 130 school buildings which have already been constructed with solar heating stay comfortably at 7C to 15C degrees.
Xinhua News Agency, Peking 26 December, 13 January (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Energy
Seas seen as carbon sinks
Carbon dioxide could be rendered harmless as a greenhouse gas by pumping it into the sea, according to consultant physicist Raymond Harrowell.
He suggests that waste C02 from oil-fuelled and coal-fired power stations could be piped and trapped in seawater at depths of between 20 and 100 feet.
He argues that most of the world's production of the gas could be pumped into the oceans, thereby preventing it from contributing to global warming.
Harrowell also suggests that other power station wastes, such as nitrogen and sulphur dioxide could be harvested for use as sulphuric acid and fertilizer.
He claims that limiting greenhouse gas emissions into the atmosphere by such methods would be cheaper than using nuclear power or energy-efficiency as a means of combating global warming.
Times 3 January
Energy
Soviets flag energy changes
Soviet energy experts have responded to repeated expressions of concern by environmentalists by agreeing that the construction of large hydro-electric and thermal power stations in the northern regions of the country should be halted.
They suggest instead, however, that preference should be given to the development of small nuclear energy complexes.
Moscow "World Service" 24 December (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
OECD's environment programme
 "All sectors of the economy must be held accountable for the environmental consequences of their activities…" said environment ministers at the end of a two day meeting, in Paris, of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
The agenda for the Environment Committee, meeting for the first time since 1985, included a comprehensive review of environmental policymaking in the past three decades.
The result was that ministers called for a radical reform in the OECD countries' approach to economic activities, "to help ensure that the basic life support systems of Planet Earth are not endangered." 
Prior to the conference, the OECD published two new reports, The State of the Environment, and a companion volume, Environmental Indicators: A Preliminary Set.
The first report reviews existing environmental conditions, emphasising that many problems identified in the early 70s still remain.
Environmental Indicators scrutinises and compares the "track record" of 24 member nations, by presenting detailed data on air and water pollution, nature conservation, exploitation of natural resources, imports of tropical rainforest timber, and waste production and disposal.
The intention is that OECD member countries (comprising the industrialised West and Japan) will use these statistics to review and monitor their own country's policies, and, suggests an OECD official, use "peer pressure" on negligent members, "prodding laggards into action" .
They agreed on the need to develop common methods of measuring progress in all areas.
One suggestion under consideration is a change in the method of calculating gross national product, in favour of including include environmental performance as an aspect of economic wealth.
The Environment Committee concluded by approving five new OECD acts aimed at bolstering the strategy of "sustainable development" as follows: i) Environmental Indicators & Information (for policy-makers and the public); ii) Use of Economic Instruments in Environmental Policy; iii) Co-operative Investigation & Risk Reduction of Existing Chemicals; iv) Integrated Pollution Prevention & Control (advocating policies which take into account risks to world environment); v) Reduction of Trans-Frontier Movement of Wastes * The reports can be ordered at HMSO Bookshops Guardian 28 January, 1 February Independent 28 January Times 28 January, 1 February Financial Times 28, 29, 31 January, 1 February International Herald Tribune 31 January The Economist 2 February OECD Press Releases 31 January
Environmental Politics
Tunisia sets conservation priorities
The Tunisian government has published details of its environmental action plan and invited international donors to contribute some $315 million needed to support key conservation projects.
The state's environment body, the Agence Nationale de Protection de l'Environnement, has identified the main priority as fighting pollution.
Substantial funds are required to deal with domestic waste, clean up drinking and irrigation water supplies, and promote agricultural use of sewage sludge.
To date, $84 million has been designated for anti-pollution work, but another $99 million is still needed.
An additional $101 million is required to tackle pollution of land and sea, caused mainly by phosphate and chemical industries, through a reduction in discharges of sulphur dioxide, fluorine compounds and phosphate derivatives.
The ANPE has also outlined a number of preventive measures.
Tunisia faces a major challenge in meeting the country's water needs whilst preventing the destruction of wetland ecosystems.
International environmental groups believe that the life of Lac Ichkeul sanctuary — a national park and protected wetland — is threatened by both existing and proposed dams on the rivers that feed the lake.
A new dam, the Sedjnane is scheduled for completion in 1992, to cater for a projected increase in both population and the tourist industry.
Tunisian environmentalists are planning research into how to reconcile conservation needs with growing water demand.
* The government is to host a further meeting in Tunis in April, when representatives of Western donors and multilateral agencies will consolidate plans to continue support for the environmental programme.
Africa Economic Digest 14 January
Environmental Politics
Diamonds, beef, and the Okavango
International pressure is being put on the government in Botswana to reconsider plans for development of the Okavango swamps.
Conservationists have communicated their concern about plans to erect a "buffalo fence" on the north-western fringe of the delta, to Botswana's representative at the European Community in Brussels.
They argue that the fence, designed to reduce the spread of "foot-and-mouth" by separating cattle from buffalo herds, and to monopolise the north-western area for beef production, is unacceptable since it would cut across routes for animals migrating to the swamps during the dry season.
They warn that the Botswana could face a consumer boycott of its beef exports if the decision to go ahead with the fence is not dropped.
The Okavango Water Development Project — which proposes to supply water to the town of Maun, in the Boteti region, and the Orapa diamond mine, is another source of controversy.
This scheme would involve the dredging of the southern Okavango delta, and subsequent flooding in the swamp area.
Greenpeace has been invited to appraise the environmental costs of such an operation, after it voiced concern that dredging and flooding would have a dangerously destructive impact on the fragile ecosystem.
Botswana's Director of Water Affairs confirmed that the contract for phase one of the project has been signed, but said that a decision had yet to be made over whether phase two was "viable" .
Mmegi (Botswana) 21 December, Market South East 17 December, Sunday Tribune (South Africa),[from Facts and Reports — Holland Committee on Southern Africa]
Environmental Politics
RSPB study urges EC policy overhaul
An study by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds has shown how EC "structural" funds, designed to alleviate poverty, fail to account for the environment and are in some cases responsible for the destruction of habitats and extinction of species.
A comprehensive study by the RSPB — "Wildlife and Development in the European Community" — has argued that the EC policy which administers the funds, worth billions of Ecu, requires a massive overhaul to ensure that all projects are monitored for their environmental impact right from the beginning.
An investigation by a Commission taskforce into the implications of the single market also concluded that existing systems are inadequate to ensure the protection of the environment.
Many Brussels officials see the issues of environment and development as entirely separate, and view care of the environment as the responsibility of the government concerned.
Impoverished governments, however, are often happy to pick up any funds available, regardless of their impact on the environment.
The report gives examples of species whose existence is being threatened by structural funds.
These include: The few remaining brown bears in the forests of the French Pyrenees, whose habitat is being destroyed by road and dam projects, the Spanish Imperial eagle, great bustard and lynx which are threatened by dams and irrigation schemes on the Duero and Tajo Rivers, and the rare Dalmatian pelican, put at risk by Greek fish-farming projects.
Even if, as conservationists hope, the European Parliament addresses the problem of the administration of structural funds, it still lacks the institutional power to oversee the work of the Commission's multiple directorates.
For this reason, the report has recommended the setting up of new agencies to monitor government spending and environmental impact.
Other recommendations include increased consultation with local people (often the first to protest if local ecosystems are threatened), and a policy of freedom of information.
Green activists have claimed that the Commission's definition of development retains the mindset of the 1960s, when vast infrastructural improvement schemes were seen as the only way to improve depressed local economies.
The findings of the report suggest that this continues to be true.
European 25-27 January
Environmental Politics
Dutch fund African green projects
The Dutch government has set up a fund, worth $24 million dollars a year, to support green projects in several African countries.
The Dutch-backed environment programmes are aimed at encouraging governments to reduce their dependence on fossil fuels, and at providing incentives for local people to protect their ecological assets such as forests.
Management teams from Dutch companies are already working on projects which will practically implement the reduction of air and water pollution and ozone layer depletion.
Examples include an alternative energy scheme which will be used to run agricultural machinery in the Gambia, and the use of the latest turbine technology in the building of a wind power plant in Zimbabwe.
Environment Magazine (US) 24 December
Environmental Politics
Hungarian green sacked from state job
A Hungarian minister, popular with environmentalists, has been sacked from his job at the Environmental Protection Ministry.
At 29, Zoltan Illes had a background in both scientific research and green activism obtained during his time at Yale University.
Illes had not come up through the state bureaucracy, and his appointment as deputy state secretary was looked upon as a "statement of intent" by many in the environmental lobby.
During his six months in office, Illes crusaded against powerful and entrenched organisations such as the water and power industries.
He was opposed to nuclear power and to the controversial Danube barrage scheme.
Dismissed because of his "too personal" interpretations of environmental affairs, Illes told a press conference that he believed that the environment would be sacrificed as the government struggled for foreign investment and the population grappled with increasing poverty, and added that Hungary does not have a coherent environmental policy.
Guardian 3 January
Environmental Politics
Greens improve performance in German state election
In state elections in Hesse, Germany, on Jan. 20, the Greens were able to improve their position after a poor showing in the German general election in December (when the party had lost representation at federal level — see ED no. 41/42).
The Greens had governed in Hesse in a "red-green" coalition with the Social Democrats (SPD) until February 1987, when the agreement collapsed because of differences on nuclear policy and was replaced by a centre-right coalition.
As a result of the election the SPD and Greens (who were led by the pragmatist Joschka Fischer) won a two-seat majority and the SPD mayor of Kassel, Hans Eichel, was expected to head a new "red-green" coalition.
On the same day, two referendums were approved in Hesse, one of which made the protection of the environment a constitutional obligation.
A court had earlier ruled that the referendum would need further legal investigation before they became binding.
Neue Zürcher Zeitung 21, 22 January Le Monde 21, 22 January UK Daily Newspapers, 21, 22 January
Environmental Politics
New French green organization
France has a new official green political movement.
Génération Écologie has the status of a national advice council and is presided over by Environment Secretary Brice Lalonde.
The aim of the organisation, which has been launched with over 6,000 members, is to "resuscitate the planet" .
Le Monde 18 December
Environmental Politics
Green party withers but environmental groups thrive
The Green Party is facing severe financial crisis after membership has plummeted from last year's record high.
The party has had to bail out its merchandising section, Ecotrade, from party funds, whilst running at a loss.
There have been also been complaints of financial mismanagement.
The Party expanded rapidly after its huge success in the European Parliament Elections of 1989, which resulted in 17,290 members by 1990.
Campaigns were extended and paid officials were recruited.
Since then, however, about 3,000 new members have failed to renew their subscriptions and 1,500 have left in favour of the Scottish Green Party.
The result has been a reduction in party funds, which have been almost exclusively derived from membership, of about 15 per cent.
Donations have declined concurrently.
The party has said that it has no intentions of reducing its campaigning activities., but will seek to improve its financial position through increases in membership fees and reductions in staff and publicity costs.
A newspaper survey has found that concern about the environment has led to a sharp rise in members of environmental organisations over the 1980's.
Membership of the two largest groups — the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and the National Trust — increased by 75 per cent and 78 per cent respectively.
The World Wide Fund for Nature trebled its numbers and Friends of the Earth (in England and Wales) increased by seven times.
A large proportion of the new interest came from young people.
Financial Times 8 January Guardian 9 January Independent 17 January
Global Warming
1990 — the warmest year on record
Average global temperatures during 1990 were the highest since records began in the late 19th century, according to analyses carried out by the Meteorological Office and NASA scientists.
Six of the seven warmest years this century have occurred in the last decade.
In order, they have been as follows: 1990, 1988, 1983, 1987, 1944, 1989 and 1981.
The high temperatures of 1990 were most striking in Europe, North America, Western Siberia and the Far East.
The global mean was 0.39 degrees above the average for 1951-80.
Over the century, temperatures have risen by 0.45 degrees.
1990 also had the lowest snow cover ever recorded in the northern hemisphere, although it is unclear whether this was a consequence of the higher temperature, or a factor contributing to it, since the less snow on the ground, the more the planet's surface heats up.
Opinions were divided as to whether the rise is mainly due to the greenhouse effect.
The likelihood of this being the case was reinforced by evidence that 1990 was one of the coldest years in the stratosphere.
Cooling of the stratosphere has been seen as a consequence of the greenhouse effect.
Some scientists continue to argue that natural climatic fluctuations may be responsible for the rise.
The 1930s and 1940s were a relatively warm period, followed by a cooler phase during the 1950s and 1960s.
Temperatures began to climb again in the 70s.
David Parker, a senior researcher at the Met Office, said: "We cannot prove that the rise was caused by the greenhouse effect, but it is likely." 
Similar sentiments were expressed by NASA scientists.
Taken together, they represent the most forceful link yet made by respected institutions between man-made atmospheric pollution and global warming.
International Herald Tribune 11 January Times 11 January Independent 11 January Guardian 11 January
Global Warming
Ice caps' tenacity casts doubt on global warming
The assumption that global warming will lead to widespread coastal flooding as melting ice caps provoke sea-level rises has been challenged by geographers at Edinburgh University.
They have produced evidence that the Antarctic ice cap has remained stable for over 11 million years, despite fluctuations in global temperature.
Indeed, increases in snowfall during warmer periods leads to slight increases in the volume of ice, with marginal falls in sea level.
On the Greenland ice sheet, some melting at the fringes will be compensated for by increased ice at the centre, again caused by higher snowfall levels.
The net result could be a rise in sea levels by just a few millimetres.
One of the researchers involved, David Sugden, cautioned however that global warming will make sea-levels expand regardless of any added volume caused by melting ice, and he added that "we would have to look at all the ice sheets in the world, not just two, before we could be sure what the effects would be" .
Times 4 January Guardian 4 January
Global Warming
Cow belching threatens world!
Researchers from Washington State University are embarking on a three-year project to measure the amount of methane produced by belching cows.
Livestock is estimated to account for some 15 per cent of global emissions of methane — one of the leading greenhouse gases.
The cows will be fitted with gas-monitoring backpacks complete with a tube connected to the cow's mouth.
Times 5 January Independent 8 January
Nuclear Power
Swedish pledge on nuclear phase-out diluted
The Swedish government has reaffirmed a pledge to phase out nuclear power by the year 2010, but has reversed earlier undertakings to begin shutting down its 12 nuclear reactors in 1995.
It will, however, invest over £350 million over the next five years in developing alternative energies and improving domestic electrical efficiency.
The programme aims to make unnecessary any further expansion of coal, oil and gas generation, all of which are deemed unacceptable on environmental grounds.
Sweden has set itself the target of freezing carbon dioxide emissions at 1986 levels by the year 2010.
The nuclear plants will not be phased out until the alternative energy sources are ready to come on-stream, however.
Sweden currently produces half its electricity requirements through nuclear power — more than any other country in the world.
A referendum in 1976 committed the government to halt construction of further reactors, but to allow the existing ones to serve out their operating lives.
12 years later, in the wake of the Chernobyl disaster, the decision was taken to start the shut-down in 1995.
The new compromise approach has been worked out by the minority Socialist government, with agreement from the Centre and Liberal parties and broad support from industry, which had feared that the previous hard-line stance against nuclear power would result in rapid increases in power bills.
Among the alternative energies to be developed are wind power generators and steam-turbine plants fired by wood chips, the waste product of the country's vast timber industry.
Some Swedish scientists doubt that the nuclear phase-out target can be met without resorting to natural gas.
* The government is planning to stage competitions to encourage companies to develop more energy-efficient products.
A precedent was set last year, when Electrolux won an "ozone-friendly" fridge competition which required no chlorofluorocarbons and used only half the energy of conventional designs.
Financial Times 17 January New Scientist 26 January
Nuclear Power
French nuclear waste agency under fire
Amid growing public debate in France over the question of what to do with the country's nuclear waste, a parliamentary report has called for major changes in the state nuclear waste agency, ANDRA (Agence nationale pour la gestion des déchets radioactifs).
The report, commissioned by the Office parlementaire d'Évaluation des choix scientifiques et technologiques, and drawn up by socialist deputy Christian Bataille, has called for its replacement by a reconstituted agency which would operate more openly.
It also recommends that the debate over the choice of 28 sites as possible repositories for nuclear waste should be re-opened.
The report suggests that at least two of these should be converted into laboratories to study the behaviour of deep-buried radioactive waste, pending any decision on long-term waste disposal.
Such a study should be conducted over 10 years, following which a new national commission, independent of the nuclear industry, would report on waste options.
ANDRA was set up in 1977 under the auspices of the atomic energy commission (Commissariat à l'Énergie atomique) and its sister organization, the state nuclear corporation (Compagnie générale des matières nucléaires).
Many of its decisions were taken in secret under the effective direction of these two organizations.
Bataille's report demands that ANDRA is replaced by a new agency without "umbilical ties" to the atomic energy commission.
Le Monde 14 December
Pollution: Air
US government report on "exaggerated" air pollution ignored
A ten-year study by the US National Acid Precipitation Assessment Programme (NAPAP) has concluded that the extent of air pollution has been grossly over-estimated.
NAPAP was created by Congress in 1980 to study the effects and extent of acid rain caused by industrial air pollutants.
The resulting three volume report concludes that acid rain has done far less damage to the nation's lakes and forests than previously thought.
Congress, however, is going ahead with $4 billion a year air pollution controls, and the report has been virtually ignored by all major news organisations.
It has, however, gone on to achieve wide publicity on the high rating US TV programme, 50 Minutes, where it was claimed to "take conventional wisdom about air pollution and shoot it full of holes" .
Washington Post 14 January
Pollution: Air
Cataclysmic ignorance according to MORI
According to a MORI poll, the majority of people have not grasped the realities of air pollution nor how they can contribute to the reduction of greenhouse gases.
The survey found that half the people questioned believe that catalytic converters would be the most effective means of reducing carbon dioxide emissions, and another 20 per cent believe that using lead free petrol will slow down global warming.
Three out of four home owners expressed concern about the greenhouse effect.
Greengauge 4 January
Pollution: Water
Gulf oil slick's effects on marine life
The huge slick of oil in the northern Gulf, caused by Iraqi pumping of Kuwaiti crude into the sea during the present war, was by early February threatening marine life throughout the area.
The slick is one of the largest, and potentially most damaging, ever to have been recorded.
Iraq's action in creating it was described as "environmental terrorism" by Allied spokesmen.
The flow of oil was for the most part halted after a few days when US aircraft bombed the pumping manifold stations.
Measuring some 35 miles by 10 miles, and heading south with the current at the rate of around one mile per day, its threat is exacerbated by the fact that the Gulf is a shallow sea, with an average depth of only 35 metres.
It also has little natural turbulence or tidal flushing.
This would mean that marine life would have no chance of escape, while the natural dispersion of the slick would be delayed.
An earlier slick in 1983, caused by Iraqi bombing of Iranian oil terminals, also raised fears of an environmental catastrophe, although in this case the marine life proved surprisingly resilient.
The present slick is on a much larger scale, however.
The most immediate threat is to bird life.
Among those first to die were cormorants and black-necked grebes.
Sand plovers, terns and redshanks were also threatened, together with other migratory birds who would shortly be using the area's mudflats and islands as a resting place in their seasonal flight from Africa to Siberia.
Aquatic life under threat includes prawns, shrimps, oysters and hamour fish, all of which were economically important to the scattered fishing villages along both the Arab and Iranian shores of the Gulf.
The oyster beds of Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates are facing catastrophe.
Larger marine creatures certain to suffer include porpoises and sea snakes, the bottlenose and humpback dolphin, the green and hawksbill turtles, which lay their eggs on tiny Gulf islands, and, most worryingly, the dugong, or sea cow, a relatively rare marine mammal, whose colonies in the Gulf are among the few remaining in the world.
The slick may lead to its extinction in the region.
As the oil sinks, it will kill coral reefs and sea grass, while on the coastal mudflats it will obliterate algae.
If it persists long enough to block out sunlight for an period, it will have the effect of wiping out phytoplankton, with potentially-disastrous effects for all marine life further up the food chain.
Its most immediate threat to human health is via the desalination plants, which provide Arab Gulf cities with much of their water.
Experts were preparing defences of floating booms across their intakes, with "skimmer" ships to help mop up any oil that may come through.
Initial attempts to disperse the slick are centred on defending the desalination plants.
The slick as a whole is too large to be broken up with chemical dispersal agents, which in any case can have damaging effects on marine life, particularly fish.
Logistical difficulties, combined with environmental concerns, rule out the prospect of burning it off.
Eventually it will be dispersed by a combination of the natural processes of evaporation and marine bacterial breakdown.
Daily newspapers (UK and US), 26 January et seq.
Pollution: Water
Pesticide threat to wildlife to be studied
The Institute of Terrestrial Ecology and Reading University are embarking on a three-year study on the effects of pesticides on wildlife.
It will focus in particular on the likely consequences of the absorption of a "cocktail" of insecticides, fungicides and herbicides on animals.
The study comes in the wake of preliminary work with red-legged partridges which showed that a mixture of pesticides can greatly increase the dangers of a any single chemical.
Little is yet known about the effects of such cocktails.
However, one of the scientists directing the study, Dr Derek Stevenson, says: "I am not sure the pesticide industry is getting a fair deal at the moment." 
He points to increased life-expectancy and reduced levels of infant mortality during the pesticide age, and adds that "occasional slight over-exposure is not necessarily going to harm anyone" .
His comments mirror similar remarks by other scientists, who have warned that excessive reactions against pesticide traces in drinking water could cause serious difficulties for the water industry.
Times 4 January
Pollution: Water
Study proves link between sewage and ill health
A study conducted by the Epidemiology Unit at Lancaster University has confirmed a link between sewage pollution and ill-health.
The study was the first to be conducted on one of Britain's beaches which fails to meet European sewage pollution standards.
The Unit followed up the health of 700 children who had been on Blackpool beach last summer.
It found an increase of symptoms of sewage pollution among the 455 children who had swum in the sea.
These children were three times more likely to suffer from vomiting and over five times more likely to contract diarrhoea.
They also suffered from itchy skin, fever, and loss of appetite, all of which have been identified as symptoms of sewage poisoning.
Untreated sewage is pumped directly into the sea at Blackpool, which was visited by 16 million tourists last year.
The British government faces prosecution in the European court over of its failure to clean up Blackpool, Formby and Southport beaches.
Observer 27 January Guardian 29 January Independent 28 January
Pollution: Water
Polluters pay — more
Increased fines for water pollution and dropping litter came into effect on Jan. 1 under the provisions of the Environmental Protection Act of 1990.
The maximum fine for water pollution was raised from £2,000 to £20,000, and that of littering from £400 to £1,000.
Crown courts can still impose unlimited fines for water pollution, as was the case with Shell UK, sentenced to pay a fine of £1,000,000 for its Mersey spillage of 1989.
The increased fines are likely to be in evidence shortly as a result of prosecutions planned by the National Rivers Authority of all 10 privatized water and sewage companies.
Local councils now have the right to issue £10 fixed penalty tickets to people caught dropping litter, and to charge supermarkets for the return of abandoned shopping trolleys, of which 140,000 are said to disappear each year.
* ICI has launched a new division, ICI Watercare, to market products for purifying drinking water and sewage and to treat industrial effluents.
Times 1 January
Pollution: Water
Windermere a "sewer" 
Lake Windermere's ranger's annual report has accused boat owners of polluting it with raw sewage and spent fuel, leading to noxious smells in warm weather.
Additionally, many people report stomach upsets, ear infections and rashes after coming into contact with the lake water.
The local authority have agreed to implement a series of new measures to fight the pollution.
Daily Telegraph 23 January Financial Times 24 January
Pollution: Water
Pesticides in drinking water
The government has admitted that pesticides are appearing in increasing concentrations in tap water, exceeding the Department of Environment's drinking water inspectorate's recommended limits.
Two types of pesticide — urons and furons — have been singled out for criticism.
They are used by local authorities and British Rail for clearing road verges and railway lines and by farmers as selective herbicides.
One product, Atrazine, is causing particular concern.
It has been found in concentrations over 40 times greater than the standard set by the European Community.
Medical advice suggests that they are not yet at toxic levels, which would pose a threat to human health.
However, the Ministry of Agriculture's advisory committee on pesticides in drinking water may now recommend a ban or restriction on its use.
Atrazine is used by farmers to control weeds in maize (corn), but is not seen as essential.
Another herbicide, Isoproturon, is in much wider use as a means of controlling the blackgrass weed which affects winter wheat.
This has also been found in drinking water, but is not seen as liable to be banned in the near future.
The drinking water inspectorate was set up a year ago.
Since its establishment, it has warned the newly-privatized water companies on 12 occasions to reduce pesticides in drinking water.
Some prosecutions may follow.
* The British Agrochemicals Association claims that the use of chemicals in agriculture has declined from 33,000 tons per weight of active ingredient in 1983 to 24,000 tons in 1990.
Times 3, 4 January Guardian 3 January
Transport
European parliament discuss transport tax proposals
A proposal to restructure the transport tax system in favour of the environment is under discussion by the European parliament.
The measures were put forward by leading European advisor on public transport, John Whitelegg, and are based on a five-fold increase in fuel costs combined with a cut in income tax.
Whitelegg said that any less severe measures would fail to break the cycle of dependence on road transport and consequent congestion.
He pointed out how the existing tax system had evolved so as to encourage the unfettered growth of car ownership and the transport of freight by lorry.
He argued that British car users meet only 27 per cent of the real costs which their vehicles impose on society, constituting a huge burden on the economy.
Cars and lorries in Britain are effectively subsidised to the tune of £20 million annually.
 "This subsidy dwarfs by any calculation any sum spent in supporting environmentally friendly non-damaging modes of transport" .
The Confederation of British Industry has put the cost of congestion on Britain's roads at an annual figure of £15 billion.
Whitelegg's solution involves the slow inauguration over 30 years of the radical system of ecological taxation devised by Ernst Von Weizsäcker at the Institute for European Environmental Policy.
Independent 5 January Guardian 5 January
Transport
 "Zero value" roads valuations under review
A government committee is to report on whether a cash value should be placed on environmental features threatened by road building schemes.
At present, development planners place zero value on features such as historic monuments and wildlife habitats in preparing break-downs of construction costs and benefits.
The sole criterion is the market price of the land.
The Department of Transport does, however, put a cash value on the time saved by road users by the building of new roads.
At the end of last year, however, Transport Secretary Malcolm Rifkind undertook to place greater weight on environmental priorities in transport policy.
This is also reflected in a soon-to-be released report by the Standing Advisory Committee on Trunk Road Assessment which has spent two years studying new economic techniques of valuing the environment.
Elements of the new approach include looking at the cost of environmental degradation of an area in terms of: its effect on house prices; the cost of alternative methods of transport; the value local people place on maintaining environmental features intact; and an assessment of the cost of replacement, for example moving a colony of badgers.
The Department of Transport's current £17 million road building programme has faced severe criticism for its damage and destruction of fragile and internationally important areas such as Oxleas Wood in south-east London.
Times 7 January
Transport
German tax incentives and traffic calming
Germany is to grant tax reductions to the buyers of new diesel engine cars.
The subsidies will amount to approximately £180 per car, and will be implemented by temporary exemption from automobile tax.
The EC has approved the scheme, saying that it did not amount to state aid to industry.
The incentives will apply to cars bought between Jan. 1, 1990, and July 31, 1992.
The German cars meet pollution standards that are tougher than those of the EC.
About 7,000 "traffic calming" schemes have been introduced into German cities in the state of North Rhine-Westfalia.
The measures are intended to cut road accidents by half, reduce air pollution by 70 per cent and create a more attractive environment for shoppers and cyclists alike.
They have involved the creation of "speed-bumps" in roads, the improvement of public transport, and reduction of inner-city parking.
The schemes have been welcomed by motorists despite the speed limit of 30 km/hour, and are increasingly regarded by planners as the model for the rest of Europe.
According to the state's traffic planning department, traffic calming had improved the economic performance of cities like Dusseldorf.
Guardian 5, 11 January Le Monde 14 December Independent 5 January
Waste and Recycling
The pros and cons of deep dumping
A meeting of oceanographers in Massachusetts has said that large-scale testing is needed to establish the ocean's potential as a dumping ground for millions of tons of sewage sludge and toxic waste.
Scientists concluded that the strong opposition of the public and congress to sea dumping is the result of "environmental hysteria" .
Sea dumping was put forward as one of the few remaining ways to halt further pollution of land and air from landfills and incineration.
For some types of waste, it was seen as a potentially far more appropriate method of disposal than shore dumping, which can pollute fishing grounds and beaches.
Material suitable for deep sea dumping included sewage sludge, industrial waste, and toxic ashes left after the incineration of garbage.
The waste could be dropped into the seas from capsules that, would open when they hit the sea floor.
With the aid of navigational satellites, the ship would be able to return repeatedly to the same area of ocean.
This way, millions of tonnes of waste each year could be pumped into the deep sea.
After ten years, the site would be closed, giving scientists the opportunity to study the effects of the dumping on sea life, which on the abyssal plains of the deep sea, consists mainly of worms and molluscs.
The Ocean Dumping Act, to come into force next year, constitutes an almost total ban on marine dumping of any sort.
Government agencies such as the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the Environmental Protection Agency are forbidden to fund any research into ocean dumping.
Scientists and engineers at the conference, however, foresaw a major collaboration between academics and European financiers who would seek a permit to put up the estimated $130 million to design the garbage ships and capsules.
* Scientists in South Carolina have discovered colonies of bacteria living deep underground.
The new findings have implications for the burial of radioactive and other toxic waste.
Until recently, scientists had assumed that there was virtually no life deeper than 50 metres below the earth's surface.
Yet more than 3,000 strains of bacteria have already been isolated, and may potentially contain useful new compounds.
Research at three other sites, including the sites of nuclear weapon testing in Nevada, have detected radically different strains of bacteria.
Until now it was assumed that sites deep underground provided a stable environment for buried waste.
Underground bacteria could compromise the containers used to bury radioactive and other dangerous wastes.
Washington Post 11 January Guardian 25 January
Waste and Recycling
Greenpeace report reveals cover-up on illegal dumping
A report by Italian Greenpeace has alleged that Italy and Turkey have colluded in the abandonment of investigations into the illegal dumping of hundreds of barrels of toxic industrial waste into the Black Sea.
In 1987, an Italian company, Sirteco, paid millions of lire into the bank accounts of two holding companies, Metrode and Eldip of Lugano, Switzerland, to finance the legal disposal of 382 barrels of chemical substances at Kimika Ice smelting works in Romania.
The barrels were washed up on Turkish beaches later the same year.
Italy was one of the 64 countries which voted in support of the global ban on sea dumping last November, under which member countries are required to prosecute ships who violate the ban.
The ships involved, the Maltese-owned Corina and the Turkish Akbay, have been identified by Greenpeace.
However, according to the environmental organisation, the incident was covered up after a meeting between Italian and Turkish foreign ministers.
Italy has refused responsibility for the waste and Turkey "has no wish to jeopardise its relations with a country which could help it to enter the European Community" .
A Venetian judge has corroborated the report, claiming that the Italian foreign ministry refused to aid investigations into the incident.
That Sirteco was obliged to do no more than inform the foreign commerce ministry that the waste disposal contract had been paid for illustrates the failure of the Italian government to monitor the international activities of waste disposal companies.
The Black Sea only recycles its water once in every 140 years and it is estimated Turkish beaches will remain contaminated by waste for more than a century.
European 4-6 January
Waste and Recycling
Fresh funding for local recycling initiatives
The government is making £40 million available to councils over the next three years for the funding of recycling schemes.
This is the first time it has specifically allocated finance for local authority investment in recycling projects.
This year's investment amounting to £10 million, will focus on the potential of sorting household waste.
A survey conducted by Social Trends has shown that Britain is failing to improve its performance in the all-round recycling of waste materials.
Board and paper recycling, which amounts to 26 per cent, had not increased since 1974.
The proportion of ferrous metal recycled fell from 71 per cent in 1980 to 44 per cent in 1988.
The amount of reclaimed glass used in manufacture doubled between 1983 and 1988, but this is still only 16 per cent of the total.
Financial Times 3 January Guardian 17 January
Waste and Recycling
France introduces a tax on waste
The French Government has imposed a tax on the use of waste disposal sites.
The levy is the first measure to be implemented from France's White Paper on the environment, which described French waste disposal techniques as being "15 years behind the times" .
The tax, intended to provide an incentive for the use and development of recycling, covers both commercial and industrial waste and will amount to an average of about £2 a tonne.
Reluctant to impose yet another local tax, the finance ministry has remained strongly opposed to the new measures.
Incomefrom the levy will amount to some £40 million which will go towards the development of new waste disposal techniques.
A proportion of the money will be administered by local authorities, and some may go to the new environment agency set up by Environment Secretary Brice Lalonde [see section on Environmental Politics].
Illegal tips will not be taxed.
New Scientist 12 January
Waste and Recycling
Genuine biodegradable plastics on horizon
Battelle, a research corporation based in Ohio, has begun producing biodegradable plastics from vegetable oil.
Similar research projects are developing plastics from materials such as corn, molasses, potato peelings and castor oil.
It has been known for some time that versatile plastics could be made from vegetable matter but production costs have been prohibitive.
However, with the US plastic waste problem escalating to crisis proportion, the need to allow for environmental and health-related costs is becoming obvious.
Other corporations currently developing biodegradable plastics include Procter and Gamble, Exxon, DuPont and ICI.
The latter released a biodegradable shampoo bottle in Germany last year, which according to the company, met with a highly positive response from the buying public.
Scientists from the University of Massachusetts are developing plastics using an organic base of starch, glucose or lactic acid to which micro-organisms are added.
 "Biopolymers" are extremely versatile, and, once submerged in soil, will degrade completely within a few months.
In the past, so-called biodegradable plastics have been viewed as fraudulent by environmentalists, as they have only broken down into smaller pieces.
Environment Magazine (US) January/February