

Agriculture and Food
 "Mad Cow" arrives in France
France's first case of BSE has been identified on a dairy farm at Plouha, in Brittany.
According to officials from the Ministry of Agriculture and Food (MAF), the single infected cow was descended from British stock.
In an effort to improve breeding stock, large numbers of British cows were imported in to the region in the 10 years preceding the UK outbreak of BSE.
The entire herd has now been bought for epidemiological research at about £200 a head over the normal abattoir price.
This procedure was previously agreed by MAF in anticipation of the arrival of the disease.
Studies will try to establish if the infected cow had been given English cattle feed from ground up ruminant carcasses — banned in Britain in 1988 and in France in 1989.
Officials report that French farmers mixed far larger quantities of bone meal into cattle food than previously admitted.
The official French view is that BSE will inevitably spread to France, manifesting itself in "spontaneous" cases with an incubation period of between two and nine years.
It is believed that the epidemic will be smaller than that in Britain, because vets are prepared for it.
Video tapes explaining how to distinguish symptoms of BSE from other diseases such as rabies were distributed to French vets last year.
Nature 7 March New Scientist 9 March
Agriculture and Food
Cheap graves for livestock pose health risk
A Meat and Livestock Commission survey has drawn attention to the threat posed to water supplies by the dumping or burial of diseased animal carcasses around the countryside.
The Commission estimates that at least half a million carcasses have so far been abandoned.
Carcasses are being left to rot after the BSE scare caused the collapse of the knacker industry.
The survey found that half of the UK's knacker businesses have gone bankrupt since they began charging last July.
Farmers can cut costs by disposing of the corpses themselves.
The Institution of Environmental Health Officers fears that the disposal of carcasses on farmland could result in large scale pollution of water courses [see ED no. 44].
Observer 24 February
Agriculture and Food
Fungicide restricted after tests
Severe restrictions have been imposed on the use of a fungicide used widely on fruit and vegetables since 1977.
Laboratory tests have shown vinclozolin to cause birth defects and other reproductive abnormalities in animals.
Aerial spraying of the fungicide, which goes under the trade name of "Ronilan" , is now completely outlawed and farmers are forbidden to use it on any crop which is not peeled or shelled.
BASF, the German company which makes vinclozolin, said that there was no cause for concern about foods already consumed or in storage, as wide safety margins had been set.
The Ministry of Agriculture said that vinclozolin had only been "partially" approved for use and was under review.
Last October, a British Medical Association report accused the Government of using secrecy in order to hide its failure to adequately test pesticides before ratifying their sale.
Guardian 19 March
Agriculture and Food
Prince Charles calls for agricultural reforms
The Prince of Wales has advocated a fundamental reform of European agricultural policy in order to halt overproduction and preserve the wildlife and countryside.
In his speech to the Royal Agricultural Society, the Prince posited that a large part of the £20 billion currently spent on Common Agricultural Policy should be used to steer farmers away from high-yield farming and reward environment-friendly methods.
Accusing conventional farmers of scorning organic farming methods as "some kind of drop out option for superannuated hippies" , Prince Charles proposed a reduction of nitrogen fertilisers by the issue of quotas for farms.
The fact that 60 per cent of organic food had to be imported, he claimed, proved that there was a market for it in the UK. * The Prince of Wales has been accused of creating consumer confusion by lending his name and crest to the sale of "traditionally reared" lamb sold through the Tesco supermarket chain.
The lamb, which comes from the Prince's own Duchy of Cornwall farms, is to be marketed as coming from "stress-free" animals on a vegetarian diet and will sell for 15 per cent above the normal price.
The director of British Organic Farmers, Patrick Holden, commented: "this is another halfway house which is likely to confuse consumers…the Duchy of Cornwall standards under which this meat was produced are not fully organic" .
According to Holden, most sheep in Britain are now returned to their natural vegetarian diet as a result of the BSE scare, and the Royal lambs are unlikely to have a provenance significantly different from that of the average British sheep.
Times 15, 19 March Guardian, Independent 15 March
Conservation: Land
Dorset heathland saved from developers
A wildlife site of international importance in Dorset has been saved from housing development by the intervention of the Environment Secretary, Michael Heseltine.
Canford Heath, on the outskirts of Poole, is one of the last remaining fragments of dry heathland habitat in Britain.
As such, it is one of the most valuable ecological sites in the country, home to numerous rare species: sand lizards, smooth snakes, nightjars, Dartford warblers and the hobby falcon.
About 17 acres was scheduled for the development of over 200 houses by Poole Borough Council, which had granted itself planning permission in early 1989.
Attempts by the World Wide Fund for Nature and the British Herpetological Society to have the development halted in the courts were defeated in December 1990 [see ED no. 41/42].
Mr Heseltine's decision to revoke the permission comes against a background of mounting criticism within European circles of Britain's failure to protect adequately its fragile habitats.
At the Strasbourg meeting of signatories of the Berne wild life convention, Britain was singled out for criticism over the Canford Heath development.
* The Department of the Environment is issuing new warnings to local authorities to take SSSI designation into account when considering granting planning applications.
The DOE is stressing the need to carry out environmental impact assessments on vulnerable areas.
WWF information release 13 March Department of Environment information release 13 March Times 14 March Independent 14 March Financial Times 14 March Guardian 14 March New Scientist 23 March
Conservation: Land
National Parks review calls for sweeping reforms
A Countryside Commission review has called for wide-ranging reforms to protect the 10 national parks of England and Wales from the growing threats of development and tourism.
The review panel was set up a year ago under the chairmanship of Professor Ron Edwards of Cardiff University.
Its report, Fit for the Future says that in many respects the Parks have failed to live up to the expectations of their founders, as enshrined in the 1949 National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act.
The panel members drew up the report after extensive visits to each Park, and to the Norfolk Broads, which enjoys similar status.
 "We saw evidence…of deteriorating environmental quality, permanent damage to the landscape and poor local relationships" , the report warns.
An estimated 100 million tourists per year were placing the Parks under severe strain, particularly in the Lake District, Peak District, North Yorks Moors, Yorkshire Dales and Snowdonia.
Other threats included farming, quarrying and mining, building developments and military training, particularly live-fire exercises.
The key recommendation is for new legislation, in the form of a fresh National Parks Act, stressing conservation and "quiet enjoyment" as the priorities in Park management.
This would also give each Park its own authority, independent of local councils (thereby extending a system applying presently in the Lakes and the Peak).
Development activity would take place only with the Park Authority's approval.
Development plans by government agencies which were opposed by the Park would require parliamentary approval.
The panel recommends National Park status for the New Forest, and calls for assessment studies on other possible candidates, including the South Downs, North Pennines, the Cambrian Mountains of Wales.
Its other main recommendations are as follows: * Farming.
The introduction of a new support system to encourage public access and conservation-friendly farming methods.
An early end to major conifer planting programmes.
All proposals for plantations of over 10 hectares to be subject to licensing.
* Transport.
The creation of "car-free zones" , including the possible closure of some routes to private motor traffic, on the principle of the "long walk in" to the Park.
This should be backed up by improved public transport, within the framework of overall traffic management plans to be drawn up with highway authorities.
* Defence.
The use of 44,000 hectares of Park land for military training was described by the report as "discordant, incongruous and inconsistent with national park purposes" .
It should be phased out.
* Development.
Statutory controls should be introduced on industrial and commercial development, and resources made available for the removal of existing inappropriate developments.
Help should also be allocated to provide low-cost housing for local people.
The report estimated that its recommendations would require additional funding of between £8 million and £10 million, excluding the cost of additional farm support.
Times, Independent, Financial Times 22 March
Conservation: Land
Britain's estuary life "being destroyed" 
In its last major report before its disbandment, the Nature Conservancy Council has warned that wildlife in Britain's 155 estuaries is under threat from inadequately-controlled development and waste dumping.
The estuaries account for nearly half the country's tidal shoreline (compared with 28 per cent in western Europe).
They are important sites for waterfowl, seals, fish, prawns, snails, shrimps and toads.
Whole populations of some European birds winter in particular British estuaries.
The major threat identified by the NCC is land reclamation.
In 1989 alone, 183 "land-claim" operations were in progress, affecting 45 estuaries.
Other threats include tidal barrages, marinas and recreational developments.
The situation is exacerbated by the fact that no single body has control over estuaries, with decisions divided between central government, local authorities and the National Rivers Authority.
Some have been designated as sites of special scientific interest (SSSI), but these stop at the low-water mark, allowing rubbish dumping further out on the water.
The NCC report calls for a national policy to protect estuaries on both sides of the tidal line.
Times 26 March Guardian 26 March
Conservation: Land
Green belt planning regulations may be loosened
Government proposals to relax planning restrictions on green belt areas around cities were put forward by Environment Secretary, Michael Heseltine, at a planning conference in the south-east.
The changes are aimed at encouraging more leisure facilities and the development of derelict land.
New developments will continue to be prohibited.
Heseltine argued that the changes were needed because "many areas of our green belt are" brown "rather than green." 
Changes to the planning regulations surrounding the redevelopment of partially abandoned hospitals in green belt areas could also be expected.
The Secretary also expressed a keen interest in developing large areas of derelict land in the area known as the East Thames Corridor, to the east of London.
David Astor, Chairman of the Council for the Protection of Rural England, welcomed the proposals, saying that the government "now has an unprecedented opportunity to turn green rhetoric into effective policies and to begin to solve the long-standing problems of excessive development pressure in the south-east" .
Financial Times 7 March
Conservation: Land
The disappearing grasslands of Britain
Britain's natural dry grassland areas have been reduced by half over the past 50 years, and much of the remainder is under threat from destruction, according to a study co-ordinated by the Nature Conservancy Council (NCC).
Grasslands are home to one-third of the country's flowering plant species, many of which have now become rare.
The main cause is the expansion of farming onto permanent grassland and the widespread use of fertilisers.
The victims have included species such as the early spider orchid, large blue butterfly and great bustard, all of which have disappeared from Britain in recent years.
Many other species native to dry grassland are under severe pressure, including the barn owl and little owl, the stone curlew, meadow pipit and corn bunting.
The adonis blue and silver-skipper butterflies are all but extinct.
Many plants are unable to survive in ground contaminated by phosphate residues from fertilisers.
Dry grasslands are in part a relic of early agriculture, dating from the days when pre-historic man undertook the first forest clearances.
Some, however, are believed to be original natural habitats.
According to Leo Batten of the NCC: "Grasslands in this country have had a low conservation priority.
The loss of the land is not as noticeable as with, for example, draining a wetland."
Over half the remaining grassland lies on Ministry of Defence land in Wiltshire; most of the rest is on downland across the south of England.
Observer 17 March
Conservation: Land
Farm buildings "should be brought under planning control" 
The Council for the Protection of Rural England have called for farm buildings to be brought under the control of the planning system.
This would require farmers to apply for planning permission as is the case with other commercial or industrial developments.
Exemptions granted to farmers date from the days when boosting food production was seen as a national priority, says CPRE's Tony Burton.
The result has been a rapid spread of unsightly buildings across the countryside.
Burton claims that: "the tide of public opinion is moving towards full planning controls.
The government has now accepted the arguments, but it has failed to come up with effective solutions".
Conservation Now!
February/March
Conservation: Land
Somerset Levels victim of falling water table
The Somerset Levels, one of Europe's most important wetlands, is drying out as a result of a falling water table, according to the Nature Conservancy Council (NCC).
Drainage by farmers is mainly to blame, the NCC says.
The effect on wading birds has been dramatic, with numbers of lapwing, curlew, redshank, godwit and snipe falling dramatically over the past 10 years alone.
Most species have registered declines of around 50 per cent.
The gradual drying out of the Levels is also having an effect on the local flora, with the slow transformation of herb-rich wetland meadows into dry fields.
Wild flowers such as marsh orchid and creeping jenny are being replaced by more common dryland plants.
The drying out appears to be continuing despite recent incentives to farmers not to carry out drainage works, and conservation management agreements between the NCC and some 1,000 farmers in the area.
Much of the Levels has been declared an "environmentally-sensitive area" , and there are a number of sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs).
The National Farmers' Union disputes the NCC's claim that drainage is principally to blame, and suggests that predators are the main cause of falling bird numbers.
Times 21 March
Conservation: Land
Antarctic research centre to open
Australia is to set up a major new centre for research into the ecology of Antarctica and the souther oceans.
Its primary role is likely to be to bolster the Australian government's campaign to have Antarctica declared a world natural reserve.
The recent Antarctic Treaty meeting [see ED no. 41/42]pointed up the lack of research so far carried out.
The new centre will be based at the University of Tasmania, at a cost of £27 million.
New Scientist 23 March
Conservation: Land
Exxon fined for Valdez spill
Exxon Corporation, the multi-national oil giant, has agreed to pay up to $1,100 million ($1.1 billion) in an out of court settlement over the 1989 Valdez oil spill.
The amount breaks down as follows: * a criminal fine of $100 million, the highest ever levied against a polluter, set after Exxon agreed to plead guilty to charges of criminal misdemeanour; * a total of $900 million in civil damages, to be administered by a board of Alaska state and US federal officials, and used for cleaning up operations along the Alaska shoreline over the next decade; * if further damage from the slick emerges between the years 2002 and 2006, Exxon will be liable for up to $100 million more.
In return for the settlement, Exxon is released from all past and future civil or criminal claims by the state or federal governments.
The company has already spent over $2 billion on cleanup operations.
However, both Exxon and the state of Alaska are still facing legal action from local fishermen, environmental groups and native American Indian villagers.
One consequence of the settlement is that scientific studies on the damage caused by the slick may now be made public.
Previously they were withheld while being used as evidence.
Washington Post 13, 14 March International Herald Tribune 14 March Times 14 March New Scientist 23 March
Conservation: Land
Navajo Indians oppose Arizona mining
Navajo Indians in Arizona have launched a campaign against mining activities which they claim are polluting water supplies, interfering with sacred sites and threatening local sheep farmers with coal dust poisoning.
There are now plans to extend the mining over a further 21,850 hectares in the Navajo's Black Mesa and Kayenta regions.
The mining is being undertaken by Peabody Coal, a subsidiary of Hanson plc.
The Navajo expressed their concern at Hanson's annual general meeting in London in January; they are now taking Hanson to the UN Human Rights Commission, with the assistance of Survival International.
Green Magazine May Survival news, no. 28, 1991
Conservation: Land
Swiss farmers clash with environmentalists
Alarmed at criticism of their activities, some farmers in the Valais canton of Switzerland have resorted to violence against environmental activists.
The local branch of the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) had criticized farmers for tearing down traditional terracing and drystone walls on hillside vineyards, in order to increase productivity and allow tractors onto the slopes.
The WWF fear that this will lead to erosion, and that the habitats of various rare species will disappear.
The farmers are carrying on the work in defiance both of cantonal regulations and a supreme court injunction ordering them to stop.
At least one local WWF activist has been beaten up, amid concern that the local police are reluctant to intervene to enforce the law.
Independent 27 March
Conservation: Species
Civil war in Rwanda threatens mountain gorillas
The home of half the world's surviving population of mountain gorillas is threatened by civil war in Rwanda.
The Parc des Volcans, which became famous in the film on anthropologist Dian Fossey, Gorillas in the Mist, is being used as a base by rebels of the Rwandanese Patriotic Front.
(The RPF represents the minority Tutsi people, fighting against the Hutu-dominated government of Rwanda.)
The thickly-forested park serves as a refuge for over 300 mountain guerrillas, but also serves as ideal cover for the RPF rebels.
In addition to its ecological value, the park also provides the government with its second largest source of foreign exchange (after coffee) in the form of "gorilla tourism" .
The government has accused the rebels of "eco-terrorism" .
Ecologists warn that the gorillas are in danger both from government shelling attacks on suspected rebel positions, and from the latter's introduction of cattle into the forest, which break down the bush.
The recovery of the gorilla population from 260 in the 1970s to today's figure of 320 has hitherto been hailed as a conservation miracle.
* Uganda has announced plans to promote its small population of mountain gorillas as a tourist attraction.
Some 420 of the animals live in the Bwindi forests on the western borders with Rwanda and Zaïre.
According to a Tourism Ministry spokesman, the government hopes that "gorilla tourism" will help attract visitors to the country after years of war and instability.
Independent 18 March Times 18 March Observer 10 March
Conservation: Species
Manatees in danger
Brazil's population of manatees — a large aquatic mammal — are in danger of extinction through hunting and pollution.
The marine manatee, which can grow to as long as 4.5 metres and weigh 600 kilograms, is suffering from the rapid disappearance of its coastal mangrove swamps, and the pollution of those that remain.
Once to be found along much of the coast, it is now restricted to relatively small areas.
Surveys along the north-east coast have shown that its numbers have fallen by half over the last decade, to today's figure of around 100.
The smaller Amazonian manatee (or cow fish) has been wiped out in many of its traditional homes in the inland river network by a combination of deliberate hunting and accidental death through being caught in fishing nets.
Although sale of manatee meat is against the law, it is still to be found in markets.
Brazilian ecologists are planning to reintroduce captive-bred manatees along stretches of rivers.
On the coast, a public education programme is under way to alert villagers to the manatee's plight.
There are also plans to cleanse some of the worst-affected mangroves of pollution.
New Scientist 16 March
Conservation: Species
Java rhino captive breeding controversy
Plans to airlift up to half of the wild Javan rhinos to new reserves have proved controversial.
About 50 of the animals survive in their last remaining wild refuge in the Ujung Kulon area.
Although their numbers appear to have held steady over the past 15 years, the prospects for survival are said to be slim.
Fifty is too small a number to overcome the cumulative effects of in-breeding, or the dangers of sudden natural disaster, while the Ujung Kulon habitat is too restricted to allow for much expansion.
The International Union for the Conservation of Nature has plans to move up to 26 of the rhinos to two new reserves in Indonesia, and to the USA, where a captive breeding programme will be undertaken.
Critics of the plan, including World Wide Fund for Nature experts, argue that such a move would only expose the rhinos to greater danger.
Dividing the colony will merely make its members more vulnerable, they argue, while previous efforts to breed rhinos in captivity have been at best unreliable.
Proponents of relocation, however, say that it offers the only long-term chance for the rhino to recover.
Independent 25 March
Conservation: Species
Road plan poses new threat to French bears
France's last remaining colony of bears, in the Pyrenees National Park, are under renewed threat from road building schemes [see ED no. 44 for farmers' fears that the bears posed threats to their livestock].
The new scheme involves the widening of a minor road through the Aspe Valley — home to a colony of 10 bears — in order for it to serve as a major access highway to a new tunnel under the Somport Pass, across the Spanish frontier.
At present, bears regularly cross the little-used road at several points.
They would be at risk from the vastly increased number of cars and heavy lorries expected to use the new tunnel.
The construction works on the tunnel would disrupt one of the colony's main breeding grounds.
The plan has the enthusiastic support of local councillors, who believe it will bring tourism and industry to the area.
On the other side of the frontier, Spain's Navarre province has carried out major EC-financed improvements of its road network.
The plan has provoked a fierce debate within France, with President Mitterrand's wife, Danielle, leading the protest, and Environment Minister Brice Lalonde expressing concern over the bears' fate.
The EC has suspended a grant towards restocking the Pyrenees with eagles and vultures because of fears of the roads' impact on the birds.
An alternative could be the reactivation of a disused railway line along the Aspe Valley from Pau into Canfranc, in Navarre.
This runs through an existing tunnel, but it has not been in operation since 1970.
Guardian 19 March
Conservation: Species
Turkish "dolphin massacre" reported
The discovery of large numbers of dolphin carcasses on the quayside of a Turkish Black Sea fishing village has triggered accusations of deliberate fishing.
The local authorities in the Samsun governorate claim that the recent deaths of over 200 dolphins were caused accidentally, when the mammals became caught in the fishing nets.
But reporters from the Hurriyet newspaper suggest that the dolphin deaths are connected with the presence of 10 fish-oil factories at nearby Yakakent.
Independent 14 March
Conservation: Species
Norwegian seal hunt sparks protests
The resumption of Norwegian seal hunting in March has led to protests from the World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA), which claims that the hunters repeatedly breach Norwegian and international regulations in the ways in which they capture and kill both adult seals and pups.
Norwegian apologists for the hunt insist that seal culling is essential to counter the decline in fish stocks.
The WSPA however argue that the decline is principally due to over-fishing by fleets from Norway, the Soviet Union and other countries.
It adds that there is evidence that seal populations themselves are now in decline.
Conservation Now!
February/March
Conservation: Species
Whales and dolphins "disrupted by sonar" 
Scientists on board Greenpeace's Rainbow Pacific research ship have claimed that whales in the southern reaches of the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman have become disorientated by sonar signals emitted from Allied ships during the war with Iraq.
The sonar appears to disrupt the whales' navigation system, hampering their migration and search for food.
At least two whales believed to have been affected by sonar have been washed up dead on the beach at Abu Dhabi.
The scientists say that the presence of warships in the region is likely to cause more deaths among whales and dolphins than the oil slick.
* In Australia, Greenpeace campaigners have staged protests against sonic seismic testing for oil, being carried out off Warrnambool, Victoria.
Guardian 27 March Independent 30 March
Conservation: Species
Sea mammal deaths to be studied for pollution links
The Department of the Environment has agreed to fund a major study into deaths and diseases among marine mammals in the North Sea, in an effort to determine once and for all whether they are linked to pollution.
The study will involve scientists from the Natural History Museum, London Zoo, the University of Liverpool and the Sea Mammal Research Unit at Cambridge.
Post-mortems will be carried out on every washed-up carcass of seals or cetaceans, such as whales and dolphins.
The co-ordinator, Thijs Kuiken, said that the inadequacy of present knowledge had been shown up by the 1989 viral epidemic which killed thousands of seals.
"There were no people studying these animals, no facilities for looking at the carcasses, for establishing the cause of death.
There was little basic knowledge about the sort of diseases they normally suffered."
The new project aims to rectify these shortcomings, establishing a system for documenting washed-up mammals, assessing the cause of death, and attempting to determine whether polluted waters may be a factor.
Kuiken says that: "These animals are at the top of the food chain, so they would have the highest concentration of pollutants in their bodies.
It is possible that pollution affects their reproductive and immune systems, but there has only been piecemeal research on this subject."
Another project will seek to establish population numbers and distribution of the marine mammals.
Independent 3 April
Conservation: Species
Californian drought imperils wildlife
California's long-running drought is pushing already endangered species towards extinction.
Lake Cachuma, which supplies the city of Santa Barbara with water, is just 14 per cent full.
Declining fish numbers are threatening attempts to reintroduce the bald eagle, which used to breed in large numbers in the area until the 1950s.
With only 2,000 breeding pairs left in the US, reintroduction programmes are seen as vital if it is to escape extinction as a result of local disasters.
A recent survey has shown that 74 of California's 113 native fish species are in need of special protection, with the drought threatening to kill off a number of species which had already been weakened by the introduction of predatory game fish and the diversion of water for agricultural, industrial and domestic purposes.
Delta smelt, coho salmon and chinook salmon are particularly at risk.
Nature 21 March
Conservation: Species
Turtle breeding success in Sri Lanka
Conservationists in Sri Lanka have launched a successful turtle breeding programme which has resulted in 600,000 newly-hatched turtles being released into the Indian Ocean.
The success of the project is due to the co-operation of local villagers, who collect up to 1,000 eggs a night.
They receive two cents per egg from the Swiss-based Hasselblad Wildlife Trust, which is funding the hatchery project at Kosgoda Beach, 72 kilometres south of Colombo.
Formerly, the villagers used to eat turtle eggs and flesh, despite this being against the law.
* The capture and sale of sea turtles has ben banned by the Seychelles government.
Green Magazine, May
Conservation: Species
Escaped mink "wiping out" water voles
Ecologists at York University have warned that water voles are in danger of being wiped out by mink — an alien predator which is spreading through the British countryside as a result of escapes from mink farms.
A study of traditional vole breeding sites in the North Yorks Moors National Park showed that a number had been taken over by mink, and that in others voles were either absent, or were present only in relatively small numbers.
Water voles have fairly specialized habitat needs: rivers or streams with steep banks and thick vegetation to protect them from birds of prey.
The ecologists warn that, unless urgent steps are taken to control the spread of the mink, water voles will die out completely in the area.
New Scientist 30 March
Conservation: Species
Fen raft spider to be rescued
The UK's largest spider, the fen raft, is to be one of the first subjects of a species reintroduction programme by English Nature, the English successor body of the Nature Conservancy Council (NCC).
It is in imminent danger of dying out from its last remaining stronghold — Redgrave and South Lopham Fen in Suffolk — due largely to the fact that a nearby borehole drilled by the Suffolk Water Company is drying out the ground.
The number of fen raft spiders on the site have declined from 1,500 in 1987 to "a handful" today.
The management of the Suffolk Water Company have admitted that the borehole is damaging the fen, and are exploring the possibility of opening an alternative.
The NCC have asked the National Rovers Authority to revoke the company's license to extract water.
English Nature's plans to reintroduce the fen raft spider to other locations was announced at its launch in early April.
Green Magazine, May English Nature information
Conservation: Species
Endangered species update
Attempts to bolster the numbers of the endangered rufous hare wallaby in the Australian outback have been set back by domestic cats, which have killed 11 of the rare animals introduced to remote areas after a captive breeding programme.
It has been estimated that only 30 of the rufous hares survive outside captivity.
The guilty cats were themselves living in the wild.
A Shanghai newspaper, Wenhui Daily, reported that a panda had been caught after killing and eating sheep on farms.
Scientists suggested that the disappearance of the panda's traditional bamboo forest habitat had forced the herbivore to turn meat-eater.
At least 130 pandas died of starvation in the mid-70s when three species of bamboo died off in panda territory.
A farmer who killed a panda in a reserve in Shaanxi province has been sentenced to death, suspended for two years, according to the Chinese Farmer's Daily.
One of his accomplices was imprisoned for life, and four others were sentenced to between three and 15 years.
Parts of Tunstall and Rendlesham forests, in Suffolk, are being set aside as a reserve for the woodlark, one of Britain's rarest birds.
Independent 20, 22 March Times 19, 20 March Guardian 13 March
Energy
Government "fails to support wind energy" 
Britain's potential for generating wind energy, which is the highest in Europe, is in danger of being neglected by the government, according to Friends of the Earth.
If fully exploited, wind power could produce anything from 20 to 50 per cent of the nation's electricity needs, its supporters claim.
Britain has just 8 megawatts of wind power capacity installed to date, compared with 35 MW in India, 250 MW in Denmark and 1,400 MW in California — which has set itself the target of meeting 10 per cent of energy needs through wind power by the year 2000.
In a study entitled Removing the Wind Brakes, FoE warn that a failure to differentiate between wind energy and nuclear power in the non-fossil fuel provisions of electricity privatization legislation is hampering the prospects for wind energy promoters.
As part of privatization, the government included a commitment to support electricity generated by non-fossil fuels by paying subsidized prices to the generators, by means of a levy raised on sales of all electricity.
These would apply both to nuclear power and alternative energies (principally wind).
Originally scheduled to run for 15 years, the subsidy period was reduced to eight years after objections from the European Commission, which was particularly concerned over long-term support for the nuclear industry.
(Only 2 per cent of the levy raised in 1990-91 went to renewables; 98 per cent went to nuclear power.)
FoE claim that the Commission would, however, look favourably on an extended subsidy period for renewable energy sources alone.
It urges the government to reopen this question.
Such longer term support would make it economically-viable for wind power operators to build turbines in areas of relatively low wind speeds, effectively doubling.
At present, they can only develop profitably in locations with high wind speed.
In practice, this means that many favoured sites are on prominent positions in the landscape, such as clifftops or mountain ridges, often within areas of scenic appeal.
These are likely to meet with opposition on the grounds of spoiling favourite views.
The Countryside Commission has called for planning guidelines on wind farms to be issued to local authorities.
It argues that they should include a presumption against development in national parks, areas of outstanding natural beauty and on heritage coasts.
* A public inquiry is to be held into plans by the Wind Energy Group to build a 24-turbine farm near the Cader Idris mountain in Snowdonia National Park.
The Countryside Commission claims that it will ruin the view from the mountain, but the developers argue that it should be looked on with pride as a source of non-polluting energy.
A heavy gust of wind tore down one of the blades of Europe's largest turbine, the VAWT 850, at National Power's Camarthen Bay Wind Energy Centre.
The centre has been closed down while repairs are made.
Times 12, 16 March Independent on Sunday 24 March Friends of the Earth press information, 15 March
Energy
British "woolly" on energy savings
A Department of the Environment report has revealed that most of the British public has "woolly and undeveloped" ideas about energy conservation, with very few people aware of the link between domestic energy usage and environmental problems.
The study suggests that leadership and incentives from government, housebuilders, appliance manufacturers and the power industries are needed to transform public attitudes and protect the environment.
The government has no plans for grants or tax incentives but is planning a £1 million energy efficiency education campaign for the autumn.
Independent 22 March Guardian 22 March
Energy
Wind power receives Dutch boost
The Netherlands is set to build 2,000 new energy-generating windmills by the end of the century, in addition to the 1,000 already in place.
Together, they will generate approximately 1,000 megawatts of power — providing about 10 per cent of the country's electricity needs, enough in itself to supply a city the size of Amsterdam.
The plan was announced after parliament had approved subsidies which will cover up to 40 per cent of the costs.
Environment Minister Hans Alders acknowledged that, partly due to the high installation cost, wind power is at present as expensive as coal or nuclear power.
He added, however, that costs should fall as new engineering technology comes onstream.
Wind power should also be relatively cheaper in the long term, as the pollution costs of fossil fuels rise.
The Dutch Energy Research Centre is carrying out tests on more powerful windmills, including one that can generate a record 1.3 megawatts.
New Scientist 16 March
Environmental Politics
US boosts biodiversity funding
US funding for research into biodiversity increased by over two-thirds in 1987-89, according to a report by the Washington-based World Resources Institute.
The main contributor to the increase came from private foundations, which gave $21.4 million to work on biodiversity in 1989 — a leap of 750 per cent in two years.
Federal funding increased by 16 per cent to $21.1 million.
Of the total money, 38 per cent went to research projects in the third world, 25 per cent to particular species and site projects, and 5 per cent to "debt-for-nature" swaps.
Nature 14 March
Environmental Politics
India's population to surpass China's by 2011
India's official census has revealed that its population can be expected to increase by 25 per cent by the year 2011, surpassing China as the world's most densely populated country.
The latter, although more populous at 1.09 billion, has slowed its growth rate to less than two per cent through the introduction of family planning.
India's growth rate has slowed by only 1.15 per cent over the last ten years, despite Indira Ghandi's attempts to emulate China by offering a free transistor radio for every vasectomy.
In order to conduct the census, 1.7 million white collar workers were recruited, given a cursory training and sent out to a total of 604,869 villages armed with census forms translated into 20 languages.
Hazards for census collectors included being shot at with arrows by tribes in the Andaman islands and chased away from the homes of the super-rich elite as many as 15 times before securing an answer.
Attempting to convey some idea of the massive population increase that is to be expected, Census Commissioner Amulya Nanda pointed out that an increase in population of 17 million a year was equal to the entire population of Australia.
Independent 26 March
Environmental Politics
 "Shadow" budget puts environment first
Labour's "Budget for the environment" has revealed plans to encourage green consumerism and commerce.
Under a Labour government, duty, in the form of VAT, would be lowered on environmentally safe products and raised on environmentally damaging ones such as heavy metal batteries, CFC-containing aerosols and non-returnable drinks cans.
Tax on insulation materials and recycled goods would be eliminated.
Power stations would be charged for emissions on a graded scale according to their contribution to acid rain and incentives in the form of lower prices would also be applied to cars with catalytic converters and unleaded petrol.
In the long term, a Labour government would consider a levy on waste disposal in landfill sites to encourage recycling and the burning of rubbish for power.
Observer 17 March Guardian 14 March
Environmental Politics
Heseltine appoints green advisor
Tom Burke, director of the Green Alliance, has been appointed as one of a team of policy advisors to Michael Heseltine, the Secretary of State for the Environment.
Burke is to advise on the implementation of proposals in the government's white paper on the environment, criticised by environmentalists as being too weak.
Professor David Pearce, a University College London economist and author of the Pearce report on the use of taxes to control pollution, is also to remain an adviser.
Financial Times 13 March
Global Warming
Antarctic found melting
The ice which surrounds the continent of Antarctica is melting, according to glaciologist Christopher Doake of the British Antarctic Survey.
His research has shown the area to have decreased from 2,000 square kilometres in 1966 to 700 sq km in 1989.
The ice has continued to melt ever since.
Retreating ice shelves could be expected as a result of global warming, but are not in themselves evidence of it.
Although warming has been detected over the last few decades, scientists claim that not enough is known about the natural temperature variations of the region to be able to come to any conclusions.
Independent 28 March
Global Warming
Link established between nylon production and nitrous oxide
Scientists at La Jolla University, California, have for the first time established a link between nitrous oxide and the nylon industry.
Increasing atmospheric levels of nitrous oxide currently stand at about eight per cent above pre-industrial levels.
Once produced, nitrous oxide remains in the atmosphere for about 150 years.
The only significant break-down of the gas occurs in the stratosphere, where, like other man made gases, it catalytically destroys ozone.
Nitrous oxide is also responsible for about six per cent of the greenhouse effect.
The researchers have found nylon production to be responsible for up to 10 per cent of the increase in nitrous oxide.
This was formerly blamed on environmental causes such as agriculture and forest burning.
The chemical company, Du Pont, has already developed technology which recycles the gas into nitric acid, in response to tough US regulations aimed at controlling respiratory disease.
Nylon has been produced for about 50 years.
Guardian 22 March
Nuclear Power
Germany abandons fast-breeder reactor
The German government has finally abandoned hopes of bringing onstream its prototype Kalkar fast-breeder reactor, in the wake of sustained opposition from environmentalists, farmers and the Social Democrat administration in North-Rhine Westphalia.
Construction work on the reactor, which had been intended to generate electricity both for domestic use and for sale to Belgium and the Netherlands, had commenced in 1972, and it had been due to start operating in 1979.
Meanwhile it was functioning in "warm-up" mode only.
A sustained campaign of legal action and demonstrations had delayed the start-up date until 1986.
The final barrier to its operation came after the Chernobyl nuclear disaster in the Soviet Union, when the North-Rhine Westphalia administration responded to intensified local concern by refusing to grant it the required license to operate.
The plant continued to run in warm-up mode while the federal government attempted unsuccessfully to persuade North-Rhine Westphalia to reconsider.
Technology and Research Minister Heinz Riesenhuber admitted defeat on March 21, when he acknowledged that: "we cannot expect to obtain an operating license in the foreseeable future." 
The total cost of the project to date is estimated as £2,400 million.
Times 22 March Guardian 22 March
Nuclear Power
Moscow City orders nuclear shutdown
The city council of Moscow has ordered that all nuclear facilities within the capital's boundaries be closed down by 1999.
The decision follows concern over levels of background radiation in the city's streets.
It will affect about a dozen reactors, all of which are used for research purposes only.
They include the three reactors at the Kurchatov Institute of Atomic Energy — one of the country's most prestigious nuclear research centres.
In the wake of Chernobyl, there is considerable and vocal opposition to nuclear power in the Soviet Union.
Levels of background radiation are frequently published in the Moscow press, and a number of environmental consultancies run radiation monitoring services.
New Scientist 30 March
Nuclear Power
Nuclear plants' lifetimes "to be prolonged" 
Nuclear Electric, the state-owned nuclear generating company, has drawn up plans to extend the life of its seven Magnox power stations.
It has announced three options, the most ambitious of which involves the extension of the various stations' 30 year operating lives by between three and seven years.
This would mean that none of the plants would close until the late 1990s, and that the most modern, Wylfa, would remain operational until 2005.
The plans have been drawn up in response to concern over the nuclear industry's long-term financial future, particularly after the end of the non-fossil fuels levy in 1998.
The plan will now go to the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate for approval.
Times 14 March
Nuclear Power
Japanese explain Mihama accident
Japanese government officials have said that the main cause of the accident at the Mihama nuclear plant in February [see ED no. 44]lay in faulty installation of anti-vibration fittings 19 years ago.
The fittings had never subsequently been checked by inspectors.
Those in question had been welded onto high-pressure water coolant pipes, to neutralize vibration in the pipe system.
They had, however, been fixed in the wrong position, officials said, and it was this that caused one of the pipes to rupture through metal fatigue.
International Herald Tribune 13 March
Ozone Layer
Peripatetic ozone destroyer confuses scientists
Chlorine monoxide (ClO), a known cause of ozone depletion in the stratosphere above polar regions, has been discovered in the upper atmosphere over temperate latitudes.
Levels of ClO climbed to five times their normal concentration between latitudes 40 and 60 degrees north between December 1988 and February 1989.
Ozone is most severely depleted over the poles, although some loss of ozone in temperate regions has already been observed by scientists.
Current scientific models cannot account for how ClO came to be there.
New Scientist 16 March
Pollution: Air
Gulf war environmental update
The burning oil wells of Kuwait continue to cause widespread air pollution, notably in the form of "black rain" , which has been reported as far away as Bulgaria, Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Meteorologists warn that it could travel up to 2,000 km, falling over the southern Soviet Union and other eastern European countries if prevailing winds allow.
The rain is rich in benzene and hydrocarbons, which can be carcinogenic, together with sulphur dioxide and other pollutants.
In Britain, junior environment minister Tony Baldry has admitted that the impact of the oil well fires would be "more severe and more widespread" than thought.
The pollution would have the most severe effect on Iraq and Iran, where agriculture was threatened over wide areas.
Scientists at Boston University, using remote sensing techniques, have found that the desert pavement of Kuwait, southern Iraq and Saudi Arabia has been broken up over large areas by the massed movement of vehicles during the war.
The desert pavement is a thin crust of smooth pebbles which, if disturbed, allows the dust and sands just below the surface to be blown by the winds over large distances.
Disrupting the pavement also allows sand dunes to drift into habitable areas.
The scientists warn that the area is likely to suffer from dust storms of increasing frequency and intensity, while advancing sand dunes could threaten to overwhelm airstrips, roads, and built-up areas between Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates.
Meanwhile, large numbers of seabirds and marine mammals continue to die as a result of the massive oil spills in the Gulf [see ED nos. 43 and 44].
Times 14 March European 8-10 March Independent 16 March International Herald Tribune 10 March Nature 14 March
Pollution: Air
Mexico closes refinery to fight pollution
The Mexican government has ordered the closure of the country's largest oil refinery in an effort to tackle the chronic air pollution afflicting the capital, Mexico City.
The 18 de Marzo refinery, on the city's outskirts, had been responsible for pumping out emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2), sulphur dioxide (SO2) and benzene, along with other pollutants.
The Mexican President, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, announced the decision in a speech on March 18 to mark the 53rd anniversary of the nationalization of the oil industry.
The refinery's 175 hectares will be replaced by areas of parks and green spaces.
Built in 1933, it supplied Mexico with some 7 per cent of refining capacity.
Its closure will cut Mexico's capacity by about 100,000 barrels per day, and cost the country an estimated $500 million.
Oil industry officials said the decision would force Mexico to import some petrol products until a new 300,000 barrels-per-day plant was completed.
The decision came against a background of growing public anxiety over the capital's air pollution levels, which have reached nearly four times the recommended limits as set by the World Health Organization.
On March 10, the authorities issued a warning to people to stay indoors after concentrations of low-level ozone reached record levels.
Government ministers admit that ozone levels are higher than anywhere else in the world.
Mexico City's altitude (7,500 feet above sea level) contributes to the problem.
There is one-third less oxygen for efficient fuel combustion, and cold layers of air in winter trap toxic emissions with thermal inversions.
Every year, the city's 35,000 industries and 2.5 million vehicles pump out five million tonnes of pollutants, including CO2, SO2, lead, and other suspended particles.
Opposition spokesmen blame the crisis on the overwhelming concentration of industry in the capital area.
Government exhortations to decentralize are ignored, largely due to the poor state of infrastructure outside the capital.
Efforts to improve conditions were outlined in the "Integral Programme to Fight Atmospheric Pollution" , which was announced in January with a budget of £1.3 billion.
This includes measures to introduce lead-free petrol, and reduce sulphur levels in both petrol and diesel.
Car drivers are banned from using their cars in the capital one day each week — although many have circumvented the ban by purchasing a second car.
Industries are being encouraged to convert to natural gas or diesel.
The programme also includes plans to reforest outlying areas of the city.
Financial Times 7 March Independent 11, 20 March International Herald Tribune 20 March Neue Zürcher Zeitung 7 March
Pollution: Air
Germany sets cleanup agenda for east
The German environment minister, Klaus Töpfer, has announced details of a programme to improve environmental quality in the five states which formally comprised East Germany.
The overall goal is to bring them up to the same standards as the western part of the country by the end of the century.
The programme is based on a study carried out last year, which showed that 57 per cent of eastern residents drank below-standard water, and that 36 per cent breathed air which contained levels of sulphur dioxide above safety levels.
The programme includes plans to renovate 278 power stations over the next five years to reduce sulphur and soot emissions, to construct 27 new water treatment plants and to renovate nearly 60.
Large-scale improvements to the sewer system are also to be undertaken, with 5,000 km of drains to be built.
Some revenue for the programme may come from taxes on carbon dioxide emissions, assuming that present proposals to introduce them become law.
Plans are also afoot to transform the disused salt mines of Saxony and Thuringia into depositories for toxic waste.
The government argues that, as well as providing jobs for unemployed ex-salt miners, the move will help alleviate the chronic lack of suitable waste sites in eastern Germany.
The plans will need approval from the regional (Lände) governments.
Some environmentalists have expressed concern that using old mines as waste dumps could be both dangerous and expensive.
New Scientist 2, 16 March
Pollution: Air
KGB warns of ecological catastrophe
The Soviet State Security Committee, the KGB, has issued a warning that the small autonomous republic of Bashkiria, in the Urals, is facing an ecological disaster as a result of toxic waste from petrochemical plants.
The fact that the KGB issued the report reflects a growing emphasis on concern with matters of environmental, rather than political, security in the Soviet Union.
It is the first time that the organization has given such a direct warning, however.
KGB General Vladimir Podelyakin called on the Bashkirian parliament to declare an environmental disaster zone over large parts of the republic, warning that "KGB experts predict that life in Bashkiria will be doomed if urgent measures are not taken in the very near future" .
He said that petro-chemical plants with little or no pollution controls were releasing hundreds of thousands of tonnes of toxic waste into the atmosphere every year.
Last year, the capital, Ufa, lost its water supply for several days because of contamination in a nearby reservoir.
In 1989, Ufa was the scene of a massive explosion, said by Western experts to have the force of a small atomic bomb, when a cloud of natural gas from a ruptured pipeline was ignited by a spark from passing trains.
Over 1,200 people died as a result, and earth was scorched for miles around.
Independent on Sunday 17 March
Pollution: Air
Polish government's environmental report
In a report presented to the Polish parliament, the State Inspectorate for Environmental Protection has stated that preparations are in hand to close down 100 out of the 800 industrial plants which were identified as causing dangerous levels of pollution.
One of the worst offenders, the Polam lighting factory at Rzeszow, has already been shut down.
The report acknowledged, however, that this was just the tip of the iceberg.
Inspection of nine sites occupied by Soviet Army units had revealed that most had groundwater contaminated by oil, which posed threats to drinking water supplies.
Three further units had refused access to the inspectors.
The report called for the establishment of an "ecological police force" , to have similar powers to traffic police in enforcing pollution regulations.
Polish TV 6 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution: Air
US-Canadian clean air agreement
The Canadian and US governments have agreed on measures to improve air quality, aimed primarily at reducing the movement of acid rain across the border.
The accord follows years of pressure by Canada on successive US administrations.
Signed by President Bush and Prime Minister Mulroney on March 13, the agreement commits the USA to cutting sulphur dioxide (SO2) emissions to below 1980 levels by the year 2000.
Canada is to reduce annual SO2 emissions from its seven eastern provinces to 3.2 million tonnes by the same time.
Both countries will also limit nitrogen oxide emissions through stricter controls on motor vehicles.
Times 14 March
Pollution: Air
Cleveland residents to sue polluters
Residents of Grangetown, near Middlesborough in Cleveland, are preparing to sue ICI and British Steel over suspected pollution from nearby plants.
The area's inhabitants suffer from one of the highest rates of asthma in the country, with well-above-average incidence of premature deaths from lung cancer and bronchitis.
Life expectancy is 10 years below the national average.
Although there is no proof that these conditions are caused by pollution from the plants, investigations by environmental lawyers have found high levels of dust and sulphur dioxide — both of which are known respiratory irritants — in the vicinity of the plants, together with above-average levels of dioxins in the soil.
Observer 3 March
Pollution: Air
Sulphur scrubbers to be fitted to Powergen stations
Powergen, one of the two major English electricity generating companies, is to fit flue gas desulphurization equipment (FGD) to its new 2,000 megawatt power station at Ratcliffe-on-Soar, near Nottingham.
This will enable it to continue using British coal, which has a relatively high sulphur content, while meeting EC standards on sulphur emissions.
A politically-controversial alternative would involve importing low-sulphur coal from overseas.
Powergen has also agreed to fit FGD equipment to another power station — possibly Ferrybridge C in West Yorkshire.
The other main power generator, National Power, is fitting FGD technology at the 4,000 megawatt Drax station in West Yorkshire.
* Scottish Power is to fit FGD equipment to its new Longannet power station outside Edinburgh.
With the government insisting on cutting back sulphur emissions from Scottish power stations, the company is likely to bring forward the opening date of the station by several years to 1992-93.
This would enable it to take over from more polluting plant, and ensure the expansion of electricity exports to England, on which the Scottish power industry depends.
Financial Times 28 March, 3 April
Pollution: Air
 "Self-scrubbing" coal developed
US researchers have developed a coal-based compound which they claim produces 80 per cent less sulphur when burned.
If it proves effective, it could remove the need for power stations to fit flue gas desulphurization equipment (known as "scrubbers" ).
The "self-scrubbing" coal will sell at a premium, but the overall cost will be a fraction of the sum which power generators can currently expect to pay for scrubbing technology.
It is to be marketed by Custom Coals International (a joint venture between the research group and a Pennsylvania generating company).
The process involves removing impurities from the coal by flotation, which deals with most of the inorganic sulphur.
The coal is then combined with various chemicals (details of which are being kept secret) which, during combustion, react with the organic sulphur and turn it into ash, thereby preventing its escape into the atmosphere.
New Scientist 30 March
Pollution: Water
EC agreement on sewage standards
The European Community (EC) has agreed on a programme to clean up sewage which pollutes rivers and beaches, poisons fish and renders water unfit to drink.
At least 160 million of the EC's 340 million inhabitants live in areas where raw sewage is dumped into inland or coastal waters.
The new standards, which will require that all household and industrial sewage undergoes treatment, must be met by all European towns and cities by 2005.
The European Commission (the EC's executive body) has estimated that the new treatment plants and drainage systems required will cost about 40 billion ecus.
German experts have estimated costs at five times this amount.
International Herald Tribune 29 March Times 20 March
Pollution: Water
Water meters will encourage better water use, says CPRE
The Council for the Protection of Rural England (CPRE) has urged water companies to concentrate on the stabilisation of water use by methods such as the introduction of meters and the stoppage of underground leaks, and to stop building reservoirs and sinking boreholes which it says, encourage a profligate use of water.
The Council's comments followed the issue of a consultation paper from the Office of Water Services on how households should pay for water after 2000, when the water companies' right to use domestic rates as a basis for charging ends.
CPRE pointed out that 40 UK rivers have been diagnosed as suffering from over-extraction, and removal of water from porous rocks has caused many of them to become sluggish or dry up completely.
The situation is unlikely to improve as many areas of Britain prepare to enter what may well be a third consecutive year of drought with groundwater levels remaining low.
Domestic demand for water has shot up by 70 per cent over the last 30 years, especially in the affluent southeast.
The council recommended that metering start in areas worst affected by shortages, with households that are likely to use large amounts, such as large houses with big gardens, connected first.
A "social tariff" — making a daily quantity of water available at low cost — has been deemed essential.
Independent 21 March
Pollution: Water
Businesses to be charged for water pollution
Plans to charge businesses for the pollution of Britain's waterways have been drawn up by the National Rivers Authority (NRA) for implementation in July.
Proceeds from the unprecedented charges, which will range from £16 to £85,000 per company, are to finance the NRA's enforcement of anti-pollution measures.
It is expected that £41 million a year will be raised from companies which hold official consents to pollute waterways.
The changes are intended to shift the burden from tax payer to polluter.
An anticipated 60 per cent of costs will fall on the privatised water companies, 30 per cent on commerce and 10 per cent on agriculture.
Charges will be assessed on a sliding scale according to the volume, nature and location of discharges.
The charges are not intended as a pollution tax per se, although the NRA acknowledges that they may cause some businesses to review polluting activities.
Financial Times, Guardian, Independent, Times 6 March
Transport
CBI calls for green transport policy
The Confederation of British Industry (CBI) has added its weight to the lobby for an environmentally friendly national transport policy and called for a series of measures to curb carbon dioxide emissions.
The CBI has suggested that petrol prices be raised faster than inflation, and that the current scale of taxes on company cars, at present related to engine capacity, should be altered to favour more fuel-efficient cars.
It has rejected the use of punitive taxes to discourage proliferation of company cars, on the grounds that this would increase private ownership of older and less efficient vehicles.
Acknowledging that cars are responsible for 70 per cent of carbon dioxide emissions from vehicles, the CBI has suggested that the taxation of road transport should be changed over a number of years to encourage the use of more fuel-efficient vehicles.
The CBI also called for heavier lorries — up to 44 tonnes — to be permitted in Britain, on the grounds that this would reduce the overall number of lorries in the country by 9,000.
Financial Times 14 March Guardian 14 March
Transport
EC imposes tougher pollution laws on EC heavy vehicles
Tougher anti-pollution standards for heavy diesel lorries and buses have been agreed between European Community environment ministers.
The new standards cut emissions of carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, gaseous hydrocarbons and particulate matter.
They are expected to halve pollution caused by large commercial vehicles, bringing them into line with regulations governing car exhaust emissions.
The measures will be introduced in two stages starting in July 1992, when all new models will have to conform to the new regulations.
From October 1993, all existing models will have to be adapted to them.
The EC has agreed to tax incentives for manufacturers who implement the standards ahead of schedule.
According to the European Commission, the standards surpass US emission standards, bringing the EC into line with Austria and Switzerland.
A representative from the Ricardo Group, a UK based engineering consultancy, is quoted as saying that the new regulations represented "one of the greatest challenges facing the truck industry" .
Financial Times 19 March International Herald Tribune 19 March
Transport
EC unleaded petrol sales soar
According to Eurostat, the statistical office of the EC, unleaded petrol sales have risen dramatically over recent years, prooving the effectiveness of European campaigns and tax incentives.
Total unleaded petrol rose from a market share of 7.7 per cent in January 1987 to 32 per cent by the beginning of 1991.
Germany had the highest proportion of sales of unleaded fuel at 74 per cent.
Sales of unleaded petrol in the UK showed the biggest increase, rising to an all-time high of 38 per cent.
European 29-31 March
Tropical Forests
"
Midland Bank may support logging of virgin rainforest
The Midland Bank has been investigating a possible scheme to log areas of virgin Amazonian rainforest, whilst simultaneously launching its new green investment fund.
The Midland, which has suffered from financial troubles, hopes to attract green consumers to the fund which will invest in companies which specialise in the monitoring and implementation of pollution control.
The Bank's fixed share offer closed in March.
A leaflet to will be distributed to the Bank's 400,000 top customers in June claims that "more and more people" want to help conserve the environment by "actively campaigning against the destruction of the rainforests" .
Meanwhile, the High Street bank has been discussing plans to log untouched Brazilian jungle with Edinburgh forestry consultancy, Land and Timber Services.
Working alongside the Brazilian government and timber companies, Land and Timber Services have identified several areas ripe for "sustainable" logging.
The Midland is owed millions of pounds by Brazil, and profits would go toward paying off Brazil's debt.
A director of the Land and Timber Services, Dr Alastair Frazer, is quoted as saying that: "getting some return of their debt from sustainable forestry is better than getting no return at all" .
He stressed that great care would be taken to preserve the ecosystem.
A Midland Bank spokesman claimed that the bank had held "very minor talks" and had reached no agreements.
Environmentalists remain strongly opposed to such projects which encourage developing countries to sell their natural resources in order to pay their foreign debt.
Observer 17 March
Tropical Forests
Amazon burning slows
The destruction of Brazil's Amazon rainforest in 1990 fell by 27 per cent from the previous year, according to new data collected by the Institute of Space Research (INPE).
The study refers to the area known as Legal Amazonia, which comprises parts of the nine northern states of Brazil.
According to Brazil's Science and Technology Secretary, Jose Goldemberg, the reduced rate in burning is due to tax increases and the reduction in subsidies for the farming of Amazonia.
However, despite a general decrease, burning in some specific areas is still on the increase.
These include Rondonia, which has lost a further 14 per cent of its territory to deforestation, and Amapa, which has lost 9 per cent.
President Fernando Collor de Mello has been concerned to slough off Brazil's bad environmental image, and the new figures are expected to ease Brazil's path in dealing with international institutions.
Nature 4 April Independent 8 March
Tropical Forests
House of Commons report criticises World Bank
A House of Commons report has blamed the World Bank for contributing to rainforest destruction.
The Commons Select Committee on the Environment, which visited Brazil, warned that arguments about the precise nature and effects of the destruction of rainforest were futile and that "the time for action is now" .
The World Bank is criticised for supporting projects such as the Indonesian transmigration programme, for which technical assistance was provided by the UK Overseas Development Agency, and which involved the relocation of some four million people and the destruction of more than 12,000 square miles of virgin rainforest.
The World Bank's funding of a highway that cut through central and west Brazil with "devastating" results was also cited.
The report endorsed the "holistic" approach of the World Wide Fund for Nature which argues for the creation of more projects to encourage sustainable use of rainforest resources in order to preserve the forests and the livliehoods of forest people.
The developed world would have to provide direct aid, technical assistance, "debt for nature" swaps and other schemes, it added.
The report emphasised the seriousness of the greenhouse effect and warned that the world had ten years in which to halt forest loss.
Independent 23 March
Tropical Forests
Forestry industry and WWF work together for "sustainable" forests
The Timber Trade Federation (TTF) and the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) have issued a joint statement in which both organisations broadly commit themselves to "sustainable" and environmentally-sound management of the world's forests.
The statement says that the organisations have agreed to work "both independently and together to focus international and national attention on those productive forests, linked with international trade, which are in danger of imminent degradation or destruction for any reason" .
From their different perspectives.
both organisations are concerned with the protection and preservation of the rainforests.
The UK timber trade wants continued availability of top quality timber and economically affordable timber supplies.
According to the WWF, timber importers have a crucial role in attaining the WWF's 1995 target date for "sustainable timber production" .
Francis Sullivan, the WWF's forest conservation officer, said that the treaty provided "the foundation for the constructive changes that are essential for the sustainable management of tropical forests" .
The TTF undertook to encourage both members and non-members to be aware of where supplies came from, to ensure that timber was bought from suppliers that were committed to "sustainable" resources wherever possible, and to work for the implementation of forest management schemes.
Financial Times 12 March
Tropical Forests
TFAP to be revamped
The Tropical Forestry Action Plan (TFAP) is to be reworked to prioritise the fundamental causes of deforestation and to allow the inclusion of forest-dwellers and non-governmental organisations (NGOs).
The plan is to be renamed the Tropical Forestry Action Programme.
The TFAP has met with severe criticism for failing to halt rainforest loss, now running at 18 million hectares each year.
To date, it has been co-ordinated through a small Rome-based unit which assists tropical countries in drawing up national plans preventing forest loss.
The new TFAP will focus less on individual projects and more on general policy changes.
It seems likely that it will be administrated nationally rather than centrally.
World Rainforest Movement founders are concerned that this will mean that the plan becomes insufficiently co-ordinated.
The World Bank, one of the originators of the TFAP, remains opposed to the co-ordination of national plans.
A new consultative group, to be set up to oversee the new programme, will include representatives from aid donors, countries possessing tropical forest, NGOs and community organisations.
Financial Times 27 March
Tropical Forests
Ecuadorean Amazon threatened by oil extraction scheme
Pristine Amazonian forest in Ecuador is being menaced by a major oil extraction project.
Parts of the area, designated the Yasuni National Park last year, have already been cleared by helicopter for a major complex of oil wells.
The area had been officially ceded to 2,000 Huaorani people, who are now under threat.
Conoco, a subsidiary of the US-based chemicals corporation Du Pont, wants to build a road and oil pipeline penetrating 100 miles into Huaorani lands from the Napo River.
The road will open the forest to settlers, who elsewhere have cleared forest for cattle, overhunted and introduced alcohol and diseases which cannot be tolerated by forest people.
Conoco has pledged to limit road building and to group oil wells together in an effort to minimise clearing and prevent colonisation.
These measures are not considered adequate by conservationists.
A recent US Natural Resources Defense Council report has announced that oil wells in the Ecuadorian Amazon already generate four millions of toxic waste every day.
Most of this is discharged untreated into the rivers and streams on which forest people and wildlife depend.
Texaco alone is estimated to have spilled a total of 16.8 million gallons of oil into the area.
Ecuador's Ministry of Energy and Mines has granted provisional approval for the project in spite of local and international objection.
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights has initiated talks with the government as a result of a petition filed by the Sierra CLub's Legal Defense Fund in June of last year.
The petition was filed on the basis of violation of the human rights of the Huaorini.
E Magazine March/April
Waste and Recycling
Britain proposes an end to EC waste market
Britain has proposed that the practise of sending waste to neighbouring countries be banned from within the EC.
The plans, put forward by Environment Minister David Trippier, would involve each country disposing of its own waste and would alter the European Commission's plans to enforce disposal at the nearest plant, regardless of cost.
The EC is broadly agreed to end the European single market in waste, wherein toxic materials traverse Europe in the search for the cheapest and least-regulated outlet, but cannot agree on how to do it.
Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium are supporters of the British plan but other EC countries say that they cannot afford to build the new plants required for waste disposal.
If the British proposals are adopted, waste will continue to be imported from undeveloped countries who lack processing facilities, on the grounds that this would be preferable to it being dumped in situ, with all the ensuing environmental hazards.
Of the EC's annual generation of two billion tonnes of rubbish, 30 million tonnes are toxic.
As much as 70 per cent of the total could potentially be recycled.
European 29-31 March
Waste and Recycling
DoE "fobs off" importation of toxic waste
Hundreds of gallons of toxic waste from US bases are being shipped into Britain for disposal, despite denials by the government.
The waste is from US bases in Greece, Turkey, the Azores and Iceland amongst other countries.
Asked for specific information about waste being shipped to the UK from US military bases by a Labour MP last July, David Trippier, Minister for Environment and Countryside, replied that "the Department of Evnvironment" (DoE) has no record of any such imports".
A report obtained from the US military, however, shows that waste was being shipped to the UK during the period January 1990 to March 1991.
A US military spokesperson has also disclosed that toxic waste from bases in Italy, Spain and Germany is likely to be shipped to Britain by UK waste-disposal companies which are sub-contracted by foreign firms hired by US bases.
The DoE has argued that waste from US bases is not covered by the Transfrontier Regulations which require close scrutiny of imported waste.
A 1989 report by HM Inspectorate of Pollution, however, lists at least seven products included in the waste which should be subject to the regulations.
Independent 31 March
Waste and Recycling
Quicklime may render PCBs harmless
Scientists from the US Environmental Protection Agency have discovered that calcium oxide, or quicklime, may chemically react with toxic polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) to render them harmless.
PCBs were widely used in electrical transformers and capacitors until they were banned in 1977.
Currently, the only known way of destroying highly toxic and carcinogenic PCBs is by incineration at temperatures exceeding 1200 degrees centigrade.
The method is very costly and there are fears that a proportion of PCBs may survive incineration to escape into the atmosphere.
If the quicklime cure proves effective, it is will reduce costs by four-fifths.
Industrial quicklime is commonly used for the manufacture of cement.
New Scientist 2 March
Waste and Recycling
Aluminium shows its metal as a recycling material
US recycling of aluminium drinks cans rose from 60.8 per cent in 1989 to 63.6 per cent in 1990, with a value of approximately $900 million to used can collectors.
The figures mark a tremendous increase in recycling, from one-in-two cans four years ago to today's rate of two-in-three.
US trade associations have claimed that this represents a diversion of 1.93 billion lbs of aluminium away from the solid waste stream.
According to the president of the Can Manufacturing Institute, Michael Dunn, the country's waste stream will soon contain almost no aluminium cans if present trends continue.
Aluminium is initially a high cost metal, but is inexpensive to recycle as the process uses 95 per cent less energy than creating the metal from ore.
It is particularly suitable for recycling as there is no doubt about the quality of its metal content.
Aluminium recycling in the UK rose to 9.5 per cent last year.
The number of UK recycling centres has risen from 24 in 1988 to 320, whilst 163 local authorities registered for aluminium can recycling programmes.
Financial Times 8 March
Waste and Recycling
Robot eats plastic packaging
A German plastics manufacturer has developed a robot which identifies and shreds PVC ready for recycling.
The robot has been developed in preparation for new legislation which is currently under consideration.
If enforced, German packaging manufactures will be obliged to collect and recycle all their discarded packaging.
The robot specialises in problematic "blister" packs, which normally pose a nightmare for recyclers because the blisters are composed of a different material from their backing, which can be made of cardboard or a different kind of plastic.
Separation of the different components therefore makes recycling time consuming and expensive.
To overcome this, Hoechst has made a new backing from recycled PVC.
Once the robot has confirmed that it has the right kind of plastic by its reading of an identifying bar code, it shreds the material ready for collection.
German supermarkets have resisted the idea of the PVC eating robot, as they would much rather customers took discarded packaging home with them rather than have their premises swarming with robots.
Hoechst, however, plans to persevere with the robot, of which only one exists to date.
New Scientist 2 March