

Agriculture and Food
Escalating livestock production threatens global environment
Rapidly increasing livestock production around the globe is threatening the environment by promoting overgrazing, deforestation, water pollution and methane emissions according to a study by the Worldwatch Institute.
The US environmental think-tank recommends the abolition of government subsidies, which amounted to $120 billion last year, and a 50 per cent reduction in meat consumption in the wealthier nations.
 "If livestock are to live in balance with the environment again, First World consumers will have to eat less meat, while Third World citizens will need to keep their meat consumption low" the report said.
Overgrazing has affected 73 per cent of the world's rangelands and pasture expansion is the leading cause of the deforestation in Latin America.
In countries such as Belgium and France, animals produce more waste than the land can absorb.
World meat production has nearly quadrupled since 1950.
Financial Times 10 July West Africa 22 July
Agriculture and Food
US farmers cannot sue for "veggie libel" 
A Colorado State bill which would allow fruit and vegetable growers to claim compensation from anyone who falsely maligned their products has been vetoed by the state's Governor, Roy Romer, on the grounds that it constituted a threat to free speech.
Under the bill, anyone who falsely accused fruit or vegetables of being tainted with dangerous preservatives or pesticides could be fined up to three times the value of lost product.
According to the US Department of Agriculture, American apple growers lost $125 million in the six months following the scare over the preservative Alar, which was claimed by the Natural Resources Defence Council (NRDC) to cause cancer.
It was claimed that Alar posed a cancer threat to 50 people in a million over a lifetime — well over the legal limit.
Alar withdrew from the market but subsequent studies in Britain and America have since concluded that the cancer risk was negligible.
A group of apple growers in the State of Washington have now filed a suit for "product disparagement" against the NRDC and the television programme Sixty Minutes, in which a skull and crossbones was shown over an apple.
Guardian 26 July
Agriculture and Food
 "Dangerous chemicals truce" offered to farmers
The agrochemicals industry has launched a national clean-up campaign aimed at removing toxic and obsolete pesticides from farmland.
The move follows recent legislation to outlaw hundreds of chemicals which were previously used by farmers, and will operate until the end of the year.
The scheme has been welcomed by the National Farmers Union as a cheap method of ensuring that farmers do not harbour illegal chemicals.
Under the joint venture between the British Agrochemicals Association and the UK Agricultural Supply Trade Association, farmers will be able to dispose of chemicals at the rate of £20 for disposal of the first 5kg and £2.90 for each kilogram thereafter.
The chemicals will be taken to one of the UK's three high-temperature incineration plants.
, A test which gives people working with pesticides an indication of the extent of their exposure is to undergo extensive field trials next year.
The test, developed by the Health and Safety Executive, can detect tiny amounts of organophosphates in urine.
Symptoms of poisoning by the chemical, which is used in sheep dip, include nausea, headaches and muscle spasms.
Large doses can result in blockages in blood supply to vital organs and breathing problems.
Independent 20 August Guardian 28 August
Agriculture and Food
Nitrogen use on wane
Cereal farmers are using less nitrogen fertiliser and have changed the way that they apply it in direct response to concern over nitrogen pollution, according to a report form the Home Grown Cereals Authority.
The report states that the change in usage is a direct result of the advice given to farmers by the UK Agricultural Development and Advisory Service.
In particular, a sharp decline in autumn use of fertilizers had resulted from research showing that the application of nitrogen in the autumn was of little economic or practical benefit to the final crop, but increased nitrate leaching into soil and hence water courses.
The survey is important because it shows that increasingly stringent EC regulations concerned with reducing nitrate levels in the water supply can be at least partly met through changing agricultural practices.
, A Ministry of Agriculture report has detected alarming levels of tecnazene in water downstream of potato crisp factories, chip shops and in sewage works.
Tecnazene, a fungicide used to prevent potatoes from sprouting whilst in storage, was found at up to 13 times the level considered safe for fish in some factories.
Used for 30 years on British potatoes, tecnazene is now under investigation by the Governments' Advisory Committee on Medicines for its possible impact on aquatic and human life.
Friends of the Earth (FoE) say that tecnazene produces paralysis in fish and tumours in mammals and should be banned.
Financial Times 16 August Guardian 15 August
Agriculture and Food
Pork contaminated by drugs
A report from the Veterinary Medicines Directorate, claiming that at least five per cent of pigs are contaminated with drug residues, has resulted in government moves to prosecute offending farmers.
In a random survey of 13,377 pigs, the kidneys of 736 were found to have doses of antimicrobial drugs above the limit set by MAFF.
Other tests showed 5.7 per cent to have excessive levels of sulphonamides, a strong antibiotic currently under investigation in the US as a possible carcinogen.
The enforcement of the Food Safety Act (1990) will make it illegal for farmers to submit such animals for slaughter.
The Living Earth (journal of the Soil Association) July-September
Agriculture and Food
Government urged to tackle carcass threat
The government must subsidise the rendering industry in order to avert the serious environmental threat posed by thousands of animals being abandoned or buried in the countryside, according to an investigating commission.
A cross-party parliamentary committee on agriculture, prompted by the increasing habit of farmers to bury livestock on or near farm land, has said that government funding is needed to prevent the terminal collapse of the entire economic system involving the re-use and destruction of animal carcasses.
In its report, Disposal of Fallen Livestock, the committee lists three reasons for the decline of the industry: a collapse in the world market for "waste" meat such as bonemeal and tallow, declining market for hides, and the increasing numbers of cows dying from the BSE condition (33,000 since 1986).
The committee criticises the governmental attitude of allowing market forces to resolve the problem as"a dangerous complacency…
In market terms, the key question is whether knackers will be in a financial position to pass on the renderers' costs to farmers at a cost the farming community finds acceptable before they are forced out of business.
We take a gloomy view".
The knacker industry has reported falls in throughput of about 45 per cent on cattle and 95 per cent on sheep.
"These are alarming figures.
Even if all these animals were buried on-farm, the long term environmental consequences would be at best uncertain".
Financial Times, Independent 30 July
Agriculture and Food
Britain lacks adequate food administration, says don
Food poisoning will affect an increasing amount of people unless an independent body is set up to enforce food contamination laws.
William Waites, of the University of Nottingham's Department of Applied Biochemistry and Food Science, has urged the government to set up a new organisation along the lines of the US Food and Drug Administration, but without responsibility for drugs.
Government cutbacks in funding for "near-market" research have forced the Agricultural and Food Research Council to halt some of its research into food safety.
This has included the shut-down of the Meat Research Institute in Bristol which "had a worldwide reputation, and people in other countries were dumbfounded when it closed" according to Waites.
There is no single agency responsible either for monitoring food safety or for prosecuting those who sell contaminated food.
At present, responsibility is split between the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and Department of Health.
Waites envisages a new, government-funded, independent organisation which would be responsible for raising standards of food hygiene by publicity and by the training of food-handlers. 60,000 cases of food poisoning were reported last year, representing a threefold rise since 1980.
New Scientist 31 August
Conservation: Land
US agrees on Antarctic Treaty
The United States, having refused in June to sign a protocol to the Antarctic Treaty banning mining in the continent [see ED 48], has changed its position after the insertion of a clause allowing the ban to be ended after 50 years if a three-quarters majority of voting members of the Antarctic Treaty agree to it.
The initial draft had stipulated that mining could begin only if all signatories agreed.
The US government was the only one among the 26 voting members to insist on the change.
New Scientist 13 July Financial Times 5 July The Times 5 July
Conservation: Land
Indians oppose Arctic drilling
Tribal leaders in northern Alaska and the northern Yukon have joined forces to oppose proposals for oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, winter home to the caribou on which the tribes depend.
The proposals to open drilling are currently being considered by the US Congress.
The State of Alaska, which is pushing for approval, believes that the refuge may contain the largest remaining oil field in North America.
Washington Post 12 August
Conservation: Land
New wetlands policy for US
President Bush has announced a new policy for the nation's wetlands which calls for steps to increase federal ownership of wetlands, increase expand satellite monitoring to identify them, and extend research on and increase protection of their ecosystems.
He described the plan as a "significant step" towards the realization of his pledge made during the 1988 election campaign that there would be "no net loss" of wetlands.
The plan "seeks to balance two important objectives, the protection, restoration and creation of wetlands, and the need for sustained economic growth and development." 
But the new policy was strongly criticized by environmental groups, primarily because it narrows the definition of wetlands.
Under the new criteria, around a third of the 100 million acres currently designated as wetlands would be excluded.
James Tripp, of the Environmental Defense Fund, described the plan as a "fraud" …
The policy of "no net loss" is being applied to a greatly shrunken wetlands base and a portion of the base that is easiest to protect because it is the wettest."
Washington Post 10 August
Conservation: Land
Experts recommend logging cut to save US forests
A report has recommended that logging in the ancient forests of the Pacific Northwest region of the USA be cut by more than half as a means of sustaining them in the long term and protecting their wildlife [see EDs passim].
The panel of four scientists listed 14 options for dealing with the forests, ranging from doing nothing to protecting almost everything, and costed each option in terms of lost jobs and lost income.
To ensure a "medium to high" probability of sustaining the forests, logging would have to be cut from the current 4.1 billion board feet of timber to 1.7 billion board feet annually.
Such a move would result in 38,000 lost jobs and $1.8 billion in lost personal income.
The forests under consideration are national property, administered by the US Forest Service.
The recommendations of the panel are expected to be heeded by Congress, since it was selected by several congressional committees and not by the timber industry or environmentalists.
The report has been welcomed by many legislators as the most authoritative and independent assessment of the old-growth timber industry ever prepared.
Washington Post 25 July
Conservation: Land
Resignation over Mekong dam project
Eric Skoglund, the environmental officer on the UN-sponsored Mekong Committee, has resigned in protest at the committee's determination to go ahead with the building of a huge dam on the Thai-Laotian border "regardless of the potential environmental costs" .
According to Skoglund and others who fear the environmental impact of the project, the Pa Mong dam, the first of several proposed, will disrupt the annual flood cycle downstream and thereby threaten one of the world's largest inland fishing grounds and one of Asia's most productive agricultural regions.
The project will also require the resettlement of 60,000 people.
BBC Wildlife August
Conservation: Land
French marshes to be protected
The French Environment Minister, Brice Lalonde, has declared the 3,000-hectare marshland of Guerande on the Atlantic coast a protected area.
The announcement follows in the wake of a government decision in principle in June to provide protection to 20 sites of national importance whose survival is threatened by urban and tourist development.
The marshes of the Guerande contain large salt beds.
They provide the habitat of a wide variety of species of wading birds.
Le Monde 22 August
Conservation: Land
Camargue under attack
A report has shown that industrial, building, agricultural or other development has destroyed 40 per cent of the Camargue, the wild coastland in the delta of the Rhone in the south of France, since the 1940s.
The extent of the destruction of flora and fauna was uncovered by comparing aerial photographs of the region from 1942 and 1984.
Alain Tamisier, the head of a French government research team, predicted that the wild areas of the Camargue would disappear within 30 years unless extensive conservation measures were taken.
There are about 150,000 acres of natural space left, but only 50,000 acres are protected by a nature reserve.
Guardian 5 August
Conservation: Land
Plan for Loire dams dropped
The French government has cancelled plans for the building of two of five dams planned for the upper Loire valley.
The dams were intended to control the flooding which affects the river in winter, but they were strongly opposed by local people and environmental groups.
Construction of the three remaining dams was given the go-ahead.
Le Monde 2 August, 8 August Observer 4 August
Conservation: Land
Britain's salt marshes in decline
Pollution and rising sea levels are destroying Britain's salt marshes, which form environmentally important barriers to coastal erosion and flooding.
According to Laurie Boorman, a scientist with the National Environment Research Council, at the present rates of degradation half the areas of coastal marshes would disappear within 50 years.
The causes for the losses are as yet unknown, but "pollutants seem to be very important" .
Growth of certain salt-marsh plants appears to be inhibited by heavy metal pollutants.
Times 29 August
Conservation: Land
Countryside Stewardship scheme launched
Farmers and landowners are being offered annual payments of up to £300 per hectare for conserving and re-creating traditional English habitats and opening them to the public.
The incentives are part of the Country Stewardship scheme, launched by the Countryside Commission.
The voluntary scheme has the backing of the government, which is providing £13 million of funds for the first three years.
Initially the scheme is being targeted at five landscape types: chalk and limestone grassland, lowland heath, waterside landscapes, coastal land and uplands.
Payments are being offered to farmers and landowners who are prepared to enter into 10-year agreements to manage suitable land by following conservation guidelines.
Additional payments are also being offered for landscape improvements, such as restoring traditional stone walls, creating reedbeds and pollarding willows.
, English Nature has agreed to pay expenses for volunteers involved in the Regionally Important Geological /Geomorphological Sites (RIGS) scheme.
Started in 1990, the RIGS scheme aims to build a network of local groups gathering information on their areas and liaising with local authorities and others to improve protection of sites of particular importance.
Countryside Commission news release 25 June English Nature news release 30 July
Conservation: Land
Radical rethink of forestry policy
A study commissioned by the Forestry Commission suggests that growing timber should not be the main priority of Britain's forestry policy, but that efforts should be concentrated on creating a wide variety of mixed-wood forests for recreation, environmental regeneration and wildlife habitats.
The study, the most comprehensive for 20 years, recommends a distinct break with past policies, which have strongly stressed the need to develop commercial conifer forests in upland areas.
Its conclusions are based on the assertion that there is in fact little likelihood of a world shortage of timber in the foreseeable future.
This consideration has underpinned national forestry policy until now.
The Forestry Commission expressed the hope that the study would generate wide debate but stressed that it had no competence to formulate overall forestry policy, which was a matter for the government.
Financial Times 19 July
Conservation: Land
National parks "overused" 
The Countryside Commission is urging the government to introduce legislation to ease the strain on Britain's ten national parks, under pressure from the growing numbers of visitors and the tourist industry's interest in development, as well as demands ranging from mineral extraction to military training.
These pressures are making it increasingly difficult to reconcile enjoyment of the parks' natural beauty with conservation, according to the commission.
 "The parks are creaking under the strain" , it claims.
The commission would like to see independent authorities running the parks instead of county councils.
In its view this change would shift priorities from local to national interest and from regional economics to conservation.
Observer 11 August
Conservation: Land
Environmental doubts on Thames "linear city" 
Conservation groups have expressed serious reservations about ambitious proposals, being considered by the Department of the Environment, to create a "linear city" of new towns along both sides of the Thames east of London.
They have pointed out that the marshes and mudflats of the Thames estuary are among Europe's most important feeding and resting groups for migrating birds.
Many parts of the estuary have been designated sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs) and the government is bound by international treaties to protect large stretches of it.
Observer 25 August
Conservation: Land
UK moves to protect hedgerows
The British government has announced measures to control the digging up of hedgerows by farmers, which has been a major focus of concern for conservationists for many years.
Farmers will be compelled to preserve hedgerows which local authorities believe to be of landscape, conservation or historical value.
Pending legislation to this effect, farmers will be entitled to cash grants to manage hedgerows for the benefit of wildlife under the recently launched Countryside Stewardship scheme [see below].
Tony Baldry, a junior environment minister, said the legislation would be introduced "as soon as possible" .
He said that both legislation and the voluntary scheme fulfilled pledges made by the government in its 1990 environment White Paper.
He expressed the hope that the two measures, which had been decided after extensive consultation, would stop the destruction of hedgerows and would satisfy all concerned parties.
Surveys have shown that Britain has lost around 100,000 miles of hedges since 1945 and that about 4,000 miles are still being dug up every year.
Guardian 26 July
Conservation: Land
Green belt development blocked in "test case" 
The Environment Secretary, Michael Heseltine, has rejected planning proposals for the use of green-belt land around the city of Chester for housing and industrial development.
The decision was welcomed by the Council for the Protection of Rural England as "one of the most important and heartening for years" .
The Chester case was widely considered a test the government's response to development pressures on open land surrounding other historic cities in Britain.
Financial Times 11 July Guardian 11 July
Conservation: Land
Chain store bans peat
Responding to a campaign by environmental groups, B&Q, a do-it-yourself and gardening chain, has decided on conservation grounds to stop stocking peat cut from bogs designated as sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs).
Peat-based products that are not from SSSIs will continue to be stocked, but according to a spokeswoman the move is a part of an overall shift away from peat to substitutes.
 "Eventually we may be a peat-free store" , she said.
Guardian 15 August
Conservation: Land
Bypass threat to ancient forest
The planned building of a bypass road around East Grinstead will threaten the ecology of one of Britain's most ancient forests, Ashdown Forest in Sussex, a research study commissioned by the Royal Society for Nature Conservation has claimed.
The narrow wooded valleys of the forest — the fictional home of author A. A. Milne's children's hero, Winnie the Pooh — date back 5,000 years and support a variety of rare plants and animals.
Guardian 13 July
Conservation: Land
Ministry charges for conservation advice
Evidence collected by the Council for the Protection of Rural England (CPRE) shows that officials of the Ministry of Agriculture are now levying charges on farmers for advice on conservation.
The introduction of charges reneges on ministerial assurances given during the passage of the 1986 Agriculture Act that the conservation service would not be cut back and would remain free.
Observer 18 August
Conservation: Species
Kenya and Namibia adopt rival positions on ivory
Namibia has agreed to join the Southern Africa Centre for Ivory Marketing, along with Malawi, Zimbabwe, Botswana and Zambia.
The Centre supports the continuation of limited ivory trading, in defiance of an international ban.
In contrast, the Kenyan government celebrated "Elephant Day" on July 18 by burning 6.8 tonnes of ivory in a ceremony held to demonstrate its opposition to the continued trade.
A government spokesman said that elephant losses in the country had been reduced from annual losses of 4,000 to 55.
The Director of the Kenya Wildlife Service, Dr Richard Leakey, commented that: "We do not want to see ivory having a commercial value, because if it has, people will continue to steal it.
By burning it, we are showing the world that Kenya sees it as not a commercial commodity at all."
Leakey added that elephant populations had not yet recovered sufficiently to allow trade to resume, but predicted that talks with pro-trading states would continue.
BBC Summary of World Broadcasts 11 June, 18 July New Scientist 27 July
Conservation: Species
Namibia's anti-poaching successes
A newly-formed anti-poaching unit in Namibia's huge Etosha Game Park has recorded dramatic successes in its first full year of operation.
Rhino poaching incidents in the park have been cut from 22 in 1989 to one in 1990, and none so far in 1991.
Losses of giraffe and other animals have also been reduced.
The new unit, established with funding from the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), has been formed from members of both SWAPO and the South African military — the former rival forces in the independence war.
WWF News, October
Conservation: Species
Caribbean sea urchins in decline
A highly infectious disease is killing huge numbers of black sea urchins in the Caribbean and the Florida Keys.
Scientists suspect a virus, bacterium or protozoan which may have been transported from the Pacific through the Panama Canal.
Urchin populations were first affected in 1983 and 1984 and recurrence of the epidemic was observed in March and April this year.
 "We may be witnessing the largest extinction of a marine animal ever recorded" , according to Robert Bullis, the director of the US-based Laboratory for Marine Animal Health.
The current epidemic among the urchins is of particular concern because the creatures are the most important caretakers of coral reefs.
They graze on the algae that grow on the coral.
If allowed to grow unchecked, the algae would smother the reefs.
Washington Post 11 August
Conservation: Species
Baobab trees attacked by disease
Baobabs in Zimbabwe and South Africa are being attacked by an unknown pathogen.
The bark of affected trees turns black and shrivels, and trunks and branches are covered with stains and lesions.
South African forestry officials are testing for both insect and fungal infestation.
An initial theory is that the baobabs contracted a fungal disease after rains earlier this year ended almost a decade of drought.
By far the largest tree in the African savannah, baobabs are protected by law in several African countries and are important ecological resources.
New Scientist 24 August
Conservation: Species
Mysterious disease killing Gulf fish
A hitherto unknown disease which may be linked to pollution caused by the recent Gulf war is killing large numbers of fish off the coast of Bahrain.
Dead fish brought in for examination — mostly grouper and silver bream — were covered with red spots on the stomach, gills and near the tail and dorsal fins.
Scientists have suggested that the fish are infected by a bacteria or a fungus, but they do not know what is causing the disease.
Although the local fishing waters were not directly by the oil spills, the director of the Bahrain fisheries institute, Jassem Ahmed al-Qaseer, said that the possibility that the deaths were in some way linked to pollution was high.
Middle East Times 27 August
Conservation: Species
Evidence of coral reef bleaching grows
Further evidence of coral reef bleaching, believed by some to be linked to rising sea temperatures caused by global warming [see ED 48]has emerged from Thailand.
Many reefs in the Andaman Sea, to the west of the country, have lost their colour to a depth of around eight metres.
Sea temperatures off the Thai coastal resort of Phuket have increased by 2C above normal since December 1990.
Coral bleaching, caused by loss of the coral's symbiotic algae or the chlorophyll which they contain, has been observed across the world.
In some areas of French Polynesia, up to 85 per cent of reefs are bleached.
Incidents have been reported in the Caribbean in three of the last four years.
, British customs officers have seized 17 tonnes of coral illegally imported into the country from the Philippines — a major source of reef coral despite the fact that local laws prohibit its collection and export.
Philippines reefs have been damaged by pollution, siltation and dynamite fishing.
Only 5 per cent are now believed to be in good condition.
New Scientist 13 July, 17 August Independent 4 July Green Magazine September
Conservation: Species
Task force on worldwide decline of amphibians
An international "frog force" has been set up to investigate the decline of the world's amphibian populations.
Responding to scientific reports from South and North America, Europe and Australia that millions of toads, frogs and salamanders are dying, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has set up the Task Force on Dwindling Amphibian Populations.
The IUCN fears that the demise of amphibians may be an early sign of a wider ecological threat.
Independent 11 August
Conservation: Species
Biotechnology — poll shows widespread fears
A poll conducted by the European Commission has revealed widespread public anxiety over the implications of biotechnology.
Among the most striking of its findings were that all those surveyed said they had more confidence in statements on biotechnology made by environment and consumers' groups than in those issuing from government or industry.
On balance, the more respondents knew about biotechnology, the more misgivings they had about its impact.
The poll was conducted among 12,800 people in all 12 EC countries.
It was included as part of the first of the twice-annual Eurobarometer surveys.
, A "Save our Seeds" campaign has been launched across Europe by the pressure group Genetic Resources Action International (Grain), which seeks to preserve biodiversity in agricultural crops.
It is hoping to help fund the work of small "seed savers" — many of whom are individuals.
Grain stress the urgency of preserving old varieties as both disease-resistant strains and ones that will thrive without high levels of pesticide or fertilizer application.
In many cases, Grain claim, the older varieties also taste better.
Losses this century have been substantial.
Of the 7,098 varieties of apples grown in the USA in the last century, all but 6,121 have disappeared.
Independent 15 July New Scientist 13 July
Conservation: Species
Mayor moves against bears in the Pyrenees
Exasperated by attacks by one or several bears on sheep, the mayor of the French Pyrenean village of Bielle has issued an order stipulating that "the bear or bears is causing a public nuisance and will be destroyed" .
The decision has caused considerable controversy and been criticized as an excessive response to the problem, but Mayor Jean Baylaucq justified it on the grounds that the bears constituted a threat to animals and humans.
The bears are thought to have taken an interest in the local sheep after grazing areas were enclosed in a neighbouring valley [see EDs passim].
, The only wild brown bear couple in Austria have produced offspring.
Bears became extinct in the Austrian Alps over a hundred years, but in the 1970s a male bear from Yugoslavia wandered across the border to take up residence in the southeast province of Styria.
In 1989 the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) released a female bear into the same area.
There are plans to release a further six to ten bears to build up the community.
Le Monde 4 August European 19 July
Conservation: Species
Faroese whalers seek Greenpeace help
Whaling communities in the Faroe Islands have approached Greenpeace for help over growing marine pollution, which they claim is making locally-killed pilot whales inedible.
Greenpeace has in the past campaigned against the Faroese whale hunt, drawing vehement criticism from the islanders.
According to whaling foreman Jakob Mohr, however, the pilot whales are now becoming contaminated with polychlorinatedbiphenyls (PCBs) and mercury, rendering them inedible.
His call for the establishment of a working relationship with environmentalists has been supported by a Fisheries Ministry spokesman.
European 19/21 July
Conservation: Species
Italians to defy EC ban on bird netting
Italians in the north-eastern region of Friuli are preparing to defy an EC ban on the long-established practice of netting songbirds.
In response to massive local pressure, the regional assembly of the autonomous region of Friuli-Venezia Giulia is debating means of legalizing "selective" trapping of larks, song and redwing thrushes, starlings and blackbirds.
The trapping season is centred around a bi-annual songbird fair, the Sagra dei Osei, held regularly since the 13th century.
Friuli is a particularly rich site for bird trappers, since it sits aside the main north-south trans-European migratory route.
A local spokesman for the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) commented that "there is no such thing as selective trapping because all sorts of protected birds end up in the nets and die before they can be released" .
European 19-21 July
Conservation: Species
Maltese bird killers may receive more woodland
The Maltese parliamentary secretary for the environment, Dr Stanley Zammit, has met with members of the country's shooters' and trappers' association to discuss transferring government-owned woodland to association members.
The proposal has drawn strident criticism from environmental groups, who have demanded that the areas in question — Mizieb and I-Ahrax in Mellieha — should be designated national parks.
According to one source, a bird of prey protected by Maltese law was shot and killed in full view of the minister during his visit to Mizieb.
The local press in Malta have responded to growing international criticism of bird shooting by warning that it may deter tourists and hamper the country's efforts to join the EC.
Government sources have suggested that the country's tourist industry should switch away from package holidays towards more up-market "cultural" tourism.
BBC Wildlife July
Conservation: Species
Britain to press for bird import ban
The British government is sponsoring a proposal for a European Community ban on the import of tropical wild birds because of the high death rates they suffer during transport to Europe after their capture in the forests of Africa and South America.
Around 1.5 million birds are currently imported into the EC every year to satisfy the demands for exotic caged pets.
The initiative was welcomed by animal-welfare and conservation groups.
, A recent study by the Environmental Investigation Agency (EIA) has revealed widespread abuse of the regulations governing the wild bird trade.
It uncovered the forging of trade documents and export licences as well as illegal trade of endangered species.
, Animaline, a British animal-welfare organization, has called for a tourist boycott of Malta, to persuade that country to ban the shooting of migratory and native wild birds, hundreds of thousands of which are killed every year for sport.
Times 4 August Independent 24 August
Conservation: Species
Water company helps spider
The Suffolk Water Company is pumping specially dechlorinated water into the habitat of the fen raft spider, Britain's largest and rarest, to save it from extinction.
The spider's future had come under threat with the lowering of water levels in its fenland habitat, as a result of a prolonged drought and water extraction from a nearby borehole.
The present scheme is intended to run for two years, at a cost of £30,000, until longer-term measures to raise water levels in the area will have an effect.
, A blind, underground-dwelling spider species long thought to be extinct, Troglodiplura lowryi, has been found alive and well under the Nullabor Plains desert in South Australia.
Times 7 August Independent 6 August
Conservation: Species
Shetland seabirds breeding success
Seabird colonies in the Shetland Isles are recording significant breeding successes after a number of years of declining numbers.
The most dramatic improvement has been among arctic terns, which are breeding on the islands for the first time in seven years.
A spokesman for the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds warned, however, that the arctic tern population, which numbers around 10,000 — 15,000, is less than half that of 1980.
Over-fishing of sand eels, the terns' staple foods, have been blamed for the decline.
, The white-tailed sea eagle, Britain's largest bird of prey, has had its most successful breeding season since its reintroduction in 1975.
A total of seven young have been raised at specially guarded nests in Scotland.
Independent 22 July Green Magazine September Joint Nature Conservation Committee news release Sea Eagle Project News 23 July
Conservation: Species
UK supports drift net restrictions
The UK is to support EC efforts to ban the use of drift nets over 2.5 kilometres long, Agriculture Secretary John Gummer has announced.
Known as "walls of death" , drift nets have been blamed for the indiscriminate killing of large numbers of marine creatures, notably dolphins.
Drift nets in use in the Pacific extend to up to 50 kilometres.
Advocating the ban, Gummer stressed that it should apply to EC vessels wherever they operated, not merely in EC waters.
, A report by the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), has warned that drastic measures will need to be taken if fish stocks in Europe's seas are not to be disastrously depleted.
A General Overview of European and UK Fisheries calls for a range of controls, including: limits on fishing activity in the north-east Atlantic; decommissioning some fishing boats; stricter enforcement of EC fishing quotas; and a well worked-out "multi-species" approach to fisheries management.
Guardian 5 July Financial Times 5 July
Conservation: Species
Pesticides "kill hundreds of animals" — MAFF
Illegal application of pesticides are still killing hundreds of animals every year, according to a survey published by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF).
Among the wild animals to have died during the course of 1990 as a result of pesticide poisoning were foxes (12 dead), crows (20) and birds of prey (36).
Some 60 pet dogs and cats died as a result of deliberate poisoning by the owners' neighbours.
A total of 798 suspected poisoning incidents were reported, an increase of 62 on the previous year.
Under the Wildlife and Countryside Act, it will as from September be compulsory for the police to interview landowners in every suspected case of pesticide poisoning.
Poisonings of birds of prey are expected to decline, however, as landowners are increasingly turning to a new kind of trap which does not use poison bait.
, A recent report by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) has revealed that illegally-applied pesticides accounted for a total of 351 birds of prey and owls, and 435 dogs, in the years 1979-89.
New Scientist 17 August RSPB news release 19 August
Conservation: Species
Rare species round-up
The authorities in Hainan in southern China have begun to crack down on the hunting, selling and buying of protected animals in the province.
As part of the campaign officials are also investigating restaurants which serve endangered or protected species such as cobras, pangolins and civets.
The Danish government has lodged a protest with its Norwegian counterpart over the poaching of thousands of seals in Greenland's territorial waters by two Norwegian-owned ships.
Olimpia's ground beetle, a green- and gold-coloured species found only in the Italian Alps, is facing extinction.
Discovered in 1855, there are estimated to be only 1,000 specimens left in the wild.
Sixty dead or dying dolphins have been washed on up beaches in southern Italy in July, raising fears of a recurrence of the viral epidemic which killed hundreds of Mediterranean dolphins in 1990.
Welwyn Garden City local council in Hertfordshire has stopped cutting grass verges on one site to preserve a specimen of the bee orchid, a rare plant normally only found in Mediterranean climates.
More than 5,000 fur coats were given a ceremonial burial at a secret grave in Britain by the anti-fur pressure group Lynx.
They had been sent to the group as part of a fur "amnesty" sponsored by them.
European 16 August BBC Summary of World Broadcasts 12 May Independent 11 July Financial Times 12 August Guardian 17 August New Scientist 24 August
Energy
Tory group advocates energy incentives
A report from the Bow Group, a Conservative Party think-tank, has called for an energy tax on the use of all fossil fuels to be imposed in a similar way to Value Added Tax.
The group — which includes MPs, oil and gas industry representatives, academics and consultants amongst its members — also called for the removal of VAT on products which encourage energy conservation.
Their report denounces as "timid and inadequate" the current UK target for carbon dioxide emissions.
This should be reduced to 20 per cent below the current level by the year 2005.
The production of renewable energy sources should also be promoted through grants, soft loans and fiscal incentives, the report concluded.
The report also calls for the provision of strong incentives for the regional power companies to reduce fuel consumption and increase energy efficiency.
Combined heat and power station projects also need to be promoted through fiscal and planning measures — as only 3 per cent of British power station output currently uses the waste heat available from power stations' hot water.
Financial Times 24 July
Environmental Politics
Environment "gets 15 minutes" at G7 summit
Environmentalists directed strong criticism at world leaders after only 15 minutes was spent discussing the environment at the Group of Seven conference in, London.
The conference, bringing together the world's seven leading industrial nations, centred on trade talks.
Prior to the meeting, Prime Minister John Major had let it be known that he would try to persuade his fellow leaders to attend the UNCED "Earth Summit" conference to be held in Brazil next June, but this was not mentioned in the conference communiqué.
Environmentalists had also hoped for pressure to be put on the US over its failure to set limits for carbon dioxide emissions.
The summit's failure to address environmental issues may however be mitigated by meeting of G7 environment ministers later this year.
A report released during The Other Economic Summit (TOES)— which grouped together non-governmental organizations concerned with environment and development issues — listed what it called G7's "failure to address nine crucial issues: atmosphere and energy, species and habitats, water and oceans, transport, land-use, agriculture, waste, global relations and the public right to know" .
Andrew Lees, FoE campaigns director, said: "Whilst the G7 may have learnt green reform, they have since done nothing" .
On a G7 scorecard drawn up by a coalition of environmental groups, Britain came bottom on efforts to tackle pollution and global warming.
Germany scored worst on transport, and Italy scored lowest on waste.
The US, however, was most strongly criticised for its record on greenhouse gas emissions.
Maneka Gandhi, India's former Environment Minister, accused the G7 countries of "keeping the Third World on the debt/poverty hook, whilst vastly over-consuming and polluting themselves" .
The Third World, she said, will be the first to suffer the consequences of over-consumption in the richer nations.
 "If global warming occurs, the cyclone that killed 150,000 in Bangladesh will be far more devastating…and the famine that is killing millions in Africa could wipe out life itself in that region" .
The TOES meeting concluded that concrete agreements on debt relief needed to be reached by the G7 countries.
A commitment to legislation, timetables and budgets, as well as the reversal of the outflow of resources from the developing nations, were vital, in addressing the root causes of environmental problems, it warned.
New Scientist 20 July Independent 18 July Times July 17 TOES news release
Environmental Politics
Micronesia's environmental concerns
The 15 nations of the South Pacific Forum have condemned French nuclear testing and called for immediate cuts in emissions of greenhouse gases.
Overfishing by foreign vessels and toxic waste dumping were also major causes for concern at their annual summit.
Forum nations include Australia and New Zealand as well as the Solomon Islands, Fiji, Papua New Guinea, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, Tonga, the Cook Islands, Vanuatu, Western Samoa, Kiribati and Tuvalu.
Leaders noted that islanders in the region had made little contribution to the problems which now threaten their way of life.
Washington Post 30 July Independent 31 July
Environmental Politics
Birth rate slows in many countries
The birth rate in developed countries has slowed over the past decade, according to the US Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) project, a huge study encompassing 25 developing countries and funded by the Agency for International Development.
The birth rate in many African countries has also fallen over the past decade.
Recent results include evidence that the average Kenyan woman now has 6.5 children compared with 8.2 children 12 years ago.
According to project head Martin Vaessen, the results indicate that the population control message was "getting through" .
He also warned, however, that reduced mortality rates will mean that the population as a whole will continue to grow.
Nature 15 August
Environmental Politics
US Green Party forms
A new US political party has been launched by the name of "Green Party — USA" .
Previously, the US green movement was composed of a loose network of local organisations.
The new party will be a national body headed by a seven member coordinating committee.
According to national committee member Charles Betz, it is unlikely that the party will produce a defined set of policy goals, as the "grassroots" nature of US environmentalism prevents a central committee from dictating policies to local organisations.
Instead, the committee will encourage local groups to participate in national campaigns, the first of which will be a drive to promote the use of solar power.
The launch comes at a time when support for the Green Parties of Europe appears to be waning.
Nature 29 August
Environmental Politics
Malaysia theatens to boycott UNCED
Malaysia has threatened to boycott next year's UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) in protest against "assaults" from Western environmentalists on the country's timber trade.
Prime Minister Mahathir Mohammed warned that if environmentalists planned to use the summit to criticise Malaysia, "there's no longer a need to attend" .
Malaysia has called on developing countries, particularly those dependent on timber and timber products, to "be conscious of negative attempts by the developed West" .
It has urged them to make a common stand to convince the industrialised countries that tropical countries are dependent on timber, and must continue with logging"within maintainable limits'.
A Voice of Malaysia broadcast cast doubt on the sincerity of Western environmental groups, asking"are they genuinely honest in their displaying of concern for the environment?
Or is it that they are being manipulated by people in the soft wood trade…to tarnish the good name of tropical hard wood?
These environmentalists should be campaigning for a better world environment from their own backyard…
"
The timber producing companies, the announcement says, would prefer to be respected for their integrity in the exercise of self-control without conditions imposed on them by other countries.
Malaysia has proposed that the cost of the sustainable management of timber should be reflected in the price of wood exports, with under-used species being promoted in preference to those under threat.
Later, a government-backed radio statement singled out alleged attempts by environmentalist to "frustrate" the timber industry in Sarawak, and deplored the fact that campaigners who had been arrested for crimes committed in the state were treated as "heroes and martyrs" by the environmental movement.
The statement implicitly warned that if criticism continued, Malaysia would not attend the summit.
Malaysian logging policies and practices have been the subject of protests by indigenous peoples as well as environmentalists.
Voice of Malaysia (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 7, 23 July, 19 August New Scientist 31 August
Environmental Politics
Vietnam recognises its environmental crisis
A major public education campaign is being planned for Hanoi after successive reports have warned of the urgent necessity of environmental protection for the city.
The campaign is to be extended into the school curriculum.
The population of Hanoi has almost doubled over the last 30 years, but inadequate planning and sanitation measures during the expansion of the city have resulted in chronic subsidence and drainage problems.
A total of 24 hospitals and 245 businesses have no facilities for waste or water processing and sanitation services are only managing to collect around 40 per cent of the daily rubbish.
Forests surrounding the city are being rapidly felled for fuelwood, and 80 per cent of them are in a severely depleted state.
A legal ban on the hunting of wildlife is not strictly enforced.
A long term environmental strategy for Vietnam is now under discussion and may be funded by the UN.
Vietnam News Agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 9 June
Environmental Politics
European firms "lack environmental strategy" 
Only half of Europe's largest industrial groups possess an environmental strategy, despite 20 per cent having already been fined for environmental transgressions, according to a report by the international environmental consultancy BDA Deloitte & Touche.
Of those firms which did possess such a strategy, a quarter had not reviewed it for more than two years, making it only mildly effective.
Within Europe, France scored badly for "concern with an image of the environment rather than a real strategic choice" .
Hungary stood out as the most environmentally aware country in Eastern Europe, with over half of its companies having implemented environmental policy.
British industrialists, unlike many others, were found to think that the demand for environment-friendly goods has peaked and are anticipating a drop in the near future.
New Scientist 20 July Nature 8 August
Environmental Politics
Mintel "green consumer" update
Four out of 10 shoppers believe that supermarkets selling "environment-friendly" products do so to exploit the market and not out of a genuine concern to protect the earth, according to Mintel. 10 per cent of respondents in the Mintel survey believed that companies were hiding behind a green "front" , and those who went out of their way to buy green products did so "in spite of corporate public relations efforts" .
The survey said that women were more conscious of the environment, with 46 per cent actively seeking out green products, compared to 31 per cent of men.
The most environmentally aware age group was under 24 or between 35 and 44.
Independent 5 August Independent on Sunday 4 August Financial Times 21 August
Environmental Politics
Resignations from conservation bodies embarrasses government
Two senior scientists have resigned from leading British conservation bodies in protest at the government's interference, which they claimed undermined their independence and the quality of advice on conservation available to them.
Environmentalists claimed the resignations were indicative of growing disenchantment with the Conservative government's environmental policy and suggested a crisis of confidence in the overhaul of the organization of nature conservation it had carried out.
On 11 July Sir Frederick Holliday resigned as chair of the Joint Nature Conservation Committee after accusing the Scottish Office of undermining the committee's powers by setting up a review body to deal with Sites of Special Scientific Interests (SSSIs).
On 22 July, David Sugden, a professor of geography, resigned from the Nature Conservancy Council for Scotland (NCCS) and from its Science and Research Board because of a last-minute decision to cut off universities from involvement in research.
Sugden warned that independent bodies would become toothless if they were constantly overruled by the government.
Independent 13 July, 21 July The Guardian 20 July New Scientist 20 July
Environmental Politics
PM plans single environment agency
John Major has proposed the setting up of a national environment agency which will combine the regulation of waste disposal with the work currently carried out by HM Pollution Inspectorate and the National Rivers Authority.
The creation of a single, unified agency would mean that pollution from industry would be monitored by a single set of inspectors, also responsible for setting standards.
Both Labour and the Liberal Democrats have already proposed the creation of a powerful, independent body similar to the US Environmental Protection Agency.
Michael Heseltine, Secretary of State for the Environment, has proposed a tough set of targets for more than 300 environmental initiatives and is pushing for a commitment to a number of green taxes.
He has also proposed yearly progress reports updating targets on everything from recycling to carbon emissions.
His proposals delighted environmentalists but were said to have caused consternation amongst fellow members of his Cabinet, alarmed at the financial and logistical implications.
Independent 9, 15 July Financial Times 8,9 July Observer 7 July Guardian 8 July Independent on Sunday 28 July
Environmental Politics
FoE board member quits in protest over stance on Gulf war
A scientist has resigned from FoE's board of directors in protest against the organisation's decision to adopt a low profile over oil spills caused by the Gulf war.
In contrast to the Green Party, which issued warnings of an environmental catastrophe at the outset of the war, FoE only issued briefing papers after large spills had occurred.
Max Wallis, of the University of Wales, Cardiff, said: "FoE in England and Wales are paralysed since senior staff decided last January to take no stance over the Gulf war, and because they have frustrated efforts to discuss the issues at board level" .
Fiona Weir, FoE's air pollution campaigner, said that the group did not feel it had the necessary expertise or information to produce warnings on "nuclear winter" effects, ozone depletion and acid rain.
Scientific opinion was divided over the consequences of the war, and some environmentalists were felt to have overstated its negative effects.
 "We've got to protect our reputation and we have to make sure that we know what we're talking about" said Weir.
Independent 21 August
Global Warming
Major criticises US over global warming stance
The British Prime Minister, John Major, has spoken out against the US's refusal to commit itself to a declaration concerning targets and schedules aimed at controlling emissions of greenhouse gasses.
Although nearly all the industrialised nations have set themselves targets for stabilising or reducing carbon dioxide emissions, the US, by far the biggest emitter, has consistently refused.
Washington continues to challenge the scientific claim that global warming is in part caused by emissions of carbon dioxide.
According to Major: "The threat of global warming is real (and includes) the spread of deserts, changed weather patterns, perhaps more flooding…possibly the disappearance of some island states" .
He said that Britain produces 3 per cent of man-made carbon dioxide emissions, the EC accounts for 13 per cent and"the United States accounts for 23 per cent…
The world looks to them for decisive leadership on this issue, as on others".
Major said that Britain's target of stabilising emissions by 2005 would be improved "if possible" .
Financial Times 18 July Independent, Guardian 16 July Washington Post 14 July
Global Warming
Aircraft make "unacknowledged" contribution to global warming
Aircraft make a far greater contribution to global warming than previously recognised, according to a report from the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF).
Pollutants from burning fuel, such as nitrogen oxide and carbon dioxide are not taken into account in current computer models of climate change.
The study also found that some pollutants are far more damaging when released at higher altitudes.
At the present rate, emissions from aircraft are set to increase by 50 per cent by 2020.
The only way to stabilise them is to limit the growth in air traffic.
Governments, airlines and passengers should take action to curb global emissions, the report concluded.
WWF news release Guardian 26, 27 August El Pais 27 August
Global Warming
Global warming — trend confirmed
The global warming trend of the past decade has been confirmed as continuing into 1991, according to research from the University of Reading.
Temperature records for the first five months matched those of last year (1990), the hottest year on record, despite unpleasant weather.
Data gathered from thousands of locations on land and sea by the Meteorological Office and the Climate Research Unit at East Anglia University shows a steady rise over the last eight years, but according to scientists, it is too early to attribute this to the build up of greenhouse gases.
Said Professor Hoskins of the University of Reading: "We know that human activities are doing something to the system but computer models are too crude at present to predict what will happen." 
Change in the atmosphere and ocean surface are clearly linked, but current models lack a factor joining the two.
Scientists believe that it will be several years before they can confirm the existence of the greenhouse effect.
Guardian 28 August
Global Warming
Europe's first environmental satellite launched
The first of a generation of satellites designed to increase knowledge of the environment, oceans and climate has been launched from French Guiana in South America.
The European Remote Sensing Satellite, ERS-1, cost £500 million and is expected to spend three years observing the Earth from space.
The satellite is designed to provide scientists with unprecedented data on the condition of the planet.
Circling the earth every 100 minutes, it will observe the entire planet every three days.
Scientists are particularly interested in observing the thawing and freezing of the polar icecaps in order to assess changes in sea level.
ERS-1 will also measure sea temperature, contributing to studies into the role that the oceans play in determining global climate.
It is capable of measuring the height and direction of wind and waves — even through cloud and at night — meaning that oceanographers may no longer have to travel the seas in weather ships.
Other benefits include the detection of oil slicks and other pollution and detailed information about land use through the seasons.
Data from the satellite will be sent directly to Sweden, where it will be processed and circulated among participating agencies.
Independent 16 July Times 17 July
Global Warming
World's first climate-change computer and information centre
The first computer dedicated solely to investigating climate change has begun operations at the Meteorological Office's Hadley Centre at Bracknell.
The twin Cray computers are funded by the Department of the Environment and will allow scientists to experiment with sophisticated models of atmosphere and ocean circulation in considering differing global warming scenarios.
The computers mark a considerable increase in the calculation capacity available to researchers in the field.
, A Centre for Climate Change Information has been opened by UNEP in Geneva, with the purpose of providing general information about the global consequences of climate change.
The centre is backed by the Swiss government and its organisers claim that although the greenhouse effect and its human causes are well known, understanding of the effects of climate change is limited.
The centre will present information in an attractive and accessible manner, using the most up-to-date scientific data.
It will target specifically chosen people in an effort to help them make links with the changing climate.
One such group is GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) negotiators, who are felt to have concentrated on the economic consequences of trade restrictions, but neglected environmental ones.
New Scientist 6 July Our Planet (journal of UNEP) Volume 3, Number 3
Nuclear Power
Multiple failures at Nine Mile Point
An accident at Nine Mile Point 2 nuclear plant in New York involved several more failures than previously thought, according to a report from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
The incident began with an electrical problem in one of the reactor's main transformers which caused fluctuations in the plant's main power supply.
This not only interfered with control room instruments but disabled two back-up systems and knocked out the computer which normally logs all changes in operations.
The accident, which occurred on August 13, did not involve the release of radiation or damage to the reactor core.
Without records, investigators are interviewing workers and searching for physical clues to what happened.
The owner, Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation, does not intend to restart the reactor until the cause of the initial failure has been identified.
New York Times 24-25 August
Nuclear Power
Austria at risk from Czech reactor
An Austrian commission of inquiry into the condition of a Czech reactor just inside the border between the two countries has found it to be in an extremely dangerous state.
The commission has called for the closure of the Bohunice power plant, warning that evacuation of citizens from nearby Vienna might prove impossible.
The report estimates that the risk of a serious accident, such as that which occurred at Chernobyl, is 100 times that of comparable modern nuclear plants.
Such an accident would threaten half of Austria.
The reactor was built in the 1960s and is not fully contained.
This means that in the case of an accident, radioactivity would escape directly into the atmosphere.
Leaks in primary circuits distributing heat from the reactor core would be uncontrollable, leading to a core meltdown.
Essential electrical circuits have no back-up.
Czechoslovakia has attempted to secure EC aid for a 16-point plan to update the reactor.
The commission, however, found the plan to be inadequate and financially unviable.
It has recommended that the Austrian Chancellor, Mr Vranitzky, press for immediate closure of the plant.
The Austrian government, however, has not done so, claiming that closure would result in an inadequate electricity supply for the Czechoslovaks, it being too impractical and expensive to supply this from other sources.
Guardian 17 August
Nuclear Power
IAEA fear ransom over dangerous Bulgarian plant
The International Atomic Energy Authority (IAEA) is concerned that Bulgaria will hold the West to ransom over demands for the closure of Kozloduy nuclear power plant, found to be "in a very poor condition" by IAEA experts [see ED 48].
Bulgarian officials have agreed to close the reactor in principle, but want millions of dollars in compensation.
President Zhelyu Zhelev has denied that the reactor is dangerous and wants the West to pay for the cost of a modern replacement for.
Kozloduy is the country's sole nuclear reactor, which generates 40 per cent of Bulgaria's electricity.
European 12-14 July BTA in English (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 31 July
Nuclear Power
France sanctions research on underground dumping
A French radioactive waste bill has cleared the way for research into the underground storage of nuclear waste, but has postponed the decision as to whether burial is to be considered a permanent option for another 15 years [see ED 47].
The bill follows a report which stressed the need for parliamentary involvement in nuclear issues, and is the first time that any aspect of French nuclear energy policy has come before the deputies.
Two sites are to be selected for the construction of underground laboratories in which tests can be carried out.
The locations will be chosen from 28 already selected, which remain secret despite calls for greater openness.
Further legislation would be needed before actual storage could begin.
The bill has proved controversial, especially over the issue of whether deep burial should be considered permanent or not.
A recent opinion poll showed that 89 per cent of the public said they would oppose plans to bury waste in their neighbourhood.
Suggestions in the bill for an independent panel of experts to be given the power of veto over the research were rejected.
New Scientist 13 July
Nuclear Power
Eastern Europe's waste problem grows
Officials at the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) are increasingly concerned over the problem of Eastern Europe's growing nuclear waste, which until the beginning of this year was taken back for reprocessing under special concessional terms by the Soviet Union.
The arrangement ended on 1 January when the Soviet Union ceased trading with its former allies on a convertible rouble basis.
Its offer to continue reprocessing on strict commercial terms, in return for hard currency or barter only, has not thus far been taken up.
Three countries — Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and Hungary — have 17 Soviet-built reactors between them, which form the key component of their energy generation capacity.
In the absence of domestic reprocessing facilities, waste is rapidly piling up in storage.
Growing environmental opposition to nuclear power in these countries is likely to find a new focus if waste has to be stored and reprocessed on their own soil.
The Bulgarian government has, however, approached the EC for a financial aid package to enable the construction of a repository for spent fuel.
Meanwhile, both British Nuclear Fuels and the French operation, Comega de France, have been encouraging Eastern Europe to sign deals by which the waste would be reprocessed at their plants in the West.
Independent 15 July Washington Post 17 July International Herald Tribune 18 July
Nuclear Power
Waste dumping incident underlines German confusion
The confusion in Germany's nuclear regulatory laws has been underlined by an incident in which 300 cubic metres of nuclear waste has been stored in an unlicensed tip on the orders of the federal Environment Minister, Heinz Töpfer.
The waste had originally been exported to Belgium for reprocessing, in contravention of both countries' laws.
Belgium subsequently insisted that one third of the waste be returned to Germany, where, however, there are no licensed storage facilities for it: opposition from the public and state governments had prevented the federal government from pursuing its plan to set up licensed reprocessing sites.
The waste reimported from Belgium has been stored at a tip in Gorleben, Lower Saxony, against the wishes of the state Environment Minister, former Greenpeace activist Monika Griefen.
Protestors blocked the site for two days, forcing the waste to be stored temporarily at a police station.
New Scientist 6 July
Nuclear Power
Power companies must provide more information
None of Britain's 140 nuclear power stations will get a licence to continue operations until they provide far more detailed information on what damage they are doing to the environment and what steps they are taking to prevent it, according to an announcement from HM Inspectorate of Pollution.
Each station is to be individually questioned, and an original deadline to provide information by August has been extended to October.
The information will not necessarily be made public.
, A lake next to Trawsfynydd nuclear power station in Wales has a higher level of radioactivity than anywhere else in Britain apart from Sellafield, according to a report from Nuclear Electric (previously the Central Electricity Generating Board).
The report disclosed that the Ministry of Agriculture monitoring programme for the lake had been seriously inaccurate.
Prepared in 1988 to assess if the site was suitable for a pressurised water reactor (PWR), the study was never made public.
The Magnox reactor has been shut since February.
Guardian 8 July, 1 August
Nuclear Power
Sellafield to be waste depository site
Sellafield in Cumbria has been chosen as the preferred site for Britain's first nuclear repository for radioactive wastes.
The findings are the result of an eight-year, £550 million survey conducted by the nuclear waste consortium, UK Nirex.
After considering approximately 500 other UK locations, Nirex narrowed the search to two sites in 1989.
Sellafield was finally chosen over Dounreay in Caithness.
Transport was a major consideration in the choice, as about 60 per cent of wastes to be treated are expected to come from British Nuclear Fuel's nearby Sellafield plant.
Nirex anticipates completing plans for the site sometime early next year, when a planning application will be lodged.
The government has already stated that a public enquiry is to be held.
The repository is intended for intermediate level waste, including that from the defence sector, and will house about 5,000 cubic metres a year.
Nirex is working on the assumption that the total volume of waste requiring disposal by the year 2055 will be between 700,000 and 2 million cubic metres.
A Greenpeace report commissioned from an independent geologist has criticised Nirex's analysis of the Sellafield site as "totally the wrong [in this case, highly fractured]rock type." 
The report concludes "there can be no confidence in an exercise which, having searched the whole UK mainland and continental shelf, identifies two nuclear sites as the best candidates for a repository" .
Nature 1 August Financial Times 19 July Guardian, Independent, Times, Financial Times 24 July
Ozone Layer
India and China ratify Montreal Protocol
The Chinese government has ratified the revised Montreal Protocol, the agreement which aims to cut the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), which damage the ozone layer.
India has also agreed in principle to do so.
With these two signatories, the industrialized countries should contribute up to $240 million towards the transfer of ozone-friendly technology to developing countries under the Montreal Protocol agreement.
Thus far, however, the fund contains only $9 million, it was reported at a review meeting in Nairobi.
The Indian government has made its final decision to sign the protocol dependent on the industrialized countries meeting their commitments on the transfer of technology in full.
New Scientist 13 July
Ozone Layer
Ozone layer depleting in Europe at twice expected rate
The ozone layer over Europe has decreased by 8 per cent in the last ten years, twice the rate scientists had expected, according to a study by the Department of the Environment.
The new figures, based on measurements from satellites and checked from ground stations, show that the rate of depletion doubled in the 1980s compared to the 1970s.
The figures confirm a trend reported in a study by NASA, the US space agency, in April, which showed that the ozone layer over much of the United States was also being depleted much faster than expected.
The report predicts that ozone levels are likely to fall by another 15 per cent by the year 2000 over most of Europe.
This will happen regardless of the efforts made to phase out the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), which are responsible for depletion of the ozone layer.
The report also gives a strong warning about the wisdom of the use of hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) as substitutes for CFCs.
While HCFCs break down much more quickly in the stratosphere and are therefore not as dangerous as CFCs, they will still cause great damage to the ozone layer because of the large amounts being released into the atmosphere, according to the report.
Dr John Pyle, chair of the Stratospheric Ozone Review Group, which prepared the report commented that: "We may well see this as the beginning of a much more significant ozone loss.
It is very worrying in terms of what may happen in the northern hemisphere".
He also noted that the fall in ozone was particularly marked in February and March, the start of the growing season.
 "We have no idea what the implications are." 
Commenting on the report, David Trippier, a junior environment minister, said that "the evidence is much clearer now that ozone loss is not confined to the Antarctic but is prevalent also in the northern hemisphere" .
Independent 19 July Observer 21 July Nature 25 July
Ozone Layer
Controversy over CFC substitute
HCFC-123, a substitute material for ozone-damaging chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) being marketed by the British chemical company ICI, has been found to cause tumours in rats exposed to it over a two-year period.
Hydrochlorofluorocarbons, or HCFCs, break down more quickly in the stratosphere and are therefore considered to be less damaging to the ozone layer.
Thousands of refrigerators and air-conditioning units have been fitted with HCFC-123 in sealed units.
According to the researchers, normal use of the material is safe, but it may be harmful to humans when equipment is being assembled or scrapped.
On publication of the findings, Carriers, a leading US air-conditioning and refrigerator manufacturer, announced that it would inform its clients of the dangers of HCFC-123 and was considering advising its service engineers not to work on machines containing the material.
Du Pont, a leading US chemical firm, said that HCFC-123 could still be used but more care should be taken with it.
The tests were carried out as part of ICI's extensive research programme into alternatives to CFCs.
The company has reportedly had more success with another product, KLEA-134a, which does not contain chlorine, does not attack the ozone layer and has thus far passed all toxicity tests.
Guardian 30 July, 31 July
Pollution: Air
US hunger for energy may undermine European acid rain gains
European efforts to reduce global warming by reducing the burning of fossil fuels may be offset by a rapid increase in US coal mining activity.
A US Department of Energy report has predicted output to rise from 890 million tonnes to 1,240 million tonnes in the next 20 years.
US consumption of electricity is expected to grow by 46 per cent, and coal, which produces more carbon dioxide than either oil or gas, is expected to continue as the staple fuel for generations.
Andrew Warren, director of the UK-based Association for the Conservation of Energy, described the US predictions as"quite horrendous.
It infers a blind lack of awareness of the urgency with which we need to reduce the amount of energy consumed in order to halt global warming"he said.
Arguments about carbon emissions are expected to come to a head in the forthcoming UNCED "Earth Summit" to be held in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992, where a global warming treaty is expected to be signed.
, US steam coal prices may rise by nearly 25 per cent from the mid-1990s as a result of the US Clean Air Act of 1990.
Financial Times 20 August Independent 26 August Guardian 27 August
Pollution: Air
 "Reductions in US emissions" doubtful
Citizens' Action, an American environmental group, has issued a report showing that US manufacturers reduced their harmful emissions by 18 per cent in 1989.
But it questions whether pollution levels have truly fallen in that period, since the figures are based on companies' revised interpretations of what they are required to report.
The Toxics Release Inventory is based on the data which companies are required to file with the Environmental Protection Agency on the types and amounts of chemicals their plants discharge into the air, soil and water.
The reporting system covers only a proportion of the chemicals emitted and also exempts many types of plants, including public utilities.
Citizens' Action and other environmental groups have been pressing for a broadening of the reporting requirements, so as to give a more accurate of pollution levels.
A total of 5,700 million pounds in weight of chemicals was discharged in the United States in 1989.
The chemical firm Du Pont was the leading polluter, accounting for 343.6 million pounds, and the state of Texas absorbed the most pollutants, 799.7 million pounds.
, President Bush has set up a President's Commission on Environmental Quality, whose brief is to report within two years on ways in which the marketplace may be tapped for environmental protection.
The 25 members of the commission include representatives from the car, oil, chemical and other industries as well as from environmental groups.
International Herald Tribune 25 July Washington Post 23 July
Pollution: Air
State of pollution emergency in Brazil
The governor of the Brazilian state of Sao Paulo declared a state of emergency in Cubatao in early July after pollution levels in the city had reached four times the acceptable levels.
He ordered all but one of the 24 industrial plants near the city to close down.
The state of emergency was lifted a few days later after pollution levels had fallen.
The crisis was caused by the climatic phenomenon of "thermal inversion" , which trapped emissions at near-ground level.
In the 1970s pollution in Cubatao, home of Brazil's largest industrial estate, reached such levels that the area acquired the reputation of "Valley of Death" .
With state support the city council launched a long-term clean-up campaign in 1981, which has, however, had only limited effect.
Financial Times 10 July
Pollution: Air
Grand Canyon clean-up
Haze over the Grand Canyon is expected to lift, following an agreement from a power station to cut polluting emissions.
Navajo Generating Station, 15 miles from the northern edge of Grand Canyon Park, has reached an agreement with environmental organisations to cut sulphur dioxide emissions by 90 per cent.
Independent 10 August
Pollution: Air
UN survey reveals UK tree damage
A combination of air pollution and drought has led to rapid deterioration in the health of Britain's trees, according to a recent UN survey.
It showed that nearly 50 per cent of the country's conifers, and more than 25 per cent of its broadleaved trees, suffered from moderate or severe leaf loss during 1990.
The comparable figures for 1989 were 33 per cent of conifers and 20 per cent of broadleaved trees.
Conifer damage is worse than any other state in western Europe.
Independent 11 July
Pollution: Air
Evidence of further damage to trees
Sulphur dioxide, low-level ozone and other pollutants not only damage trees by disrupting photosynthesis but also by disrupting their ability to regulate their water levels, according to two German botanists.
Uta Maier-Maercker and Wolfgang Koch, of the Centre for Botanical Research in Munich, studied spruce trees and found that when exposed to ozone their stomata, the pores on the leaves through which water evaporates, did not open or close as efficiently as those of unexposed trees.
Transpiration in ozone-damaged trees was irregular and delayed, and transpiration rates did not vary with external conditions as they do in healthy trees.
New Scientist 13 July
Pollution: Air
Plant pests thrive on pollutants
A study sponsored by the Natural Environment Research Council has found that trees exposed to air-pollutant gases are likely to suffer as much from aphid attacks as from the direct effects of the pollutants.
The aphids, which feed on leaves, conifer needles and shoots, seem to thrive when exposed to sulphur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide or ozone.
They are generally healthier and put on weight, and as a result they multiply faster and cause an increase in the size and frequency of pest outbreaks.
The report highlights the effects of pollutants interacting with another cause of stress, such as insect attack (as in the case of aphids), frost damage and fungal attack.
It is part of a research programme aimed at understanding the basic processes causing damage to trees and crops due to atmospheric pollution.
Natural Environment Research Council press release 9 September
Pollution: Air
Acid rain laboratory to close
The research programme into acid rain run by National Power (NP), the recently privatized British power-generating company, is to be closed.
Up to 450 of the 500 staff will be made redundant at the laboratory in Leatherhead, Surrey, one of the country's leading research centres on acid rain, and the remainder will be transferred.
NP had inherited the programme (which was also partly funded by its rival, PowerGen) on privatization from the Central Electricity Generating Board.
The company justified the closure as part as part of a cost-cutting exercise necessary to allow it to compete in the private sector.
It has declared in the past that since British powers stations are able to meet targets for reducing the emissions that cause acid rain, research on the problem may no longer be a top priority.
The move was sharply criticized by environmental experts, who said it would set back research and also meant that NP had reneged on a pledge that work on environmental problems would not suffer under privatization.
Independent 14 July Financial Times 12 July
Pollution: Air
Pollution inspectorate found ineffective
Polluters are going unpunished and factories not being properly inspected because of a serious shortage of staff at Her Majesty's Pollution Inspectorate, according to a report from the National Audit Office (NAO).
The report found that the inspectorate will need to double its current staff by 1994 if it is to fulfil its role of monitoring compliance with the Environment Protection Act of 1990.
Formed in 1987, the inspectorate was to integrate pollution control in all areas: air, waste, water and radioactive pollution.
The NAO report, however, found that some areas had been neglected, notably air, as the inspectorate concentrated its resources on those areas it considered to be priorities such as nuclear sites.
NAO also found the inspectorate's prosecution of pollution offenders to be very uneven, with penalties varying substantially from area to area.
Guardian 21 August New Scientist 24 August Independent 21 August
Pollution: Air
MPs call for action on sick building syndrome
A report by the House of Commons Select Committee on the Environment has estimated that indoor air pollution and sick building syndrome cost the British economy at least £650 million a year in terms of the effects on thousands of people suffering chronic ailments caused by increased allergies, asthma and other conditions.
The report, Indoor Pollution, concludes that the low quality of air in commercial buildings has led to "reduced health and efficiency for many people over long numbers of years', which may have had" greater economic impact than more life-threatening conditions".
It believes that the economic evidence on the significance of sick building syndrome is of the greatest importance.
A wide range of pollutants can be present in indoor air, including chemicals from vehicle emissions, photocopiers and laser printers and dust from human skin, smoking, asbestos, mineral fibre and other sources.
Many commercial buildings have no natural ventilation.
Ventilators are often blocked and air-conditioning badly maintained and operated.
The committee recommends that building regulations be amended to ensure that offices and other similar buildings have adequate ventilation.
It also urges the government to calculate the costs of allergies and asthma triggered by environmental factors, and to speed up the finalization of promised guidelines on the rights of people to smoke-free air at work and in public places and the segregation of smokers and non-smokers.
The report criticizes architects, designers, building operators and the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) for not paying sufficient attention to air quality.
In particular, it takes the HSE to task for not taking the problem of sick building syndrome seriously.
 "Their attitude was that air condition, which was more equated to comfort than health, was solely the responsibility of the employer." 
The report also notes that air quality in people's homes is often also poor, largely because of inadequate ventilation and heating and because "householders often have a wrong sense of priorities about the importance of ventilation" .
Times 11 July Guardian 11 July Financial Times 11 July
Pollution: Water
Toxic spill threatens California town
A train derailment near the town of Lakehead, California, 175 miles north of San Francisco, has resulted in disastrous contamination of the Sacramento River by 20,000 gallons of the herbicide metham sodium.
At least 100,000 fish are thought to have been killed, along with the insects and plants on which they depend.
The spill has wreaked havoc with the economy of Lakehead, which depends on tourism for the bulk of its business.
Local authorities have warned people to stay away from the river and parts of the Shasta Lake as a health precaution.
About 40 people have been treated for eye and skin irritation, breathing problems and nausea after being exposed to the spill.
It does not appear to have affected drinking water supplies, however.
, Mercury accumulation in lakes across Canada and the United States continues to pose a threat to health, despite earlier claims that it had virtually been eliminated as a problem, according to recent studies.
Twenty US states have warned people to limit or remove consumption of fish caught from a number of lakes, while Canadian officials have discovered mercury at significant levels in 95 per cent of lakes tested in Ontario.
Washington Post 16, 20, 22, 23 July Independent 17 July International Herald Tribune 27 August
Pollution: Water
Serious oil spill off Western Australia
A Greek oil tanker broke up and spilled 12,000 tonnes of light crude oil off the west coast of Australia on 21 July, creating what was described as the country's worst such environmental disaster.
The spill occurred off Cervantes, a fishing town 105 miles north of Perth, after a fire caused the bow of the Kirki, carrying 80,000 tonnes of crude from Saudi Arabia, to be severed from the rest of the vessel.
The outflow produced a slick of eight miles long and a mile wide.
(All 37 crew members were airlifted to safety.)
The slick threatened conservation zones and five islands supporting seabirds and colonies of Australian sea lions, but a major ecological disaster was avoided when it began drifting out to sea.
An oil rig tender also succeeded, after initial problems, in towing the tanker further out to sea to calmer waters, where the remaining oil was transferred to another tanker.
The Times 23 July The Financial Times 22 July The Guardian 22 July
Pollution: Water
European "blue flag" beach scandal
The credibility of the European Community scheme under which clean beaches are awarded a "blue flag" has been seriously undermined after it emerged that blue flags had been awarded to 11 beaches in Italy which the government had previously registered as too dirty for bathing.
Under the scheme, beaches are nominated by independent committees in EC member countries and flags are then awarded by a jury.
But environmentalists have long claimed that the scheme has been underfunded, badly run and above all exploited by the tourist trade.
The European Commission has threatened to withdraw its sponsorship from the scheme.
, Dr David Wheeler, a scientist working on a Department of the Environment project on the quality of bathing water, has resigned because he believes it lacks credibility.
He said that the tests could not ascertain whether the public was at risk from contaminated water because they relied only on healthy volunteers and beaches which met certain standards.
European 5 July Guardian 19 July Financial Times 15 August
Pollution: Water
Marine pollution worse than previously thought
New methods of detecting the presence of organic compounds in fish suggest that pollutants may be killing them and other marine species in smaller concentrations than previously thought.
Brian Bayne, the director of the Plymouth Marine Laboratory, has suggested that scientists may be underestimating the damage to marine life caused by organic compounds such as pesticides and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
On the basis of tests carried out in the North Sea by the Laboratory, Bayne believes that organic pollutants may be having a greater impact on marine life than heavy metals such as lead, mercury and cadmium, which had hitherto been widely blamed for most of the damage.
Times 30 August
Pollution: Water
Coastal oil spills reach record high
A record 791 oil spills occurred off Britain's coast in 1990, according to a survey by the Advisory Committee on the Protection of the Sea.
The figures show that the number of pollution incidents rose for the fifth successive year and have doubled since 1985.
Guardian 13 August
Pollution: Water
North Sea protection group launched
Local authorities in countries bordering the North Sea have set up an organization, Kimo, for the purpose of sharing information on technology and good practice with the ultimate aim of improving the coastal and marine environments while also safeguarding economic prosperity.
Shetland Islands council is the co-ordinator of Kimo in Britain.
Shetland Times 26 July
Pollution: Water
NERC study warns of heavy metals entering food chain
Highly poisonous metals dumped in Britain's rivers are seriously polluting the North Sea and coastal waters where they are now entering the food chain, according to the largest-ever survey conducted in UK waters.
Cadmium, lead and arsenic — all on Britain's Red List of dangerous substances — have been found in high concentrations in the Humber Estuary, the River Thames and throughout the North Sea.
Backed by the government, the Natural Environment Resources Council (NERC), has been conducting tests into plants, water and sediment from a ship travelling the North Sea.
The NERC survey is the Department of the Environment's contribution to the North Sea Task Force, a body established by nine North Sea Environment Ministers, who are establishing a management system to control pollution.
Ministers have agreed to reduce emissions of 37 pollutants by 50 per cent by 1995, cutting a handful of more dangerous ones, such as cadmium and lead, by 70 per cent.
Although other nations contributed to North Sea pollution, much of the contamination was traced back to Britain.
Dr Geoffrey Millward, lecturer in oceanography at Plymouth Polytechnic, said: "There is an element of Britain underestimating the problem and sweeping it under the carpet.
We deserve some of our "dirty man of Europe" image."
No safety limits have been set for sediment contamination, but the level of lead in the North Sea was found to be 50 times greater than the global average.
The coastal regions, those richest in marine life, were found to have the highest concentrations.
According to Millward; "There is a severe risk to marine organisms and ultimately humans who may eat them." 
A further study testing the effects of sediment dwelling animals such as mussels, shrimps and crabs is due to start next April.
Independent on Sunday 25 August
Pollution: Water
Radioactive waste "entering the Thames" 
Documents leaked to The Observer purport to reveal that radionuclides, which have been associated with cancer, are being discharged into the sewage system from 750 locations in the Thames region, including hospitals, universities and industrial sites.
Radionuclides, including iodine and strontium, are flushed into the sewers, from where they pass into watercourses from which domestic supplies are drawn.
Sewage treatment works do not remove radioactivity.
The revelations have prompted the National Union of Public Employees (NUPE) to launch a campaign for reform of the "inadequate" monitoring of radioactive waste discharges into the sewers.
NUPE fears that its members in the sewage industry may be exposed to carcinogens.
The union is supported by Friends of the Earth, whose radiation campaigner, Dr Patrick Green, commented that: "Compared with a nuclear installation, the amounts of radioactivity are not massive, but the dosages are quite large for a confined space like a sewer." 
Observer 28 July
Pollution: Water
Pollution prosecutions double
Prosecutions of water polluters in the UK more than doubled in the 12 months ending 30 March, compared with the previous year.
The National Rivers Authority (NRA) took 494 polluters to court compared with 191 in the previous year.
Farms in the South-West region and sewage works in the North-West and Midlands were among the main offenders.
In the South-West, 90 polluters were fined a total of £23,000, mostly for illegally high discharges of agricultural slurry.
In the mainly rural Wessex region, prosecutions increased from one to 28.
Environmentalists criticized what they claim are insufficient fines levied on polluters, most of which fell far short of the maximum permitted £20,000.
The total amounted to only £418,700 — an average of less than £1,000 per conviction.
The NRA's report also reveals that spillages from sewage works have increased by 20 per cent since privatization in 1989.
Observer 21 July
Pollution: Water
Water companies use "differing standards in reporting pollution" 
The government's Drinking Water Inspectorate suspects that Britain's 39 water companies may be adopting different standards when it comes to reporting pollution incidents which threaten the safety of domestic supplies.
The Inspectorate is considering issuing tighter guidelines on the matter.
Its first annual report revealed that, in 1990, Welsh Water reported 22 such incidents, while Severn Trent, which serves a bigger population, recorded none.
A Welsh Water spokesman suggested that: "We have abided by the letter of the law; others may not have." 
Such an interpretation was rejected by a Severn Trent representative.
During the course of 1990, nine water companies warned consumers to boil tap water at one time or another.
Independent 27 July
Transport
US regulations encourage alternative fuels
The American Gas Association has predicted that at least 10 million vehicles in the US will be running on alternative fuel by the start of next century, as the industry develops non-petrol substitutes in response to tough anti-pollution regulations introduced in several states, notably California and Texas.
Among the most common alternative energy sources under study are natural gas, methanol and other alcohol fuels, propane and electricity.
Some federal government agencies are setting an example: the Energy Department and the General Services Administration are scheduled to take delivery next year of 50 Chrysler minivans which will run on compressed natural gas.
The most stringent regulations are those recently introduced in California, where, by the year 2003, cars must emit 85 per cent less hydrocarbons, 50 per cent less carbon monoxide and 75 per cent less nitrogen oxide than currently permitted.
Ten per cent of all cars sold in California must be "emission free" by the year 2003.
Washington Post 6 July
Transport
BMW and Nissan launch electric cars
Both the BMW and Nissan car companies have announced prototype electric cars, to add to those already being developed by General Motors, Peugeot and Ford.
BMW acknowledged that work on its "E1 Concept Car" had been given added urgency by California's restrictions on petrol-fuelled and pollution-emitting vehicles.
The hatchback model will be "much more expensive" than a comparable petrol car, a company spokesman admitted.
It is powered by a sodium/sulphur battery, recharged from domestic electricity supplies in 12 hours.
It will have a range of 155 miles and a top speed of 75 mph.
Nissan's FEV (Future Electric Vehicle) car is powered by a nickel-cadmium battery, with a range of 150 miles and top speed of around 70 mph.
Its recharging time is only 15 minutes.
Guardian 27 August Financial Times 28 August
Transport
Electric cars "may be more polluting" 
The widespread replacement of petrol-driven vehicles by electrically-powered ones may result in an overall increase in pollution, according to a study for the German government by the Institute for Environmental Protection and Energy Technology in Cologne.
The study found that the notional replacement of all Cologne's cars with electrically-driven ones would create an additional electricity demand of 7,000 — 9,000 megawatt/hours a day.
Given the fact that two-thirds of Germany's electricity is generated by fossil-fuelled power stations, this could lead to an overall 20 per cent rise in carbon dioxide, as well as increases in sulphur dioxide.
According to the study's author, Dr Hansgert Quadflieg, the widespread introduction of electric cars"may simply transfer the problem pollution somewhere else.
If electric cars are going to have a significant future, we have to find a cleaner way to generate electricity."
Observer 4 August
Transport
Traffic fumes "pose risk to children" 
Air pollution, mainly generated from traffic fumes, is posing a risk to children's health in the UK, according to a study commissioned by Greenpeace.
The report, compiled by health specialist Cathy Read, warned that traffic exhaust may both exacerbate and initiate asthma.
The condition is affecting growing numbers of children in the country, with one in seven primary schoolchildren suffering from it.
Pollutants such as nitrogen oxide, carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons have also been linked to hay fever, chest infection and childhood cancer.
Traffic has increased by 57 per cent over the last 10 years, and air pollution has grown concomitantly.
During 1979-89, nitrogen oxide emissions increased by a third from 908,000 to 1,298,000 tonnes, carbon monoxide from 3,992,000 to 5,751,000 tonnes, and hydrocarbons from 490,000 to 762,000 tonnes.
Road traffic is directly responsible for 88 per cent of carbon monoxide emissions, 48 per cent of nitrogen oxide and 37 per cent of hydrocarbons.
The study showed that children in the UK "regularly experience levels of pollution that…have been shown to cause damage in other countries" , said Read.
Independent 29 July Guardian 29 July
Transport
 "Clean-burn" petrol developed
A US company claims to have developed a "clean burning" petrol which would cut emissions by one-third.
Atlantic Richfield Co. says that its new petrol is as clean as methanol, and that it would be ready to start selling it in California by 1996.
Pollution expert Michael Bradley said that oil companies were "all of a sudden doing some very amazing refinements to gasoline" , because they feared that the substitution of alternatives such as methanol would be made compulsory.
, The Dutch city of Groningen, known for its radical approach to transport policy, is planning to run some of its buses on bio-ethanol made from sugar beet and wheat.
Guardian 11 July International Herald Tribune 12 July
Tropical Forests
World Bank bans funding of rainforest logging
The World Bank has announced that it will no longer fund logging projects in tropical rainforests.
The new policy represents the victory of a new, more environmental approach by the world's biggest development agency [see ED 46].
Throughout the formulation of the policy, which took ten months, pressure continued for the bank to continue its support of logging projects on the grounds that managed logging was better than indiscriminate clearance.
Lobbying by groups such as Friends of the Earth and the World Wide Fund for Nature are thought to have been instrumental in the change.
The new policy document, outlining the bank's policy into the next century, also recognises the rights of forest dwellers and local people to continue with traditional ways of life.
The Bank has declared its intention to restrict itself to reafforestation projects, bringing degraded land back into production, developing secondary forests and financing the policing of ancient forests.
Guardian 17 July WWF news release June
Tropical Forests
Rainforest negotiations reach impasse in deadlock over debt
Negotiations between government representatives for a treaty to preserve tropical forests, due to be signed by world leaders at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), have reached deadlock.
The G7 nations began pressing last year for international laws aimed at protecting the world's forests, but North and South have remained divided over should foot the bill.
The bulk of the world's rainforests, 97 per cent, are located in 27 developing countries.
The debt owed by these nations totals $630 billion — about half of the developing world's total debt.
The nations are demanding compensation for their curbing of forest exploitation by cattle ranching and logging.
They also want financial aid and technology transfer to be included in binding agreements.
Western nations, however, have for the most part refused to link forest conservation with debt, claiming that adequate assistance already exists.
Friends of the Earth rainforest campaigner, Tony Juniper, said that the northern countries were refusing to address the main issue: "That forest destruction is caused by poverty and debt…
There is little hope of slowing the destruction of tropical forests until they do"he said.
UNCED senior forestry advisor, Bernardo Zentilli, said that negotiations were now continuing on the basis of a shared declaration regarding the principles of forest protection, to be presented at the Rio summit.
Environmentalists are concerned that the impasse may undermine other important legal agreements due to be made at UNCED regarding the conservation of rare species, global warming and climate change.
Observer 25 August
Tropical Forests
Indonesia pushes paper industry at expense of forest
Indonesia's ambition to become the top paper-producing nation is leading to some of the earth's finest forests being felled, according to a report from an international environmental group, Down to Earth.
The group claims that Indonesia has begun a "programme of massive expansion of its pulp and paper industry" involving the clear-felling of rainforests and their replacement with fast-growing species.
Indonesia only began exporting paper four years ago, and has 41 paper mills.
The government plans to build a further 56 large pulping mills over the next 15 years.
The report warns that the impact of the government's current transmigration programme on the rainforests will pale into insignificance in comparison to the new developments in the paper industry.
The World Conservation Monitoring Centre, Cambridge, estimates that 160 species of Indonesian timber-trees are already threatened with extinction.
The country's draft National Forestry Action Plan, drawn up with the help of the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation, concluded that if Indonesia was to be self-sufficient in wood for its burgeoning paper industry, new pulpwood plantations would have to be developed.
Both the World Bank and the UK's Overseas Development Administration have offered their expertise in creating a plan for this.
New Scientist 24 August
Tropical Forests
Illegal logging "rampant" in Malaysian states
Complaints sent from Malaysian businessmen to government officials have given an unprecedented insight into the extent of illegal rainforest logging in country.
The letters, copies of which were obtained by Far Eastern Economic Review, show that systematic breaches of forestry and revenue laws are taking place.
They show that logging in Sabah and Sarawak is rampant, and that other countries may be involved.
Far Eastern Economic Review 4 July
Tropical Forests
British Gas — further logging revealed
Following revelations about British Gas's contribution to the destruction of Ecuadorean rainforest [see ED 48], new information has come to light concerning far larger concessions held by the company in Gabon.
The Gabon holdings cover four million acres and already yield 9,000 barrels of oil — worth about $162,000 — a day.
Major findings here and in the Congo are fuelling the company's expansion in the region.
Over the past three years, British Gas has also purchased concessions in Sudan, Tunisia, the Bahamas, Egypt, Malaysia, Trinidad, Indonesia, Sudan and Somalia.
The company began operating in the world's rainforests when it bought out the international interests of the American company Tenneco in 1988.
In its 1990 statement of company policy, it pledged to "protect the natural environment, comply with the spirit and letter of environmental legislation, assess the likely environmental effects of planned projects and maintain standards of environmental protection reflecting best industry practice" .
Widely commended for its environmental stance in Europe, the same standards have not been applied in the company's operations in Ecuador, where roads were driven into virgin forests, rivers were so badly polluted that they caught fire, fish were dynamited and local people forced off their lands.
According to Friends of the Earth, Gabon contains huge tracts of virgin rainforest and has one of the slowest deforestation rates in Africa.
It houses at least one so far uncontacted tribal people as well one of the continent's last undisturbed elephant populations.
Gabon's authoritarian political system, coupled with a lack of environmental groups or effective media, have led to fears that exploitation of its resources could lead to a far worse situation than that in Ecuador.
, British Gas has been attacked for its environmental record by a leading representative of Confeniae, the umbrella organisation of Ecuador's Indian peoples.
Luis Vargas, an Archuar Indian, said that Indians no longer wanted British Gas on their land and were no longer prepared to negotiate with the company, "British Gas has done a lot of damage in our forest" he said.
The company's oil-producing activities have been concentrated in the north, but operations are increasingly expanding in the south due to escalating militant action from tribal groups.
Vargas claimed that the company had recently called in the military to protect one of its sites against armed tribesmen.
British Gas denied all knowledge of such an incident.
The Ecuadorean Government does not recognise native peoples as having land rights.
Guardian July 5 Financial Times 16 August
Tropical Forests
India takes steps to conserve Himalayas
The Indian Ministry of Environment and Forestry has drawn up a plan to restore the ecological balance of the Gangotri river basin, the source of the Ganges in the mountains of Uttar Pradesh.
Growing numbers of pilgrims and tourists are visiting the area, and it is now one of the most polluted regions of the Himalayas.
Fuelwood and clean water are growing scarce, topsoil is being washed away, and raw sewage is entering the river in increasing amounts.
The ministry's seven-point plan aims to establish a national park and wildlife sanctuary, control tree felling, regulate the flow of tourists, restrict construction and development, build water-treatment plants, and reduce people's reliance of fuelwood by introducing subsidies on other fuels.
, Nepal has announced the launch of a Clean Himalaya Campaign to cope with tons of rubbish left by trekkers and mountaineers.
Around 90,000 people trek and climb in Nepal every year.
New Scientist 17 August Independent 6 August
Tropical Forests
Brazil plans new road in Yanomami territory
A road being cut through a designated national park by the Brazilian army has led to speculation that the government may be intent on prospecting the mineral-rich rainforest lands of Brazil's northern borders, currently inhabited by the Yanomami, the largest isolated group of Indians in Brazil.
The "Transfrontier Highway" will run for 6, 929 kilometres, passing through six forest reserves and 22 homelands of native Indian groups, including the Yanomami.
It will cut through Neblina National Park, comprising 2 million hectares of rainforest, was designated a park in 1979 under Brazilian law, to protect its rich and diverse habitat.
Brazil's own environmental agency, IBAMA, was unaware of the project until deforestation began, and enquiries from journalists have been met with silence.
It is expected that the purpose of the road is the militarisation of the Maturaca region, along Brazil's northern border.
A plan to occupy a 160 kilometre strip along the border with camps and soldiers was originally envisaged by Brazil's military dictatorship as part of its "Calha Norte" project.
The land is rich in minerals such as gold, niobium and cassiterite.
It is rumoured that the project is backed by an international mining consortium and there have been recent reports of attempts to enlist Yanomami from the area for military service.
Survival International news release 22 July Commissao pela criacao de Parque Yanomami news release 17 September
Waste and Recycling
Trinidad rejects waste dumping
The Trinidadian government has announced that it will refuse to authorise any arrangements to dump waste from developed countries in its territory.
Calling on other Caribbean countries to adopt similar measures, Environment Minister Lincoln Myers quoted from a recent Greenpeace report which detailed 21 separate waste import agreements in the region last year.
Caribbean Times 9 July
Waste and Recycling
Las Vegas becomes water-concious
Under pressure from environmental critics and rapid population growth, Las Vegas has set up a water authority to manage supplies.
It has raised water rates, adopted new restrictions on lawn-watering and landscaping, insisted on the use of low-flush toilets and halted the building of artificial lakes.
The city, located in a desert basin with little rainfall, has long been regarded as being among the most wasteful of water resources in the Western United States.
Washington Post 9 July
Waste and Recycling
Tyre-fuelled power plant opens in US
An electricity-generating power plant using spent vehicle tyres as fuel has opened in Sterling, Connecticut.
The plant, operated by Oxford Energy Co, will consume 10 million tyres a year.
Environmental officials believe that some 3 billion used tyres are currently stockpiled around the USA.
Composed largely of oil, not rubber as in the past, they are relatively richer in energy capacity than equivalent quantities of coal.
Electricity generated by the plant's steam turbine will be sold to the Connecticut Light and Power Co.
Company officials insist that emissions from the combustion of the tyres will not remain within legal limits.
Some environmentalists argue, however, that it will produce unacceptable levels of pollution, and that it is also economically inappropriate.
According to Greenpeace activist Joe Thornton, "using oil to make a tyre and then burning it is not an efficient use of resources" .
Attention should be focused on developing renewable energy sources, he said.
Washington Post 21 July
Waste and Recycling
Germany's recycling scheme unveiled
The German government's proposals for new regulations designed to ensure that most packaging material is recycled by the year 1995 [see ED no. 47], are meeting criticism from industrial sources.
The Environment Ministry's proposed Packaging Ordinance states that: "The causers of packaging pollution — trade and industry — are in future to be responsible for taking back, recycling, re-using and disposing of their products" .
It sets a target of 80 per cent of plastics and paper, and 90 per cent of glass, tin and aluminium, to be recycled by 1 July 1995.
In an effort to meet their commitments, some 400 companies have taken shares in a new organization, Duales System Deutschland (DSD), which aims to co-ordinate the reclaiming and recycling work.
However, manufacturers of raw materials which are easy to recycle, such as aluminium, have complained to the EC about possible effects on prices.
EC officials are also concerned about the effect of the system on the free movement of goods between member countries, with a number of non-German companies complaining that it will effectively discriminate against imported products.
The logistical problems associated with the scheme have also drawn criticism from the German Newspaper Industry Association, whose spokesman warned that"the implementation [of the Ordinance]would result in total chaos.
We cannot begin to imagine how we could force our readers to return their newspapers, or how the collections could be organized nationwide."
He argued that an obligation on publishers to take back all newspapers and magazines, sold or unsold, would result in sharp price rises.
"German newspaper producers already use between 50 and 60 per cent recycled paper in production, and they do not have the technical means to increase it overnight.
The stuff would have to be stored, and then most probably burnt."
, The Bank of England is planning to transform some of its used banknotes into compost.
It is launching an experimental scheme to turn some of the 2,000 tonnes of notes disposed each year into garden compost in collaboration with the Botanic Centre in Middlesborough.
Observer 1 September Independent 11 August Financial Times 9, 14 August
Waste and Recycling
French minister threatens resignation over waste tax
France's Environment Minister, Brice Lalonde, has threatened to resign unless the government agrees to implement his plan for a new waste tax.
Under the proposal, companies would be charged between 20 and 50 francs (£2-£5) per tonne of rubbish generated, the proceeds being used to fund modernizations of France's waste disposal system.
Independent 27 July