

Agriculture and Food
Africa advised to refuse "free" pesticides
African countries would be well advised to refuse many of the pesticides that they receive for free, according to a scientist from the US Environmental Protection Agency.
As much as 80 per cent of Africa's pesticides arrive as donations, and disposal of the chemicals, many of which are never used, is a mounting problem.
According to chemist Janice Jensen, an estimated 7,000 tonnes of surplus pesticides have accumulated in Africa.
The Japanese government sometimes requires a country to accept chemicals as a part of wider aid packages which include other highly valued items such as tractors.
Such packages have resulted in stockpiles of chemicals — methyl bromide in Sudan and dimethoate in Guinea-Bissau and Benin — that far exceed projected demands.
It then becomes the responsibility of these countries to dispose of the excess.
Much of the stocks are left over from the campaigns conducted against locusts and mosquitoes two decades ago.
Most consist of organochlorines which are now considered obsolete.
This year, 50 tonnes of dieldrin were collected in Niger and shipped to the Netherlands for disposal.
Germany has told Benin that it will not help with pesticide disposal until it refuses unnecessary donations.
According to Jensen, the most effective way of disposing of the chemicals is to spray them over the land according to the manufacturer's directions, allowing them to be broken down by the sun and weather.
This is preferable to stockpiling of leaking barrels at storage sites.
New Scientist 14 September
Agriculture and Food
Partial ban agreed for highly toxic pesticide
A pesticide which has long been thought to cause sickness and death in farm workers has been subjected to a partial ban following an agreement between the manufacturers and the US Environmental Protection Agency.
The use of Parathion will be banned on 81 of the 90 crops for which it was previously licensed.
Cheminova Agro, of Denmark, will continue to produce parathion for use on the remaining nine crops.
The pesticide is most frequently used on these crops, and the EPA is seeking to ban it from these also.
Developed as a nerve gas by German chemists during World War II, Parathion was recognised as highly toxic in the 1970s.
It was superseded in 1989 when safer and more economic substitutes were found.
It is likely however that Parathion will continue to be used for at least another 18 months before a full ban is implemented.
The partial ban has angered environmentalists and farm workers who have described it as a "cheap ploy" to allow Cheminova Agro to continue to produce 60 per cent of its current annual output of the pesticide.
Washington Post 6 September
Agriculture and Food
 "Extraction, not drought" is killing streams
Extraction of water by companies rather than below-average rainfall is responsible for the drying out of many of Britain's streams and rivers, according to Lord Buxton, a leading conservationist.
Speaking at a conference in Cambridge, Lord Buxton said that three years of dry weather were not primarily responsible for the lowest groundwater levels since the 1940s.
"The level of abstraction and consumption has increased over the last century by hundreds of times, and perhaps in some cases by thousands.
This is entirely without precedent."
He called on the government to withdraw all licences for pumping water from rivers and underground aquifers.
Some 70,000 such licenses have been granted to companies and individuals ranging from farmers to brewers.
Lord Buxton called on the government to "start again with a clean slate" .
Other speakers at the conference pointed out that over-abstraction from rivers leads to a falling rate of flow which critically affects the rivers' ecology, and they warned the situation may deteriorate as water continues to increase in the 1990s.
Independent 1 October
Agriculture and Food
 "Mad cow ostrich" fears
German veterinary scientists have detected symptoms similar to those suffered by "mad cows" in ostriches.
According to a report in the journal Veterinary Record, three ostriches in German zoos have been displaying the classic signs of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) after feeding on meat from local slaughterhouses.
If the ostriches were indeed infected with BSE by this route, it would be the first recorded case of the disease being transmitted from cattle to birds [see Eds passim].
Independent 22 September
Conservation: Land
UN report on Africa highlights deforestation
The latest United Nations report on the state of the environment in Africa says that virtually the whole continent is now being deforested at a rapid and accelerating pace.
It calculates that for every 100 hundred trees cut done only nine are planted, and concludes that in some countries fuelwood supplies will soon be exhausted unless massive replanting is undertaken.
Most Africans depend on wood and charcoal for household fuel.
Because of the depletion of this resource and population growth, Africa's needs for fuelwood may double by the year 2000, according to the report.
The report notes that a combination of soil degradation and poor rainfall have increased food shortages and poverty.
Many governments have also been forced to concentrate on short-term economic crisis management to the detriment of longer-term environmental protection measures.
 "The results have included inadequate replacement of renewable resources…and the displacement of subsistence food farming and pastoralism onto more marginal lands, which then deteriorate further" , the report concludes.
West Africa 2 September
Conservation: Land
Indian satellite to monitor natural resources
A new satellite launched by India is expected to provide additional information on the country's natural resources.
IRS-1B is the successor to IRS-1A, launched in 1988, which has mapped all of India for groundwater potential and has also produced soil, land-use and forest maps.
The new satellite will double the country's capacity for information gathering from space.
Additional more powerful satellites are due to be launched in 1993 and 1996.
, Villagers are continuing their protests against the Sardar Sarovar dam in the Narmada river in central India [see ED No. 48]despite the danger posed to their village by water building up behind the half-completed dam.
They are protesting against the resettlement programmes.
Nature 19 September New Scientist 14 September
Conservation: Land
World Bank doubts about Thai dam
The World Bank has postponed payment of a loan to Thailand to complete a large dam across the Mool River, 570 kilometres northeast of Bangkok, until the government has analyzed independent environmental-impact studies and carried out new assessments of its own.
The dam project has been criticized by conservationists, who claim that it will ruin the area's rice production, devastate fish stocks and may introduce dangerous diseases such as schistosomiasis or bilharzia (as yet unknown in Thailand).
New Scientist 28 September
Conservation: Land
China to build Yangtze River dam
The Chinese government has given the go-ahead to the building of a controversial dam across the Yangtze river as a means of controlling the annual flooding in central and eastern China.
The project for the dam, which would be largest in the world, has been under consideration for nearly 70 years.
The flood disaster in July, which left 20 million hectares underwater, killed more than 2,000 people and made 1 million homeless, appears to have swayed Chinese officials to include the project in the next development plan.
Opposition from scientists and environmentalists has been strong.
They warn that the dam will upset the ecological balance in the Yangtze basin, with unforeseeable consequences.
New Scientist 28 September
Conservation: Land
Climbers to pay for clean-up of Everest
The Nepalese government is increasing its charges for climbing Mount Everest, the world's highest mountain, and six other peaks in the Himalayas as part of its effort to clear the rubbish left behind by climbing teams.
Some estimates suggest that around 50 tons of waste — including cars, bottles, boxes, packing materials, tents and oxygen cylinders — are strewn around the foothills and lower slopes of Everest.
Other estimates put the figure much higher.
Edmund Hillary, who with Tenzing Norgay was the first man to climb Everest in 1953, has called the mountain a "junk heap" and has suggested it should be closed for five years to clear the rubbish.
Such a move was considered by the government but rejected after protests from the tourist industry and local people.
Independent 24 September
Conservation: Land
International status for Rutland water
The government has announced that Rutland Water, a large reservoir in eastern England, has been designated a Special Protection Area (SPA) under a European Community directive on the conservation of wild birds and as a Wetland of International Importance under the Ramsar Convention.
Rutland Water is particularly important for overwintering wild ducks and other wildfowl, including gadwall, widgeon, teal, shoveler, goosander, tufted duck, great-crested grebe, mute swan and coot.
It has already been notified as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) by English Nature, the statutory adviser to the government on conservation in England.
In designated SPAs EC governments are required to take steps to avoid significant pollution, disturbance or deterioration of bird habitats.
The Ramsar Convention commits signatory states to promote the conservation of particular wetland sites and the wise use of all wetlands within its territory.
English Nature news release 4 October
Conservation: Land
Homes built on toxic waste tip
Residents in an area of Portsmouth have discovered that their homes are built on a toxic waste tip.
The site was used by the Royal Navy for years to dump blue asbestos and other hazardous materials from ships and dockyards.
This is expected to be the first of many similar cases to come to light as local councils draw up registers of contaminated land under the Environmental Protection Act.
Green Magazine November
Conservation: Species
Hippopotamus "ivory" poised to come on market
The Tanzanian Wildlife Department is negotiating a contract with a Botswana company for the annual culling of 2,000 hippopotamuses in order to harvest their canine and incisor teeth, which can be used as an ivory substitute.
Under the terms of the contract, Botswana Game Industries — one of Africa's largest wildlife product concerns — will pay the Tanzanian government $600 for every hippo killed.
As well as the teeth being sold for ivory, the meat will be butchered for the local market, and turned into biltong (dried meat) for export, while the hide will be tanned for leather.
In order to produce sufficient likeness to ivory, the thick enamel layer on the hippos' teeth will have to be burned away with acid.
Hippopotamuses are not regarded as an endangered species, and in some areas of Tanzania and elsewhere in east and southern Africa, are seen as something of a nuisance.
But conservationists warn that unregulated expansion of "wildlife utilization" programmes such as these may lead to over-exploitation.
Guardian 27 September
Conservation: Species
TRAFFIC office opens in Taiwan
TRAFFIC, the wildlife trade monitoring organization, is to open an office in the Taiwanese capital of Taipei.
The development is seen as a significant victory for conservationists, since Taiwan is one of the centres of the international trade in endangered species, including rhinos, tigers, orang-utangs and Malaysian sun bears.
The Taiwanese government passed legislation in harmony with the regulations of CITES (the UN's Convention on Trade in Endangered Species) in 1989, although environmentalists have since accused it of failing to enforce these laws sufficiently.
(Taiwan is not eligible to join CITES as such since it does not belong to the UN.)
BBC Wildlife October
Conservation: Species
Tigers threatened by park incursions
Apparently uncontrolled incursions into a national park in the northern Indian state of Rajasthan are threatening the survival of its fast-dwindling population of tigers.
Marble quarrying operations on the fringe of the 200 square kilometre Sariska reserve have disrupted the fragile ecology of the park, driving away cheetahs, leopards, sambars and wild boar, as well as the tigers, whose recorded population fell from 45 in 1988 to just 19 a year later.
The state government has supported the quarry operators, issuing 300 licenses to quarry in the last six years.
Rajasthan's mining department earns around £1.1 million per year from the licenses, which fly in the face of the provisions of the federal government's Forest Conservation Act.
The upsurge in quarrying takes place against a background of increased poaching and harvesting of forest produce, while hundreds of people who had been moved out of the park in the past are now starting to return.
Recently, the Rajasthan government has announced plans to sell land inside the park boundaries.
The federal environment ministry opposes such developments, but cannot intervene without the support of the state government, and fears that the park may effectively cease to exist.
New Scientist 28 September
Conservation: Species
US bans drift-netted fish imports
The Bush Administration has declared a ban on the import of fish caught with drift-nets, which have been widely blamed for killing dolphins, whales and seabirds.
The ban takes immediate effect for fish caught in the South Pacific: the import of drift-netted fish from elsewhere will be banned from July 1, 1992.
Drift-nets are most notoriously used by the tuna fishing fleets of the Pacific.
Countries which currently use drift-nets will be obliged to provide documents certifying that fish exported to the US have not been drift-netted.
Fishing fleets which are presently identified by the US as using drift-nets include Japan, South and North Korea, Taiwan and France — the latter being added to the list as the ban was announced.
According to the US National Marine Fisheries Service, the Japanese fishing fleet was responsible for widespread unintended deaths of marine mammals and birds in 1990.
Figures released by the Service claimed that a mere 10 per cent of the Japanese drift-net fleet was responsible for the deaths of 1,758 whales and dolphins, 81,956 blue sharks, 30,464 seabirds and more than three million non-target fish, including salmon.
, Threatened with US trade sanctions, the Taiwanese government has announced that it will end the use of drift-nets by its fleet in international waters from July 1992.
, The Mexican government has decided not to take advantage of a GATT decision to condemn an earlier US ban on import of tuna from Mexico.
The ban was imposed on the grounds that dolphins were being killed by the tuna fleet.
A GATT committee ruled that this infringed free trade, but Mexico's President Salinas has promised to introduce methods to protect dolphins, as part of a "bilateral" solution to the dispute with the US.
The GATT statement had drawn fierce criticism from US environmentalists and some Congressmen.
Washington Post 20 September Financial Times 27 September Economist 5 October
Conservation: Species
North Sea fish stocks "will crash" 
Commercial fish stocks in the North Sea are in danger of "crashing" due to over-fishing, according to a report by the former head of the fishing conservation unit of the EC, commissioned by the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF).
Author Michael Holden warned that common species such as cod, plaice and haddock could disappear in under five years, unless drastic measures were taken to limit catches.
The report claims that the present conservation system, based on "total allowable catches" (TACs) for each EC member state and fishing vessel, is failing to protect stocks adequately.
Many fishing vessels take catches well in excess of the TAC, and simply dump overboard the surplus dead fish.
EC government scientists had recommended that there should be a total stock of 150,000 tonnes of adult cod, and 100,000 tonnes of adult haddock, to ensure sustainable supplies.
The TAC system should have provided for this, but the latest estimates of existing stocks were only 78,000 tonnes of cod and 81,000 tonnes of haddock, Holden's report claimed.
The report said that, as a matter of urgency, the EC fishing fleet should be cut by 40 per cent across the board, with incentives offered to fishermen to retire or retrain, and to take boats out of service.
WWF news release 18 September Independent 18 September Guardian 18 September New Scientist 21 September
Conservation: Species
Clash over shellfish potting
Local shell fishermen have clashed with conservationists over the latter's appeal for an end to shellfish potting in the waters around Skomer Island's Marine Nature Reserve, south-west Wales.
The Marine Conservation Society claims that potting can damage fragile and rare seabed species, including the sea fan and black cave sponge.
The Pembrokeshire Shell Fishermen's Association challenge the claim, and warn that any such ban will threaten the livelihoods of locals.
Guardian 9 September
Conservation: Species
Bats to be protected under European agreement
An agreement to protect Europe's 30 species of bats has been concluded within the framework of the Bonn Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals.
The agreement provides for restrictions on the killing or capture of bats; the reduction of the use of pesticides and timber treatments which harm bats; the identification and protection of important bat habitats; and the co-ordination of research on bat conservation.
Department of Environment news release 11 September English Nature news release 16 September
Conservation: Species
Mediterranean dolphin epidemic resurfaces
An epidemic which wiped out hundreds of dolphins in the Mediterranean last year seems to have reappeared.
Scientists report that 150 dead or dying dolphins washed up on the shores of Italy and Sicily since June were infected by the same morbillivirus which accounted for those killed in 1990 [see ED no.
XX].
A morbillivirus strain — known as phocine distemper virus — also killed some 20,000 common seals in the North Sea in 1988.
Early in September, large numbers of dead and dying dolphins appeared on the shores of the Greek island of Zakinthos, suggesting that the disease is being carried eastwards.
There are now fears that it could threaten the endangered monk seal population.
Some scientists think that the infection has spread from dogs carrying canine distemper virus.
, A survey by the Greenpeace ship, Sirius, has revealed a healthy population of striped dolphins in the western Mediterranean.
Despite the viral epidemic which killed hundreds over the past two years, the Greenpeace scientists counted nearly 2,500 during a five week tour, suggesting that, despite fears to the contrary, there is still a sustainable population in the region.
New Scientist 7, 28 September
Conservation: Species
Spain demands EC pay for European conservation plan
The Spanish government is objecting to an EC plan for a network of nature reserves across the Europe, on the grounds that the Community's richer countries should help it pay for conservation.
Under the EC plan, member states would be compelled to establish protected reserves for their key habitats and species, to be co-ordinated by a new body known as Natura 2000.
The proposed EC directive calls for protection of the 10 most important sites for each designated habitat or species within four years, and the top 100 sites in each case within 10 years.
A spokesman for the Spanish Environment Ministry claims, that, as Spain includes within its boundaries some 40 per cent of the EC's "ecologically privileged" areas, it should receive assistance towards their protection from other Community states.
"Spain has managed to maintain those areas much as they have been since the Middle Ages, because industrial development here has been much slower than in other European nations.
What we are being asked to do now is to sacrifice the development of these areas in order to protect the environment.
It is a very high price to pay."
Spain's relatively weak environmental protection laws could mean that its government would be compelled to purchase the land in order to protect it, or risk facing legal action from frustrated developers.
EC officials have pointed out that, in theory, Community funds will be available to support its wildlife protection plan, but it is unclear how much compensation Spain will demand.
New Scientist 28 September
Conservation: Species
UK amphibian population in crisis
The populations of frogs, toads and newts in the UK are declining rapidly, largely as a consequence of the disappearance of their habitat, rising levels of pollution in rivers and acidification of fresh water.
The decline comes against a background of global concern over reduced populations of amphibians worldwide [see ED No. 49/50].
The amphibians require fresh water in which to spawn, while hedges provide moist ground for adults to hide.
One study, focused on Leicester, showed that in some areas more than 90 per cent of ponds had been drained.
Another survey, carried out by Trent Polytechnic, revealed a 30 per cent decline in numbers of the common frog over the past three years.
A spokesman for the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, Dr Chris Cummin, commented that: "There are six major species of British amphibian — Crested, Smooth and Palmate Newts, Common and Natterjack Toads, and the Common Frog.
All are suffering serious declines in numbers."
Observer 15 September
Conservation: Species
Roadside wildlife threatened by cutting
The practice of cutting and spraying roadside verges is destroying valuable wildlife habitats, according to a new report by the Council for the Protection of Rural England, entitled Conservation on the Verge.
Road improvement and widening schemes result in the permanent loss of wildlife havens that may be hundreds of years old.
Many are home to a wide range of local flowers, long lost from nearby cropland.
The CPRE is now appealing to local councils to carry out mowing in late summer, after the flowers have blown, rather than early in the season, thereby allowing natural seeding to take place.
It also asks councils to remove grass cuttings, which kill the plants underneath, and to take firm action to prevent farmers from ploughing up verges.
If such measures were taken, the CPRE argue, the half-million acres of Britain's roadside verges could be turned into "one long flowering nature reserve" .
Independent 23 September
Conservation: Species
Britain's wild flowers threatened by climate change
Global warming is likely to produce significant changes in Britain's wild flora, according to research by the environmental group, Plantlife.
It warns that over 40 species of native flowers may be at risk, including such common examples as daffodils, bluebells and snowdrops.
Some more southern varieties, such as cow parsley and meadowsweet, may be driven northwards as their habitats are taken over by invaders from warmer climes.
Green Magazine November
Conservation: Species
Shetland bird breeding success confirmed
The dramatic improvement in breeding among Shetland's seabird colonies [see ED no. 49/50]has been confirmed.
Latest figures from conservation groups suggest that a total of 24,000 pairs of arctic terns bred during the 1991 season, producing at least 30,000 young.
Shags, arctic and great skuas, guillemots, razor bills and puffins also recorded increases on the 1990 season.
A recently-introduced ban on the fishing of sand eels, the birds' staple food, has been credited with the success.
Conservationists warn, however, that the populations of the arctic skua, cormorant and shag continue to decline.
New Scientist 28 September
Conservation: Species
Rare species round-up
Namibia has raised the prospects of an end to the culling of seals next year, if tourists come in sufficient numbers to view them.
A total of 23,000 seals will be killed this year.
The International Fund for Animal Welfare has reached an outline agreement with the government by which sealing will be ended, if the Fund "provides the expertise to make seal tourism a viable proposition" .
Australian kangaroos are being driven into wheat fields as a result of drought in their outback habitat.
 "The" roos will come from miles around for a green field", said a spokesman for the Australian Wheat Board.
The European Parliament has called on the EC to ban imports of exotic birds, 1.5 million of which are brought into the continent each year, often in appalling conditions.
Customs officers at Birmingham airport have uncovered a clutch of 1,439 African clawed frogs from Zaire, imported without a licence.
Argentine officials have asked the NASA space agency to help locate an oil slick which has killed hundreds of birds and is threatening one of the world's largest penguin reserves.
A survey by the Worcestershire Nature Conservation Trust has concluded that 97 per cent of the county's wildflower meadows have been destroyed in the last 40 years.
Guardian 10, 12, 14, 19 September Independent 14 September Green Magazine September
Energy
UK accused of "blocking" EC energy efficiency
Environmentalists are accusing the UK government of obstructing the passage of EC air pollution laws in an effort to preserve its home market in central heating boilers, which are less efficient than those produced in other EC countries.
The EC's proposed first step toward limiting air pollution is the imposition of tough efficiency standards for gas boilers.
Implementing the directive across the 12 member states would save an estimated 26 million tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions a year.
It would also reduce sulphur dioxide and nitrous oxide emissions, which cause acid rain, by 42,000 tonnes.
Only about 40 per cent of British boilers would meet the proposed standards.
The Energy Efficiency Office proposes that the EC allow less stringent requirements for British boilers.
In its White Paper, the government made a commitment to press for European minimum standards for domestic appliances.
A spokesman for the Department of Energy said that the government was "determined to improve energy efficiency, but not at a disproportionate cost and effect to the consumer" .
, Environment Minister David Trippier has announced that Britain was "not opposed" to EC plans for an energy tax.
The government needed more time to study the proposals, Trippier insisted.
Under the EC strategy, an energy tax would rise gradually to $10 a barrel by the year 2000.
It would be based on the carbon content of fuels and would have the biggest effect on the coal industry.
Guardian 27 September, 2 October Observer 29 September
Energy
Big companies invest in windpower
Three large British companies with interests in wind power, National Power, British Aerospace and Taylor Woodrow, have set up a subsidiary to build five wind farms a year until the turn of the century.
The new body, National Wind Power, also inherits 21 wind power projects from its parent companies.
The company has stressed the importance of government support for the future of wind energy.
Although Britain had the best potential for wind power, especially in Scotland, of any European country, it was far behind in exploiting this renewable resource.
The company estimates that wind power alone could supply at least 10 per cent of Britain's energy needs by the year 2025.
Financial Times 12 September
Energy
Labour criticizes energy policy
The Labour Party has attacked the government for restricting the use of new, more efficient forms of power generation "in order to meet the demands of their City advisers to boost short-term profitability of the regional electricity companies" .
It also criticized the electricity companies for failing to take the lead in developing alternative energy sources.
Launching a document called Green Power, energy spokesman Kevin Barron, said that Labour would change the existing levy on fossil fuels used for other energy sources (primarily nuclear power) into a clean energy levy.
Part of this would be earmarked for incentives to promote combined heat and power (CHP) energy and other sources.
Labour would also take control of the national electricity grid, making it responsibility for energy saving.
Independent 5 September
Energy
Renewable energy campaign launched
Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth have launched a campaign to persuade the British government to increase its target for the generation of electricity from renewable resources.
Greenpeace argues that Britain could produce 10 per cent of its electricity from wind, wave and solar energy by the year 2000.
The government's target is 2 per cent.
It says that the potential in Britain for producing electricity from renewable sources is greater than anywhere else in Europe.
It has submitted three scenarios to a government advisory group allowing for various capacities of electricity production from onshore wind, offshore wind, landfill, hydroelectric, solar cell, wave and forestry schemes.
All three options imply a cost per kilowatt-hour lower than government estimates for nuclear power.
At the same time, Greenpeace released the results of an opinion poll which showed that six out of ten of those questioned wanted the government to give greater priority to renewable-energy projects as part of the effort to counter the greenhouse effect.
Eight out of ten wanted the government to raise the target for renewable production.
And seven out of ten declared a willingness to pay higher electricity bills if necessary.
Times 5 September
Environmental Politics
UNCED "environmental charter" encounters difficulties
A preliminary draft of a charter on the environmental rights of developing nations has been issued following the third set of negotiations in preparation for the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED).
Delegates at the UN in Geneva had hoped to set standards for every aspect of environment and development.
The organisers of the conference had amassed the hundreds of rights suggested under 17 different principles, hoping eventually to amalgamate them into a single-page charter and a declaration similar to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
North and South, however, remained deeply divided, the poorer countries feeling that the charter failed to take account of their economic development.
The Group of 77, an alliance of developing nations, has demanded that developed countries acknowledge the pollution they have created and pay for it.
The Group linked third world debt and more favourable trade agreements to environmental issues.
Summit organisers had hoped to produce three global conventions for signature in Rio, but these were blocked.
Developing nations argued that the motion on protection of rainforests abused their right to self-determination [see ED 49-50]and the convention on biodiversity was seen by some as a ruse to gain control of their resources.
The convention on climate change is being blocked by the US on the grounds that global warming remains unproven.
, The UN Secretariat has come up with a figure of $165 billion a year for saving the world's environment.
The amount is the equivalent of trebling every wealthy country's aid budget to the third world.
New Scientist 7, 28 September Guardian 6 September
Environmental Politics
Senator proposes GATT code on environment
The incorporation of an environmental code into the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) has been called for by Senator Max Baucus, chairman of the Senate's international trade sub-committee.
The code has been proposed as a stop-gap pending the negotiation of an international agreement on environmental standards which Baucus described as "likely to be decades away" .
The code would address "an obvious deficiency" in GATT which puts trade above environmental consideration, he said.
Under the code, each country would be allowed to meet its own environmental standards.
Imported products which failed to meet these standards could be subjected to extra duties providing that: the environmental standards had a scientific base; the same standards must be applied to all competitive domestic production; and imported products could be proved to be causing economic damage to competitive domestic industries.
According to the Senator, the "incentive of avoiding duties" would encourage the manufacture of products with higher environmental standards.
Financial Times 5, 18 September
Environmental Politics
World Bank 1992 report to address environment
The World Bank has announced that its report for 1992 is to be dedicated to the themes of environment and development following the momentum built up around these issues as a result of the UNCED conference, to be held in Brazil in the same year.
The bank's current report (1991) mentions that there is some evidence of a man-made "greenhouse effect" but adds that the magnitude and consequences of the effect remains unknown.
The report adds that the question of "burden sharing" is crucial, as past accumulations of greenhouse gases have come largely from the industrialised world while future growth is likely to come increasingly from the developing nations.
West Africa 23 September
Environmental Politics
Conservative pollution agency plans held up by Gummer move
Plans by Prime Minister John Major to set up a powerful anti-pollution agency have been delayed following demands from John Gummer, Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, for a share in the running of the National Rivers Authority (NRA).
The NRA was to have formed part of the new body.
The Prime Minister's aim of amalgamating the functions of Her Majesty's Pollution Inspectorate and the NRA took green lobby groups and opposition parties by surprise.
The legislation for the new agency was expected to have been introduced into Parliament at the earliest possible opportunity by Secretary of State for the Environment, Michael Heseltine, who is expected to set a firm date for publication of the consultation paper on the new environment agency sometime in October.
David Gee, Director of Friends of the Earth, has commented that"MAFF has steered agriculture into three crises — food mountains, falling farm incomes and nitrate pollution.
They are the last group you would give water management to".
Financial Times, Guardian, Independent 23 September Observer 22 September
Environmental Politics
Single environment agency for Scotland
A single agency to control all forms of pollution in Scotland is to be set up over the next three years.
The Scottish Environmental Protection Agency (SEPA) is to be responsible for controlling radioactive waste, air pollution, water pollution and the regulation of solid waste disposal.
At present, responsibility for monitoring and regulation of the different areas is split between several different organisations.
The new agency will be funded by the Scottish Office and given an initial budget of £20 million.
According to the Secretary of State for Scotland, Ian Lang, bringing the agencies together would be a logical step toward more effective pollution control.
A spokesman for the Scottish Green Party, Philip O'Brien welcomed the move in principle but said: "We shall have to see, for example, what numbers of inspectors SEPA will have.
The current number of environment inspectors is ludicrous".
Independent 24 September
Environmental Politics
Whitehall instructed to prioritise environment
The government has instructed its departments to give a higher priority to the environment when drawing up new policies, taking the environment into account at a much earlier stage than it has done previously.
Departments will have to place a monetary value on any destruction of the environment that may result from government policies, meaning that environmental impact will be assessed at the same time as other benefits and costs.
According to Environment Minister David Trippier, the scheme is the first of its sort in the world.
, The House of Commons environment committee has proposed introducing tighter laws to prevent manufacturers from falsely claiming their products are environment friendly.
The committee, chaired by Conservative MP Hugh Rossi, wants an amendment to the Trade Descriptions Act to help put an end to companies making misleading "green" claims bought about by the rise of green consumerism.
Financial Times 6, 24 September
Environmental Politics
New Chairman for Joint Nature Conservation Committee
The Earl of Selbourne is to become the new chairman of the Joint Nature Conservation Committee, Britain's umbrella nature conservation organisation, following the resignation of the previous Chairman, Sir Fred Holliday [see ED 49/50].
Issues facing the new chairman include the payment of compensation to Scottish landowners who have been prevented from planting conifers over large areas designated as Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs).
The conservation of the Scottish Highlands was the issue which initially prompted the disbanding of the former Nature Conservancy Council and the creation of three separate bodies for England, Scotland and Wales.
Sir Fred resigned after Conservative peers forced through legislation allowing review of all Scotland's SSSIs.
Guardian 6 September
Environmental Politics
Green Party agrees to internal reform
The Green Party has agreed to internal reforms aimed at making it more electorally effective after a prolonged debate at the party's annual Wolverhampton conference.
Changes are to include a nine-member national executive, a regional council and clearly defined leadership structure, which will make it more akin to mainstream political parties.
The Party's best known members, Jonathan Porritt and Sara Parkin, declined to stand at a ballot to elect two Green Party political speakers.
Parkin may stand for a seat on the new party executive.
The two new figureheads, one man and one woman, are likely to be selected from the six speakers chosen by the party during the conference.
The reforms are designed to reverse the drastic decline in the Party's support.
Financial Times 19, 20, 23 September European 22 September
Environmental Politics
FoE cinema commercial highlights debt crisis
Friends of the Earth (FoE) has launched a nationwide cinema commercial making explicit the connection between Third World debt, the UK's High Street banks and rainforest destruction.
The 50-second commercial highlights the role of the banks in the destruction of the rainforest by prolonging the debt crisis.
Tony Juniper, FoE's Rainforest Campaigner, said;"If more people understood the connection between the debt and rainforest loss, the banks would be forced to behave quite differently.
People don't know why the rainforests are disappearing at such a rate".
Friends of the Earth news release 23 September
Global Warming
Spain sets new energy policy but increases greenhouse gases
The Spanish government is to adopt a new energy plan which will include the country's first-ever pollution-cutting measures.
However the plan also allows for a 36 per cent rise in carbon dioxide emissions from heavy industry and power plants.
This could jeopardise the EC target of stabilising emissions at 1990 levels by the turn of the century.
Spanish officials in Brussels insist that Spain has a right to increase emissions because its current rate is lower than most EC countries.
They are demanding that richer countries cut back their carbon emissions to compensate.
The head of the Spanish consumer association, Francisco Zaballa, has called the plan "a start" , but complains that there is no plan for enforcement.
 "There is no mention of sanctions against companies, or fines if they do not fulfil the objectives, or of incentives…for them to make adjustments" he said.
New Scientist 14 September
Global Warming
Huon pines may provide missing climate clue
Trees growing well above their normal altitude in Tasmania have provided strong evidence of rapid global warming.
Studies of the yearly growth rings of the Huon pines suggest that the temperature in the past 25 years has risen faster than at any other time since AD 900.
The findings may prove highly significant in the greenhouse debate.
Research by a joint US-Australian team has found a strong correlation between the thickness of the tree rings and the recorded temperatures for the years since 1900.
The team found no episode in the last 1,000 years to match the growth in the width of tree rings recorded in the last 25 years and the temperature rise that this indicates.
Australia's national research organisation has said that the temperature jump could still have been caused by a natural variable.
The researchers are to examine more trees including four more species before they firm up their claims.
New Scientist 21 September
Global Warming
Algal blooms create carbon
Marine algal blooms, previously thought to act as a carbon sink, have been found actually to produce carbon dioxide, thereby potentially adding to the greenhouse effect.
The tiny plants consume carbon dioxide during photosynthesis but also generate gas as they lay down their skeletons.
It was previously thought that the tiny plants leached carbon dioxide from the atmosphere in creating their skeletons, taking it with them to the sea bed when they died.
Researchers aboard the RRS Charles Darwin, one of the Natural Environment Research Council's vessels, conducted tests on algal blooms in the North and South Atlantic.
They were surprised to find that carbon dioxide concentrations were higher in water taken from inside the algal blooms than outside it.
The reason is that although the algae need carbon to create their skeletons, they extract this from bicarbonate in sea water, not from carbon dioxide.
Carbon dioxide is released in the ensuing chemical reaction.
New Scientist 7 September
Nuclear Power
New Mexico waste project begins
The US Energy Department has started the Waste Isolation Pilot Project (WIPP), a five-year research programme to test the suitability of an underground site in New Mexico for the storage of nuclear waste from government facilities.
The waste, accumulated over a 40-year period, will remain dangerously radioactive for tens of thousands of years.
The department's plans are strongly opposed by local groups and New Mexico's representatives in Congress.
Doubts have also been expressed about the safety of the site [see ED48].
Washington Post 22 September
Nuclear Power
Radioactive leaks under-reported
The US Energy Department and the Westinghouse concern significantly under-reported leaks of up to a million gallons of radioactive water from storage tanks at the Hanford Nuclear Reservation, according to a General Accounting Office (GAO) report.
Hanford, in Washington State, is a nuclear-weapons plant operated by Westinghouse on behalf of the government.
Around half the country's radioactive waste is stored there.
The GAO report cites the instance of one storage tank which it estimated had leaked between 50,000 and 800,000 gallons of radioactive water over a ten-year period up to 1978, against the operators' reporting of 5,000 gallons.
Washington Post 22 September
Nuclear Power
Greenpeace urges radical reform of IAEA
Greenpeace has called for a complete reorganization of the International Atomic Energy Authority (IAEA), the UN regulatory body, on the grounds that its mandate to promote nuclear energy is incompatible with its responsibility as an international nuclear watchdog.
In The IAEA File, Greenpeace also levels a number of specific accusations against the organization.
It claims that the IAEA:(i) colluded with the Soviet authorities in concealing the true impact of the Chernobyl nuclear accident in 1986 and failed to respond to warnings that foreshadowed disaster;(ii) failed to prevent the diversion by the Iraqi government of enriched uranium from French and Soviet civilian programmes for military purposes;(iii) refuses to tackled the issue of the transport of nuclear waste across national boundaries; and (iv) encourages the dumping of radioactive waste in Africa and other developing countries.
The IAEA has vigorously denied all the accusations, describing some of them as "absolutely outrageous" .
Financial Times 17 September
Nuclear Power
Prague admits reactors were built below standard
A senior official of the Czechoslovak Atomic Energy Commission has told an international conference in Vienna that some nuclear reactors built in his country in the 1970s fell below Western safety standards.
Zdenek Kriz said that: "There was no discussion about safety.
[We]accepted the Soviet philosophy, which differed on standards from the rest of the world".
International Herald Tribune 5 September
Nuclear Power
Slovak poll shows opposition to nuclear plants
Some 39 per cent of the population of Slovakia is opposed to the continued construction of nuclear power plants in the republic, according to a poll conducted by the Slovak Academy of Sciences; 31 percent of respondents were in favour of construction, while 30 percent had no view.
Asked what concerned them most in connection with nuclear power, respondents named the possibility of accidents, human error and the storage of radioactive waste.
The poll also showed that most people in Slovakia were poorly informed about nuclear-energy issues.
CTK News Agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 11 September
Nuclear Power
BNFL fined over illegal dumping of waste
British Nuclear Fuels has been find £7,500 plus costs after admitting the unauthorized disposal of radioactive waste.
The magistrates' court at Fleetwood, Lancashire, was told that metal boxes used by BNFL's Harwell plant were found in a scrapyard in Liverpool.
Independent, Guardian 18 September
Ozone Layer
Ozone hole found over Antarctica for third year running
A deep hole has been discovered over Antarctica for the third year in succession.
The New Zealand Meteorological Service has measured ozone levels over Scott Base on Ross Island ever since the first hole was discovered in 1985.
Ozone holes before 1989 varied in depth.
Scientist Tom Clarkson said that there was a 50-60 percent loss of ozone over the Antarctic during the southern spring (from September to November).
He predicted that the phenomena would continue next year.
Ozone destruction is most pronounced over the Antarctic due to climatic and atmospheric extremes.
A notable depletion in the ozone layer over the Arctic and northern Europe has also been recently discovered.
Washington Post 28 September 1991
Ozone Layer
India refuses to sign Montreal Protocol
After its initial ratification of the Montreal Protocol [see ED 49-50], India has refused to go ahead and sign it.
The international treaty is aimed at saving the Earth's ozone layer and commits member countries to phasing out production of the gases that destroy the layer.
India's Environment Minister, Kamal Nath, said that he was dissatisfied with the conditions governing aid to developing nations to help them produce alternatives to chlorofluorocarbons.
The conditions were felt to "infringe India's sovereignty" .
Independent 21 September
Ozone Layer
Satellite to explore ozone layer
A satellite which will monitor the earth's ozone layer for three years is to be deployed from the US space shuttle Discovery, launched in September.
The Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) will transmit data on the ozone layer back to earth.
The satellite will observe seasonal thinning of the ozone layer above the Antarctic and other areas where the ozone layer is believed to be thinning such as the US and western Europe.
The debate about the depletion of the ozone layer has been so far hampered by a scarcity of data.
UARS is designed to provide a wealth of hard information concerning the chemistry, dynamics and energy balance of the atmosphere.
UARS is the first stage of Nasa's Mission to Planet Earth, a 15-year global research programme aimed at studying the Earth "as a complete environmental system" .
It is the US equivalent to the more modest European ERS-1 (see ED 49-50).
Financial Times 18 September Independent 14 September
Pollution: Air
Urban pollution is Brazil's "main environmental problem" , report claims
The most comprehensive environmental survey ever carried out in Brazil has revealed that the country's most serious environmental problem is not the destruction of the Amazon rainforest but the pollution of its cities.
Furthermore, other ecosystems have suffered greater damage than the Amazon.
The report was prepared for the United Nations in advance of the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro scheduled for 1992.
In line with UN guidelines, it takes stock of the situation but does not contain any specific conclusions or recommendations.
In Brazil's cities, over 90 per cent of sewage is untreated, only 3 per cent of rubbish is properly dealt with, more than 40 per cent of the water supply is unsafe, and the air is heavily polluted by traffic fumes and industrial emissions.
In the rural areas, there are a number of ecosystems under serious threat, including the Atlantic forest, the grasslands of the Pantanal swamp and the Cerrado savanna.
Roberto Guimaraes, who coordinated the work on the survey, notes that much ecological damage could be prevented if the country's strict environmental-protection laws were properly enforced.
 "Our legislation is copied by several countries but it is not effective because of an institutional weakness and, sometimes, lack of political will" , he declared.
% Montevideo, the capital of Uruguay, is suffering serious acid-rain pollution, according to a survey by the health ministry.
The city used to claim that it had some of the cleanest air in Latin America.
New Scientist 7 September EFE News Agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 26 September
Pollution: Air
Chicago sets up world's first "futures market" for pollution
The Chicago Board of Trade (CBT) is setting up the world's first market place for pollution, with the intention both of making money and reducing emissions.
Under the US Clean Air Act, each plant is given a limit on permissible sulphur pollution.
 "Permits to pollute" can be traded between plants, under a system initiated by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA — see ED No. 47).
The CBT, which operates the world's largest futures market, now wants to open a market for pollution rights.
The market will allow firms to buy up current and future pollution allowances.
The market is to open in 1993 with a market price of $400 to emit one ton of pollution.
It is not expected that the cost will rise above $2,000, the cost of the government fine for emitting the same amount.
Whilst many believe that the free-market and environmental protection are mutually exclusive, others believe that if the CBT plan is successful, the implications for industry will be enormous.
Environmentalists have expressed concerned about the concept of a money-based "right to pollute" .
The initiative is being closely watched by state regulatory bodies in America and the EC including Britain.
Guardian 27 September China to tackle acid rain The Chinese government has announced that controlling the country's growing acid-rain pollution had become a matter of "extreme urgency" .
Spokesman Song Jian noted that areas affected by acid rain had seen a fall in agricultural production, devastation of the environment and serious economic losses.
He recommended the levying of a pollution tax on emissions of sulphur dioxide from industrial plants and developing low-sulphur coal and other clean energy resources.
, China's first journal on population and environmental issues, Zhongguo Renkou, Ziyuan yu Huanjing, was launched on 29 August.
Xinhua News Agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 29 August, 6 September
Pollution: Air
Reduced pollution produces whiter snow in Arctic
The introduction of lead-free petrol and the reduction of industrial emissions in North America and Europe is causing cleaner, and whiter, snow to fall in the Arctic.
Working from samples taken from the ice cap, French researchers have calculated that snowfall in Greenland in 1967 contained seven times more lead than in 1989.
Concentrations of two other heavy metal pollutants, cadmium and zinc, were more than halved during the same period.
The researchers pointed out that current levels of lead in Greenland snow are still 25 times higher than 5,000 years ago.
Emissions from the prime source of air pollution in the Arctic, industrial plants in the northern Soviet Union, have not been reduced.
New Scientist 14 September
Pollution: Air
Fossil fuel tax less costly than acid rain, according to Greenpeace
The tax on fossil fuels proposed by the European Commission would be less costly than paying for the damage caused by acid rain, according to a report by Greenpeace.
The report calculates that acid rain throughout Europe causes between £200 billion and £600 billion of damage to lakes, forests, crops, buildings and human health every year.
The EC tax on the other hand would cost all energy uses £82 billion per year.
The report, prepared by the University and East Anglia and the consultancy firm Environmental Resources, was submitted to the Department of Environment in October 1990.
Greenpeace released it after the department decided not to publish it.
New Scientist 28 September
Pollution: Air
Welsh watchdog opposes "filthy fuel" 
Wales' pollution watchdog is fighting plans to burn orimulsion, reportedly one of the dirtiest fuels in the world, at a National Power plant in Pembroke.
The Countryside Council for Wales, responsible for landscape and wildlife conservation, has argued that the fuel will further damage the uplands of central Wales which have already suffered damage from acid rain.
National Power has applied to John Wakeham, the Secretary of State for Energy, for permission to convert the Pembroke station to burn orimulsion, a bitumen and water mix, which the power company wants to import from Venezuela.
The converted station is expected to emit 200,000 tonnes of sulphur dioxide a year.
A spokesman for National Power said that about 15 per cent of British coal had an even higher sulphur content than orimulsion.
The power company is considering converting several of its rarely-used oil-fired stations for use with orimulsion.
The other main power company, PowerGen, also wants to burn orimulsion at Richborough station in Kent.
In August, a trial burning produced a corrosive black cloud which caused damage worth millions of pounds to new cars stored nearby.
The Countryside Council is continuing to lobby John Wakeham and David Hunt, the Secretary of State for Wales.
Independent 30 September
Pollution: Water
Exxon agree to higher fine over Valdez spill
The petrochemicals company Exxon have reached an agreement with the Alaskan and US federal governments on a final settlement of the legal action over the Exxon Valdez oil spill.
Under the new settlement, Exxon have agreed to pay a criminal fine of US$150 million, of which $25 million is suspended.
This new settlement represents a net increase of $25 million over the previously-agreed total [see ED nos. 45 and 46], which was rejected by the Alaska House of Representatives as an inadequate reflection of Exxon's criminal liability.
The additional money will be used for further clean-up work in the Prince William Sound, site of the spill.
International Herald Tribune 1 October Financial Times 1 October
Pollution: Water
Great Lakes pollution "hazard to health" 
Pollution in the Great Lakes has grown to the extent that it is a "a hazard to human health" , according to a report prepared by a joint US-Canadian team.
The Lakes sit astride the US-Canadian frontier, forming the world's largest body of fresh water.
It warns that pollutants in the water may be causing insidious neurological damage in children, and infertility in adults.
The lakes have been used by both industry and farmers as a dumping ground for a variety of potentially toxic chemicals, including polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and organochlorine insecticides such as dieldrin and DDT.
Compiled by the International Joint Commission, a specialist body established to monitor the Lakes, the report expresses particular concern about the dangers of cumulative exposure to PCBs among children.
"The defects are not clinical.
Neither parents nor physicians would be likely to recognize them.
They are of concern in terms of public health."
It also suggests that the presence of toxic chemicals in reproductive tracts of people living near the Lakes "could be a factor contributing to the otherwise unexplained declines in North American fertility rates" .
New Scientist 23 September
Pollution: Water
EPA beach standards "ineffective" 
A US environmental group has warned that the federal Environmental Protection Agency's standards for beach cleanliness are inadequate.
The Natural Resources Defense Council claims that, even if beaches met the EPA standards, 19 out of 1,000 swimmers would develop gastro-enteritis, largely as a result of untreated sewage being discharged into the sea.
Many beach authorities already reject the EPA's standards as too lax.
But, using their own tests, authorities in 10 states either shut off, or issued warning notices on, beaches over 2,400 times during 1989-90, with New York State issuing the most restrictions, despite the fact that it also has the most relaxed standards.
New Scientist 31 August
Pollution: Water
Stretches of Saudi coastline "beyond repair" 
Oil pollution from the Gulf War has left stretches of the Saudi coastline "beyond repair" , according to the environmental group, Greenpeace, which claims that the Saudi government is not doing enough to clean up the damage.
Worst affected is the country's 400 kilometre north-eastern shoreline, where much of the wildlife has been killed off.
In some places, oil is packed up to a foot deep in the sand, according to the co-ordinator of Greenpeace's expedition to the area.
"Marine life is dying.
Each time a bird dives for food it becomes coated in oil, and birds are continually ingesting it", he said.
Up to eight million barrels of oil was spilled into the Gulf during the war, some of which was now being carried offshore by tidal currents to form new slicks in the open Gulf.
The Saudi government claims to have removed the equivalent of 1.7 million barrels from offshore slicks, and says it is now starting to address the problem of oil on the beaches.
Washington Post 4 September International Herald Tribune 6 September European 6-8 September Guardian 5 September
Pollution: Water
Egypt to strengthen marine pollution laws
Egypt is preparing new, tougher legislation to protect its marine environment which is likely to be approved by parliament early next year.
The new measures will mean that oil spillages or leakage of other hazardous materials will be punishable with stiff fines or the imprisonment of company executives.
Companies will also be obliged to pay clean-up costs.
Under previous legislation dating from 1969 and rarely implemented, companies faced maximum fines of only $3,000.
The Egyptian Petroleum and Mineral Wealth Ministry is drawing up plans requiring that new offshore exploration and production contracts perform an environmental survey.
The surveys will be repeated at prescribed intervals.
Middle East Economic Digest 29 September
Pollution: Water
NRA to close loophole on sewage pollution of rivers
The National Rivers Authority is to close a loophole under which the 12,000 sewage works in England and Wales can cause highly toxic pollution of rivers without fear of prosecution.
At present, sewage works must ensure that effluent meets the required standards of cleanliness for 95 percent of any 12 month period.
For the remaining 5 per cent of the year, they are allowed to exceed the standards by an unlimited amount.
The new ruling will keep the 95 per cent rule, but for the remaining 5 per cent of the time a new, tighter standard will be set.
The new laws bring the sewage companies into line with other industries.
Financial Times 25 September Independent 25 September
Pollution: Water
Greenpeace takes NRA to court
The environmental group Greenpeace is taking the National Rivers Authority to court over what it claims is the NRA's "hopelessly inadequate" efforts to counter pollution.
Greenpeace have applied for a judicial review of the NRA's system of controlling pollution — based on "consents" by which companies are allowed to pollute up to specific limits.
Greenpeace claim that the Authority is failing in its statutory duty to gather the necessary evidence to enforce the law.
The pollution consents are in practice frequently broken, but prosecutions are rare.
Greenpeace's decision to apply for a review follows its successful private prosecution of chemical company Albright and Wilson — the first such private action taken under the provisions of the 1989 Water Act.
During the course of the case, Greenpeace produced evidence claiming that the company had notified the NRA of its intention to discharge heavy metals into the Irish Sea from its Whitehaven plant in excess of its pollution consent limits, but that the Authority took no action to prevent it.
The NRA have subsequently announced that it intends to carry out its own prosecution of Albright and Wilson.
On the same day that it announced its intention to apply for the judicial review, Greenpeace members attempted to block the company's discharge pipes, provoking an injunction banning them from trespassing further on the company's property.
Independent 12 September NRA news release 10 September
Pollution: Water
Petrol stations "contaminate environment" , says report
Almost half of Britain's petrol stations are polluting their environment, according to the Environment Assessment Group consultancy.
Although it stresses that much of the contamination does not pose a health risk, leaks from service stations have caused explosions and have contaminated water supplies.
Mindful of the provisions of the new Environmental Protection Act, under which petrol stations are classified as potential sources of contamination, oil companies have started to commission risk assessments of their stations.
Green Magazine November
Transport
Measures to combat diesel fumes urged
The Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution has called for tougher controls on pollution caused by diesel engines of lorries, buses and coaches.
It also recommended that the cost of road fund licences be reduced for those vehicles which meet new stricter limits on emissions about to be agreed by the European Community, and that excise duty levied on diesel fuels be cut for those which meet EC standards.
The commission believes that tougher standards on fuels and engines should be introduced by the government at the earliest possible date to provide an incentive to the transport industry.
Diesel engines are the main source of smoke in cities and are responsible for a fifth of all emissions of nitrogen oxides.
Financial Times 5 September Guardian 5 September
Transport
Transport
DoT uses "outdated" methods to assess impact of roads
The Council for the Protection of Rural England (CPRE) has complained to the European Commission about the procedures used by the Department of Transport (DoT) to assess the environmental impact of road building.
It is particularly concerned about the system whereby land value is based on the price it would command with planning permission, since this discriminates against protected sites of ecological importance, which are on occasion "zero rated" , since by definition they would not be developed.
The CPRE claims that the department's practices fail to comply with EC standards.
Guardian 16 September
Transport
Government fails on traffic growth, says FoE
The government is failing both to control the growth of road traffic and to promote the development of new fuel-efficient cars, according to the Friends of the Earth (FoE).
As a result, the government's own modest target of stabilizing the emissions of carbon dioxide by the year 2005 may not be met.
According to the FoE's report, Transport and Climate Change, computer modelling has shown that CO2 emissions must be reduced by 30 per cent, not just stabilized, to protect the environment.
It also claims that emissions could be stabilized by 1994 through the use of new technologies and tax incentives for fuel-efficient cars.
The necessary reduction by 2005 could also be achieved if the government restrained the growth of traffic to 16 per cent instead of the estimated 34 to 59 per cent.
To restrain traffic growth, FoE argue, the government should introduce road pricing, increase funding for public transport and ensure that taxes reflect the true environmental cost of car use.
Independent 4 September
Tropical Forests
Tropical forest destruction rates "increasing" 
A report by the UN Food and Agriculture Organization has revealed that the rate of destruction of the world's tropical forests has increased by 40 per cent during the period 1980-90.
Environmental groups welcomed the acknowledgement of a growing rate of loss, but suggested that the true figures could be higher.
The FAO report estimated that a total of 42 million acres of tropical forest were cleared in 1990 — more than an acre every second — as compared with just 30 million in 1980.
By comparison, the woodland areas of industrial countries appear to be growing slightly in size.
The greatest rates of deforestation occurred in Latin America, followed by Africa and Asia.
In some countries however, notably Brazil, the rate appeared to have declined somewhat since the mid-80s, as government incentives for land clearance were ended.
Much of the worldwide loss was the result of impoverished farmers being compelled to clear the land for subsistence agriculture.
Friends of the Earth argued that the FAO report represented a belated acknowledgement of FoE's own findings [see ED.
No. 41/42].
In a 1988 report, the FAO claimed that there was no evidence to suggest accelerated forest loss.
Washington Post 9 September FoE news release 10 September
Tropical Forests
Drug firm buys right to screen rainforest plants
A major US pharmaceutical company, Merck and Co., has reached an agreement with the National Institute of Biodiversity of Costa Rica, by which it will be allowed to "screen" plants and insects gathered from Costa Rican forests in order to assess their medical potential.
Merck will pay royalties on any sales resulting from the exercise.
The agreement, by which Merck will pay the Institute $1 million, is intended to provide an incentive for the conservation of Costa Rica's remaining forest lands, by allowing them to serve as a sustainable productive resource of materials other than timber.
Local people will be trained to gather plants and other materials which may have economic potential.
These will be collected and catalogued by the Institute, which will pass on to Merck any promising varieties.
Merck intends to make synthetic copies of any compounds resulting from rainforest products which prove to have pharmaceutical potential.
This way, the company claims, there would be no need to carry on harvesting the original variety from the forest.
Commenting on the accord, a Merck spokesman stated: "You read papers today (that there are) all those medicines in the rainforest.
I feel some scepticism, but why not give it a try?"
Merck has concluded a similar arrangement with the New York Botanical Gardens: botanists there pass on potentially-useful plants to Merck, which has agreed to give royalties to the country of origin should a marketable drug result.
The Costa Rican Institute is enthusiastic about the Merck agreement: "It's a very productive way to preserve the great biological diversity we have" , said Anna Sittenfeld, head of science programmes.
"It helps us preserve our natural areas by increasing opportunities for the people who are living around them.
We can hire more people and create jobs.
It also helps people here in Costa Rica understand that our forests are important, not just for land, grazing and trees, but also for drugs and medicines."
Washington Post 21 September
Tropical Forests
Controversial Amazonian rainforest group born
A new organization dedicated to saving the Amazon rainforest has been launched amid controversy in Paris.
The Fondation Amazonie has been set up by Belgian film maker Jean-Pierre Dutilleux, formerly among the leading lights of pop singer Sting's Rainforest Foundation.
However, the new organization's claim that its projects are backed by the Brazilian government's Indian agency, Funai, has been denied by Funai's president, Sydney Possuelo.
The Fondation Amazonie invites donors to help purchase strips of rainforest, with a view to creating protected areas.
Its initial aim is the establishment of a national park, three times the size of Belgium, in the Upper Solimnoes River region of western Amazonia.
It aims to set up observation posts to secure the area against invasion by miners, settlers or ranchers, conduct health and vaccination programmes among indigenous people, and carry out environmental surveys of the forest.
The initial target is £3 million.
Given Funai's denial of any involvement, it is not clear how the Fondation will achieve its aims.
Its launch coincides with the opening of a Brazilian congressional inquiry into the alleged "internationalization" of the Amazon by Western governments and environmentalists.
, A leading Brazilian rainforest conservationist, Gumercindo Rodrigues, has been shot and critically injured in the northwestern Amazon.
Guardian 19 September
Tropical Forests
Laos bans logging
The Laotian government has announced a ban on all logging and timber exploitation in an effort to protect its fast-diminishing forests.
The ban will remain in force until new controls on forestry are introduced.
International Herald Tribune 19 September Financial Times 20 September
Tropical Forests
Malaysia arrests rainforest campaigners
Eight foreign environmentalists have been arrested by the Malaysian authorities after staging anti-logging protests on the island of Sarawak.
Five who pleaded guilty have been sentenced to jail terms of between 50 and 60 days.
The remaining three are to stand trial.
The campaigners came from the UK, USA, Germany, Sweden and Australia, representing organizations including Earth First (US), Robin Wood (Germany) and the Society for Threatened Peoples (Switzerland).
They were arrested after chaining themselves to cranes which were loading logs on to barges in the port of Kuala Baram.
Their protest follows that of local Penan tribal people, some 20 of whom were arrested after setting up barricades in the forests nearby.
The chief minister of Sarawak, Abdul Taib Mahmud, said that the campaigners had "no right to come and stir up trouble in the state" .
Two foreign journalists who reported the protests were deported.
Independent 8, 19 July Far Eastern Economic Review 1 August
Tropical Forests
Indonesian logging continues in face of ban
Logging is continuing in protected areas on the Indonesian island of Siberut, in violation of an international agreement to preserve the area.
Plans exist to log 250,000 hectares of virgin rainforest and replace it with a palm oil plantation, much of which will be worked by migrant labour from Indonesia's main islands.
The forests are home to the Mentawi tribal people, who stand to lose both their livelihoods and their homes as a result of development.
Green Magazine November 1991
Waste and Recycling
UK landfill in "appalling" state, says Commons committee
A House of Commons committee of MPs has concluded that it was "appalled" at the poor standards and non-availability of information on British landfill sites.
The report was compiled in order to assess Britain's ability to comply with a draft EC directive intended to standardise waste standards throughout Europe.
It concluded that no one knew what was in the dumps or if they had the capacity to meet future needs.
Britain dumps more of its waste (88 per cent) than any other European country studied in the report and incinerates the least (11 per cent ).
Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine has taken no action against 56 of the 79 English waste disposal authorities which have failed to fulfil their legal obligation of 10 years' standing to draw up plans for waste disposal.
The report has warned the government to prepare for the "wholesale contamination" which is likely to ensue as legions of small-scale operators shut down and abandon their plants.
Guardian 20 September
Waste and Recycling
Government "missing recycling target" 
Friends of the Earth are claiming that a survey of local authority recycling schemes proves that, without changes in policy, the government will fail to meet its target of recycling 25 per cent of domestic waste by the year 2000.
At present, FOE allege, only 2.6 per cent of domestic waste is recycled, and over 80 per cent of local authorities have no plans to introduce kerbside collection schemes — seen as essential to give the necessary boost to recycling.
Cost was cited by local authorities as the mainobstacle to establishing more recycling ventures.
Friends of the Earth news release 8 July
Waste and Recycling
Claims for disposable nappies disputed
Environmental claims made for disposable nappies by their manufacturer, Proctor and Gamble, have been challenged by in independent survey commissioned by the Women's Environmental Network (WEN).
Nine million disposable nappies are discarded in Britain every day.
The company has claimed that in environmental terms, there is "little to choose" between pampers and traditional cloth nappies.
Their conclusions are based on two cradle-to-grave studies conducted in Germany and financed by the company.
WEN, however, believes that both studies ignore much of the damage done by disposable nappies while exaggerating the problems with cloth nappies.
The organisation's own scientific consultants found that the damage done by felling trees and producing paper pulp for the disposable nappies was virtually ignored in the Proctor and Gamble studies.
Guardian 14 September