

Agriculture & Food
BSE figures rise
The number of cases of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) among cattle has continued to rise, despite repeated assurances from government spokesmen that the disease would soon decline.
The total of cases confirmed in 1991 was 23,607, compared with 12,315 in 1990.
In the first three months of 1992, a further 6,631 cases were reported (50 per cent up on the equivalent period last year).
The Food Magazine May/July
Agriculture & Food
Agriculture & food round-up
Packaging from recycled paper and board should not be allowed to come into contact with fatty foods, according to the Swedish National Food Administration.
It has warned that recycled packaging can cause bacteria and harmful chemicals, including those used for de-inking, to migrate into the food.
It recommends that a layer of plastic or aluminium foil be used as protection within the package.
* The number of English farmers fell by 7.4 per cent during the 10-year period 1981-91, according to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
The total fell from 193,000 to 179,500.
The Food Magazine May/July
Conservation: Land
EC to aid preservation of Coto Donana
The EC has declared its willingness to help finance a plan for the environmentally-sound development of the Coto Donana wetlands in southern Spain, which had been repeatedly identified as at risk from inappropriate farming and tourism.
The wetlands are one of Europe's most important sites for migratory birds.
The EC's move follows publication of a new report commissioned by the Andalusian regional government, which warns that the viability of the 50,000 hectare national park at the centre of the wetlands is under threat from unrestricted development on its borders.
The report is particularly critical of the expansion of rice and strawberry crops, which will draw unacceptable amounts of water from the reserve, and of planned marina developments.
An early halt to development is considered unlikely, however, in view of the close ties between some of the developers and members of the Spanish government.
Independent 4, 15 April
Conservation: Land
Africa's largest estuary under threat
The African continent's largest estuarine system is at risk from mining development.
Lake St Lucia and its wetland fringes, on the Indian Ocean coast of Natal, South Africa, has been targeted for open-strip titanium mining by Richards Bay Minerals, a 50 per cent owned subsidiary of Rio Tinto Zinc.
The mines would be confined to a narrow line of dunes which separate Lake St Lucia from the sea, but would still cause irreparable damage to the wetland as a whole, ecologists believe.
The company has long-standing permission to commence operations, but has now agreed to a government request for an environmental impact assessment, the result of which is expected soon.
Opponents of the mining claim more cash could be generated from eco-tourism than titanium extraction.
BBC Wildlife, May
Conservation: Land
Moscow's forest lost to potatoes
Moscow's last remaining forest, in the Losinskii Ostrov National Park, is being cut down by the city's hungry, who are using the land for illegal potato growing.
The loss is causing concern to Moscow doctors, who have warned that without the forest, the city's air pollution problems will increase.
According to President Yeltsin's environmental adviser, a total of one million tonnes of pollutants were released into the air last year — equivalent to 130 kg per person.
Plans for a forest protection bill have been shelved.
The medical newspaper, Meditsinskaya Gazeta is calling on doctors to finish every consultation with the words "Save Losinskii Ostrov" .
European 9 April New Scientist 4 April
Conservation: Land
New UK ESAs and Ramsar sites announced
Five new "Environmentally Sensitive Areas" (ESAs) have been designated in Scotland.
Farmers within ESAs can receive grants in return for signing management agreements providing for environment-friendly farming practises.
The new ESAs are: the Argyll Islands (including Iona, Mull and Islay); the Shetland Islands; the Cairngorm Straths; and the western and central Southern Uplands.
* The government has designated four more wetlands under the Ramsar Convention: Chippenham Fen, Cambridgeshire; the Exe Estuary, Devon; Lindisfarne, Northumberland; and Old Hall Marshes, Essex.
SCENES (Scottish Environment News), 3/92 BBC Wildlife, May
Conservation: Land
UK tree planting at post-war low
Fewer trees are being planted in the UK presently than at any time since the war, according to the timber industry body, Timber Growers UK.
The withdrawal of tax incentives in 1988, following widespread and inappropriate conifer afforestation of upland areas, was blamed for the decline.
The Chairman of Timber Growers UK, Andrew Christie-Miller, called for the reintroduction of incentives.
Environmentalist Jonathon Porritt urged the government to take steps to provide "more tree cover without destroying environmental interests" , adding that: "What is worrying is the lack of long-term strategy." 
Independent 3 April
Conservation: Land
Threats to UK estuaries on the rise
The UK's estuaries are facing growing threats of serious damage, according to a survey of 126 estuaries by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB).
It found that a total of 57 were at risk of permanent damage, compared to 43 in a similar survey carried out in 1988.
Marina development, land reclamation, port expansion and pollution were the most common causes of the threat.
The RSPB is calling for a more co-ordinated government approach to protect vulnerable coastal areas.
RSPB news release, 28 April
Conservation: Land
Fisons to sell peat arm
The UK's leading peat producers, Fisons plc, is to sell its horticultural division.
Fisons had been targeted by environmentalists for its peat-cutting work on sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs), and there had been signs recently that protests were becoming more militant.
In its first such action in the UK, the Earth First! group attacked peat-cutting machinery and water pumps on Thorne and Hatfield Moors, causing an estimated £100,000 worth of damage.
The action was denounced by Friends of the Earth as"completely inappropriate…
The people involved have naively played into Fisons' hands by allowing the company to divert public attention from its own eco-vandalism".
Independent 14 April Guardian 1 May
Conservation: Land
Kew Gardens endorses peat-free compost
Peat-free compost based on coconut husks has been endorsed by botanists at Kew Gardens after an 18-month long trial.
The peat-substitute, known as coir, is now used in 95 per cent of composts applied at Kew.
Assistant curator Mike Sinnott said: "We were able to take peat out and put coir in with virtually no alteration in volume, nutrient mix or acidity." 
He added, however, that in some cases, more nitrogen fertilizer was required.
Coir is imported by ICI from Sri Lanka, where it is a waste product from coconut palms grown for food and fuel.
The coir is blended with a mix of nitrogen, phosphate and potassium fertilizers to form the new compost.
It is currently about 20 per cent more expensive than peat composts.
New Scientist 28 March
Conservation: Species
Zimbabwean wildlife at risk from drought
The widespread and prolonged drought affecting southern Africa is starting to kill large numbers of wildlife in south-east Zimbabwe.
The deaths are likely to accelerate as the dry season wears on.
Rainfall during the December-April rainy season was under 10 per cent of normal, and the country's maize crop has been devastated.
The hippos of Gonarezhou National Park, on the Mozambique border, may face total extinction.
Hippos are uniquely vulnerable to drought, but other grazing and browsing animals, such as elephant, kudu and eland are also at risk.
According to a park spokesman, 80 per cent of game animals died in the 1983 drought, despite the fact that there was still some surface water.
This year, the remains of surface pools are drying up fast.
 "Unless it rains, I don't believe there are going to be any animals left in the low veld by September" , he said.
Park officials are concerned that local genetically-distinct sub-species of elephant and other animals may also disappear forever, unless a breeding population can be maintained.
The drought has been linked to the El Niño Pacific current phenomenon.
New Scientist 4 April
Conservation: Species
Toxic metals, pollution causing dolphin deaths
The widely-reported deaths of large numbers of cetaceans in the Mediterranean [see ED 57]is probably due to poisoning by heavy metals, exacerbated by industrial pollution, according to a series of post-mortems by marine scientists at various sites on the Mediterranean coastline.
Large quantities of mercury, cadmium, lead and other heavy metals have been discovered in the bodies of relatively young dolphins.
In some cases, mercury levels have reached 300 parts per million — 600 times the acceptable level.
The presence of such high levels of mercury is something of a mystery, since 65 per cent of the metal in the Mediterranean is naturally-occurring.
Some scientists have suggested that a rise in the sea temperature could be releasing more mercury.
Independent 21 April
Conservation: Species
Boston sewage plant could kill whales
A new $6 billion sewage treatment plant, intended to solve pollution problems in Boston Harbour, could threaten the survival of the 350 remaining Northern right whales.
The plant, due to open in 1995, will pump treated sewage further offshore into Cape Cod Bay.
The whales use the Bay as a winter feeding ground and nursery, and there are fears that they could be harmed by the 1.9 billion litres of waste to be deposited in the vicinity via new 15km outlet pipes.
The Environmental Protection Agency is currently preparing a biological impact assessment of the project, as required by the provisions of the Endangered Species Act.
New Scientist 4 April
Conservation: Species
Seal hunt quota increased
The seal hunt quota agreed by Norway and Russia has been increased from 51,000 last year to 60,000 this year, prompting protests from Greenpeace that there is no scientific basis for such an increase.
The annual seal hunt, which takes place on the pack ice off Greenland and in the Barents Sea, is justified by the Norwegians on the grounds that seals compete with the fishing fleet for fish.
But Greenpeace insist that only a small percentage of the fish caught by the seals are of interest to the fishermen, and that over-fishing remains the main threat to North Sea fish stocks.
It warns that seal populations are decreasing, particularly that of the harp seal, and that the hunt could exacerbate this.
Norway blames the harp's decline on lack of fish and possible chemical pollution.
This year's quota includes 40,000 harps.
Since the EC imposed its ban on seal pelt imports in 1983, the Norwegian government has maintained the hunt by paying grants for sealing trips, with a bounty for each seal landed.
* Russian scientists have reported large numbers of seals dying of blood cancer in the White and Barents Seas, allegedly as a result of radioactive waste resulting from the nuclear tests previously carried out on the Novaya Zemlya peninsula [see Nuclear Power section].
New Scientist 28 March ITAR-TASS World Service 3 April (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Conservation: Species
S. African states prepare to sell ivory
Zimbabwe has announced that it intends to sell its stocks of ivory, in direct contravention of the recent CITES ruling [see ED 56].
The country's Department of National Parks holds stocks of ivory amounting to around 25,000 tonnes, mostly obtained from elephants that had been culled or died naturally, or from seizures from poachers.
Ministers from Zimbabwe, Malawi, Namibia and Botswana subsequently met to discuss a common ivory sales strategy.
Radio RSA, Johannesburg [BBC Summary of World Broadcasts]29 March Guardian 17 April
Conservation: Species
 "Dolphin-friendly" tuna label "misleading" 
The labelling of cans of tuna as "dolphin-friendly" should be discontinued, since no importer can be sure that the tuna has been caught in a way which has does not threaten dolphins, according to the Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society (WDCS).
The Society reached an agreement with most tuna-canners in 1990, setting up the labelling scheme in return for the canners' agreeing not to buy tuna that had been caught through drift-netting or "setting-on-dolphins" (where the mammals are rounded up to catch the schools of tuna which swim beneath them).
The labelling scheme has been criticized by Greenpeace, the World Wide Fund for Nature, and other wildlife groups, on the grounds that the importers cannot always substantiate their claims.
A Greenpeace spokesman commented: "Tuna sales are up because dolphin-friendly labels lead to massive complacency by making people think the problem has been solved.
It hasn't.
The sad fact is that dolphin-friendly labels were a commercial decision by companies looking to protect their profits, not dolphins."
Sales of canned tuna rose by 4.1 per cent in 1991.
No tuna importer has yet responded to WDCS's latest appeal, and the majority insist that they will continue to carry "dolphin-friendly" labels.
New Scientist 9 May
Conservation: Species
Rare species round-up
Red squirrels and dormice are to be included in English Nature's Species Recovery Programme, which aims to restore populations through selective reintroduction…
The Natal Parks Board is to sell by auction five black rhinos in June.
The buyers will have to demonstrate that the rhinos will be used for breeding, and will be protected from poachers…
The amount of rhino horn entering Yemen has doubled over the last 20 months, apparently as a result of increased poaching activity in Zimbabwe and Swaziland.
A total of 1,540 lbs is estimated to have been smuggled into Yemen during that period — roughly equivalent to the horns of 240 rhinos.
The horn's principal use in Yemen is for ornamental dagger handles.
Earlier reports that this use has been superseded by plastic now appear to be in question.
Green Magazine, May Guardian 4, 6 May
Economics & Industry
Chemical firms to clean up Eastern Europe
The European Chemical Industry Federation has announced that its members are to co-operate on assisting Eastern Europe with cleaning up its legacy of pollution.
The "Environmental Advisory Service for Technology Transfer" (EASTT) will function as a non-profit operation, with chemical companies pooling technology and covering the costs of sending teams to assess damage and suggest solutions.
The scheme will begin with a pilot project at the EVM formaldehyde plant in Hungary.
European 16 April
Economics & Industry
Environmental impact reports "inadequate" 
The first comprehensive study of the quality of environmental impact reports in Britain has found that three quarters associated with major road building schemes are unsatisfactory, while two-thirds submitted to local authorities to cover factories, farm buildings, out-of-town shopping centres and quarries are also inadequate.
Reports prepared by utility companies, often for electricity or pipeline schemes, are mostly satisfactory, however.
Environmental impact statements have to be included with all development proposals judged likely to have a "significant" effect on the environment, under an EC Directive incorporated into British law in 1988.
About 250 are produced in Britain each year.
The Environmental Impact Assessment Centre at Manchester University considered 83 statements submitted between 1988 and early 1991.
They were judged on the criteria laid down by the EC Directive — that they should be unbiased, should properly examine alternatives, and should detail the measures that would be taken to mitigate any environmental damage.
Two-thirds of the statements were found to be biased: this was particularly evident when developers had not used outside consultants to prepare the statements, and where the developer was also the planning authority.
No independent supervisory body exists to ensure the quality and objectivity of statements.
Independent 15 April
Economics & Industry
Air pollution futures trading to begin
A futures market in tradeable pollution limits is to be established in Chicago, following earlier moves in California [see ED 57].
US electricity generators have been given new limits on the amount of sulphur dioxide they can emit after 1995.
But a ruling by the US Environmental Protection Agency allows utilities that meet the standards to sell their unused "rights to pollute" .
Companies which decide the cost of clean-up is too high will be able to buy the pollution permits in a new futures market at the Chicago Board of Trade.
The basic unit of trade will be the right to emit one ton of sulphur dioxide into the atmosphere each year.
The 25 initial contracts, due for delivery in 1995, will rise and fall in dollar increments.
Traders said it was too early to price the first contracts.
Independent 22 March
Energy
Chinese give go-ahead for Three Gorges dam
The Chinese parliament has voted in favour of the controversial Three Gorges dam on the Yangtze river, the biggest hydro-electric project in the world, which will be capable of generating one-eighth of all the power now produced in China.
Over the last 40 years of communist rule, numerous research studies have been conducted into the feasibility of the dam, first proposed by Mao Tse-Tung 70 years ago, but no decision made.
Construction of the dam, which is likely to cost at least $20 billion, will flood 600 kilometres of river valley and displace more than a million people.
It is now included in the country's new Ten Year Plan, though Prime Minister Li Peng declined to announce a firm starting date.
The giant scheme has been criticised inside and outside China on scientific, economic, environmental, social and even defence grounds.
The reservoir backed up behind the dam could be vulnerable to nuclear attack, opponents say.
The most recent feasibility study, completed in November 1988, recommended building the dam at the eastern end of the Yangtze's famous Three Gorges, one of the world's scenic wonders.
Ten experts refused to sign the report.
The project was denounced in 1988 by Chinese critics as a Stalinist folly.
Bankers have warned of ballooning costs over the 18 years it would take to build.
The National People's Congress voted 1,767 to 177 in favour of building the dam, but 664 abstained, one of the highest levels of dissent ever recorded.
Hubei People's Broadcasting Service 1 April (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Financial Times 4, 7 April New Scientist 4 April
Energy
UK wind farm developments
The second largest wind farm in the UK — and one of the largest in Europe — is being planned in mid-Wales, near Llandinam in Powys.
The wind farm is a joint venture between Tomen, a Japanese trading house, EcoGen, a UK company formed in 1990 to bring together a number of interests working on commercial wind power, and SeaWest, a US company and the world's largest developer of wind farms.
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries of Japan will supply the 103 turbines to power the farm.
The turbines each have an output of 300kw, giving a total power capacity of 31MW.
The construction of wind turbines on a moor opposite the Bronte family home in Haworth, West Yorkshire, is generating controversy between the rival conservationists of literature and the environment.
Jutting more than 100 feet above Brow Moor, the turbine is providing Gillson's quarry with cheap electricity and will recover its capital costs within six years.
Bradford City Council gave the quarry owner permission for a much lower generator on a "less visually intrusive" pylon, rather than the tower that has been erected.
Now retrospective planning permission must be sought, according to a council spokesman.
Independent 7 April Independent 14 April
Energy
More challenging targets for renewable energy urged
A report from the all-party Energy Select Committee of the House of Commons urges the government to set "challenging" targets for the amount of energy to be generated by renewable sources by the year 2000.
It suggests these should be in the 3,000-4000 megawatts range — three to four times the current government goal, and in line with figures proposed by environmental groups.
The report also calls for government programmes to stimulate the market for renewable energy, including tax incentives and low-interest grants, and urges the government to encourage small-scale renewable projects in Scotland that could serve local communities.
The report comes as the Department of Trade and Industry takes on the tasks of the now defunct Department of Energy.
Anxiety is growing over the Government's commitment to energy sources such as wind, wave and solar power since Colin Moynihan, the Energy Minister who championed the cause, lost his seat at the general election.
He had set up a 10-strong Renewable Energy Advisory Group (REAG).
Its work was suspended during the election campaign and advisers fear that its draft report could now be shelved.
One of the most criticised areas of current government policy is the early end of the subsidy to renewable energy projects, currently available under the Non-Fossil Fuel Obligation.
This has succeeded in kick-starting many renewable projects, but as its 1998 cut-off date approaches, it is becoming difficult to finance new schemes.
The REAG was expected to recommend contracts under the NFFO offering at least 10 to 15 years of premium prices for electricity generated through renewable means.
Financial Times 1 April
Environmental Politics
Report on links between population growth and environmental degradation
The Third Revolution, a study by Paul Harrison funded by several international bodies including the UN Population Fund (UNFPA) and the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF), claims that steep rises in world population could lead to catastrophic damage to the world environment and a severe loss of species and natural habitats.
The study's starting point was a UN forecast that the world's population will reach around 11.5 billion by the end of the next century, although it also took account of upper forecasts which suggest figures of 12.5 billion by 2050 and 28 billion by 2150.
Among the study's main recommendations is a massive programme aimed at giving women access to family planning methods, education and health facilities.
Financial Times 24 April
Environmental Politics
World green fund restructured
Governments of 32 countries have agreed to restructure and enlarge the Global Environment Facility (GEF), the fund set up by the World Bank and UN agencies in 1990 to handle transfers of money from industrialized countries to developing countries for environmental protection measures.
The GEF, restructured in response to Third World criticism of the dominant role played by western donor countries, will now be "transparent and accountable to contributors and beneficiaries alike" .
The GEF is likely to handle most of the funds which are expected to be pledged by donor countries under conventions on climate change and the protection of biological diversity due to be agreed at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June.
Its brief, which already includes protection of international waters and the ozone layer, is also likely to be extended to include combating desertification and deforestation.
New Scientist 9 May
Environmental Politics
Green "protest vote" in German state elections
The German Green Party scored significant successes in two Land (state) elections held on April 5.
But their achievement was marred by suggestions that they had benefited from "protest voters" motivated primarily by disillusionment with the main parties.
Extreme right-wing parties scored more pronounced successes.
The campaign in both Baden-Württemberg and Schleswig-Holstein was dominated by the issue of the increasing number of people seeking asylum in Germany.
In Baden-Württemberg the Greens increased their share of the vote from 7.9 per cent in 1988 to 9.5 per cent, and their representation from 10 to 13 seats.
In Schleswig-Holstein, however, the picture was less clear.
Although the Greens increased their share of the vote from 2.9 to 4.9 per cent, this left them just below the 5 per cent threshold required for representation.
Neue Zürcher Zeitung, April 1-5 Le Monde, April 7, 8 The Economist, March 28, April 1
Environmental Politics
Baltic co-operation agreement
The three Baltic republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania have signed an environmental co-operation agreement with Sweden.
All parties agreed to co-operate in protecting the environment of the eastern Baltic Sea, especially with respect to rubbish disposal and nuclear waste storage.
They also agreed to undertake joint research projects and exchange environmental information.
Neue Zürcher Zeitung April 2
Environmental Politics
Plans for UK pollution body shelved
Legislation to set up an umbrella agency to control pollution in England and Wales has been postponed because government ministries disagree over the scope and scale of the new body.
The proposed "UK version of the US Environmental Protection Agency" had been flagged by ministers as a likely outcome of wide-ranging discussions on the matter.
There was no mention of the agency in the Queen's Speech, which set out the government's legislative plans for the new 18-month session of Parliament following the re-election of the Conservatives on 9 April.
A spokesman stressed that the government was still committed to setting up the agency (one of the commitments in the Conservatives' election manifesto), and that the necessary bill would be introduced later in 1992 or in 1993.
New Scientist 9 May
Environmental Politics
UK faces two new EC legal actions
The European Commission has decided to send warning letters to the British government as a first stage in initiating legal proceedings over two alleged breaches of EC environmental legislation.
The first case concerns the pollution of Carnon Valley and Falmouth Bay in Cornwall caused by heavy metals released after a mine shaft burst in a nearby disused tin mine.
The burst was caused by rising water levels inside the mine after pumping equipment was removed.
The Commission claims that the government has breached an EC directive on dangerous substances in groundwater and surface water.
The second case concerns the planting of 2,000 acres of conifers in Deeside in Scotland.
The Commission claims that the government has breached the directive which requires an assessment of the environmental impact of major projects.
The planting has been sharply criticized by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds because of the effect on local bird life.
Independent 30 April
Environmental Politics
Scottish Natural Heritage established
Scottish Natural Heritage (SNH) has been formally set up from the merger of the Nature Conservancy Council for Scotland and the Countryside Commission for Scotland.
As defined in its own "statement of mission" , SNH will aim to protect and enhance Scotland's natural heritage and enable everyone to understand, enjoy and use it wisely "in a manner which is sustainable" .
The latter phrase, used in the 1991 act setting up the agency, enshrines the word "sustainable" in UK legislation for the first time.
SCENES (Scottish Environment News) March 1992
UK brings CO2 cut forward
The British government has brought forward the target date for reducing the level of carbon dioxide emissions to 1990 levels from 2005 to 2000.
This brings it in line with the target to which other European Community countries and Japan are committed.
The new commitment has been made conditional on other countries taking similar action, which was interpreted by analysts as a reference to the United States, which has thus far refused to agree to reduction targets.
Independent 1 May Financial Times 1 May
Global Warming
US calculations on CO2 cuts
An internal government analysis produced by four US agencies suggests that the United States could achieve reductions in carbon dioxide emissions of between 7 and 11 per cent with little economic dislocation.
Cuts of this size would bring the US close to the target sought by many other industrialized countries to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases to 1990 levels by the year 2000.
Until now the Bush administration has refused to participate in such a programme.
International Herald Tribune 27 April
Global Warming
Report predicts falling grain yields
A study presented to the United Nations suggests that grain yields will fall by 10 to 15 per cent in much of the third world as a result of global warming.
The study assessed the implications of regional changes in climate as predicted by the models of the Meteorological Office in Britain and the Goddard Institute of Space Studies (GISS) in the United States.
Both assume a doubling of the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
It was prepared for the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change by Martin Parry, the director of the Environmental Change Unit at the University of Oxford and an expert on the greenhouse effect in agriculture.
Most of the world's main food crops, including wheat, rice, sorghum, millet and soya beans, will suffer from the changes.
A crucial difference between the two models, however, is their assessment of the impact in northern latitudes.
The GISS model predicts increases in yields as summers become warmer in temperate regions, while the Met Office model predicts declining harvests in North America in particular.
The latter could have a global impact, pushing up grain prices substantially.
Predictions on the basis of the Met Office model suggest that an additional 400 million people would become at risk from hunger over the next 50 years.
600 million are already deemed at risk.
Parry says that he has become more pessimistic since about the impact of global warming since he prepared a series of case studies for the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) which were published in 1990.
He stresses that his findings are not firm predictions but "sensitivity studies" showing the vulnerability of world agriculture to climate change.
The projections build in the ability of farmers to adapt to climate change by changing crops and farming methods.
To prevent widespread famine, the report calls for the development of new crops adapted to hotter climates and drier soils; major irrigation and land reclamation schemes; and, above all, a reduction in population growth.
New Scientist 18 April
Global Warming
Marshall Islands first to go under?
An unpublished study commissioned by the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicts that global warming will cause sea levels to rise between 30 cm and 100 cm over the next hundred years.
It highlights the plight of the Marshall Islands, a former US trust territory which is now independent.
The islands in the archipelago, located in the central Pacific, are on average 250 cm above sea level.
The report says that the Marshall Islanders are likely have to flee their homes within 30 years and that the islands may be the first of the world's low-lying countries (mostly Pacific islands) to be inundated as sea levels rise.
The report is presently unfinished and unpublished, allegedly because of opposition from the Bush administration, which has been intent on playing down the possible effects of global warming.
Independent 1 May
Global Warming
Southeast Asia threatened by climate change
Climate change and rising sea levels could seriously disrupt the agricultural economy of Southeast Asia, according to a study undertaken for the UN Environment Programme (UNEP).
The forecast is based on assumptions of variable temperature rises across the region during the next 50 years, from around 1.1 to 4.2 degrees centigrade.
Rainfall is likely to increase locally, as a result of higher levels of evaporation and transpiration, with sea level rises averaging around one metre.
Among the immediate consequences will be: * seawater flooding of low-lying rice, shrimp and fish farms along coastlines; * the flooding of large sections of Bangkok, the Malacca coast and western Johor in Malaysia, and much of the heavily-populated northern coast of Java; * the destruction of many mangrove swamps and salt-water marshes, and the permanent flooding of river deltas.
Crop yields would fall as a result of shorter growing periods, and reduced solar radiation due to heavier cloud cover.
Although the increase in rainfall would aid irrigation, it would add to the problems of soil erosion and nutrient leaching.
Increased erosion will accelerate the process of silting up the region's hydro-electric dams.
The report predicted that the direct effects on farming would include destruction of 80,000 hectares of coastal rubber plantations in Malaysia, and substantial losses to the shrimp industry of Thailand — currently the world's largest shrimp producer.
Far Eastern Economic Review 16 April
Global Warming
UK coastal defences in question
A report by English Nature has revealed widespread erosion along the Essex and north Kent coasts.
The erosion is believed to have been caused by a combination of: i) the relative rise in sea level brought about by the slow sinking of southeastern England; ii) an actual rise in sea level locally since the 1970s; and iii) the reduction of saltmarshes due to human-made sea defences.
The problems caused by the coastal erosion may be a foretaste of the predicted dramatic effects of global warming, according to English Nature.
It is calling for a radical overhaul of coastal protection and flood defence planning.
Difficult decisions will have to be made, it says.
The House of Commons select committee on the environment has also strongly criticized the state of Britain's coastal defences.
It rejected evidence from government witnesses that present management arrangements were working well and has called for a radical reorganization.
English Nature press releases 27, 28 April Guardian 29 April Independent 29 April
Global Warming
International satellite programme to monitor changes
The space agencies of the United States, Russia, Europe, Japan, China and Brazil have agreed to a joint programme which will use both existing and new satellites to monitor changes in the global environment.
One of the main aims of the programme will be to collect information over the next 15 years to measure the impact of global warming.
Initially, the temperatures of sea surfaces and the circulation of heat through the oceans will be measured.
Guardian 1 May
Global Warming
China fails to commit itself to carbon cuts
The Chinese government has refused to agree to binding targets for cuts in carbon emissions, but is prepared to co-operate "in principle" with international efforts to combat the greenhouse effect.
Its position was outlined by Prime Minister Li Peng during talks with Germany's visiting Environment Minister, Klaus Töpfer.
Its present priority was to double the country's economic power over the next decade.
The government has, however, announced plans to introduce energy efficiency measures to reduce the amount of coal used each year by around 300 million tonnes.
A conference on the matter is to be held in Beijing later in the year.
According to Töpfer, the Chinese argued that they could not apply Western European safety standards to their nuclear plants.
DPA (German news agency) 13 April (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Global Warming
Brazil carbon emissions figure
Brazil is responsible for nearly 12 per cent of carbon emissions in the world, according to the director of the National Institute for Space Research, Volker Kirchhoff.
Burning of the Amazon forest produces nearly 720 million tons of carbon dioxide annually.
Le Monde 10 April
Global Warming
Impact of climate change on British flora and fauna
Britain's native flora and agricultural crops are likely to be transformed by global warming, with the present emphasis on special sites militating against the ability of nature to adapt to a warmer climate.
The assertion is made in a study by botanist Dr Philip Gates.
In Spring Fever — The Precarious Future of Britain's Flora and Fauna, he warns that species as varied as bluebells, mountain hares and the great raft spider — currently the subject of a reintroduction programme by English Nature — will be among the casualties.
Native species which are currently concentrated within isolated protected sites — such as nature reserves and sites of special scientific interest — will become increasingly inbred and unable to adapt to climate change through evolution.
Gates argues that a framework of green corridors and wildlife circulation networks should be introduced to augment the protected sites.
At present, he argues: "We have left our wildlife with nowhere to go." 
Certain local tree species will be unable to adapt to a warmer climate, and Gates suggests that saplings planted now should come from southern European seed stocks.
The warmer climate will support a varied range of crops, including sunflowers, lupins, aubergines, sweet peppers, hemp and melons.
 "Energy crops" such as willows, will spread.
Independent 14 April
Nuclear Power
Chernobyl death toll "much higher than stated" 
Ukrainian officials have estimated that between 6,000 and 8,000 people died as a direct result of the nuclear accident at the Chernobyl reactor in April 1986.
These figures are more than 200 times higher than the official toll of 31 deaths as claimed by the former Soviet government.
One statistic disclosed by the Ukrainian officials at a press conference on the impact of the accident is that deaths among members of the emergency services involved in decontamination work are three to five times above the rates for people of equivalent age.
The Ukrainian government is committed to closing down all the nuclear power stations in the republic.
* The Ukrainian government has announced it may consider restarting the two undamaged reactors at the Chernobyl site unless foreign help is forthcoming in installing new facilities to provide heating for the people still working in and around the complex.
Independent 23 April Financial Times 24, 28 April
Nuclear Power
Russian weapons plants shut down
The Russian government has ordered the closure of two nuclear reactors producing plutonium for nuclear weapons, sited outside the Siberian city of Krasnoyarsk.
They are cooled by water taken from the river Yenisey, which is then discharged back into the river, in contravention of recently-passed environmental legislation.
The river is already heavily polluted by chemical and metallurgical industries.
The ecology committee of the Russian parliament had demanded the shut-down, but the government's decision was also seen as a response to the winding-down of Russia's nuclear weapons programme.
Financial Times 21 April Le Monde 22 April ITAR-TASS World Service 20 April (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Nuclear Power
Arctic dumping by Soviets revealed
Russian officials have admitted that nuclear-powered vessels of the former Soviet navy have regularly dumped their nuclear waste in the Arctic since the 1960s.
The dumping, mainly in the Barents and Kara seas off the coast of the Kola peninsula and northern Norway, has potentially serious consequences for the local marine environment.
Norwegian scientists who have been testing the seas for several years have yet to detect any significant radioactive contaminating of fish, but they have not yet tested the water near the dumping sites.
Moreover, sunken waste containers could pose a serious threat over time as they begin to leak.
Scientists from Russia, Norway and other countries have started a programme of testing and research to assess the extent of the problem.
That Soviet ships dumped nuclear waste in the area has been suspected for many years.
But detailed claims were first made in public by a member of the former Soviet parliament, Andrei Zolotkov, in late 1991.
They have been confirmed by many other sources since.
International Herald Tribune 5 May
Nuclear Power
US radioactive contamination charted
At least 45,000 sites in the USA are potentially contaminated by radioactivity, according to a study commissioned by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
The study records a total of 45,361 locations, including hospitals, factories and former military sites, where there is a risk of contamination.
It does not, however, attempt to quantify the amount of radioactivity present, nor whether it poses a threat to human health or agriculture.
The study is based on a survey of records from locations where radioactive material is known to have been stored, manufactured or spilt.
Among the sites listed are that of the 1956 crash of a nuclear-armed bomber aircraft at Albuquerque, New Mexico, and the Agriculture Research Center at Beltsville, Maryland, where scientists used radioactive matter to test the effects of fall-out on crops in the 50s and 60s.
International Herald Tribune 10 April
Nuclear Power
France suspends nuclear arms tests
The French government has announced a moratorium on its nuclear weapons testing programme for the remainder of the year.
The move was welcomed by other South Pacific states, and by Greenpeace, whose flagship Rainbow Warrior was sunk by the French secret service in 1985 during a protest against the testing.
Around 200 atmospheric and underground nuclear tests had been conducted by the French over the last three decades at its test sites on Fangataufa and Mururoa atolls, in the colonial territory of French Polynesia.
The programme was estimated to have cost around $1,000 million per annum.
French Prime Minister Pierre Beregovoy claimed that the moratorium was intended as a gesture towards limiting nuclear proliferation, and he called on other countries to make "balanced reductions" in their nuclear arsenals.
He added that the moratorium would be extended if other countries followed suit.
* The Russian government has called for a comprehensive moratorium on weapons testing by all nuclear states.
International Herald Tribune 9 April Le Monde 10 April Guardian 10 April Independent 13 April Far Eastern Economic Review 30 April ITAR-TASS World Service 17 April (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Nuclear Power
Sellafield waste dump "may explode" 
Independent engineering consultants have identified serious design flaws in the proposed nuclear waste dump at Sellafield, which may lead to a build up, and possible explosion, of inflammable gas.
The flaws were pointed out last year in a report by W.S. Atkins consultants, commissioned by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution (HMIP).
The report was submitted in March 1991, but was only made public last month after its discovery in the Department of Environment's library by a Friends of the Earth researcher.
The dump is intended to store low- and intermediate-level waste from the year 2005.
The engineers' criticism focuses on the possible consequences of a gas build-up, which, they claim, had not been sufficiently considered by the dump's designers, nuclear waste authority Nirex.
They warn that volatile gases such as methane and hydrogen could build up and cause explosion similar to those which have occurred down coal mines.
The steel reinforcements of the dump may not be adequate to contain such an explosion, the engineers suggest: "An explosion could breach containment, shatter surrounding rock or concrete and displace some of the waste material causing further voids, as well as the ingress of groundwater" .
Nirex deny that the report identified any new problems.
A spokesman commented: "The problem of gas generation and release underground is as old as mining, and can be dealt with in simple ways by removing either the combustible gases, the oxygen or the means of ignition." 
The repository's design provides for such solutions, Nirex insist.
* Nirex have agreed to an HMIP request to construct test tunnels in the vicinity of the proposed dump to chart the speed and direction of groundwater flows.
The decision follows growing concern that some groundwater in the area is rising through aquifers to the surface relatively swiftly, bringing the risk of contamination of local springs.
* The government's Radioactive Waste Management Advisory Committee has published a critical assessment of the dump plans, calling for improved barriers within the dump to guard against the movement of radioactivity, and warning that long-term structural stresses to the surrounding rock could provoke "mini-earthquakes" in west Cumbria.
Independent 4, 23 April Guardian 20 April
Nuclear Power
Fewer Sizewell clones to be built
Nuclear Electric, Britain's main nuclear power company, has decided to cut its construction programme for pressurized water reactors (PWRs), similar to the one in Sizewell (Sizewell B) currently under construction.
Based on a design by the US company Westinghouse, four or five new such stations were originally planned, but Nuclear Electric now plans to build only two Sizewell B "clones" later this decade.
It will then switch to a new design, which is yet to be decided.
Since the cost of the highly controversial PWR programme would have been spread over all the stations built, it has now become considerably more expensive per reactor unit.
New Scientist 9 May
Nuclear Power
Welsh nuclear plant "must stay closed" 
The Trawsfynydd nuclear power plant in north Wales must remain closed, the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate has ruled.
The Magnox plant was shut down over a year ago by its operators, Nuclear Electric, after problems developed with its steel reactor pressure vessels.
An early restart had been planned, but the Inspectorate ruled against it on the grounds that there was still a risk that welds in the pressure vessels could fail as they cool, becoming brittle and eventually breaking, with the risk of a serious accident due to loss of coolant.
Nuclear Electric will now undertake modification work which will involve running the reactors at a higher temperature, to prevent the problem arising.
This will result in the loss of about one-third of power generated.
High levels of radiation mean that it is impossible to inspect or repair the suspect welds.
Trawsfynydd, which employs 500 people, is 27 years old.
It is one of four Magnox stations which have suffered problems with the pressure vessels.
The others are Berkeley in Gloucestershire, which has been shut down, and Bradwell Point (Essex) and Hinkley Point A (Somerset) which, after safety reviews, have been allowed to continue.
Guardian 17 April Independent 17 April
Nuclear Power
Russian seals "dying of radiation" 
Radioactive and toxic pollution in the oceans off northern Russia is leading to the deaths of thousands of seals from cancer, according to Russian scientists.
They have called for the removal of dangerous waste dumped in the White and Barents Seas, which, according to the news agency Tass, "have been turned into a pool for radioactive waste" .
A spokesman for the Northern Polar Institute claimed that nuclear tests on the Arctic archipelago of Novaya Zemlya were also contributing to the seals' deaths.
The animals spend much of the year on the islands.
Nuclear testing in the area was suspended early in 1991.
Guardian 4 April
Ozone layer
Ozone loss more serious than anticipated
The atmosphere over Europe lost 15 to 20 per cent of its protective ozone layer during the winter but it does not have a full-scale "ozone hole" , an international scientific team has said.
Results from the European Arctic Stratospheric Experiment (Easoe) show that ozone levels reached a record low over much of the northern hemisphere in January, as chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) chemicals combined with natural pollutants from the Mount Pinatubo volcanic eruption to create "highly peturbed conditions" in the stratosphere.
During January, the scientists measured ozone losses of about one per cent per day at some heights.
The team said that within a decade winter ozone losses over the northern hemisphere would be double those recorded by the end of the 1980s.
The Easoe scientists said that the ozone loss was more serious than they had expected when they embarked on the £14 million experiment in late 1991.
It does not, however, match the most alarming predictions made two months ago when Easoe and Nasa, the US space agency, released preliminary measurements of ozone destruction.
In part, this is because the aerosols from the Pinatubo volcano did not reach the Arctic stratosphere in as high quantities as feared.
Unseasonably warm weather is also thought to have limited the depletion.
European scientists have warned that an ozone hole could be created if a future winter was longer and colder — especially as levels of ozone-destroying chlorine in the atmosphere are expected to rise into the next century.
Scientists only declare a "hole" in the layer when half or more of the ozone in the high-altitude atmosphere is destroyed.
To date, losses over the Arctic and the northern hemisphere are less severe than this.
The Easoe team said that even if CFCs were phased out well ahead of current schedules, the ozone layer over the northern hemisphere would, by conservative estimates, be depleted by 20 per cent on historic — or pre-CFC — levels by the winter of 2000.
These findings add urgency to UN negotiations to bring forward a global ban on CFCs and related chemicals under the Montreal Protocol.
A ministerial meeting planned for November in Copenhagen is expected to agree to phase out ozone- destroying chemicals by the end of 1995.
Independent 8 April Financial Times 8, 16 April Guardian 8 April New Scientist 9 May
Ozone layer
Cancer and crop damage implications of thinning ozone
The incidence of malignant melanoma, a potentially fatal type of skin cancer, rose by 82 per cent between 1979 and 1989 among people in Scotland, according to a study by Glasgow University.
The results raise fears that the thinning ozone layer, and consequent increase in ultra-violet (uvB) radiation, may be leading to an alarming rise in skin cancer.
Although the number of cases per head of population is less in England, the trend is similar, as it is in nearly all other temperate climates with predominantly white-skinned populations.
A team at the university's dermatology department examined all the 1,354 men and 2,459 women diagnosed with melanoma in Scotland over the period.
They found the incidence per 100,000 of the population had risen from 3.4 in 1979 to 7.1 in 1989 for men, and from 6.6 to 10.4 for women.
Melanoma is the most dangerous of three types of skin cancer and is mainly linked with sunburn and sudden, intermittent exposure to sunlight.
In addition to the human health implications, a professor of chemistry at Lancaster University has said that there could be 10 per cent crop losses of barley, beans and peas as a result of ozone depletion.
Environmental campaigners are concerned about the effect ozone depletion may have on the marine food chain as the uv radiation affects plankton living on the ocean surface.
Guardian 15 April Green Magazine, May Financial Times 8 April
Ozone layer
UNEP warning on ozone layer: Canada and India act
Dr Mostafa Tolba, executive director of the UN Environment Programme (UNEP), has said that damage to the ozone layer is worse than previously thought and has proposed advancing a ban on ozone-destroying chemicals by four years to the start of 1996.
Most industrialised governments are believed to be so alarmed by new reports demonstrating the rapid destruction of the ozone layer that they will almost certainly approve a new target of 1996.
Governments will be asked to propose and tentatively agree to changes in the 1987 Montreal Protocol [see EDs passim]at a forthcoming UN meeting.
* The Canadian government is to phase out the production and import of all chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) no later than the end of 1995 — a year earlier than previously targeted and five years ahead of the current requirement of the Montreal Protocol.
Environment Ministers from the federal government and the provinces have also agreed to begin recovery initiatives by the end of this year.
Canada played a lead role in negotiating the original Montreal Protocol, and was the first to sign the amended protocol in 1990, which called for a phase-out of CFCs by 2000.
The Indian government has announced it will join the Montreal Protocol after the amendments to the protocol adopted in June 1990 come into force.
This reverses its earlier refusal to sign [see ED 51].
* About 40 Greenpeace protesters cut off rail shipments to a Du Pont chemical plant to protest about the company's production of CFCs.
They chained a cargo train to the rail tracks that lead to the US company's production complex.
Newscan 3 April (Canadian government publication) International Herald Tribune 6 April Financial Times 7 April All India Radio in English 7 April (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Ozone layer
Call for halon ban
Friends of the Earth (FoE) has called for a ban on further production of halons, used principally in fire extinguishers.
FoE says that alternatives are in use and existing stocks will be adequate well past the year 2000, when the Montreal Protocol requires an end to their use.
Halons are the most potent destroyer of the ozone layer, and are being produced without restriction in Britain despite bans in other countries.
Bromine, the atom in halons which makes them effective fire fighters, also renders them three times more damaging to the ozone layer than the better known chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), used in aerosols and refrigerators.
FoE claims that halons now account for a quarter of the ozone depleting chemicals in use in the UK.
Germany, another producer of halons, is banning their use later this year.
Import bans and other restrictions have been announced by non-producers Switzerland, Sweden, Austria and Norway.
In 1990, ICI produced nearly half of the global output of the most common halon gas.
ICI has said that all halon production will cease by 1995, and supports government intervention through regulation and financial incentives to set up a halon bank linked to an international regulatory system.
Guardian 24 April
Ozone layer
Japan brings forward CFC ban
The Japanese government has announced that the ban on the production and use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) is to be brought forward to the end of 1995, from the original target date of 2000.
The move brings Japan into line with the cut-off dates announced earlier by the US and EC.
Financial Times 1 May
Pollution: Air
UK's dirtiest power stations
Friends of the Earth has published a list of the 20 dirtiest power stations in the UK, using figures obtained from the Department of Environment.
Measured in terms of sulphur dioxide emissions, the list is headed by the coal-fired Drax station in North Yorkshire, which permitted 269,300 tonnes in 1990.
The others in the top five were Eggborough (192,700 tonnes); Ferrybridge C (176,800); Cottam (173,800); and West Burton (168,300).
12 of the stations, including Drax — said by FoE to be the dirtiest in Europe — are owned by National Power, and eight by Powergen.
FoE says that the stations are sited in areas where World Health Organization guidelines on sulphur emissions were breached last year.
A National Power spokesman said that the company was investing £700 million on fitting cleaning equipment at Drax.
The new information adds fuel to the debate over applications by the power generators to keep secret details of their fuels used, and the emissions resulting, on the grounds of commercial confidentiality.
Guardian 27 April Financial Times 27 April
Pollution: Air
Ozone blamed for asthma epidemic
Increasing amounts of low-level ozone pollution are giving rise to an asthma epidemic among babies and young children, according to a senior government health adviser.
Professor Stephen Holgate, chairman of the Department of Health's Committee on the Medical Aspects of Air Pollution, cited recent research in Aberdeen which suggested that car fumes were to blame for a doubling in the numbers of children suffering from asthma and hayfever.
Low-level ozone is produced by the effects of sunlight on car fumes.
New evidence suggests that the most common incidence of asthma and bronchial complaints occur where ozone levels are highest, principally in south-east England.
Holgate called for new research into the medical effects of air pollution.
It had hitherto been assumed that successive Clean Air Acts had dealt with the problem.
However, hospital admissions for asthma attacks, mostly among children, doubled during the 1980s.
Observer 12 April
Pollution: Air
Air pollution in Britain worsens
Air quality in the UK declined markedly during the 1980s, according to new figures released by the Department of Environment, with emissions of all major pollutants increasing.
Sulphur dioxide from power stations — one of the main factors in acid rain — increased by 50,000 tonnes, while nitrogen oxide also showed a marked increase.
Carbon dioxide increased by 3 million tonnes, but methane levels decreased slightly.
Traffic fumes accounted for a growing proportion of the problem.
Outputs of "black smoke" , mainly from diesel engines, doubled.
Traffic now accounts for 51 per cent of total nitrogen oxide emissions, compared to 31 per cent in 1980.
New Scientist 28 March
Pollution: Water
Thailand's rivers polluted by sugar mills
Three tributaries of the Mekong River in north-eastern Thailand have suffered devastating pollution as a result of the leakage of molasses from a sugar mill silo.
Some 9,000 tonnes of molasses leaked into the Nam Pong river in mid-March, subsequently spreading to the Chee and Mool.
The molasses triggered bacterial growths which consumed all the oxygen, killing virtually all the fish and other water creatures.
The construction of a dam on the Mool five kilometres upstream from the Mekong is likely to prevent fish from unaffected areas recolonizing the rivers once the pollution has cleared.
Fisheries officials believe that this could result in the rivers being permanently lacking in some species of fish, and this in turn poses a serious threat to the fishing communities on the river banks.
New Scientist 9 May
Pollution: Water
Black Sea convention signed
Ten countries in the vicinity of the Black Sea have signed a convention for combating the pollution problems facing the sea.
They include Romania, Russia, Georgia, Ukraine, Turkey, Moldova, Azerbaijan, Armenia, Greece and Yugoslavia.
The convention was signed after a meeting in Bucharest, Romania, which was also attended by international organizations such as the UN Environment Programme, the World Bank, and the UN Economic Commission for Europe.
Rompres (Romanian press agency) 21, 22 April (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution: Water
Nepalese rivers polluted by carpet industry
Rivers in the Katmandu Valley, Nepal, are suffering from dangerously-high levels of pollution as a result of the introduction of chemical washing practises in the manufacture of "Tibetan" carpets for export to the West.
Until recently, the carpets were shipped to Switzerland for washing before re-export.
However, in an effort to increase their value as finished goods, most carpets are now washed locally, with a solution based on caustic soda, sulphuric acid and bleaching powder.
The process uses large quantities of water, and hundreds of small washing plants have spring up along riverbanks.
The chemical effluent from the process flows untreated into the rivers.
At least 70,000 litres of it is estimated to flow every day into the Dhobi Khel, one of the valley's main rivers.
The resulting pollution is effectively killing off the rivers and poisoning groundwater.
This summer, the situation has been exacerbated by prolonged drought.
Shortage of drinking water has already provoked riots in Katmandu.
Environmentalists in Nepal and elsewhere argue that the solution lies in a boycott by Western purchasers.
Barbara Adams, a US-born resident of Katmandu, said: "I am waiting for the day when owning a Tibetan carpet incurs the same disapproval as wearing a leopard skin coat." 
The carpet industry is, however, one of Nepal's largest employers, with some 250,000 people depending on it for work.
Guardian 24 April
Pollution: Water
Oil lakes persist in Kuwaiti desert
Huge lakes of oil, some over a mile square and up to a metre deep, are persisting in the Kuwaiti desert, taking over from the oil fires as the most serious threat to the country's environment.
They were created when retreating Iraqi forces sabotaged well-heads during the Gulf War.
The lakes are poisoning the desert soil, and trapping — and killing — large numbers of birds and insects, as well as causing respiratory problems in nearby towns.
Around 30 or so of the larger lakes remain, mostly composed of heavy crude oil which is solidifying into a sticky, semi-viscous non-porous layer.
Kuwaiti oil officials are now attempting to establish a network of pumps and pipelines to shift the oil into tank farms.
* A new report suggests that coastal marine pollution as a result of the Gulf War has been largely confined to a strip of several hundred kilometres along the northern Saudi coastline.
International Herald Tribune 22 April Middle East Economic Digest 17 April
Pollution: Water
 "Water for Wildlife" campaign launched
A combination of drought, over-abstraction and pollution are threatening the wildlife which depends on Britain's rivers, according to the launch report of a new organization, Water for Wildlife, headed by conservationist Sir David Attenborough.
Among the species at risk are swans, kingfishers, mayflies and dragonflies, of which four species have disappeared in the last 20 years.
Drainage — which has affected 97 per cent of lowland bogs and 95 per cent of fens, also played a role in the removal of wetland habitat, said the report, as did the canalization or culverting of waterways.
The group pointed to particular examples of "sick rivers" such as the Kennet in Wiltshire, whose source, once a spring, is now a sewage pond, and which has been particularly badly affected by over-abstraction, with the river running dry in some places.
Water for Wildlife, which has secured initial sponsorship from detergent manufacturers Reckitt and Colman, will be campaigning for increased powers for the National Rivers Authority, and for growing awareness of the need for water conservation and recycling.
Independent 7 April
Pollution: Water
FoE court case can go ahead
Friends of the Earth has been given permission by the High Court to pursue a legal case against the government over the level of pesticides in drinking water in the Thames and Anglian regions.
FoE's case rests on the fact that levels are above the standards laid down by the European Commission.
The court has ruled that these standards have force in British law.
Independent 2 April
Pollution: Water
Russian inland seas "face catastrophe" 
Russian scientists are expressing concern that the Black and Azov seas are facing ecological catastrophe as a result of pollution and oil spills.
According to Mikhail Vinogradov at the Moscow-based Oceanology Institute: "The Dnieper, Dnestr and Danube bring in millions of tons of industrial wastes and pesticides every year, while passing ships drop some 10 million tonnes of oil annually." 
International Herald Tribune 4 May
Pollution: Water
Controversial US copper mine project re-starts
Work is to restart in June on the controversial Flambeau River copper mine project, in Wisconsin.
The scheme was halted last year after an alliance of environmentalists and native Americans succeeded in obtaining a judicial order on the grounds that a number of endangered species, including the purple warty back mussel, had been found about a mile from a planned drainage pipe outlet.
The Lac Courte Oreilles Band of the Chippewa tribe had also argued that the mine would pollute their fishing grounds.
The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources has now issued an environmental impact assessment stating that the mine's operations will not have any affect on the wildlife.
The company involved, Flambeau Mining, claims that up to 70 per cent of the $20-30 million cost of the mine will go towards environmental protection measures, including a water treatment plant.
The copper deposit is owned by Rio Tinto Zinc.
It is expected to be worked out in a little over six years.
Financial Times 28 April
Pollution: Water
Scottish river quality improves
Water quality in Scottish rivers improved significantly over the period 1985-90, according to the latest Water Quality Survey.
97 per cent of the territory's waters are now officially unpolluted — representing a net increase of 968 kilometres compared to 1985.
Lengths of rivers classified as "grossly polluted" were down by 56 per cent.
in the new survey, 96.2 per cent of estuaries were classified as either "fair" or "good" quality; 91.3 per cent of coastal waters either "good" or "excellent" .
The survey attributed the improvement to reduced agricultural pollution, improved treatment of sewage and industrial waste, and increased public activity in reporting pollution.
SCENES (Scottish Environment News) 3/92
Transport
Light railway alternative proposed
An unobtrusive, relatively clean light railway has been put forward as an alternative method of transport for the M25 London orbital motorway.
The railway was proposed by the Royal Society of Nature Conservation (RSNC) in response to the £2.8 billion plans to widen the M25.
The RSNC warns that the widening could threaten at least 81 important wildlife sites.
The rail route would link up with British Rail networks carrying commuters into London and provide request stops between medium sized stations, providing a viable public transport system for small villages.
Local authorities are demonstrating a growing interest in light railways as a cheap, energy-efficient transport solution in urban areas.
The £130 million Metro Link which opened in Manchester in April was cheaper to construct and operate than traditional railways.
The Manchester Metro Link uses existing rail track for part of its journey, switching to tramlines on city centre streets.
Green Magazine, May
Transport
Ford launches cleaner cars in California
Two new Ford car models, designed to meet the pollutant emission standards California has set for 1997, are to be launched in the US.
Ford claims the new versions of the Ford Escort and the Mercury Tracer are the cleanest-running cars ever approved for mass production in the world.
The new cars will sell for the same price as regular models, although the Ford say they will cost $100 more to produce.
Fuel efficiency will be reduced by around one mile (1.6 kilometres) per gallon, but they will produce only half the emissions currently permitted under California standards, the strictest in the United States.
International Herald Tribune 18/19 April
Transport
Chemical in petrol may cause leukaemia
The chemical benzene may be one of the main causes of leukaemia in Britain, according to a lecturer in toxicology at University College Hospital, Dr Simon Wolff.
He has found that countries with high car ownership have high levels of blood and lymphatic system cancers.
Benzene is found in petrol vapours and car exhaust fumes.
Studies on people exposed to high concentrations of benzene in the workplace have shown it is linked with leukaemia.
Dr Wolff compared the number of cases of leukaemia and lymphoma with car ownership statistics in 22 countries during the period 1984=88.
He found a link for five out of ten categories of leukaemias and lymphomas.
These include acute myeloid leukaemia — the cancer associated with benzene in workplace studies — and acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, the type common in children.
His findings were published in a Swiss journal, Experientia, after his article was rejected by mainstream British medical periodicals.
Other researchers doubt benzene could be a significant cause of leukaemia — they are concentrating on natural and man-made radiation and the possibility that unknown viruses may be to blame.
Independent 16 April
Transport
Hungary introduces "green card" for cars
The Hungarian government is introducing a "green card" system for cars to ensure that they have regular checks designed to cut down on emissions of carbon monoxide (CO) and hydrocarbons (HC).
Owners will be required to have their cars repaired within 15 days if they are found to exceed limits.
The aim is to achieve cuts of 30-40 per cent in CO emissions, and 20 per cent in HC output.
The average age of Hungarian vehicles is 9.5 years.
Budapest Radio 28 April (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Transport
Michelin's "green tyre" to cut fuel consumption
The Michelin tyre company claims to have developed a "green" tyre, featuring new polymers which will result in reduced surface resistance of between 35 and 50 per cent.
This should result in cuts of up to 10 per cent in fuel consumption.
European 16 April
Tropical Forests
Brazilian mahogany exported "from Indian reserve" 
Evidence has emerged that mahogany which has been logged illegally in Brazilian Indian reserves is being exported to Western countries, much of it to the UK, which accounts for 52 per cent of Brazilian mahogany.
According to information obtained by Survival International — and recorded on a BBC TV film by journalist George Monbiot — more than 10,000 hectares of the Arara Indian reserve has been destroyed by illegal logging and the activity of settlers, who are following newly-cut logging roads into the forest.
One of these, cutting through the centre of the reserve, was built by the Bannach Timber Company, which exports mahogany to the UK.
At least 5,000 settlers are believed to have entered the reserve via this road.
Much of the Arara's traditional land has been sold to cattle ranchers or affected by mining operations and road construction, including the Trans-Amazon Highway.
The Brazilian government's Indian agency, FUNAI, has demarcated some 300,000 hectares of Arara territory, but has failed to mark out another 687,000 hectares, despite the fact that this is also officially recognized as Arara land.
* Brazil's former Environment Secretary, Jose Lutzenberger, has warned that timber cutting in Brazil, particularly that of mahogany, is "out of control" , with illegal logging operations proliferating, and timber companies using gunmen to kill Indian people who oppose their activities.
In a statement issued in the name of Brazil's Gaia Foundation, Lutzenberger warned: "Timber traders in many parts of the Amazon wield more money and power than most government departments.
They have succeeded in corrupting many of the people charged with the protection of the Indians and forests.
My attempts to stop their illegal activities were partly responsible for my sacking."
Survival International information, 11 May Gaia Foundation, Brazil, information 30 April
Tropical Forests
British Gas withdraws from Ecuador
British Gas has announced that it is to abandon its operations in Ecuador, citing economic grounds.
However, its operations have been the focus of sustained criticism from environmental groups and the local Achuar Indians, who claimed that their hunting and agriculture were at risk.
Some 2,500 Achuar had staged a three week protest march to Quito, the capital, where they were due shortly to be received by President Borja.
Guardian 1 May BBC Wildlife, May
Tropical Forests
UK aid programmes "fail" 
Six key UK aid projects designed to protect tropical forests have failed in virtually all their objectives, according to an unpublished draft report commissioned by the government's aid arm, the Overseas Development Administration (ODA).
The projects failed both to protect natural forest, and to improve prospects for the poorest people in the area, according to the report's author, consultant Michael Flint.
One programme in the Côte d'Ivoire resulted in the destruction of 40,000 hectares of natural forest, and its replacement by a badly-managed 30,000 hectare plantation.
Another, in the southern African state of Lesotho, which was designed principally to provide fuelwood, proved so unpopular with local people that arson attacks became common.
In all cases, claimed Flint, the projects had suffered from insufficient planning, and inadequate attention to the needs of local people.
 "The main negative effect has been the loss of common property rights, notably grazing and/or common land." 
The ODA says that the report was designed to evaluate old errors and help prevent new ones, and that it will be published soon.
Guardian 8 April
Tropical Forests
Malaysian Prime Minister accuses West of "using Penans" 
Malaysia's Prime Minister, Mahathir Mohamed, has accused Western campaigners of using the Penan people of Sarawak as a means of promoting the interests of temperate timber over tropical hardwood.
These latest assertions follow repeated claims by Malaysian government officials that efforts to halt the destruction of the Sarawak rainforests are motivated by commercial temperate timber interests, unwilling to accept competition from tropical wood.
Mohamed claimed that"the anti-tropical timber activists see in the Penans an opportunity to put a human face to their campaign for temperate timber.
So the gentle Penans are urged to be militant, to protest, to erect blockades and defy the authorities."
Bernama news agency, Kuala Lumpur 27 April (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Tropical Forests
Fires destroy Costa Rican forest
Fires are reported to be causing huge amounts of damage to Costa Rica's largest-remaining tracts of forest and nature reserves.
Five fires are sweeping through the area, and widespread damage has been caused to the International Friendship Park, classified as a UN heritage site.
The government has declared a state of emergency and asked for assistance from the US.
Independent 13 April
UNCED
Prepcom meeting ends unresolved
The final UNCED preparatory conference ( "Prepcom 4" ) ended in early April after five weeks of negotiations in New York, with little firm agreement.
The only significant advance recorded was in the draft Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, in which Northern countries accept the principle of assisting the South to develop without destroying their environment, and Southern states agree to work towards curbing population growth.
The declaration stated that the eradication of poverty was "an indispensable requirement for sustainable development" .
Other principles accepted by the declaration were: i) that the polluter should pay for the cost of the clean-up; ii) that environmental damage should be guarded against even if there were no apparent scientific reasons for doing so — the "precautionary principle" ; iii) that women have "a vital role in environmental management and development" ; and iv) that, while nations have a right to exploit their own resources, they must not damage the environments of other states.
Other issues remained unresolved, including terms of trade and the debt crisis, action to combat global warming, and the means of safeguarding tropical forests.
At the root of the problem, according to one European civil servant, was the fact that: "The poor countries wanted a lot of money with no strings attached, while the rich ones wanted to give a little money with lots of strings." 
US resistance to binding agreements on either aid or greenhouse gas cuts was cited by many as being a significant factor in preventing further progress.
* US President Bush has agreed to travel to Rio for the summit, saying that "the US has a strong environmental record, and I'd be proud to take that record anywhere" .
But he added that he was anxious "not to get into a major harangue down there" .
Some of the President's political advisers are concerned that the visit might be "an election loser" for Bush.
Financial Times 6 April Observer 5 April Independent 6 April International Herald Tribune 6 April Guardian 11 April
UNCED
Third World preparatory meeting
Representatives of 55 developing countries have held a three-day meeting in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, to coordinate their approaches to the Earth Summit.
They adopted the Kuala Lumpur Declaration, which essentially called for a massive transfer of funds from the North to the South to finance environmental and development projects.
In the opening speech, the Malaysian Prime Minister, Mahathir Mohamad, made a strongly worded attack on the rich industrialized countries' attempts to force developing countries to compromise their economic development and foot much of the bill for environmental protection measures.
Mahathir said: "It is the rich who must be prepared to sacrifice their progress in the interest of our development…
The negotiations to prepare for Rio reflect the continuing attempt by the South to bring the North to the table to overcome over four decades of neglect on the growth and development of the South…
Fear in the North of environmental degradation provides the South with the leverage which did not exist before".
Financial Times 28, 30 April International Herald Tribune 29 April
UNCED
Call for "new environmental ethics" 
A call for the adoption of "new environmental ethics" was issued at the close of a meeting in Tokyo of the ad hoc "Eminent Persons Group" , comprised primarily of former statesmen.
The call was made as part of the "Tokyo Declaration" issued by the 27-member group, whose meeting was sponsored by UNCED.
The declaration asked governments to consider introducing new environmental taxes, to increase assistance to developing countries, and to move to an early settlement of the Uruguay round of GATT talks, in order to enable third world countries to have easier access to northern markets.
Among those attending were former US President Jimmy Carter, former Singapore leader Lee Kuan Yew, and the previous president of the World Bank, Barber Conable.
The meeting was hosted by Japan's ex-Prime Minister, Noboru Takeshita, who expressed the hope that this would "demonstrate Japan's intention to play an active role in solving global environmental problems" .
Financial Times 7, 15, 18 April
UNCED
EC joint strategy
Environment and development ministers of the European Community (EC) countries have agreed a joint strategy to present to the Earth Summit.
There continue to be a considerable range of views among the 12 member countries on specific issues likely to be discussed at the summit, however, such as the feasibility of carbon taxes or the level of development aid.
The EC has agreed to reduce carbon dioxide emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000.
The European Commission is urging acceptance in principle of a carbon tax within the Community and of the global carbon tax as proposed by Argentina and Brazil, and realization of the UN's long-standing target of development aid totalling 0.7 per cent of each donor country's gross national product.
In a related development, the EC environment commissioner, Carlo Ripa di Meana, strongly criticized the latest draft of the Convention on Climate Change as a "sellout" to accommodate the interests of the US government (which has thus far refused to commit itself to specific emission reductions).
Financial Times 6 May
UNCED
Carbon commitment watered down by US pressure
Specific enforceable targets for the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions have been removed from the latest draft of the Convention on Climate Change being prepared for the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June.
The new wording, insisted on by the US government, which is refusing to commit itself to specific targets, refers to the reduction of emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000 as merely a "guideline" target.
Before the publication of the new draft, the Bush administration had appeared to show greater flexibility in its negotiating stance.
It had published a document which suggested that existing US energy-saving programmes on lighting, motors and air conditioning would probably ensure that US carbon emissions would not be any higher in 2000 than in 1990 [see report in Global Warming section].
New Scientist 9 May International Herald Tribune 30 April Guardian 28 April
UNCED
UNCED facing failure, environmentalists allege
Environmental groups have warned that the forthcoming UNCED summit faces failure, with differences between North and South more clearly defined than ever.
A statement issued by over 100 groups and alliances, including the Brazilian Forum of Non-Governmental Organizations, the Pan-African Movement, Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace, is critical of the North's failure to commit itself to concrete moves on fair trade, debt reduction, poverty alleviation and technology transfer.
It also denounces the US failure to act on greenhouse gas emissions.
UNCED's Secretary-General, Maurice Strong, has acknowledged that there will be "serious failures" at the summit, and added, in an oblique reference to the US, that "some countries are not going nearly as far as they could" .
Financial Times 2 April Guardian 3 April
UNCED
Prince Charles calls for third world aid, population control
The Prince of Wales has criticized both developed and developing nations for failing to take steps to safeguard the global environment.
Addressing the opening meeting of the UN Brundtland Commission, the Prince expressed his concern that politicians' obsession with short-term gain would sacrifice the survival of future generations if the UNCED summit ended in failure.
The prime focus of his speech was on the need to achieve population control in the third world by tackling poverty and child mortality and by improving education and the prospects for women.
"We will not slow the birth rate until we finally address poverty.
And we will not protect the environment until we address the issues of population growth and poverty in the same breath."
He expressed disappointment that some Catholic countries were unwilling to discuss population at UNCED.
Prince Charles was also critical of northern nations for failing to address adequately issues such as global warming, ozone depletion and marine pollution, and to "remove the barriers in the world economic and trading system that make sustainable development in the third world more difficult" .
He called for a reversal in the present flow of funds from southern to northern states, due to the debt crisis.
 "Sustainable development can be achieved, but only if irreversible degradation of the environment is halted in time" , the Prince said.
He called for more imaginative use of alternative energy, particularly solar technology, and for the adoption of practises involving "living thriftily, saving energy, repairing, re-using and recycling" .
The Prince's speech was understood to have arisen in part out of a series of consultations with leading environmentalists, including Jonathon Porritt, Professor David Pearce, Richard Sandbrook — Director of the International Institute for Environment and Development — and Economist environment editor Frances Cairncross.
Independent 23 April Guardian 23 April
Waste & Recycling
Toxic waste convention comes into force
The Basel Convention on the transfer of toxic waste, whose primary purpose was to prevent uncontrolled dumping of toxic waste in third world countries, came into force in early May, against a background of warnings that it lacks sufficient political support, and is in danger of being watered down by a series of exemptions.
Of the 105 countries who originally signed the convention, only 22 have subsequently ratified it.
Among those which have not done so are the US, Canada, and all the EC countries with the exception of France.
The convention establishes procedures for the transport and disposal of toxic waste, and insists that the country for which the waste is intended should agree to receive it before it leaves port — an effort to avoid incidents such as the 1988 voyage from port to port of the Karin B. Environmentalists have criticized the convention for its lack of "teeth" — enforcement is left to individual countries — and for its lack of precision on what constitutes acceptable disposal standards.
The Organization of Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has now agreed a "green list" of substances which it regards as exempt from the terms of the convention, on the grounds that they are recyclable.
Lead, cadmium and thallium are among those included on the list, established as a result of pressure from the recycling industry, which warned that the convention's bureaucracy could damage the trade in recyclable materials.
But environmentalists warn that this could also result in third world countries being the destination of some of the toxic materials which are left at the end of the recycling process.
The EC is now considering adopting the "green list" .
New Scientist 9 May