

Agriculture & Food
Dynamite fishing threatens Mekong ecosystem
Increased use of "dynamite fishing" methods in Cambodia have led to drastic reductions in fish catches for communities downstream, particularly in Laos, where catches have fallen by 50 per cent.
According to a spokesman from the Thai section of the Earth Island Institute, the growing use of such unsustainable fishing practices in Cambodia is disrupting the main spawning grounds of numerous fish species, and thus threatening the ecosystem of the Mekong Basin as a whole.
Dynamite fishing is illegal in Cambodia, but the lack of strong centralized authority in the country means that the law is impossible to enforce.
BBC Wildlife, October 1992
Agriculture & Food
Gummer urges financial penalties for polluters
John Gummer, the UK Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, has suggested that the European Community (EC) should have the power to suspend subsidy payments to farmers who pollute the environment.
Speaking after a meeting of EC agriculture ministers, he made clear, however, that not all his colleagues agreed on the need for stricter environmental regulations at a time when farmers were trying to adapt to reforms in the EC's common agriculture policy (CAP).
Under existing arrangements, individual governments can withhold subsidy payments under national support schemes but they do not have the power to do so under CAP schemes.
Environmental organizations have been calling for some time for the incorporation of environmental criteria into the various CAP support mechanisms.
Financial Times 30 September
Conservation: Land
First Northern forest conference
The first conference to discuss the destruction of Boreal (temperate zone) forests, held in Sweden, agreed to a statement condemning the consumer countries of Europe and North America for driving the devastation.
Over 100 environmental groups, representing interests as diverse as the World Wide Fund for Nature, Earth First, the Women's Environment Network and the (N. American) Algonquin Nation, agreed that present logging practises were wholly unsustainable, and that only a significant reduction in the consumption of pulp, paper and timber products would create conditions for a shift to sustainable forestry.
Women's Environmental Network information, 7 October
Conservation: Land
US may open parks to strip mining
The Bush Administration has announced plans which could result in large areas of protected lands being opened up to strip mining for coal.
At present, under a federal law passed in 1977, mining is prohibited in national parks and forests and on other protected lands.
Coal reserves estimated at 16 per cent of the nation's total are known to lie below such lands in 24 states.
The law does, however, exempt those who had a "valid, existing right" to the coal, although this was not clearly defined by Congress.
The Administration decided that it applied to any coal owner who had actively sought to mine the coal up to the day the law was passed.
In a subsequent series of court cases, however, federal judges ruled that this definition was inadequate.
Even if no mining had been carried out, the courts decided, the owners of the mineral rights still had a valid claim to the coal, and in seeking to deny them this, the government was violating the Fifth Amendment, which prohibits it from taking property without just compensation.
A proposed Interior Department regulation, to go into effect shortly after the presidential election, effectively takes on board the recent court rulings, and provides for compensation payments to all coal owners affected.
According to both the coal industry and the National Wildlife Federation, the government will as a result be forced to pay out hundreds of millions of dollars if it is to prevent strip-mining on protected lands.
If it fails to do so, mining is likely to proceed.
International Herald Tribune, 29 September
Conservation: Land
Coastal protection plan launched
England's 10,000 km coastline is threatened by a combination of over-exploitation, erosion and inadequate management, according to English Nature, the government's nature conservation adviser.
It has published the reports of three task groups aimed at addressing the problem.
The coastal group warned that "the combination of rigid sea walls now hemming in most of our low-lying or erodible coast, and land reclamation, is causing severe" coastal squeeze "" , which had resulted in the loss of some of the country's most valuable coastal features, notably salt-marshes.
It argued for a policy of "managed retreat" , using natural rather than man-made defences, with nature conservation brought into the heart of shoreline defence policy.
The estuary group reported that the country's 80 coastal estuaries and the wildlife which depends on them, particularly wading birds, had suffered from a lack of overall management.
English Nature is planning to draw up management plans for 80 per cent of the country's estuary areas by the end of the decade, starting with the Mersey, Humber and Exe.
The marine group called for the creation of a national network of protected marine sites, in response to a present lack of adequate statutory protection for habitats and species below the low water mark.
It identified 500,000 hectares of costal habitat which it said were in need of active conservation measures.
The EC's Habitat Directive specifically calls for internationally-important sites below sea level to be protected.
The seas around the British Isles are the most ecologically-valuable of any European Atlantic country, including cup corals, sea fans and a range of species-rich sediments and rocky areas, all of which are inadequately protected.
Sediments providing essential food for fish are vulnerable to damage by heavy trawling gear.
The group calls for a system of zoning to be drawn up in collaboration with the fishing industry.
English Nature information, 14 October
Conservation: Land
Scottish sites protected
The government has designated seven sites in Scotland as special protection areas (SPAs) under the terms of the EC's directive on Conservation of Wild Birds.
The sites named are as follows: the Flannan Isles, Shiant Isles, St Kilda, Fowlsheugh (Kincardine), Loch of Lintrathen (Angus), Loch Spynie (Moray), and the Loch Ken and River Dee Marshes.
The last three have also been designated Ramsar sites (under the international Ramsar Convention on wetlands of international importance).
SCENES (Scottish Environment News) August 1992
Conservation: Species
Bush supports loosening of Endangered Species Act
President Bush has warned that he will not sign an extension of the Endangered Species Act unless it is amended to take local employment priorities into account, "because people and their jobs deserve protection too" .
The Act is due to be "re-authorised" later this year, although it will remain in force in any case until 1993.
Bush made the statement while campaigning in the Pacific North-West USA, where the Act has become the focus for resentment among logging workers, who fear it will cost them their jobs.
It has been used to halt logging activity in the country's few remaining old-growth forests, on the grounds that they constitute an essential habitat for species listed in the Act, notably the northern spotted owl [see EDs 52; 57; 59/60].
In his speech, Bush asserted that "it is time to make people more important than owls" .
Environmentalists, supported to some extent by Bush's Democrat opponent, Bill Clinton, countered that the logging industry had no long-term future due to the rapid depletion of the forests.
They blamed the job losses on automation of the timber industry and increasing exports of raw, unprocessed logs.
Washington Post 15 September
Conservation: Species
Anthrax attacks Namibian elephants
Namibia's rare desert-adapted elephants are under threat from anthrax.
In an effort to protect them from the disease, Namibian nature conservation officials have resorted to vaccinating the animals with darts fired from helicopters.
The operation appears to have been successful, and none of the vaccinated elephants has shown any symptoms of the disease.
A spokesman for the World Wide Fund for Nature, which supported the operation, said: "Saving the desert-dwelling elephants of Namibia is a high priority because they are so unique…
They have adapted their behaviour to survive in the arid and semi-arid conditions of northwest Namibia."
New Scientist 10 October
Conservation: Species
UNEP rhino envoy appointed
In an effort to help stem the tide of rhino poaching which is now threatening the survival of the species, the UN Environment Programme has appointed a "special envoy" , charged with persuading governments to take steps to close down the trade in rhino products.
Esmond Bradley Martin, the envoy appointed, has worked on the problem for many years as a consultant to the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), which has mounted sustained campaigns against the trade.
Despite some success in Japan, Hong Kong and Yemen, however, the trade continues to thrive, and latest evidence suggests that it is expanding.
Rhino poaching has recently experienced an upsurge in Africa [see ED 59/60].
New Scientist 3 October WWF information, various dates
Conservation: Species
Koalas face extinction
The wild population of koalas is in danger of dying out, largely due to destruction of its native habitat.
The marsupial's population is believed to have fallen from 400,000 in the mid-1980s to around 200,000 today, and the rapid decline is continuing.
Deborah Tarbart of the Australian Koala Foundation warned: "Unless economists join conservationists and recognize the value of our wildlife by considering the environment, the only koalas left will be in the souvenir shops." 
Independent 2 October
Conservation: Species
Pro-whaling body established
Four northern European pro-whaling nations meeting in the Faroe Islands have, as expected, set up a new organization, flying in the face of majority opinion on the International Whaling Commission (IWC).
The North Atlantic Marine Mammals Commission, as it is to be known, groups together Norway, Iceland, Greenland and the Faroe Islands.
It will be based in Tromso, Norway.
A spokesman declared that traditional whale-hunting countries could no longer stand by and watch as international management of whale stocks crumbled under the pressure of environmental extremists.
The new body reflects the hunting countries' frustration at the IWC's recent decision not to lift the ban on commercial whaling [see ED 61].
Independent 12 September Guardian 12 September
Conservation: Species
Laos fishermen to help dolphins
A group of Irrawaddy dolphins, which appeared for the first time in Laos last year, are in danger of dying out as a result of the increasing use of gill nets by local fishermen.
The animals suffocate after being trapped in the nets, and the fishermen are reluctant to cut them free due to the high cost (US$20) of replacing the nets.
In response, the Laotian government, with the support of a number of environmental organizations, has set up a fund by which fishermen will be able to claim compensation for nets destroyed to free dolphins.
Many Laotians hold dolphins in high regard, believing them to be reincarnated people.
There are many accounts of dolphins rescuing people in danger of drowning or being attacked by crocodiles.
BBC Wildlife, October 1992
Conservation: Species
Flamingos go wild in Germany
A colony of wild flamingos has become established in northwest Germany, but the origin of the birds is a mystery.
Six Chilean flamingos (Phoenicopterus chilensis) appeared at the Zwillbrocker Venn nature reserve in 1982, and the birds have since reappeared, in growing numbers, each year.
This summer, a flock of 31 birds (including some European flamingos — Phoenicopterus ruber rosus) successfully raised four chicks at the site, thereby allowing it to be designated as the world's most northerly wild flamingo colony.
The original birds are believed to be escapees from captivity, probably from a private collector who omitted to clip their feathers to prevent them flying away.
As yet, no owner has claimed them.
New Scientist 3 October
Conservation: Species
Pollarding to be reintroduced to save beeches
Medieval techniques of pollarding and woodland grazing are to be reintroduced in an effort to combat the decline of a group of 400 year-old beeches at Burnham Beeches, Buckinghamshire.
Many of the trees have died in recent decades, apparently as a result of the abandonment of traditional pollarding and grazing practices.
According to Burnham Beeches superintendent Ian Turney: "Since grazing was stopped, young trees have grown up between the pollards, competing for light, water and nutrients.
And because pollarding has not been carried out, tall, heavy shoots are growing up from the ancient trunks, which are usually rotten and hollow inside, and these too often either split or simply collapse".
Pollarding, which involves repeated cutting of branches at head height, and was originally practised mainly for firewood, is to be reintroduced, along with experimental grazing of ponies, pigs and cattle.
Both practises were once essential parts of the medieval commons economy.
New Scientist 26 September
Economics & Industry
World Bank report promises environmental awareness
In its latest annual report, the World Bank promises that environmental considerations will feature strongly in new projects.
The report follows a period of growing self-criticism of the environmental consequences of previous Bank decisions, notably in the recent World Development Report [see ED 59/60].
In the annual report, the Bank states that: "Without adequate environmental protection, development will be undermined; without development, environmental protection will fail." 
The aim is to ensure that environmental considerations are taken into account at every stage of a project.
The Bank is also considering introducing environmental safeguards into its controversial structural adjustment programmes (blamed by environmentalists for forcing third world countries to despoil their environmental heritage in the quest for Northern-style economic prosperity).
A Bank spokesman claims that "not much is known about the relationship between macroeconomic measures and environmental impact." 
* An internal document prepared by the Operations Evaluation Department lists 35 per cent of Bank projects as "unsuccessful" .
The document, which was leaked to The Ecologist magazine, also states that the proportion of failures has multiplied by two and a half times over the last 10 years.
Ecologist editor Nicholas Hildyard commented: "We have long known that World Bank projects bring environmental catastrophe and suffering on a grand scale.
Now we know the projects are economic failures as well.
This removes the last shred of justification for the World Bank's very existence."
Middle East Economic Digest 25 September *BBC Wildlife, October 1992
Economics & Industry
Companies named for attacking American tribal lands
Survival International, in co-operation with Minewatch, has published details of activities by some of the world's major industrial companies which it claims are responsible for causing serious damage to the traditional lands of tribal people in the Americas.
Its report focuses on 10 organizations whose activities have drawn opposition from native American groups: Rio Tinto Zinc's Kennecott subsidiary is accused of infringing land rights of the Chippewa Indians in constructing the Flambeau Copper Mine in Wisconsin.
RTZ's Tinto Holdings Canada Ltd subsidiary has a controlling interest in a company which mines uranium at Elliot Lake, Ontario, which has been blamed for destroying the fishing-based economy of the local Anishnabe Indians.
RTZ are also criticized over tentative plans to open a huge copper mine in the heartland of the Guaymi people in Panama.
RTZ has denied the accusations.
Hanson's Peabody subsidiary is criticized for the effects of its coal mining activities on Navajo land in Arizona.
Despite an agreement between Peabody and the Navajo Tribal Council, pollution from the mines has been blamed for contaminating local water supplies, and forcing Indians to leave their homes.
Newmont Gold has been accused of "invading" the land of the Western Shoshone Indians in Nevada to carry out gold mining.
The tribe's National Council has expressed strong opposition to the activity, and in particular to the cyanide heap-leaching process used at the mine.
Newmont has denied the allegations.
Maxus of the USA is building a road and oil pipeline into Waorani Indian land in Ecuador [see ED 61].
Settlement activity is likely to follow.
Daishowa of Japan has a logging concession on the land of Lubicon Cree Indians in northern Alberta.
It has refused the Cree's request for an undertaking not to commence logging until their outstanding land claim has been settled.
The Air Forces of the UK, Netherlands and Germany are criticized for continuing low-level flying exercises over the lands of the Innu people on the Labrador-Quebec peninsula.
The flights have been blamed for disturbing the game on which the Innu depend, and there are reports that pregnant women have miscarried as a result of the noise.
Energy Fuels Nuclear of the USA is mining uranium on the pre-eminent sacred site of the Havasupai tribe: Red Butte near the Grand Canyon in Arizona.
The tribe fear that tailings from the mine may contaminate local waterways.
Shell is developing natural gas fields in the Camisea River area of south-eastern Peru, on the lands of the Machguenga Indians, who are negotiating with the company in an effort to ensure that their rights and environment are respected.
The development is adjacent to the lands of the Kugapakori Indians, most of whom are uncontacted and therefore vulnerable to disease brought in by project workers.
Through its 50 per cent stake in the El Cerrejon open cast coal mine in northern Colombia, Exxon has been accused of acquiescing in the pollution of the Wayuu people's lands, resulting in some communities being uprooted.
In addition, its oil exploration activities in the Ecuadorian Amazon has been blamed for damaging the hunting economy of the Waorani, Quichua, Siona, Secoya and Cofan Indians, by driving away wildlife and polluting soil and water.
Its operations in Prudhoe Bay, Alaska, have allegedly had a devastating effect on the caribou herds hunted by indigenous peoples in the area.
The German mining company Uranerz operates the Key Lake uranium mine in Saskatchewan, believed to be the world's largest, which has provoked expressions of concern from local Dene and Cree people, who fear possible radioactive contamination of their land.
Survival International information, 17 September
Economics & Industry
Market mechanisms at heart of UK's environment strategy
The British government has made market mechanisms a central theme of its strategy to improve environmental performance.
This emerged as the main point of its second annual progress report on environmental policy, following the publication of the 1990 White Paper, This Common Inheritance.
Environment Secretary, Michael Howard, laid out a broad range of economic options, including tradeable pollution emissions, carbon taxes, road pricing and higher fuel prices.
An in-depth study on the implications of road pricing is expected to be published in 1994.
Any progress on carbon taxes, however, would depend on EC-wide agreement, and its eventual structure would in any case be strongly influenced by the Treasury.
On pollution permits, Howard favoured imposing limits on total emissions of gases by power generating companies, while fees would also be levied on discharges of waste into watercourses, and on abstraction from rivers and groundwater sources.
In both cases, the charges would be on a sliding scale, with environmentally-damaging practises attracting penal rates.
On waste, the government intends to introduce a system of credits designed to ensure that local authorities get on target to meet the goal of 25 per cent recycling of household waste by 2000.
Under one proposal, householders may be charged for the removal of non-recyclable rubbish, while separated consignments of glass, paper, and cans would be collected free.
The government is also considering increasing the cost of landfill disposal as a further means of encouraging recycling.
In other areas, the report committed the government to introduce tighter air quality standards for low-level ozone, benzene and carbon monoxide by 1993, and for other exhaust gases, together with sulphur dioxide, the following year.
Water quality standards for rivers and estuaries are to be tightened gradually from 1993 onwards.
The report also outlined areas in which implementation of the White Paper had been delayed, including the publication of strategic reviews of nuclear and renewable energy, both of which had been postponed, and the failure of many local authorities to publish plans for achieving the 25 per cent recycling target.
The report drew little enthusiasm from environmental groups.
Greenpeace's Executive Director, Michael Melchett, described it as "deeply depressing" , adding that "the only hope for the environment in this country rests with action by the European Community and other international regulators" .
Fiona Reynolds, Director of the Council for the Protection of Rural England, warned that unless the government changed its economic priorities, "the effectiveness of economic instruments can only be marginal — like fiddling while Rome burns" .
* In a separate development, the government has announced plans to launch a three-year programme to help small- and medium-sized businesses improve their environmental performance.
Financial Times 1, 2 October, 29 September* Guardian 2 October Independent 2 October
Economics & Industry
Environment "not significant" for smaller companies
Only a minority of the UK's small companies regard environmental concerns as a priority, according to a survey by accountants KPMG Peat Marwick.
Two-thirds of a total of 324 companies interviewed said that the environment was not a trading issue last year, and 59 per cent agreed that it would not become one in the forthcoming year.
Differences emerged between the manufacturing and service sectors, however, with 44 per cent of the former saying that they had been affected by green concerns, as against just 29 per cent of the latter.
A KPMG spokesman said: "The environment has been pushed down the agenda of many private companies by other factors such as the recession and exchange rates.
* The Confederation of British Industry estimates that one company in five is allocating up to 25 per cent of its total investment to waste management and improvement of environmental performance.
Financial Times 16, 10 September
Economics & Industry
UK chemical companies refuse US-style openness
Three out of four UK chemical firms surveyed by Friends of the Earth failed to support proposals to extend to the UK the level of openness on toxic emissions required in the US.
Under US law, companies are obliged to make public details of all releases of 300 listed toxic chemicals.
The annual "Toxic Release Inventory" is widely used by campaigning groups in effort to cut emissions.
FoE's survey covered UK chemical companies which also operate in the US.
Earth Matters, Autumn 1992
Economics & Industry
Green detergent association formed
European detergent makers have established an Environmental Detergent Manufacturers Association (EDMA) with the aim of furthering the cause of "environment-friendlier" detergents.
About 20 firms have joined EDMA, under the chairmanship of Robin Bines, managing director of Ecover UK.
It aims to co-ordinate best practice in areas such as green audits, packaging and waste minimization, water quality and alternatives to animal testing.
EDMA will campaign to ensure that only the highest standards are applied in deciding the criteria for the planned EC eco-label on detergents.
Environment Business 7 October
Economics & Industry
Annual pollution permits auction for US
The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has appointed the Chicago Board of Trade as administrator for its annual auctions of pollution permits, scheduled to start next year.
(Chicago is already host to the country's first pollution trading operation — see ED 59/60).
The auctions, which will involve permits allowing electricity utilities to emit sulphur dioxide, are part of the EPA's strategy of halving emissions of the gas by the end of the decade.
Financial Times 29 September
Energy
World Energy Congress endorses green view
It is possible for the world to stabilize carbon dioxide emissions and still enjoy considerable economic growth, according to the fifteenth World Energy Congress, the gathering of the world's energy-generating industry.
In a dramatic departure from its previous orthodox stance on environmental matters, the congress endorsed a report by energy experts from more than 50 countries.
The report projects what it calls the "ecologically driven" case, under which worldwide economic growth would rise by 3.3 per cent per year while carbon dioxide emissions remained virtually stable.
The current trend towards ever higher emissions would be curbed by energy conservation (accounting for around 43 per cent of the required reduction) and a shift away from fossil fuels to renewable energy (accounting for the remaining 57 per cent).
The report admits that "there has probably been a persistent tendency within the world's energy industry to understate the technical potential for improvement and substitution" .
It stresses that "it is often cheaper to invest in energy conservation than in additional energy supply" .
It concludes that the reorientation will require strong public support for energy efficiency, appropriate action, a willingness and ability to introduce new technology on a wide scale, and a widening empathy with environmental concerns.
Guardian 25 September
Energy
Gabcikovo controversy continues
The long-running controversy over Czechoslovak plans to proceed with the Gabcikovo dam project on the River Danube [see EDs passim]continues, ahead of talks between Hungary and the Czechoslovak federal government.
The dispute over Hungary's withdrawal from the project, in alleged contravention of the 1977 bilateral treaty providing for its construction, may go to the International Court of Justice in The Hague.
Environmentalists in Czechoslovakia are becoming increasingly critical of their government's decision to proceed unilaterally with the project.
Demonstrations against it were held in Prague in late September.
Meanwhile, the Czechoslovak government has allocated a budget to promote its position on the dam abroad.
Radio Czechoslovakia 22 September Hungarian Radio 18, 23 September
Energy
Thailand launches conservation campaign
In an effort to prevent widespread electricity blackouts, the Thai government has set up an ambitious energy conservation programme.
Largely because of the high economic growth rate in Southeast Asian countries, electricity demand is far outstripping demand throughout the region.
This has led to blackouts in neighbouring Indonesia and the Philippines, for instance.
The Thai plan is based on calculations which show that it is cheaper to improve the electricity efficiency than to build new power stations.
The measures include an energy conservation fund encouraging consumers to buy household goods (ranging from refrigerators to light bulbs) which are energy-efficient.
The fund will be financed by a tax on oil and oil products, which is expected to raise US$55 million per year.
Another set of measures aims to encourage generating companies to produce electricity at the lowest economic and environmental cost (for instance by revising tariff systems and campaigning for energy saving).
The latter are partly funded by the World Bank's Global Environment Fund.
Specialists from the International Institute for Energy Conservation working with the government claim that the Thai programme provides a blueprint for similar measures in other developing countries.
New Scientist 3 October
Energy
Orimulsion application on hold
The UK's Inspectorate of Pollution (HMIP) has insisted on additional environmental safeguards before it will give approval to a controversial plan to burn orimulsion at two power stations in Wales and Lancashire.
Orimulsion, a new bitumen-based fuel from Venezuela, has been widely criticized as a "dirty" fuel because of its high sulphur content.
According to press reports the HMIP did not detail the environmental measures it deems necessary, but they are thought to include flue gas desulphurization equipment.
The application was made by National Power.
The other generating company, PowerGen, has been burning orimulsion on an experimental basis under less strict control regulations in force at the time of licensing.
Financial Times 1 October Guardian 1 October
Environmental Politics
EC Environment Ministers meeting
At a informal gathering in Scotland, EC Environment Ministers have called for environmental protection measures to be extended into all areas of the Community's policy-making.
Among their recommendations are: the need for regular reports on implementation of the Fifth Action Programme on the environment; the rapid establishment of the European Environment Agency; and early ratification of the Climate Change Convention agreed at UNCED, with the development of national strategies to implement it by the end of 1993.
Environment Business 23 September
Environmental Politics
EC Commissioner calls for more research funding
The EC's Research Commissioner, Filippo Pandolfi, has attacked the European Commission's current environment research and development programme as "wholly inadequate" , and demanded that it be increased by at least 25 per cent.
The current level of funding, amounting to 550 million ecu for the 1990-94 framework programme on research and technological development, is close to running out.
Only 113.4 million ecu remains for proposed projects over the next two years.
Pandolfi has called for a supplement of 136 million ecu to enable a number of projects to be revived.
His call will be debated by the European Parliament before the end of the year.
Among projects rejected on the grounds of a lack of funds are a number researching into climate change and environmental protection technology.
Pandolfi is also concerned at the lack of funds available for research into renewable energy.
Environment Business 7 October
Environmental Politics
Campaigning groups maintain support despite recession
The UK's leading environmental groups are maintaining levels of support through the recession, but the rapid rate of membership growth experienced over the past few years has slackened.
Income from catalogue sales and large "one-off" donations has declined markedly.
The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) has maintained its membership levels at around 230,000, as has Survival International at its peak strength of 12,000.
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB)— the country's second largest green group after the National Trust — continues to expand, however, with over 850,000 members, as do Greenpeace (412,000) and Friends of the Earth (231,000).
One of the most successful groups is the Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society, which is managing an annual membership growth of 22 per cent.
BBC Wildlife, October 1992
Environmental Politics
UK Green Party conference
The recent decline in the fortunes of the UK Green Party was epitomized in the eyes of many observers by the deep divisions which emerged at its annual conference, held in Wolverhampton in mid-September, where organizational reforms approved last year were overturned.
After gaining 15.8 per cent of the national vote in the 1989 European elections, and achieving a membership high of approximately 18,500 the following year, the party has declined to around 6,500 members.
In the 1992 general election, it gained just 1.3 per cent of the vote.
The key issue of debate at the conference were the "Green 2000" reforms, designed to give the party a more organized and professional structure.
They were approved at the party's 1991 conference [see ED 51].
One of the leading advocates of Green 2000, Sara Parkin, subsequently became chair of the party's executive.
The reforms were, however, strongly opposed by a section of the Green Party, which in broad terms viewed them as a betrayal of the movement's roots and as a "sell-out" to mainstream political methods.
In the face of this opposition, Parkin resigned as chair of the party's executive, together with four of its seven remaining members.
At the 1992 conference, motions reversing the "Green 2000" reforms were passed.
An attempt to have Parkin suspended from the party was unsuccessful.
Parkin criticized her opponents as "anarchists" , and said that "the Green Party has become a handicap for Green politics" .
Unless it changed radically, she warned, "it was finished as a political force" .
Times 12, 14 September Guardian 7, 10-12 September Independent 11, 12, 16 September Le Monde 20 September Green Party information
Environmental Politics
French green resigns
The secretary-general of Génération Ecologie, François Donzel, has resigned ahead of the party's first congress planned for November.
He has criticized the lack of internal democracy in the party, founded in 1990 by former Environment Minister Brice Lalonde.
Donzel remains on the party's national bureau, however, and is opposed to any moves toward union with France's other Green party, Les Verts.
Le Monde 9 September
Environmental Politics
Moroccan Green Party banned
Morocco's fledging Green Party has been declared illegal, ostensibly because it has not been officially authorized.
Police raided its founding conference at a Casablanca hotel, where 40 people were arrested and cautioned.
Guardian 15 September
Environmental Politics
Environmental factors "may cause falling sperm count" 
The average male sperm density has fallen by nearly 50 per cent over the past 50 years, according to a new Danish study of 15,000 men worldwide, suggesting that environmental factors may be to blame.
Sperm quantity has also declined, by about 25 per cent.
Professor Nils Shakkabaek of Copenhagen University, who co-ordinated the study, says that a corresponding increase in genito-urinary abnormalities and incidents of testicular cancer tend to support the environmental conclusion.
Some experts have linked lower sperm counts with toxic polychlorinatedbiphenyls (PCBs).
Independent 11 September
Global Warming
France, Spain threatened by global warming
A new Anglo-Dutch study suggests that parts of southern France and western Spain are particularly at risk from sea-level rise as a result of global warming.
The least vulnerable countries are the UK, Belgium and the Netherlands.
Although much of the Netherlands is below sea-level, its existing flood defences should protect it.
The study suggests that Northern European agriculture could benefit from temperature rises.
Guardian 11 September
Global Warming
EC committee demands CO2 cut
The European Parliament's Transport Committee has called for a 40 per cent cut in carbon dioxide by the year 2010 — a far more ambitious figure than the Community's official target of a freeze at 1990 levels by 2000.
Environment Business 23 September
Nuclear Power
No evidence of radiation in Arctic
Arctic waters show no increased radiation levels from nuclear waste dumped there over the years by Soviet authorities.
Norwegian scientists have come to this conclusion after being allowed to conduct tests in the previously closed Kara Sea off northwestern Russia.
But they were not allowed to take readings off the island of Novaya Zemlya, a former Soviet nuclear testing site.
According to information released by the Russian government, between 1968 and 1982 the Soviet navy dumped 13 spent nuclear reactors and thousands of barrels of radioactive waste in the area.
Similar tests in the Baltic Sea have not shown evidence of radiation leaks either.
A number of Soviet nuclear submarines were scuttled in the Baltic over the years.
Independent 11 September International Herald Tribune 11 September Financial Times 25 September
Nuclear Power
More thyroid cancers in Belorussia
The number of children contracting thyroid cancer in Belorussia has increased considerably since the Chernobyl nuclear accident in 1986 in neighbouring Ukraine.
According to a study by the Belorussian Ministry of Health, the incidence of thyroid cancer in children rose from on average four per year in 1986-89 to 56 in 1991, and at least another 60 cases have been diagnosed thus far in 1992.
In the most contaminated region (in the southeast near the Ukrainian border) the incidence in 1991 and early 1992 was 80 cases per million children per year.
The world average is one case per million.
The study linked the increase directly to the radioactive fallout from Chernobyl.
According to Vasily Kazakov, who led the study, the youngest children affected were contaminated in 1986 even before they were born, when their thyroid glands were already sufficiently developed to absorb radioactive iodine.
The results of the study have been verified by experts from the World Health Organization (WHO) and independent doctors.
Nature 3 September Le Monde 4 September
Nuclear Power
Chernobyl to be reopened temporarily
The Chernobyl nuclear plant, scene of the world's worst nuclear accident in 1986, will be partially reopened during the winter.
Vladimir Fuks, chair of Ukratomenergoprom, the Ukrainian nuclear power company, confirmed that the plant would definitely be closed in 1993, as demanded by parliament.
But during the winter, when temperatures in Ukraine regularly drop to -25C, the two reactors of the complex currently under repair would be the only source of heat on the site, he said.
There are plans to commission three new nuclear plants elsewhere in Ukraine to replace Chernobyl.
They would be the pressurized water reactors (PWRs).
At present there is a moratorium on the construction of nuclear plants, and the plans would need parliamentary approval.
Guardian 10 September
Nuclear Power
Russia shuts weapons reactor
The second of Russia's two reactors producing weapons-grade plutonium has been shut down.
(The other reactor was closed down earlier this year; see ED 58.)
The reactor, at a plant in Krasnoyarsk in western Siberia, is of the Chernobyl type.
International Herald Tribune 1 October
Nuclear Power
Russia and Ukraine repeat call for Western help
Speaking on the eve of an international conference in London, the heads of the Russian and Ukrainian nuclear-power companies expressed their exasperation with the lack of financial help from Western countries to improve the safety of their nuclear facilities.
"If Western governments will stop just talking and will give real assistance, then we will not reject that help, because it will enable us to solve the safety matters more quickly.
But if the help is always delayed, we have the capacity to provide the necessary level of safety for our nuclear stations ourselves", noted Erik Pozdyshev, head of Rosatomenergo, the Russian nuclear-power company.
Pozdyshev also reaffirmed that Russia plans to keep its Chernobyl-type reactors in operation until well into the next century "after making the necessary safety changes" .
There are also plans in both countries to commission new, more modern pressurized water reactors (PWRs).
Financial Times 10 September
Nuclear Power
Cubans halt work on reactor
The Cuban government has decided to suspend construction work on its only nuclear reactor indefinitely because, according to President Castro, the Russian government is insisting on "unacceptable economic conditions" in return for continuing its aid to Cuba's nuclear programme.
The reactor is located in Jurugua, near Cienfuegos in the west of the island.
Le Monde 8 September
Nuclear Power
Row over Japanese plutonium ship escalates
Despite growing international criticism, the Japanese government is pressing ahead with its plans to ship highly radioactive plutonium from France and Britain to Japan to supply its nuclear-power industry.
It was reported in August that a ship had left for France to collect a first consignment [see ED 62].
At the time the Indonesian and South African governments banned the plutonium shipments from their territorial waters on safety grounds, and other countries in Latin America and the Pacific have made similar announcements or expressed serious concern.
The route of the first shipment--expected sometime this later year--is being kept secret for security reasons, but the government has said that it will try to avoid territorial waters.
The development of a domestic nuclear industry is highly controversial in Japan, and the international outcry has strengthened public opposition as well as, according to press reports, doubts within the government.
Independent 3 October International Herald Tribune 7 October Far Eastern Economic Review 1, 8 October
Nuclear Power
Sellafield nuclear dump delay
An application for the construction of Britain's first underground waste repository for low-level and intermediate nuclear waste is unlikely to be made before 1998, Nirex, the nuclear waste disposal company, has announced.
The delay stems from Nirex's decision to build an underground research laboratory to test geological conditions at the proposed site, Sellafield in Cumbria.
In June the company admitted that initial results from boreholes drilled in the area showed that its knowledge of conditions was "not sufficiently firm" .
If permission is granted for the laboratory, then it would take another two to three years to construct, gather data and analyse the results.
Nirex had originally planned to apply for planning permission for the repository--strongly opposed by environmental organizations--this year, with 2005 as the target date for its opening.
This timetable has now slipped by six to seven years.
Financial Times 29 September Guardian 28 September
Nuclear Power
HSE safety proposals
Safety standards for future nuclear power stations should be set so that risks to the public are ten times smaller than the danger of a road accident, according to new proposals published by the Health and Safety Executive (HSE), the British industrial safety regulatory body.
The consultation document, which the HSE sees as a contribution to the debate about the future of the country's nuclear energy industry, proposes to adopt a risk of death to a member of the public of 1 in 100,000 a year as the benchmark for new nuclear power stations.
(In comparison, the risk of a person dying in a traffic accident is 1 in 10,000, and the risk of dying in a fire or a gas explosion at home is 1 in 1,000,000.)
Financial Times 6 October
Nuclear Power
German privatization plans
The federal government is proposing changes in the nuclear energy law that would remove its obligation to subsidize the development of nuclear power.
This would mean in effect that the privately owned operating companies would have to shoulder all research and development, waste disposal and decommissioning costs.
Licensing and safety inspection would remain in the hands of the government.
The move marks a further step in the downgrading of the government's involvement in the nuclear energy industry.
New Scientist 3 October
Nuclear Power
Reactor shutdowns in Britain, Sweden, Lithuania, Bulgaria
The Sellafield nuclear reprocessing plant in northwest England has been shut down after a leak of six gallons of plutonium inside a sealed unit where liquid plutonium is evaporated to form a solid oxide for storage.
According to British Nuclear Fuels, the leak was caused by an "engineering fault" and no radioactive material escaped into other working areas or the environment.
The clean-up operation is likely to take around five weeks.
The Swedish nuclear safety board has closed down five elderly boiling-water nuclear reactors on safety grounds [see also ED 59-60].
In all five, inspections had uncovered fissures in the cooling systems, requiring emergency repairs which were expected to take about three weeks.
Four of the reactors are part of the Barsebäck and Oskarshamn complexes, owned by Sydkraft, and the fifth is at the Ringhals plant.
The Lithuanian authorities have closed down the nuclear reactor at Ignalina because of a unspecified fault.
They stressed, however, that there had been no radiation leak at the plant, which is of the Chernobyl type.
There have been two fires in the troubled Kozloduy reactor in Bulgaria.
Both were caused by short circuits during testing prior to restarting the reactor, which was shut down in February [see ED 56 and 59-60].
The fires caused only minor damage, and according to an engineer at the plant there were no effects on the environment.
* Radioactivity up to 30,000 times above normal levels has been found in Bogdanovka, a health resort in central Russia.
Financial Times 17 & 23 September Independent 17 September Le Monde 20 September Guardian 7 & 23 September Bulgarsko Radio (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 22 September
Ozone layer
Antarctic depletion worse than ever
Depletion of the ozone layer over the Antarctic has started earlier and is spreading faster than last year, according to US scientists.
Scientists at the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration reported that ozone readings over the South Pole in mid September were 15 per cent lower than those taken a year earlier.
If this trend continues, the ozone hole this year will be the deepest ever.
The scientists attributed the deterioration in ozone levels to particles boosted into the stratosphere by volcanic eruptions in 1991 and to the continued increase in worldwide emissions of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and other ozone-depleting gases.
Independent 25 September New Scientist 26 September
Ozone layer
Halons levelling off
After rising for decades, concentrations of ozone-depleting halon gases in the atmosphere are now levelling off, according to a study by the US National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
The NOAA attributes the improvement to a combination of voluntary controls and measures adopted under the Montreal Protocol.
New Scientist 3 October
Ozone layer
Ozone depletion reduces crop yields
Experiments conducted by a British scientist suggest that the increase in ultraviolet radiation caused by ozone depletion will have immediate and serious effects on the yields of some key food crops as well as on other plants.
In his experiments Nigel Paul of the Institute of Environmental and Biological Science at Lancaster University observed a wide variation between species.
Some, such as wheat, were resistant to increased ultraviolet radiation, but others, such as peas, barley and oil-seed rape suffered significant reductions in yields.
In the most sensitive cases yields were reduced by 1 per cent for every 1 per cent cut in the ozone layer.
Among other vegetation, coniferous and beech trees appeared most seriously affected by increased radiation.
Ultraviolet radiation damages DNA in plants.
Plants may come into leaf earlier (leading to frost damage), grow more slowly, have more branches and smaller leaves, produce fewer flowers, or have lower oil and protein contents.
The ozone layer over Europe has already been reduced by 10 per cent in the last ten years, and is expected to decline at an accelerating rate.
Concern about ozone depletion has until now centred on its effects on humans, for instance through increased skin cancers.
The economic consequences for food crops and other plants of the resulting increase in ultraviolet radiation have received less attention.
Guardian 26 September
Ozone layer
Greenpeace campaign on CFC alternatives
Greenpeace has written to 2,000 companies in Britain advising them how to avoid using hydrochlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
The circular says that ammonia, hydrocarbons and water can be used instead of CFCs for refrigeration; carbon dioxide and pentane can be used in foams; and there are many alternatives to CFCs in solvents.
Companies have no excuse for continuing to use CFCs, according to Greenpeace.
The campaign has been launched in part because of what Greenpeace calls the government's failure to back alternatives to chlorine-based technology and instead to encourage the use of HCFCs, which are still damaging to the ozone layer.
Guardian 30 September
Ozone layer
Malaysian moves on CFCs
The Malaysian government has banned new industries from using chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and halon gases and has imposed ceilings on their use by existing industries.
A panel has also been set up to monitor imports of CFCs and halons.
Far East Economic Review 17 September
Pollution: Air
Mystery ozone cloud perplexes scientists
Huge clouds of low-level ozone have formed over central Brazil and the Atlantic, apparently as a result of burning forest and savannah grasslands.
The burning releases nitrogen oxides and carbon monoxide, which react with sunlight to form ozone.
High levels of the gas at low-level have been shown to threaten the health of plants, animals and humans.
Researchers from NASA and the Brazilian space agency, INPE, are attempting to measure the density and drift of the clouds.
An INPE spokesman blamed annual forest burnings in the centre-west of Brazil.
"As the ozone has formed over a largely uninhabited region, it seems there is no immediate danger.
But it is the first time that we have seen such a phenomenon on a large scale.
It is such a strong signal that it is necessary for us to know more about it."
New Scientist 10 October
Pollution: Air
Japan and China co-operate on coal desulphurization
The Japanese and Chinese governments have signed an agreement to carry out joint tests on equipment to desulphurize coal in Chinese power plants.
Under the agreement, Japan will provide equipment and technology worth 7.3 billion yen (US$60 million).
A department of the Chinese trade and industry ministry will carry out the tests, first in Qingdao in Shandong province.
A simple desulphurization method will be used.
It is hoped this will cut the sulphur content of coal emissions by between 50 and 70 per cent.
Kyodo News Service (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 14 September
Pollution: Air
Bhopal — still no compensation
Nearly eight years after the Bhopal industrial accident, not one person has been paid any compensation for damages.
The Indian government has been strongly criticized for its slow response, but a bill has now been introduced in parliament which should speed up the processing of claims.
In December 1984 a lethal gas escaped from a pesticide factory in Bhopal, causing the death of some 2,500 people and leaving 50,000 temporarily disabled.
It was the world's worst-ever industrial accident.
Down to Earth 31 August Pesticide News, September 1992
Pollution: Air
Hospital incinerators survey
Hospital incinerators in Britain are causing serious pollution as a result of economizing on fuel and overloading with waste material.
A survey by the waste management company Grundon found that (i) incinerators were run at too low temperatures, were overloaded, and produced black smoke;(ii) emission and temperature warning alarms were ignored or switched off; and (iii) storage areas were littered with burst bags, exposing used syringes, dressings and other material.
In general, improper handling and failure to meet temperature, retention and cooling times meant that the end products were often not sterile.
Environment Business 7 October
Pollution: Water
New treaty on sea dumping
Thirteen European countries bordering the Atlantic Ocean have signed a new Convention on Marine Pollution, known in short as the Paris Convention.
It replaces a more general treaty adopted in 1974.
The convention establishes the principle that nothing that is harmful to human health and marine life can be dumped at sea.
It commits all signatory states to (i) use the best available techniques for controlling pollution,(ii) reduce discharges of toxic waste to harmless levels by the year 2000, and (iii) refrain from all dumping of radioactive waste for a period of 15 years.
The issue of dumping radioactive waste overshadowed the final phase of the negotiations and nearly caused them to break down.
Eventually a compromise was adopted between the call championed by Scandinavian and other countries for a permanent ban, and France and Britain's insistence on their right to dump larger items such as nuclear components of submarines and power stations.
The two countries now have the right to dump such material after 2007, but they have undertaken to give serious consideration to finding land-based alternatives in the meantime and will only be able to dump after consultation with the other signatory states and in accordance with the "no-harm" principle.
Environmental groups deplored the failure of the convention to impose an absolute ban on the dumping of radioactive waste.
But Greenpeace noted that the British government's willingness to sign the convention as it stood was a fundamental shift in policy in that it had agreed for the first time to the elimination in principle of dangerous chemicals.
Independent 23 September Financial Times 23 September Guardian 23 September
Pollution: Water
Criticism of arms dumping at sea
Greenpeace has accused the British Ministry of Defence of breaching international agreements by dumping thousands of tons of munitions (bombs, shells and hand grenades) at a site in the Atlantic Ocean 400 miles off the southwest coast of England.
Under the London Dumping Convention, military dumping is allowed but must be notified to the convention's secretariat.
This, Greenpeace claims, the ministry has failed to do.
The ministry denies it has acted against the convention.
According to Greenpeace, 1,100 tons of munitions were dumped at the site in 1991 and 8,400 tons thus far this year.
Financial Times 9 September Guardian 8 September
Pollution: Water
Water pollution figures for UK
The number of "major" incidents of water pollution declined by 41 per cent in 1991, from 658 to 386, according to figures contained in the second annual report by the National Rivers Authority (NRA).
The decline is due primarily to a fall in the incidence of farming-related pollution.
Sewage- and water-related sources accounted for a quarter of major incidents, followed by industry- and oil-related sources.
The total number of incidents increased to 22,469, a rise of 8 per cent on the previous year.
This was due to a higher number of reported sewage leakages.
Most of the incidents "caused little or no environmental harm" .
Some 356 prosecutions were brought in 1991 and convictions were secured in 347 cases.
The levels of fines showed a sharp rise, with the £200,000 the largest fine imposed.
The NRA attributed the downward trend in major incidents mainly to its tough and rigorous pollution prevention and control measures and the strong signals being sent by the courts through massive increases in the size of fines imposed on convicted offenders.
NRA press release 25 September Financial Times 26-27 September
Pollution: Water
NRA proposals on water supply
The National Rivers Authority (NRA) has recommended a new scheme to the government for setting future targets for a cleaner water environment.
The scheme, if adopted, would allow the government to set "statutory water quality objectives" for all inland and coastal waters in England and Wales for the first time.
The scheme is in two parts.
The first would be used to set targets for improved river quality based on six "use" classes; fisheries ecosystem, abstraction for drinking supply, abstracting for agricultural and industrial use, water sports, commercial farming of fish and shellfish, and special ecosystem (i.e. specific areas for the purposes of nature conservation).
The second part of the scheme would provide a means of assessing the general state of the water environment at regular intervals.
This would be achieved by looking at the chemical, biological, nutrient and aesthetic states of water.
Recommending the scheme, the NRA's chief scientist, Jan Pentreath, said: "After much consultation, I believe that the right balance has now been achieved.
It is right that water should be improved locally on the basis of what it is to be used for…
At the same time, it is essential to have a national picture in order to assess that overall priorities and accountabilities are being addressed.
This requires looking at the environment through different "windows" , each of which gives a slightly different picture."
NRA press release 2 October
Pollution: Water
Row over river pollution claims
Greenpeace has published a report, called "Filthy Fifty" , listing 50 industrial plants in England and Wales which it claims are licensed to discharge highly toxic materials into rivers and estuaries.
The organization accused the National Rivers Authority (NRA) of sanctioning "legal pollution" and implementing the government's "policy to pollute" .
The NRA responded by defending its record of reducing river pollution since its creation in 1989 and accused Greenpeace of issuing "alarmist propaganda" .
Financial Times 15 September New Scientist 19 September Financial Times 26-27 September
Pollution: Water
New WHO ruling on lead
The World Health Organization (WHO) has adopted new guidelines on the levels of lead in drinking water.
The new standard is a maximum of 10 micrograms per litre of water, one fifth of the old standard.
It is part of a series of revisions to existing WHO guidelines on the quality of drinking water which are due to be made public in mid 1993.
A statement from the WHO said that there was no doubt that lead in drinking water "may lead to serious neurological damage, especially among infants, children and pregnant women" .
As to implementation, it said that "experts agree that meeting the new recommendations will require considerable time and expense" .
Scientists from the Oxford-based Water Research Centre estimate that the new standard is currently exceeded in around 4 million homes in Britain, and that meeting it will require removing all lead piping from homes.
This would cost £8.3 billion, according to government estimates.
Independent 28 September New Scientist 3 October
Pollution: Water
Results of water meters trial disputed
A survey of more than 6,000 homes in England fitted with water meters on a trial basis has cast doubts on the belief that the move would limit consumption.
One in three householders believed bills were less than they would have been under the existing system (of flat-rate charges), nearly one in five said bills were about the same, while more than one in three said they were higher.
Interested parties disagreed on the interpretation of the findings.
According to Ofwat, the water industry regulatory body, the "trials do not appear to have caused difficulties, with 91 per cent of householders saying they had no difficulty in affording metered water" .
But the National Consumer Council said the survey showed that"if people can afford to pay the bills generally then they are not going to save water.
The hardship of saving water will fall most on the poorest people.
It is much fairer to charge the same rate for water to everybody".
Introducing meters to replace the current system of rates — to be completed by 2000 — has proved highly controversial.
Currently only 3 per cent of households in England and Wales have a water meter.
Independent 12 September
Pollution: Water
Lake Victoria under threat
Pollution, overfishing and the introduction of new species of fish are posing a serious threat to marine life in Lake Victoria in Africa, the world's second largest freshwater lake.
A research team funded by the US government has been investigating Lake Victoria's ecology.
They have found that algae are thriving on nutrients from sewage, farm runoff and factory waste: when they die they drift to the bottom and consume the available oxygen; water hyacinths clog the shallows, reducing the light and oxygen reaching the area where many of the native fish species live; in the past the fish acted as a check on the algae, but more than 400 species have disappeared in recent years; one culprit is considered to be the Nile perch, a large fish introduced in the 1950s.
New Scientist 26 September
Pollution: Water
Yosemite pollution
Soil and water in the Yosemite national park in California are polluted with toxic chemicals which have been leaking from underground fuel tanks for decades.
Officials have acknowledged that currently 38 sites polluted with chemicals from heating fuel, petrol, diesel and solvents are being cleaned up.
All the sites are above the deep wells used for drinking water and are in areas either paved over or not open to public use.
International Herald Tribune 22 September
Transport
Cyclists safer from pollutants
Cyclists are at substantially less risk from exhaust fumes than car drivers, according to a new report by Greenpeace.
On the basis of studies carried out in the UK, Europe and the US, the report concludes that car drivers are regularly exposed to levels of pollution up to 18 times higher than cyclists.
Exposure to carbon monoxide and, in particular, exposure to the carcinogen benzene, are highest in slow-moving, congested traffic in urban areas, while concentrations of nitrogen dioxide increase in longer, higher speed driving, such as motorway journeys.
Keeping windows closed had no effect on the level of pollutants, which enter the car through the ventilation system.
Independent 9 September New Scientist 12 September
Transport
Dutch subsidise low-sulphur diesel
The Netherlands government has announced that it will make available 25 million guilders (£8 million) in subsidies to encourage the use of low-sulphur diesel oil in public and freight transport.
The move anticipates tougher EC controls on sulphur dioxide emissions, widely expected next year.
The subsidies are planned to cut sulphur emissions from lorries by a quarter.
A complete switch to low-sulphur would see a national reduction of 4 per cent in SO2 emissions.
New Scientist 19 September
Transport
Franco-German agreement on fuel consumption
The French and German Environment Ministers, Ségolène Royale and Klaus Töpfer respectively, have agreed that fuel consumption on cars made in their countries should be cut to an average of 55 miles per gallon by 2005.
The announcement has drawn criticism from car manufacturers, however, who regard it as unrealistic.
 "It's just an opinion from two people — forget it" , said Renault director George Douin.
Other car industry sources described it variously as "utopian" and "unreasonable" , and said it was not being taken seriously.
Guardian 25 September
Transport
Converter rules to be relaxed
The British government has applied for a one-year exemption from European Community environmental legislation requiring all new cars to be fitted with catalytic converters from 1 January 1993.
The slump in car sales in Britain (down by a third compared to 1989) has meant that manufacturers have been left with large stocks of unequipped cars.
For similar reasons other EC countries, including Belgium, France and Italy, have also requested a temporary exemption or are expected to do so.
The move has been criticized by environmental organizations, which argue that the cars could be fitted with a converter because the cost, around £300 per car, is not prohibitive and that in any case manufacturers have known for some time when the law would come into effect.
Several manufacturers who have equipped all their new cars with converters for some time also disapprove of the relaxation.
Independent 26 September Environment Business 7 October
Transport
Germany on course to miss CO2 targets
The Federal Environmental Office and the car manufacturer Daimler-Benz have warned separately that the car industry may not be able to meet the target of reducing carbon dioxide emissions by a quarter by 2005.
The Daimler-Benz study claims that carbon dioxide levels will actually increase by 10 per cent over the period because control efforts are being cancelled out by increased traffic volumes.
Even with new developments such as lighter cars, emissions could only be reduced by 6 per cent, it says.
The Federal Environmental Office believes that a 50 per cent increase in emissions is likely in the transport sector (including air traffic).
It calls for immediate measures to reduce traffic flows, including the introduction of a speed limit on motorways and a sharp increase in the price of petrol.
Environment Business 7 October
Transport
UK lead emissions down, carbon monoxide up
Emissions of lead from road vehicles have fallen by more than two thirds over the past ten years, according to figures published by the UK Department of Transport.
The department's annual compendium of transport statistics shows that lead emissions fell from 6,700 tonnes in 1981 to 2,200 tonnes in 1990.
The main causes of the reductions are considered to be a 1985 EC directive limiting lead levels in petrol and the introduction of unleaded petrol in 1986 and the preferential fiscal measures to encourage its use.
The statistics also show that carbon monoxide emissions from road vehicles rose from 4.2 million tonnes in 1981 to 6.0 million tonnes in 1990, an increase of 42 per cent.
Over the same period motor traffic increased by 49 per cent overall.
Financial Times 4 October
Transport
UK buses to use rapeseed oil
Reading Transport has become the first British bus company to run its buses on a fuel derived from oilseed rape.
The fuel, known as rape methyl ester (RME), is becoming increasingly popular throughout Western Europe for buses, taxis and tractors.
Although RME is more expensive than diesel, it produces no sulphur dioxide and less carbon dioxide, factors which make it particularly suitable for use in urban areas.
Engines suffer a slight loss of power on RME, but this is estimated at less than 2 per cent compared with diesel.
Exactly how much more expensive RME is compared to diesel is still hotly disputed.
Some experts claim the difference may be as much as 15 per cent, but producers in Austria--which leads the rest of Europe in RME use--claim they can make RME for the same price as diesel.
New Scientists 3 October
Tropical Forests
UK banana company clears Costa Rican forest
The British banana company, Geest, has been accused of illegal felling of areas of rainforest in north-east Costa Rica, next to the Tortuguero National Park.
The company is to be prosecuted by the Costa Rican Ministry of Natural Resources.
The charges relate to trees cleared for a new plantation.
In particular, Geest is accused of stripping trees along watercourses, in contravention of the law.
Geest denies the charges, claiming that it has a valid permit for all clearances.
Environmentalists have also expressed concern at reports of massive fish deaths in the region, which local people blame on use of herbicides and pesticides in the plantations.
A local biologist, Rocio L  pez, claims that heavy rains wash nematicides into the waterways and then into the ocean.
Since no water and fish samples have been taken after the kills, the claim cannot yet be substantiated.
But, according to L  pez, "We know it's the banana companies because there is no other agricultural activity in the area" .
BBC Wildlife, October 1992 Pesticide News, September 1992
Tropical Forests
UK endorses Malaysian forestry
A leaked UK government report endorses Malaysian forestry practices as "sustainable" , despite near-universal agreement that this is not the case.
The document, leaked to Green Magazine, details a memorandum of understanding between the UK and Malaysia, following a visit to the country by British forestry officials.
The visit left the British with an "overall impression of forestry departments with a good understanding of sustainable forest management and with good guidelines and rules to achieve this" .
The UK has agreed to help provide further research and technical assistance into sustainable logging.
Friends of the Earth describe the document as "a typical piece of political fudging" , pointing out that both the World Bank and the International Tropical Timber Organization have expressed grave concern over the rapid pace of deforestation in Malaysia.
Green Magazine, October 1992
Tropical Forests
Cambodian deforestation "at breakneck speed" 
Cambodia is losing its forests at "breakneck speed" , according to a Chem Widyha, a parliamentary foreign affairs official.
Speaking at a conference in Bangkok, Thailand, he said that forest cover had fallen from 13 million hectares in the 1960s (corresponding to 73 per cent of the country's land area) to seven million hectares today (39 per cent).
This gave it "one of the highest per capita rates of deforestation in the world" .
Relative peace has given loggers the security to operate, as well as producing something of a construction boom, creating an internal market for timber products.
Timber is also exported via Laos, Thailand and Vietnam.
Recent UN studies showed that both the government and rebel factions were involved in logging [see ED 59/60].
The Nation (Bangkok) 22 September
Tropical Forests
Burma ponders log export embargo
The Burmese government has warned that it may place a ban on all exports of logs to Thailand, in the face of reports that some traders are exporting logs illegally.
Thai timber industry sources believe that the move presages a freeze on the granting of any new logging concessions from the end of 1993.
The Nation (Bangkok) 18 September
Tropical Forests
Philippines forest falls to geothermal plant
One of South-East Asia's richest botanical areas, the slopes of Mount Apo on the Philippine island of Mindanao, is to be cleared to make way for a geothermal power plant.
The government has given permission for the plant to go ahead in the face of sustained opposition from environmentalists, church groups, and the local Lumad tribal people, to whom the mountain is sacred.
Environmentalists warn that deforestation of this critical watershed area could have disastrous consequences for downstream regions.
Mount Apo is also one of the last remaining strongholds of the Philippine eagle, whose numbers have shrunk to around 40 as a result of the widespread deforestation throughout the archipelago.
Within the government, local officials of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources have expressed misgivings over the fact that permission was granted at senior level despite the findings of environmental impact assessments which concurred with the environmentalists' fears.
The site is under military guard, ostensibly to protect it from attack by anti-government rebels of the New People's Army.
BBC Wildlife, October 1992
Tropical Forests
Deforestation leads to increases in disease
Parasitic insects carrying dangerous diseases thrive in the wake of deforestation, resulting in increased incidence of potentially-fatal illnesses such as malaria and river blindness.
Research carried out by the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine suggests that various species of malarial mosquito thrive in the wake of forests being opened up.
In Brazil, for example, the Anopheles darlingi is able to exploit conditions such as pools of water created by the construction of settlements and road construction, opencast mining and eroded land, to breed in far greater numbers than normal, resulting in a population explosion.
In West Africa, the savannah-dwelling blackfly which transmits the worm causing river blindness has expanded southwards as forests are cleared in Liberia, Ghana and the Côte d'Ivoire.
Opening up forest land to new migrants also has a double effect: the newcomers lack immunity to local strains of disease and suffer accordingly, while also importing diseases from outside to which the indigenous forest peoples are similarly vulnerable — as happened with malaria in the Brazilian Amazon.
New Scientist 10 October
Waste and Recycling
Somali toxic waste dumping scandal
The head of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Mostafa Tolba, claimed in early September that a Swiss and an Italian company were seeking to take advantage of the civil war in Somalia by dumping toxic waste in that country.
He said that the companies, subsequently identified from other sources as Acher Partners and Progresso, had signed an agreement to this effect with a representative of one of the warring factions.
Since the overthrow of Mohamed Siad Barre in January 1991, Somalia has been riven by clan fighting and famine.
Central authority has collapsed, and 100,000 people have already died from the combined effects of the fighting and famine.
Under the contract, a copy of which was leaked to the media, Nur Elmy Osman, describing himself as "minister of state for health, Republic of Somalia" , granted Acher a 20-year concession to treat up to 550,000 tons a year of industrial and hospital waste, including "solid and liquid waste of the toxic type" , at a disposal facility in Somalia and to store the treated waste in a landfill.
The disclosure caused a furore in Italy, Switzerland and among Somalia's neighbours.
Both the Italian and Swiss authorities launched investigations into the allegations.
Acher claimed that it had merely arranged the contract on behalf of Progresso, but representatives of the latter denied involvement in illegal activities.
A Geneva-based consultancy hired by the United Nations to investigate the allegations subsequently reported that it had found no evidence that any hazardous waste had been exported to Somalia.
UN officials announced on Oct. 6 that the two companies had aborted their plan.
Commenting on the affair, Tolba said that it "should remind us that wherever there is human suffering there is someone ready to make a profit" .
Guardian 7, 11 September Financial Times 10 September Independent 11 September
Waste and Recycling
Germany bans exports to Third World
The federal environment ministry and its counterparts in the sixteen states have agreed to impose a ban on the export of toxic and domestic waste to Third World countries.
Household waste can still be exported to neighbouring countries such as the Netherlands and Belgium under existing contracts.
The ministers could not agree on rules for the return to Germany of illegally exported waste.
The move follows several waste dumping scandals, in particular the illegal export of hospital waste to France and chemical waste to Romania.
According to official figures, the former West Germany exported around 552,000 tones of toxic waste and 550,000 tons of domestic waste in 1990.
It is widely thought that substantial additional amounts were exported illegally to countries in Eastern Europe and the Third World.
Environment Business 23 September
Waste and Recycling
France bans Australian waste imports
The Environment Minister, Ségolène Royal, has banned the importation of certain types of industrial waste from Australia.
After an authorized shipment of electric transformers arrived in France and was transported to a specialist factory in Saint-Vulbas for decontamination, the minister announced that no such shipments would be allowed in the future.
The decision was taken in response to a campaign by Greenpeace against the international trade in waste products and in the wake of a scandal involving the illegal importation of hospital waste from Germany [see ED 62].
Le Monde 8 September
Waste and Recycling
France to mirror German recycling scheme
France is planning to set up a national system for recovering and recycling packaging waste similar to that being implemented in Germany [see ED 49/50; 56].
The government has adopted a decree laying down the legal framework for licensing companies to carry out recovery and treatment of packaging waste.
The first company to have received a licence is due to begin operations by the end of this year.
Initially around ten waste-sorting and treatment centres will be commissioned.
Environment Business 23 September
Waste and Recycling
UK dumps "pollute SSSIs" 
Waste dumps are causing pollution in more than 30 Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) in Britain, according to a survey published by Friends of the Earth.
The main problems highlighted by the survey are toxic waste seeping into watercourses and inadequate controls on refuse dumps.
Although some damage is caused by illegal flytipping, most of the pollution arises from licensed sites.
Guardian 10 September
Waste and Recycling
Computer recycling
Most computer companies are working on setting up a computer recycling scheme, according to IBM environmental operations director John Gillett.
Referring to IBM's own plans, Gillett said that details had not yet been worked out, but it was clear that additional plant capacity would be needed to reprocess computer parts.
In about 18 months IBM would be able to market a computer with a high content of recycled material, he said.
Environment Business 23 September