

Agriculture & Food
Gene food labels urged
A report by the Food Commission, an independent London-based organization and publisher of Food Magazine, has called on manufacturers and supermarkets to label products made from genetically modified organisms.
Britain is currently one of the few countries in the world where so-called "gene food" is already on sale.
Available products include cheese made from a genetically modified enzyme and bread made with a genetically modified yeast.
 "We are not saying there is anything wrong with these kinds of products, but they should be labelled so that consumers have a choice" , according to the report's author, Sue Dibb.
The report warns that there could be a consumer backlash if products are not labelled.
In the USA, it notes, there has been a storm of protest over a government decision not to insist on tests and labelling of genetically modified foods, which has led to calls for boycotts of gene foods.
Food Commission press release 2 November
Agriculture & Food
Fish farming practices criticized
A report by the Compassion in World Farming (CIWF) group on fish farming in Britain--a growth industry which now accounts for some 10 per cent of the country's total fish consumption--has highlighted some of the practices associated with raising fish in captivity.
CIWF estimates that average stock density of 15 kg of fish per cubic metre is equivalent to keeping a 2-foot salmon in a shallow bathtub.
This concentration of fish causes social stress, disease and oxygen depletion, which may in turn cause high mortality rates especially in hot weather.
The report also challenges the industry's claim that 1 kg of fish is produced for every 2 kg of fish feed.
The ratio is in fact nearer to 1:11, CIWF claims.
Since most fish feed is made of fish, farmed salmon and trout are being reared at the expense of much larger quantities of wild species like sprat, capelin, pout and sand eel.
Food Magazine November/January
Agriculture & Food
Food poisoning at record levels
Cases of salmonella food poisoning in Britain have trebled in the last three years and are at an all-time high, according to government statistics.
Environmental health experts say that increased reporting cannot account for the total increase.
They point out that a survey of local authorities has shown a poor level of awareness of food hygiene among many food businesses.
For instance, only 18 per cent of retailers, 22 per cent of caterers and 60 per cent of food manufacturers were keeping food at temperatures recommended by the Department of Health.
The government has announced that it is planning to launch a training programme for all food handlers.
Food Magazine November/January
Agriculture & Food
Grants boost "green" farming
Government-sponsored grants to British farmers to promote environmentally friendly land management are providing a substantial contribution to their incomes and more than offset losses resulting from less intensive agriculture.
A survey commissioned by the Ministry of Agriculture has shown that farmers in environmentally sensitive areas (ESAs) have become more interested in environmental issues since their introduction.
Being within an ESA entitles them to grants to improve the environment.
The most popular purposes for the grants are enhancement of the landscape and the creation of new wildlife habitats.
Farmers' loss of income from farming ranges from £8 to £139 per hectare in the four ESAs surveyed, whereas their additional income from the government grants ranges from £21 to £170 per hectare.
Independent 20 October
Agriculture & Food
Dutch fertilizer plan fails
A Dutch project to process manure into odourless fertilizer pellets for sale is proving uneconomical, a government report has concluded.
It found that the cost of building the required plants was too high and the sales of pellets too low to provide a viable solution to the country's manure surplus problem.
Dutch farms produce 84 million tons of manure a year, 13 millions more than the land can absorb.
Manure seepage from storage areas is polluting waterways and evaporating ammonia is contributing to acid rain.
International Herald Tribune 22 October
Conservation: Land
UNEP launches coastal management programme
A coastal management programme designed to resolve conflicts among those involved in coastal land and marine resource use is being launched by the UN Environment Programme (UNEP), in conjunction with the Food & Agriculture Organization and the World Bank.
The programme, the responsibility of UNEP's Oceans and Coastal Areas Programme Activity Centre, has three components.
First, the elements of integrated coastal management will be outlined in a technical booklet.
Second, a training programme for staff involved in coastal area management will be developed.
Third, the approach will be tested on an island coastal area.
The technical booklet is now being drafted; it will then be reviewed by international experts.
The training programme will be developed by a number of international non-profit-making institutions and then tested at a university in a developing country.
Trained staff will then apply what they have learned at a chosen test site, which will be on an island to minimise uncontrollable external intrusions.
UNEP information, October
Conservation: Land
Arsonists destroy Greek forests
Greece has suffered more forest fires this summer than at any time in the past 40 years.
Some 20,000 acres in the area around Athens were destroyed in September alone.
The island of Angistri went up in flames within minutes of being declared a wildlife refuge.
Years of drought and sparks from poorly maintained electricity cables are to blame for some fires, but many have been started by arsonists.
Greece lacks a public land registry and speculators hope to be able to claim ownership of former forest land for development.
 "Speculators working for land developers are behind most of the fires" , said Agriculture Minister Sotiris Chatzigakis.
 "Turning regions like Angistri into wildlife refuges automatically rules out construction there." 
The government is to introduce tough penalties for arsonists and has promised to institute a land registry, but the forestry service remains desperately under-staffed.
Guardian 9 October
Conservation: Land
Canadian grizzlies get forest reserve
Canada's first grizzly bear reserve is to be set up in the Khutzeymateen area of British Columbia (BC); logging and hunting will be banned in the reserve.
The area, 45 kilometres north of Prince Rupert, was first proposed by the BC government as a conservation area for grizzlies 18 years ago.
A recent survey of the 443-kilometre Khutzeymateen valley showed it contained a population of 50 grizzlies, the largest known on Canada's west coast, but that logging of the valley's temperate rainforest-although it could be economic-- "would pose a substantial threat to the bears and the habitat" .
A decision has still to be taken on whether to carry out further research on detailed conservation plans and to consult the Tsimshian indians, who hunt and fish in the area.
Logging firm West Frazer Mills, which planned to cut up to 1.5 million cubic metres of timber in the area, said the decision would result in the loss of 80 jobs.
However, increased tourism is likely to create just as many jobs with better long-term prospects.
BBC Wildlife November
Conservation: Land
England's disappearing countryside
A fifth of England could be built on by the middle of the next century, according to a report from the Council for the Preservation of Rural England (CPRE), which finds that countryside is disappearing much faster than official figures suggest.
The report, The Lost Land, says that Department of the Environment (DoE) statistics have failed to record the loss of 690 square miles of countryside, an area larger than Greater London, since the second world war.
The report condemns recent changes in countryside protection policies, which it says were based on severely flawed statistics.
According to the DoE 190 square miles of countryside a year were built on in the 1980s; the CPRE study, however, puts the figure at 460 square miles.
A government report on land use change, published in 1991, predicted that 11 per cent of the land area would be urbanised by 2011.
According to the CPRE report, however, the 11 per cent figure was exceeded long ago, and 15 per cent of England is already urban land.
The report, written by consultant Geoffrey Sinclair, used four sets of government data on changes in land use to give "consensus" figures.
The DoE figures are based on land use changes recorded by the Ordnance Survey Independent 16 October
Conservation: Land
New funds for wildlife sites
English Nature, the statutory body which advises the government on nature conservation in England, has been allocated an additional £1.04 million for the protection and management of wildlife sites.
The funds will be used (i) to enhance the restoration and management of lowland peatland sites, by removing scrub to encourage plants and animals, raising the water table to encourage pest regeneration, and introducing a monitoring programme;(ii) to develop work on Special Protection Areas (SPAs) designated to protect the habitats of certain rare, vulnerable or migratory bird species; and (iii) to speed up the conclusion of agreements with landowners who manage their land for conservation.
English Nature press release 29 October
Conservation: Land
RSPB seeks protection for Thames estuary
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) has called for the Thames estuary to be protected from damaging development.
The estuary is the country's most important for birds; nearly 300,000 waders and wildfowl spend the winter on its mudflats and marshes.
It is also an important resting and feeding stop for migrating species.
An RSPB report calls for the government to draw up a strategy for the estuary's future development with the involvement of local councils, the National Rivers Authority and English Nature.
There is particular concern about the East Thames corridor initiative, promoted by Michael Heseltine when he was Environment Secretary, which envisaged large-scale housing, leisure and industrial development on both banks of the estuary.
A new motorway crossing, now being considered by the Department of Transport, and the Channel Tunnel rail link are also potential threats to the remaining natural habitat.
The estuary's saltmarshes are also threatened by rising sea levels.
Independent 8 October
Conservation: Land
Slow progress on SPAs criticised
Delays by the Scottish Office in designating special protection areas (SPAs) under the provisions of the European Community's Wild Birds Directive have been criticised by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB).
 "Scotland is lagging behind almost every other country in the EC," commented RSPB senior conservation officer in Scotland David Minns.
 "Not only are we slow to implement the European directive, we are designating the least-threatened sites first." 
Seven new Scottish SPAs were designated in September (see ED 63), bringing the total to 25; a total of 137 sites in Scotland qualify for SPA status.
Minns said the new SPAs were welcome but he questioned why they had been given priority over the Cairngorms or the mudflats of the Solway Firth, "areas of enormous importance for wildlife which are under real and immediate threat" .
Both these areas had been proposed for SPA status by the Nature Conservancy Council, in August 1990 and July 1988 respectively, but no progress has been made.
Designation of these areas would require the government to take significant conservation initiatives.
 "If the political will existed," Minns said, "the remaining sites could be given SPA status by the end of next year." 
A Scottish Office official responded that the list of potential sites had been published and local authorities were being asked to deal with any development proposals as if they had already been designated as SPAs.
* A book cataloguing 256 sites in the UK of international importance for breeding, migratory and wintering birds has been published.
Important Bird Areas in the United Kingdom has been compiled jointly by the RSPB, Scottish National Heritage, the Countryside Council for Wales, English Nature and the UK Joint Nature Conservation Committee.
SCENES (Scottish Environment News) September 1992
Conservation: Land
Peat-free preference
Some 95 per cent of people who use peat-free composts are happy with the results, a survey by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) has found.
Commenting on the survey, the RSPB's peatland officer, Clifton Bain, said that continued consumer pressure was vital to put a stop to the destruction of Europe's peatland bogs.
Green Magazine November
Conservation: Land
Focus on degradation of temperate forests
In a wide-ranging report, Forests in Trouble, the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF) has highlighted the destruction of the world's temperate forests.
Temperate forests--including deciduous, coniferous, mixed and mountain forests--account for about half of the earth's forest cover.
Their disappearance has not caused the same level of concern as the disappearance of tropical rainforests, but the report points out that some temperate forests are as rich in species as rainforests.
It also rejects the claim that there is no problem because the total area of temperate forests has remained stable; this statistic, it says, masks regional losses and the replacement of diverse native or old-growth forests with plantations.
Among the threats to temperate forests identified by the report are logging of native forests, the treatment of trees as crops in a market shift from timber to pulp and paper production, air and water pollution, cutting for firewood, and forest fires.
Of these, logging poses by far the most serious threat.
The regions most at risk are Eastern Europe, the Nordic countries, Canada, China, Alaska and the Pacific northwest of the United States.
The ecologically fragile mountain forests (such as those in the Andes) are particularly vulnerable.
The report also warns that the Siberian forests, closed to the major logging companies until recently, are under serious threat from uncontrolled commercial exploitation [see also below].
The report says that around 90 per cent of the world's native temperate forests have been destroyed (not including the former Soviet Union, for which data were unreliable).
It calls on countries to improve management of plantations and set aside remaining native forests to allow them to regenerate naturally.
New Scientist 7 November Independent 29 October
Conservation: Land
Siberian forests under threat
Asian, American and European logging companies have begun exploiting on a massive scale the world's largest remaining native forest in Siberia, now part of the Russian Federation.
Foreign companies were barred from logging in Russia until two years ago.
Since then some 4 million hectares have been cut down and millions more have been destroyed by accidental forest fires.
Native peoples who depend on the forests for their livelihoods, and animal species like the Siberian tiger, have suffered.
The spruce, fir, pine, larch, oak and birch trees cut down will taken centuries to replace because growth is slow on the permafrost.
Environmentalists claim that the Russian authorities, desperate for foreign investment, are turning a blind eye to the logging companies' many breaches of the country's nature protection laws European 22-25 October
Conservation: Land
Africa soil loss benefits others
Studies are providing increasing evidence that the huge quantities of topsoil blown away under drought conditions in Africa are benefiting marine life, soils and vegetation to the west, in the Atlantic Ocean and the Americas.
Scientists have discovered that the tons of dust which fall into the ocean provide vital minerals (particularly iron) to plankton and krill, shrimp-like animals at the beginning of the food chain.
It has also been shown that dust blowing in from Africa is acting as a kind of vitamin supplement to the poor soils of the Amazon rainforest.
The process of soil loss through wind erosion accelerates during droughts, and Southern Africa is currently experiencing the worst this century.
Scientists calculate that millions of tons of valuable topsoil have been lost, putting great strain on the region's agricultural development.
 "The African dust feeding the Atlantic and the Americas shows how very large and distant ecosystems depend on each other" , notes Michael Garstang, a soil scientist who has been conducting research in Africa, Brazil and the mid-Atlantic.
International Herald Tribune 30 October
Conservation: Species
EC protects dolphins
European Community tuna fleets have been banned from using nets that also catch dolphins in areas where tuna and dolphins are found together.
The nets, which close like a purse, are already used by EC fleets in the Indian and Atlantic, where dolphin and tuna are not found together.
The move is a pre-emptive one by EC fisheries ministers to stop EC fleets adopting a practice used by others in the central and eastern Pacific, where dolphins are sought by fishermen because tuna are known to swim beneath them.
Independent 20 October
New protected species announced
The British government has added more than 90 species of animals and plants to the list of those protected under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981.
Inclusion on the list indicates that the species are in danger of extinction in the UK, or likely to become so, unless conservation measures are taken.
Species included in the new list include the Sussex Emerald Moth, the sturgeon, floating water plantain and marsh saxifrage.
The list of protected species is reviewed every five years.
English Nature news release 28 October
Conservation: Species
Butterflies get Alpine haven
A butterfly sanctuary has been established in the Swiss Alps by the conservation group Alp Action.
The butterfly population of the Alps is only 1 per cent of the level at the start of this century, Alp Action says, because of the use of pesticides and uprooting of hedgerows.
However, quite small areas of land can be used successfully for conservation programmes, provided they are kept free of pesticides and contain the plants on which butterflies feed, such as clover, thistles and stinging nettles.
The new sanctuary has been set up on dry prairie land south of Lac Leman.
Local farmers have agreed with Alp Action to continue reaping the land by traditional means, using scythes.
New Scientist 24 October
Conservation: Species
Decline of British birds
The breeding activity of many of Britain's bird species dropped significantly last year, according to the 1991 Common Birds Census, a survey covering 74 species.
Breeding populations of 20 species were well below 1990 levels, with 12 species at their lowest level for 30 years.
The British Trust for Ornithology (BTO), which analyses the annual survey data, attributes the 1991 results partly to the unpleasant spring and slow migration, and in many cases regards them as reflecting normal fluctuations in the bird population.
There were lower numbers for eight migrant species spending their winters in Africa and affected by drought conditions on that continent.
However, the Trust cites further losses for migrants like the Sedge Warbler, Whitethroat, Chiffchaff and Spotted Flycatcher as "very real cause for concern" .
Species whose populations decreased were from a variety of habitats including open fields and farmland (Skylark and Yellowhammer), ponds (Moorhen), scrub (Whitethroat), wetlands (Sedge Warbler), woodlands (Stock Dove), aerial feeders (Swallow and House Martin) and many generalists particularly at home in gardens (Wren, Dunnock, Robin, Blackbird and Song Thrush).
There were five species whose breeding populations had definitely increased--Sparrowhawks and Kestrels, the two widespread daytime predators, and the Marsh Tit, Nuthatch and Treecreeper, all woodland species [see ED 57].
British Trust for Ornithology information, 7 November
Conservation: Species
Trial for pesticide poisoning in Spanish nature reserve
Spain's biggest trial of ecological crimes has begun with 34 rice farmers, pesticide salesmen and government officials accused of poisoning more than 20,000 birds with banned pesticides in the Donana national park in 1986.
Donana is a huge reserve at the mouth of the river Guadalquivir about 50 km south-east of Seville.
One of Europe's most important wetlands, it is home to rare species such as the imperial eagle and the lynx, and provides a vital staging post where birds rest on their migrations to and from Africa.
During the summer of 1986 between 20,000 and 25,000 water birds died, many of them protected species and in danger of extinction.
The deaths were only publicised as a result of action by the Andalus ecologists' group.
European 22-25 October
Conservation: Species
Bushmen poachers "tortured" 
A recent report published by the Botswana Christian Council reveals that bushmen in Botswana, disorientated by being moved off their land and "fitted into an alien mode of existence" , have been tortured by police when arrested for poaching wild animals or killing livestock.
Hunger and poverty, the main reasons for their poaching, are not treated by the courts as extenuating circumstances.
The Botswana government says that it will investigate the torture allegations.
Botswana bushmen have recently formed their own organisation, First People of the Kalahari.
The government has said it is willing to revise its policy on "Remote Area Dwellers" (Bushmen and others), and there have also been two recent official gatherings to discuss such issues, in Namibia and in Botswana.
However, the Botswana bushmen delegation at the Namibia meeting was described by Survival International as a hand-picked group who did nothing but sing the praises of their government.
Survival International, November 1992
Conservation: Species
Higher seal cull in Namibia
The Namibian government has approved seal cull quotas double those in 1991, according to the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW).
Some 40,000 pups and 2,200 adults will be killed and used for fertilisers, oils and aphrodisiac potions.
Green Magazine November 1992
Conservation: Species
Proposal for Mediterranean sanctuary for cetaceans
The French minister for the environment, Ségolène Royal, has announced a proposal for a sanctuary for small cetaceans in the Mediterranean between France and Italy.
The protection of cetaceans was cited as a priority in the Mediterranean Action Plan at UNEP's Cairo conference in October 1991.
Le Monde 25 October
Economics and Industry
Environmental bill totals £14bn
Environmental protection in the UK cost £14 billion in 1991, or about 2.5 per cent of the country's GNP, according to a report by the Department of the Environment, with about one third of the total being paid by the government and the rest by industry and consumers.
About 60 per cent of the spending identified by the report covers pollution abatement, with the rest devoted to resource management, improvement of amenities and other items.
Cleaning up river pollution and purifying water accounted for almost half of the total, £6.7 billion, much of which will eventually be paid by water consumers.
About £3 billion went on reducing pollution caused by all kinds of waste and £2.4 billion on curbing air pollution.
The report finds that carbon monoxide emissions have risen by 30 per cent since 1980, with road vehicles being responsible for 90 per cent of these, but that lead emissions have fallen by 70 per cent since the arrival of unleaded petrol in the mid-1980s.
Financial Times 15 October Environment Business 21 October
Energy
Gabcikovo dispute escalates
The dispute between Czechoslovakia and Hungary over the damming of the Danube at Gabcikovo [see ED 61 & 63]worsened in October as the Slovak authorities, apparently acting on their own initiative in advance of the imminent dissolution of the Czechoslovak federation, instructed contractors to begin the final stage of construction work to divert the river.
The move followed the breakdown of talks between the three directly involved parties, sponsored by the European Community (EC).
The Hungarians reacted by calling for an emergency meeting of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) and submitting its case to the International Court of Justice.
The Gabcikovo hydroelectric project, involving a 20-kilometre diversion of the Danube along the border between Czechoslovakia and Hungary, was to have been bilateral venture, but Hungary withdrew in 1989 because of what it considered the unjustifiable environment effect, including the pollution of drinking water and destruction of wetlands.
The dispute has been complicated by tension between the federal Czechoslovak government and the Slovak government.
The latter has been the main advocate of the project, which would greatly improve the republic's electricity supply.
In an apparent attempt defuse the row, the Slovak prime minister, Vladimir Meciar, declared on Oct. 30 during a visit to neighbouring Austria: "We are willing to suspend work until an international commission checks the technical problems of the project, and we are open to further negotiations." 
In the meantime the first effects of the diversion have been reported in Hungary.
Thousands of fish and other wildlife have died in the immediate vicinity of the project, water levels downstream have fallen by several metres, and water shortages have been reported Budapest and other cities along the Danube (which receive most of their drinking water from wells bordering the river).
Guardian 26 October, 3 November Financial Times 26, 31 October European 29 October — 1 November International Herald Tribune 31 October
Energy
Clean coal research produces results
Researchers in the United States have developed a method of increasing the efficiency of coal-fired power stations and reducing emissions from them.
At Schenectady, New York, General Electric and the US Department of Energy have finished a two-year test on an integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) plant.
This is based on the combined heat-and-power cycle process, in which natural gas is burned to drive an electricity turbine and the waste heat drives a steam turbine.
The IGCC plant does not run on natural gas, however, but on gas made from coal in a gasifier.
(Coal loses about 10 per cent of its potential energy in the conversion, but this is balanced by the reduction in pollutants produced during burning.)
The IGCC plant achieved an energy efficiency of 45-50 per cent, compared to 37 per cent for a conventional coal-fired station with flue-gas desulphurization equipment; and it produced 10 per cent less carbon dioxide, only a seventh of the sulphur dioxide, a third of the nitrogen oxides, and no methane.
IGCC plants are also attractive because they can run on natural gas as well as coal gas.
As to cost, a report commissioned by British Coal, British Gas and others has calculated that IGCC plants will produce electricity at a slightly higher cost than conventional coal-fired stations.
And a leading energy analyst, Walter Patterson, has calculated that IGCC plants cost more to build than natural-gas stations but much less than coal stations.
New Scientist 7 November
Energy
Cheap Colombian coal at a price
Survival International (SI), the international organization championing the rights of tribal peoples, has highlighted the plight of Amerindian communities devastated by the Colombian government's drive to produce coal for export.
Cheaply produced coal from Colombia is one of the main sources of imports which are helping to undermine the competitiveness of domestically produced coal in Britain.
It was the low price of imported coal which provided part of government's rationale for closing down most of the coal industry (which is now under review--see below).
SI quotes the case of the largest open-cast coal mine in South America, El Cerrej  n in northern Colombia, which lies on land inhabited by the semi-nomadic Wayuu people.
The health of the population has deteriorated considerably since the mine was built.
People have died from the resultant pollution, which includes the accumulation of coal dust in the air, drying up of drinking water supplies, and depletion of local fish stocks.
The pollution claims have been given credibility by the Colombian health ministry, which has declared a large area around the mind "uninhabitable" because of the accumulation of toxic waste.
SI is calling for the UK to ban the importation of cheap coal produced at the expense of tribal peoples' lives and livelihoods.
Survival International press release 30 October
Energy
Pit closures: environmental implications…
The planned closure of 31 of the remaining 50 coal mines in Britain, which has now been made subject to a review after widespread protests, will have serious environmental implications, the National Rivers Authority (NRA) and others have warned.
The closures could cause severe damage to hundreds of miles of streams and rivers, the NRA claims.
Once the pumps in the mines stop working they fill with water, which will dissolve exposed minerals like zinc and cadmium.
As previous closures have shown, this acidic and toxic floodwater eventually finds its way into waterways.
Legal experts have noted, in this context, that because of a loophole in the law an owner (in this case British Coal) is not responsible for the pollution caused by the abandonment of a mine.
Independent 23 October Environment Business 21 October New Scientist 31 October
Energy
…and reaction by environmental groups
While environmental groups have over the years been highly critical of pollution caused by coal-fired power stations, in particular the levels of emissions of sulphur dioxide and other gases that cause acid rain, neither Friends of the Earth nor Greenpeace nor other groups has expressed support for the scaling down of the coal industry along the lines proposed by the government.
Instead they have called for the diversion of subsidies paid to the nuclear power industry--one of the reasons why coal-based electricity is "uncompetitive" --to the development and improvement of technologies which burn coal more efficiently and more cleanly.
Independent 23 October
Energy
Swedish studies link cancers to power lines
Two studies in Sweden have provided the first convincing evidence of a link between exposure to electromagnetic radiation from overhead power lines and the incidence of cancer, according to officials from the Swedish National Board for Industrial and Technical Development.
One study found a significant increase in childhood leukaemias in the corridors of land underneath the country's network of power lines.
The population sample was the largest ever for this kind of study, as was its timescale (twenty-five years from 1960 to 1985).
A second study found a link between two forms of adult cancer, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and brain cancer, and exposure to power lines.
After evaluating the two studies the board is convinced that the link is "80 per cent correct" , in the words of the director of its electricity safety department, Jaak N  u.
The board is now drawing up options for the government's consideration.
Concern about the link between power lines and cancer first arose in 1979.
Many studies have been published since, but none so far has convinced regulatory bodies that action should be taken to protect populations exposed to electromagnetic radiation.
New Scientist 31 October
Energy
World mining industry "under scrutiny" 
A senior mining executive has warned his colleagues that in the wake of the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro the mining industry is coming under intense scrutiny over its environmental record.
George Littlewood, vice-president of the Australian mining group CRA, speaking at a conference in the United States, quoted as evidence a paper produced by the Worldwatch Institute.
The paper, he said, moved the argument against mining on environmental grounds one step further by suggesting that the world could not afford the ecological price of meeting its present demand for mineral resources, and by arguing that the mining industry was a profligate user of energy and thus contributed to global warming.
He said that the "momentum created by the Rio summit and public opinion in sections of the developed world are on the side of the environmental movement, not the industry" .
He called on the industry to balance the debate by pointing out that mining contributed to economic development, and that "morality is on the side of development as well as on the side of those who care for the environment" .
*The chairman of RTZ, the world's largest mining company, Sir Derek Birkin, has suggested that the public should share the costs of clearing up mining waste, since "society as a whole, rather than mining companies, benefits most from the creation of those wastes" .
It would be more honest, if politically embarrassing, he said, to admit that cleaning old mine waste was in effect a tax on the companies.
Financial Times 22, 23 October
Energy
World Bank puts conditions on Narmada backing
Regardless of a critical report it had itself commissioned, the World Bank has decided for the time being to continue financing the Sardar Sarovar dam and canal project on the Narmada river in India.
In a report submitted earlier this year [see ED 61], a team of experts had said there were "serious deficiencies" in the project.
Opponents of the scheme have said it is unacceptable on environmental as well as human rights grounds--it will displace some 200,000 people.
In response the World Bank in September outlined changes which it said took account of the report's criticisms.
But members of the review team claimed that the remedial measures ignored or misrepresented their main findings.
The Bank management declared that changes to the project made by the Indian authorities had been very constructive and justified the Bank's "continued support" .
Although member countries approved the management's plan, they also attached conditions.
They called on the Indian government to draft a population resettlement plan and to apply stricter environmental standards.
A team of experts will visit India in April to assess implementation of the conditions, and the decision to continue funding for the project will then be reviewed.
Financial Times 26 October New Scientist 31 October
Energy
New EC energy labels
The European Community (EC) has finalized a directive which will require manufacturers and importers to label major household appliances sold in the EC with information showing their energy consumption.
The directive will enter into force in 1994.
Labels will be required for fridges and freezers, washing machines and driers, dishwashers, ovens, water heaters and hot-water storage appliances, air conditioners and lamps.
Additional types of high-energy-using appliances may be added to the list at a later date.
Environment Business 21 October
Energy
Chair for UK energy trust
Lord Moore, a former cabinet minister, has been appointed chairman of the new Energy Saving Trust--founded to identify energy-efficiency projects, mainly in the domestic sphere, for British Gas and regional electricity-generating companies to invest in.
The trust will also recommend whether the investment costs should be passed on to consumers (a decision ultimately the responsibility of the respective regulatory bodies).
The Department of the Environment had come under increasing criticism for the slow progress in setting up the trust.
As minister for social security, John Moore had been a prominent member of the Thatcher government until 1988.
He had previously been a junior minister at the Department of Energy and financial secretary to the Treasury.
Financial Times 9 October
Energy
Chicken power
Some 0.02 per cent of Britain's energy needs or 12,000 homes are now supplied by a power station in Suffolk which runs on chicken droppings.
Set up with help from a government subsidy aimed at encouraging renewable energy projects, the plant burns poultry litter from surrounding farms.
The scheme has been criticized by some animal welfare activists.
Green Magazine November
Energy
Waste-to-energy subsidy?
Four of the biggest British companies in the waste-to-energy business (generating power from waste) have formed a lobby group to persuade the government to grant them a subsidy.
Funds would come from the non-fossil-fuel obligation, an 11 per cent tax on electricity generated from oil, gas and coal.
The revenue from the tax, currently around £1.2 billion per year, is intended to subsidize projects using alternative fuel sources, but at the moment more than 90 per cent goes to the nuclear industry (which is why the tax is often called the "nuclear levy" ).
Only two grants have gone to renewable-energy projects.
The waste-to-energy companies are pressing for financial support to allow them to take advantage of new waste management regulations due to come into force next year.
From April 1993 local authorities will have to contract out waste management, and this should give the companies more opportunities to secure contracts for the conversion of waste into energy.
But they say that around £100 million is needed to ensure such projects are economically viable in the short term.
Financial Times 4 November
Energy
Tibet tapping solar energy
The government of the Chinese autonomous region of Tibet has set up a scheme to utilize solar energy for industrial and household use.
In addition to stimulating specific projects, a research centre for solar energy is due to be established.
By the end of 1991 thousands of solar-powered cells, cookers, houses and greenhouses had been installed in Tibet.
Xinhua news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 12 October
Environmental Politics
Environmental co-operation agreements signed
Australia and Singapore have signed an agreement on environmental co-operation.
The two governments will work together on solutions for environmental problems based on principles of environmentally sustainable development.
Singapore's Environment Minister Ahmad Mattar and his Australian counterpart Ros Kelly signed the agreement in Canberra.
* Albania has signed an environmental protection agreement, its first, with Germany.
The agreement was signed in Bonn by Albanian Environment Minister Tritan Shehu and his German counterpart Klaus Töpfer.
Radio Australia (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) * ATA (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
Lalonde rules out cabinet jobs
Brice Lalonde, the former French Environment Minister and president of Génération Ecologie, has ruled out participation by his party in a French cabinet in the event of a ministerial reshuffle.
Lalonde said his party sought a place in government at the start of an administration, not as part of a "breathless" government, as he described the current Parti Socialiste administration.
Le Monde 27 September
Environmental Politics
Green involvement in French regional governments
The French Green party Les Verts and the ruling Parti Socialiste in the Nord — Pas-de-Calais region have reached an agreement setting out guidelines for economic development in the region.
The accord follows a threat by the Greens to withdraw their support for the Socialists in the regional assembly unless consideration for environmental factors was built into development strategies.
However, the two parties failed to come to any agreement over plans for the construction of autoroute A16, linking Boulogne with Amiens.
The right-of-centre Lorraine regional government can now command an overall majority in the 73-member regional assembly, having won the support of the five representatives of Les Verts by reaching agreement on creating a regional environmental agency.
Spending on environmental protection will be increased to 35 million francs in 1993, three times the 1992 level.
Regional Council president Gérard Longuet has been holding discussions on this agreement since June not only with Les Verts but also with Génération Ecologie, two of whose six representatives also announced their support for his administration.
* There are fears of a fascist group called New Resistance infiltrating Les Verts.
Ecolo-J, a branch of Les Verts for young people, has barred around 20 members in Normandy, Nantes, Angers and Grenoble.
Le Monde 15, 21 October *Le Monde 25 October
Environmental Politics
Russia's devastated environment
Recent reports issued by the Russian government reveal the environmental devastation caused by years of rapid industrialisation, nuclear testing and uncontrolled dumping of toxic wastes.
The reports, ordered by President Boris Yeltsin, are being distributed to all the country's regional administrations.
An area of 1 million square miles, or 15 per cent of Russian territory, is regarded as ecologically unsafe for human habitation.
Large areas have been ruined by nuclear testing, which exposed millions of people to radiation.
Industry has been allowed to operate with no regard to the damage it was causing.
All Russia's major rivers are estimated to have between 10 and 100 times the permitted viral and bacterial levels.
Moscow is one of 84 towns in Russia where air pollution is more than 10 times the permissible level; 85 per cent of city dwellers breathe heavily polluted air.
The effects on human life are clearly documented.
Life expectancy is falling (the 1992 figure of 69 years for women and 63 for men compares with UK figures of 78.3 and 72.7).
Infant mortality rates are rising rapidly, reaching 17.9 per 1,000 births in 1991 according to the Russian statistical classification, although the report states that if international standards were applied the figure could be three times this level.
Some 11 per cent of infants suffer birth defects and doctors calculate that in the year 2015, on present trends, only 15-20 per cent of babies will be born healthy.
About 55 per cent of schoolchildren suffer health problems; respiratory illnesses are particularly prevalent.
The full cost of the 1986 Chernobyl disaster is revealed for the first time.
Some 2.7 million people still live in affected areas--400,000 of them in areas made unfit for human habitation because of radiation levels or in areas from which they should have been moved.
In all, 1.3 million people have been registered as suffering from diseases related to the radiation leak.
Guardian 8 October European 8 October
Environmental Politics
 "Green" troops planned
A force of "green" troops is to be set up to fight pollution and natural disasters worldwide.
The unit, to be attached to the UN Centre for Urgent Environment Assistance, is not expected to become operational before 1994.
European 15-18 October
Environmental Politics
Worldwatch Institute report on global trends
Some encouraging trends, as well as growing threats, emerge from the Worldwatch Institute's report Vital Signs, which looks at 36 environmental and social factors worldwide.
There has been a small reduction in cigarette smoking, to 1,008 per capita; military spending fell in 1990 and figures for 1991 were expected to show a further decline; and significantly smaller quantities of ozone-depleting chemicals are being produced; but, disturbingly, grain production has fallen while population continues to grow at record rates.
The world grain harvest during 1992 is expected to be the lowest for five years at 686 pounds per person.
Population growth has now overtaken the nuclear threat as the biggest challenge for the future, the report says, describing global population growth of 92 million in 1991, including an increase of 80 million in the Third World, despite worldwide declines in fertility rates.
Falling world fish catches, rainforest depletion, reduced energy efficiency, disappearing bird species and increasing global temperatures also give cause for concern.
On the positive side, production of ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbons has fallen 46 per cent since the peak year in 1988; bicycle production surpasses car production, with 95 million bikes built in 1990, compared with 36 million cars; and world petroleum production fell by 1 per cent in 1991, continuing a downward trend since the record output of 62.7 million barrels in 1979.
During the past eight years the use of natural gas has been rising, but wind and solar power have also been increasing dramatically.
Washington Post 18 October
Environmental Politics
Japan to host technical transfer centre
An international centre promoting the transfer of environmentally-sound technologies to developing countries is to be created in Japan.
It will be financed by the Environment Fund of the UN Environment Programme, but the Japanese government has already made a voluntary donation of $2.3 million towards the centre.
Offices will be in Osaka and in Shiga prefecture.
New Scientist 7 November
Global Warming
Climate change could cause crisis in China
A team of scientists from China, Britain and the Netherlands have produced a gloomy forecast of the impact of global warming on China by the year 2050.
Their report, published by the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF), draws on climate data made available for the first time to the West by the Chinese Academy of Meteorological Sciences.
China, it says, could become much warmer and drier, and large areas of steppe could turn to desert.
The temperature change would bring a marked reduction in the biodiversity of Tibetan Alpine ecosystems, and hundreds of thousands of hectares of the east China plains would be flooded if sea levels rose by half a metre, a change which would place the country's major coastal cities at risk.
The report's assumptions are based on one of the "business as usual" scenarios from the latest report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change: a doubling of the world population, an increase in emissions of carbon dioxide by 180 per cent and a global temperature rise of 2.5 degrees centigrade by the end of the next century [see ED 57, 59/60].
New Scientist 7 November
Global Warming
Saving energy starts at home
As part of its contribution to "Helping the Earth Week" (17-23 October), the UK Department of the Environment has launched a campaign to encourage householders to improve energy efficiency in the home and thereby to make a contribution to reducing global warming.
The campaign makes a direct link between global warming and the consumption of energy in the home, which accounts for a quarter of the emissions of carbon dioxide.
Speaking at its launch, the Environment Secretary, Michael Howard, said: "Not enough people yet realize just how much unnecessary damage is caused by inefficient use of energy.
By taking the right measures, every home could save £100 a year and reduce its annual carbon dioxide contribution by 1.5 tons, a cut of 20 per cent.
Energy efficiency gives a double bonus: a cut in fuel bills, and in emissions of carbon dioxide."
The literature accompanying the campaign gave ten suggestions, listed in increasing order of cost, to help householders to save energy.
They were: using only heat, lights and appliances that are needed; lagging the hot water tank; lagging hot water pipes; using low-energy light bulbs; adding a thermostat, thermostatic radiator valves and a timer programmer to heating systems; fitting draught-proofing to windows and doors; ensuring that loft insulation is at least 150 mm thick; installing plastic secondary double glazing; if relevant, seeking advice on cavity wall insulation; and, if relevant, fitting an energy-efficient gas-condensing boiler.
Many of these actions would pay for themselves in under two years and some would have an instant money-saving effect, the leaflet says.
Department of the Environment press release 12 October Independent 13 October
Global Warming
CO2 emissions still rising in UK
Figures published by the Department of Industry (DTI) show that on current trends emissions of carbon dioxide in Britain will probably continue to rise over the next thirty years.
The figures thus cast doubt on the government's ability to meet its target of stabilizing emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000.
The DTI forecasts that carbon dioxide emissions, which amounted to 160 million tons in 1990, will range between 157 and 179 tons by 2000.
The forecast for 2020 is between 188 million and 285 million tons.
The lower estimate is predicted for low economic growth and much higher fuel prices than today, while the higher estimate is based on a combination of high growth and cheap fuel.
Environmental groups have pointed out that on the basis of these figures emissions are likely to increase significantly after 2000, even if the stabilization target is met, unless the government takes action to promote energy conservation.
Independent 10 October Environment Business 21 October
Global Warming
Rethink on coastal defences
The Ministry of Agriculture, which is responsible for Britain's coastal defences, is considering a major rethink in policy, shifting the emphasis away from technological solutions toward more natural solutions involving the revival of salt marshes, which have traditionally protected coastlines.
The salt marshes act as barriers between the sea and land.
As sea levels rose over the centuries, due to the slow sinking of the south-east of England, the marshes gradually retreated inland.
But in recent decades the sea walls built behind the marshes as a secondary defence have been blocking their retreat and have squeezed them.
The result has been that sea walls have had to take the brunt of the power of waves and currents at high tide, which erodes them and requires rebuilding on an ever larger scale.
English Nature and the National Rivers Authority (NRA) are testing the feasibility of what they are calling a "managed retreat" from the sea and "soft defences" .
They have created an experimental salt marsh by allowing coastal farmland at Northey Island in Essex to be flooded.
Independent 12 October
Global Warming
EC clean electricity experiment in Spain
Four Spanish electricity-generating companies are taking part in a pilot project, funded by the European Community (EC), to produce electricity from coal with a new technology which reduces emissions of carbon dioxide and other pollutants.
The new technology, based on a coal gasification process, is thought to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 20 per cent compared to traditional coal-fired power stations.
European Community press release 24 September
Nuclear Power
Cancer test case opens
Two families who blame their children's blood cancers on their fathers' exposure to radiation at the Sellafield nuclear reprocessing plant have launched a test case against British Nuclear Fuels Limited (BNFL).
In the first case a woman is seeking compensation for the death in 1962 of her 10-month-old daughter from leukaemia; the girl's father worked as a fitter at Sellafield for nearly 30 years and has since also died of cancer.
In the second case a woman of 27 is seeking damages for contracting lymphoma in 1988, the treatment for which has left her permanently disabled and sterile; her father worked as a fitter at Sellafield for more than 20 years.
The case breaks new ground in Britain in that it seeks a ruling on whether radiation damage can be passed on to children through their fathers' sperm, in which case, under current legislation, BNFL would be liable.
Guardian 23, 27 October
Nuclear Power
Delay for Sellafield waste processing plant
Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution (HMIP) has refused permission for the commissioning of a new nuclear reprocessing plant at Sellafield while authorizations for discharges are still under review.
The decision was backed by the responsible government minister.
The Thermal Oxide Reprocessing Plant (THORP), built at a cost of £2.6 billion, is due to start up in 1993.
British Nuclear Fuels Limited (BNFL), which will operate the plant, had applied to begin loading uranium under existing authorizations.
This was rejected by HMIP.
The inspectorate is known to be concerned about the pollution the plant will cause and is planning an eight-week consultation process on the basis of a draft authorization (setting out permitted discharge levels for a range of pollutants) due to be published shortly.
The move has been welcomed by environmentalists, but BNFL and trade unions say the delays are threatening several thousand jobs of employees and contractors.
Guardian 29 October Financial Times 24 October
Nuclear Power
Waste dump laboratory plan
Nirex, the nuclear waste disposal company, has unveiled its plans for an underground research laboratory to test geological conditions at the site of Britain's proposed nuclear waste repository in Cumbria.
The company had admitted in June that initial results from boreholes drilled in the area showed that it did not have sufficient knowledge of conditions to guarantee safety of the repository.
The proposal for the lab has met with considerable opposition.
Many critics suspect it is the first stage in the construction of the repository itself, a highly controversial project.
The company's timetable for evaluating the results of the tests has also been criticized as too tight.
A spokesman from Friends of the Earth, Patrick Green, declared: "This rock lab is a fraud.
From Nirex's new timetable it is clear that the lab has very little to do with rigorous scientific investigation and everything to do with pulling the wool over the eyes of [local]people."
It is likely that the proposal will be subjected to a planning inquiry.
Guardian 22 October Independent 22 October
Nuclear Power
Plutonium ship arrives in France
The Japanese freighter Akatsuki Maru has arrived in France to load 1.7 tons of processed plutonium to be transported back to Japan to supply the country's nuclear-power industry The shipment, the first of a series, has aroused great controversy worldwide because of the dangers inherent in transporting highly radioactive material across the seas.
Since the ship left port in September [see ED 63], many countries along the potential routes-including Argentina, Chile, Indonesia, Philippines, South Africa, Uruguay and several Pacific countries--have banned the ship from their territorial waters.
The actual routes followed by the ship are being kept secret.
International Herald Tribune 29 October European 29 October — 1 November
Nuclear Power
Rocky Flats still unsafe
An internal memo by a senior employee at the Rocky Flats plant in Colorado has disclosed that substantial amounts of highly radioactive plutonium are stored in unsafe or untested containers and in unstable condition and are not suitably protected against fire.
For many years Rocky Flats manufactured plutonium triggers for US nuclear warheads.
It was investigated in 1989 for violations of environmental laws, and production ceased later that year.
The Rockwell corporation, which had operated the plant under contract from the US Energy Department, subsequently pleaded guilty to ten charges and agreed to pay a fine of $18.5 million.
Local environmentalists have fiercely criticized the fact that unsafe conditions still exist at the plant even after three years of clean-up work.
They also criticized the view, endorsed by the memo's author and officials at the Energy Department, that there was no "imminent hazard" .
Washington Post 8 October
Nuclear Power
Lithuanian reactor closed down
The second reactor at the Ignalina nuclear power station has been closed down after a leak of radioactive steam.
Officials stressed that no radiation had escaped into the atmosphere and there was no danger to the environment.
The Ignalina plant, located north-east of Vilnius, is Lithuania's only nuclear power station and produces around 60 per cent of the country's electricity.
Its two reactors are of the Chernobyl type and became operational in 1983 and 1986 respectively.
The first reactor was closed down for repairs earlier this year after a gas leak.
Washington Post 16 October Le Monde 17 October
Nuclear Power
EC concern over Chernobyl reopening
The European Commission has expressed its deep concern over the decision by the Ukrainian authorities to reopen temporarily one of the three nuclear reactors at Chernobyl [see ED 63], the site of the world's worst nuclear accident in 1986.
Financial Times 20 October
Nuclear Power
Russian action against Greenpeace ship
Greenpeace's attempt to investigate the environmental effects of the former Soviet Union's nuclear dumping off the island of Novaya Zemlya in the Arctic Ocean [see also below]has been thwarted by the Russian coastguard.
The research ship Solo was seized when it crossed into territorial waters.
The 33-strong crew was arrested and the captain faced charges of violating international maritime law.
But after discussions involving diplomats from several countries, the authorities released the crew and the ship nine days later.
Greenpeace and other sources have revealed that 15 nuclear reactors and some 17,000 containers of nuclear waste have been dumped off Novaya Zemlya since the 1950s.
The island was one of the Soviet Union's main nuclear testing sites during the cold war.
Financial Times 13 October Guardian 13 October International Herald Tribune 20 October Washington Post 20 October
Nuclear Power
Arkhangelsk "ecological disaster area" 
Scientists at the medical institute of Arkhangelsk in northern Russia have called the region an "ecological disaster area" after studying the findings of a twenty-year investigation on the state of health of the local population.
Pregnancy and birth complications are 1.7 times more common in Arkhangelsk than in neighbouring districts, and in the past three years the incidence of cancer and blood diseases in children has risen threefold.
The causes of the environmental degradation are manifold.
The scientists mention in particular the nuclear testing on neighbouring Novaya Zemlya [see above], pollution in the White Sea and Barents Sea, and toxic waste dumps in the region.
Radio Rossiya (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 30 September
Nuclear Power
Seizures of radioactive material
German police have seized two consignments of highly radioactive material used in the nuclear power industry and in the manufacture of nuclear weapons.
On 10 October two cylinders were seized at Frankfurt airport which contained several grammes of caesium-137 and 5 grammes of strontium respectively; three days, later 2.2 kilos of enriched uranium were seized in Munich.
Officials refused to indicate the exact origin of the material but did say that "experience tells us that this kind of material comes from Eastern Europe" .
Five Polish nationals were arrested in connection with the first seizure, and two Czechoslovak nationals and five others in the second.
According to the Federal Criminal Office the illegal trafficking in radioactive material has increased dramatically in 1992.
The government has appealed to Russia, Ukraine, Belorussia and the Baltic republics to tighten their border controls to prevent the smuggling of radioactive material.
Le Monde 13, 18 October
Nuclear Power
French dump opens
The first facility to store low-level and intermediate-level radioactive waste on French territory has been opened in the department of Aube, 200 kilometres east of Paris.
Some 1 million cubic metres of radioactive material will be stored in the dump over the next forty years.
Le Monde 21 October
Ozone layer
Taiwan to phase out CFCs by 1996
Taiwan is planning to prohibit the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) by 1996.
Under a timetable worked out by the country's Environmental Protection Administration, consumption will be cut by 30 per cent of the 1986 level of 10,159 tons by 1992, by 50 per cent in 1993, 80 per cent in 1994 and 85 per cent in 1995.
Measures to cover coolant recycling and to impose air pollution control fees to deter CFC use have also been drawn up.
Development of substitutes for CFCs is being stepped up by the Industrial Technology Research Institute and manufacturers.
The moves are in compliance with the Montreal Protocol.
Central News Agency, Taipei 15 October (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Ozone layer
Thailand puts a price on phasing out CFCs
Phasing out chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) will cost Thailand about US$418 million over the next five years, according to a report by the Thailand Development Research Institute.
The country has frozen imports of CFCs at the 1991 level of 15,648 tonnes; according to the Industry Ministry imports to August this year were in line with last year's total of 10,044 tonnes.
However, Thailand's consumption of CFCs remains high compared to other similar countries.
The Nation, Bangkok 2, 6 October (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution: Air
Japanese acid rain survey
Acid rain was found in 85 per cent of samples taken from 23,000 locations in Japan in a three-month survey conducted earlier this year by the Japanese Consumers' Co-operative Union (JCCU).
Acid levels high enough to affect plant growth were found in 41 prefectures.
A survey of nitrogen oxide levels in the atmosphere, also conducted by the JCCU, recorded concentrations in the Tokyo and Osaka areas higher than the 0.06 parts per million maximum level set by the environment agency.
* A £20 million reforestation programme has been launched in the Giant Mountains of northern Moravia, Czechoslovakia, an area damaged by pollution from coal-fired power stations.
The programme is financed by a Dutch foundation.
Kyodo News Service Tokyo 15 October (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) *European 15-18 October
Pollution: Air
Acid rain damages UK SSIs
Acid rain is thought to have damaged 46 of the 56 sites of special scientific interest (SSIs) in the UK studied in research commissioned by English Nature.
Worst hit areas include the Lake District, the Pennines, the far south-west, and high ground in southern England.
The research shows that many of the sites will still be threatened even after the European Community's Large Combustion Plant Directive reduces sulphur emissions from power stations by 2003.
Dr Andrew Farmer, English Nature's atmospheric pollution specialist, said: "Acid rain can cause local extinctions of rare species, such as the natterjack toad from southern England.
Many water plants cannot survive in acidified pools or streams, and dippers and otters are less likely to be found there.
However, this study is the first to show just how much of the national resource of a particular type of wildlife habitat has been affected by acid rain."
Dr Farmer warned that SSSIs already damaged by acid rain would continue to be affected even after the EC directive comes into effect.
Water bodies affected by acidification can be rehabilitated, he said, but never recover the diversity of wildlife they once harboured.
He called for a commitment from the EC to provide adequate protection for threatened habitats.
English Nature is now studying the effects of acid rain on other SSIs.
English Nature news release 29 October
Pollution: Air
US Clean Air Laws may be weakened
The US administration is planning to weaken a provision in the clean air laws designed to preserve air quality in unpolluted areas.
Currently companies must install state-of-the-art controls on new plant whose emissions pose a threat to air quality in unpolluted areas, but the proposed changes would permit cheaper and less effective devices.
The plan has been finalised by high-ranking officials of the Environment Protection Agency, although EPA Administrator William K. Reilly is still said to be "looking at the options" himself.
International Herald Tribune 30 October
Pollution: Water
California water allocation bill signed
US President George Bush has approved legislation to reallocate scarce Californian water supplies from agriculture to the state's cities and drought-threatened wildlife in a decision which has dismayed farmers but pleased environmentalists.
The water bill also includes funding for several large-scale dam and water projects throughout the west, which forced the President to choose between the interests of his California supporters and those in other states who were urging the passage of the bill.
Farmers in California now use about 85 per cent of the state's water while city residents face severe rationing after six years of drought.
Independent 2 November
Pollution: Water
Lead in US drinking water above EPA safety standards
A US government report has shown that lead levels in almost one-fifth of the nation's largest municipal water systems, including some serving Washington and suburban counties, exceed the safety standards set last year by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
EPA Administrator William K. Reilly stressed that the findings were "by no means a crisis" because the agency survey only targeted households at high risk of elevated lead levels either because they are served by municipal water lines made of lead or have interior piping made of lead or copper with lead solder.
The survey found that 130 of the nation's 660 largest public water systems exceeded an EPA "action level" of 15 parts per billion of lead.
Any system in which more than 10 per cent of monitored, high-risk residences exceeded that threshold was cited.
Washington Post 21 October
Pollution: Water
NRA accused of not enforcing UK pollution standards
A report from the Women's Environmental Network (WEN) shows that the National Rivers Authority (NRA) has brought only five prosecutions against polluting paper mills since 1990, even though 42 of the country's 56 mills have broken the law.
The mills are also breaking pollution levels set by the local NRAs which WEN claims are inadequate in the first place.
Other campaign groups are also critical of the NRA's performance; the Clean Rivers Campaign describes the NRA's workforce as "sadly apathetic and demoralised" .
The NRA will actually disappear in 1994 when it will be merged with other watchdogs to form an environmental protection agency but environmentalists fear that in the meantime poor standards of monitoring and inactivity will prevail.
Green Magazine, November 1992
Pollution: Water
Lib Dem anti-lead campaign
The Liberal Democrats have claimed that over half a million bottle-fed babies in England and Wales may be at risk from mental retardation due to lead pollution of tap water.
The party's environment spokesman, Simon Hughes, has called on the government to take action to combat excess lead in drinking water.
Launching the Poison in the Pipeline? report, Hughes said that in 1991 one in four water-supply areas in England and Wales supplied water which contained lead more than five times above the level which the World Health Organization (WHO) deems to be harmful to health.
He called on the government to set legal limits of lead in water in line with WHO guidelines, and to widen the number of households eligible for grants to replace lead piping.
 "The government and water companies should make removing lead from our tap water an urgent priority" , he declared.
Liberal Democrats press release 16 October
Pollution: Water
How to save the Aral Sea
The UN Environment Programme (UNEP) has published a detailed report on the environmental problems of the Aral Sea.
The report also suggests a range of options for saving Central Asia's second major inland sea.
The Aral Sea has been shrinking since the 1960s, when water from its tributaries began to be diverted for agricultural irrigation in what were then the Soviet republics of Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan.
Much of the diverted water was also wasted because of inefficient irrigation systems.
By the 1980s the annual flow of water into the Aral Sea had been reduced to "virtually nothing" , according to the report.
This has reduced the sea's volume by 70 per cent and its surface area by 54 per cent, increased salinity to 29 per cent (three times open ocean levels), and destroyed virtually all fish stocks.
The concentration on intensive cotton and rice cultivation has led to a build-up of pollution from fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides.
The UNEP report concludes that the Aral Sea can only be saved and the ecological balance restored by increasing the water flow down the tributaries.
It lists the following options:(i) reducing irrigation;(ii) improving irrigation efficiency;(iii) improving water management by providing consumers with incentives to conserve water;(iv) introducing other crops, including other strains of rice and cotton, with lower water needs; and (v) taking the poorest quality land out of production.
While the report describes the first two options as the most far-reaching and effective in the long term, it acknowledges that they would cause severe economic strains (because of the dependence of the local economies on irrigated crops) and that the required infrastructural improvements would be very expensive.
Our Planet 4/1992
Pollution: Water
Old US mines are big polluters
A report in the Los Angeles Times has highlighted the fact that thousands of abandoned nineteenth-century mines and mills in the western United States still leach cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, arsenic and toxic materials into waterways and the soil.
As yet there are no estimates of the cost of cleaning up the areas around the mines, but it is likely to be very high.
The problem is exacerbated by the fact that many of the mines are now within built-up areas.
International Herald Tribune 21 October
Pollution: Water
Toxic leak in Northern Ireland
Some 1.25 tons of the highly toxic liquid chlorobutadiene have leaked into Lough Foyle from a Du Pont plant near Londonderry.
An urgent investigation has been launched into the potential impact of the spill, which has been described by the Department of the Environment as "extremely worrying" .
The incident was not reported to the authorities for three days because, according to a company spokesman, its size had not been immediately appreciated.
The spill was caused by a "process upset" , he said.
Chlorobutadiene, also known as chloroprene, is a highly flammable odourless liquid used in the manufacture of synthetic rubber.
It is toxic by inhalation or ingestion and can be absorbed through the skin.
It is also thought to be carcinogenic.
Independent 10 October
Pollution: Water
Solomon Islands water crisis
The Solomon Islands health ministry has declared a water disaster in Honiara, the capital, after the tap water supplied by one of the city's four water sources was found to be highly contaminated.
The ministry described the problem as very serious and has asked the National Disaster Council to deal with the problem.
Radio New Zealand (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 14 October
Transport
BMW and Renault sign recycling pact
Germany's BMW and France's Renault have signed an agreement to work together on disassembling and recycling used cars.
It is the first international agreement of its kind.
Used BMW cars in France will be processed by Française des Ferrailles in Athis-mons, while Günter Schmitt in Würzburg will recycle both companies' cars in Germany.
The German government recently drafted regulations making it compulsory for car makers to take back their old cars when they are due to be scrapped.
Financial Times 14 October
Transport
Japanese car firms develop electric limos
Two Japanese car makers are developing electric-powered versions of their luxury models, designed for leasing to government officials.
The companies see the vehicles as an important step in the development of electric cars, which the government supports.
Toyota's Crown Majesta will incorporate new hermetically sealed lead batteries, which eliminate the need for regular checking and topping up of water levels.
A single charge will take the Majesta 140 kilometres at 40 km per hour; top speed is 110 km per hour.
Nissan's Cedric has a range of 120 kilometres (at 40 km per hour) and a top speed of 100 km per hour.
*The Prague authorities have revoked a regulation which was due to come into force during October, requiring all cars entering the city's historic centre to be fitted with a catalytic converter.
The authorities are said to have realised that too little time had been allowed for vehicles to be updated.
New Scientist 31 October * European 15-18 October
Transport
Financial help for cleaner UK buses?
In a new charter for cleaner buses, Friends of the Earth (FoE) urges that bus companies should be given financial incentives to fit new engines to comply with EC emission standards expected to be introduced in 1995.
FoE pollution campaigner Karen McVeigh says that such allowances should be made conditional on the bus operators including a requirement for low-sulphur diesel in their fuel specifications.
The new EC regulations could cut harmful particle emissions by 75 per cent and nitrogen dioxide levels by more than half.
Green Magazine November 1992
Tropical Forests
Nobel Peace Prize for Quiche Indian campaigner
A Quiche Indian woman from Guatemala who has achieved worldwide recognition by speaking out against the oppression of her people has been awarded the 1992 Nobel Peace Prize.
Rigoberta Menchu's achievement is seen by Survival International as an acknowledgement by the international community of tribal peoples worldwide and their struggle to survive.
Survival International calculates that 100,000 people have been killed in Guatemala in the last 25 years and over a million forced to flee what is described as the brutality of the US-supported government there.
The worldwide picture for tribal people remains grim.
Some 1,200 Jumma were killed by the army in Bangladesh.
In Brazil, despite some progress, half the remaining Awa-Guaja still flee contact with the whites and hundreds have been killed by local ranchers and loggers.
However, there have been achievements towards the recognition of tribal and indigenous peoples' rights.
May saw the completion of the demarcation of the Yanomami territory in Brazil, which can only be reversed by presidential decree.
In September, Survival International's report Indians of the Americas — Invaded but not Conquered, and its account of the Top Ten companies responsible for invading Indian lands in the Americas, resulted, according to Survival, in threats of legal action from RTZ, the Body Shop and Shell.
Survival International press release, 16 October
Tropical Forests
Patience of Urueu-Wau-Wau indians wears thin
Urueu-Wau-Wau indian leaders have said in a statement to Survival International that they can no longer tolerate the invasion of miners and loggers on to their land.
They say that machinery is destroying the land and scaring the game away.
Their land was demarcated last year but lack of respect for the boundaries resulted in the killing of a trespasser in July after two warnings were ignored.
Survival International November 1992
Tropical Forests
Illegal tropical timber trade remains strong
New evidence of large-scale illegal trade in tropical timber throughout South East Asia and the Pacific has been made public in a report by Traffic, the wildlife trade monitoring programme.
The new report, entitled Illegal Tropical Timber Trade: Asia-Pacific, estimates the scale of the problem at hundreds of thousands of hectares of forest being illegally logged each year and billions of dollars lost in foreign exchange.
In the Philippines alone, illegal logging, misdeclaration of species and corruption costs the country almost five million dollars every day.
Only 14 per cent of the Philippines tropical forest remains untouched and 100,000 hectares is disappearing every year.
There are allegations of corruption against the military and other bodies supposedly responsible for the enforcement of forestry laws.
Illegal practices include smuggling, transfer pricing, under valuing and misclassification of species.
Traffic's director Jorgen Thomsen draws attention to the responsibility of the tropical timber consuming countries, along with the International Tropical Timber Organisation (ITTO), to find effective solutions rather than leaving the responsibility to the producing countries.
WWF press release, 10 November
Tropical Forests
ASEAN attacks Austrian import labelling scheme
Austria's imposition of mandatory labelling for tropical imports has been criticised by the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Malaysia's Agriculture Minister Sanusi Junid said ASEAN had agreed to take a common stand to discourage similar actions by other countries.
Austria's move, he said, went against the "spirit and content" of the "statement on forest principles" agreed at the UNCED summit in Rio (see ED 59-60).
 "We are of the opinion that if such action is to be imposed, it should also involve temperate timber," he added.
Malaysia has threatened to organise a trade boycott of Austrian goods if Austria fails to rescind its eco-labelling law.
Malaysia led the lobbying at the Rio UNCED summit against the adoption of a binding convention on conservation and sustainable development of forests, arguing that much of the developed world's criticism of the exploitation of forests was ill-informed and hypocritical.
Financial Times 13 October Bernama News Agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 27 October
Waste and Recycling
EC toxic waste accord
The environment ministers of the twelve European Community (EC) countries have agreed to restrict the transport of toxic waste across their frontiers and to ban in principle the export of waste to Third World countries.
The agreement will come into effect in September 1994.
The agreement, reached after two years of negotiations, was made possible after the European Court of Justice (the EC's judicial body) had changed a previous position and ruled--in a case brought by a Belgian village seeking to stop the dumping of Dutch waste-that waste was not a "commercial good" and could therefore by implication be exempted from the principle of free movement of goods enshrined in the European single market due to be introduced in 1993.
The new regulation reinforces the principle of "self-sufficiency" , namely that waste should be dealt with as close as possible to the point of production and that countries should be responsible for processing or dumping their own waste.
It also provides some flexibility for smaller countries, which had claimed that for them self-sufficiency was not always feasible.
As some observers noted, the new regulation establishes the principle that environmental concerns take precedence over commercial arguments.
In this context EC officials stressed, however, that waste was a "unique case" .
Under the new rules some waste shipments to other European countries and those to some Third World countries (the latter for recycling purposes) will still be allowed under licence from the European Commission.
Importing waste into the EC will also be banned, with the exception of shipments from developing countries for treatment or recycling.
The EC will now be in a position to ratify the Basel Convention governing the international movement of toxic waste, which came into force in May [see ED 58].
Independent 21 October Guardian 21 October
Waste and Recycling
Toxic waste imports to UK increasing?
UK importation of hazardous waste "continues to be steady and could well be rising" , Greenpeace has claimed.
Unpublished figures from Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution (HMIP), Greenpeace says, indicate that 22,580 tons of toxic waste entered Britain in the first six months of this year.
This would represent a fall compared to the full-year figure for 1991, but Greenpeace claims that the actual level of imports is in fact much higher because HMIP's data collection is inadequate.
As evidence Greenpeace mentions the case of Humberside, where the county council has recorded toxic waste imports of 11,410 tons for the half year of 1992, compared to the HMIP's figure of 6,920 tons.
The imports originate mainly from Switzerland, Belgium, Germany and other European Community countries.
Greenpeace criticized the government for not doing enough to stop the trade in toxic waste, despite its espousal of the principles that developed countries should be "self-sufficient" in waste disposal and that waste should be disposed of "as near to source as possible" .
*To prevent Nigeria from becoming a dumping ground, the country's Federal Environmental Protection Agency (FEPA) has tightened regulations on the importation of toxic chemicals.
Henceforth importers will have to apply for licences.
Guardian 8 October Environment Business 21 October Radio Nigeria (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 1 October
Waste and Recycling
Evidence of German dumping in Eastern Europe
German firms are said to be dumping in Eastern Europe waste which it would be costly for them to dispose of in Germany itself, including radioactive uranium, used tyres and banned pesticides.
This claim comes from Greenpeace, which says that the most popular target countries are Albania, Romania, the Baltic states and the republics of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).
Under current German law, traders can export all types of waste if it is to be used for "commercial purposes" in the destination country.
This means that in effect waste can be exported with impunity.
At the same time the laws on waste disposal in Germany itself are among the strictest in the world.
The Greenpeace report cities evidence of German firms paying smugglers up to DM 1,500 per ton to transport waste to Eastern Europe.
This outlay represents around a fifth of what it would cost to dispose of the waste locally.
Two methods used by the smuggling firms are bribing local officials to allow them to dump waste in landfills and offering to build (often low-quality) incineration and energy-producing plants in destination countries in exchange for permission to burn their toxic waste there.
The report mentions one case of a man who tried to sell a plant which would convert rubbish into natural gas, and was only unmasked as a fraud at a late stage when it was shown that his scheme involved a chemically impossible process.
European 8-11 October
Waste and Recycling
Antipodean panel suggests plan for toxic waste
Australia and New Zealand should not build their own incinerator to dispose of toxic waste, but should instead develop a range of technologies, including portable systems, tailored to the particular properties of the waste.
This is the recommendation of an Independent Panel on Intractable Waste, which has submitted its report on the disposal of toxic waste to the Australia and New Zealand Environment and Conservation Council, the body which brings together the environment ministers of the two countries (including those of the Australian states).
The panel rejected the construction of a high-temperature incinerator in Australia on grounds of cost and public opposition.
It proposes a two-year ban on exports of toxic waste while the new technologies are being tested.
Subsequently, it believes, it would acceptable to export waste which could not be dealt with in Australia.
Australia's toxic waste became an international problem in September, when 18 tons from Western Australia were shunted around Europe until France agreed to arrange for their disposal [see ED 63].
New Scientist 7 November
Waste and Recycling
New carpet recycling process
An American company, Collins and Aikman, has developed a method of grinding up old carpets to produce synthetic wood.
The new process could make carpet recycling possible on a major scale; until now it has been laborious and expensive to separate out the component materials, which often include wool, nylon as well as latex.
The market for recycling carpets is potentially huge: millions of tons of carpets are dumped in Europe and North America every year.
In the new process, the carpet is granulated and then mixed and extruded with a catalyst.
The resulting material is then mixed with other waste plastics so as to produce a range of products, including chairs and tables, marine wood, toothbrush handles and weatherproof flooring.
At the moment the synthetic wood is two to three times more expensive than natural wood, but Collins and Aikman believes that the product can nevertheless be competitive because of the savings on incineration or dumping costs and because it lasts three to five times longer than wood.
The company is offering to recycle any vinyl-backed carpets free of charge.
Financial Times 4 November
Waste and Recycling
Plastic bags worth recycling
Recycling plastic bags is economically viable, according to a study by Nottingham University Consultants which compared the cost of recycling with making them from scratch.
Recycling also saves energy and produces less pollution.
The study calculated that, compared to recycling, the production of new polyethylene bags requires three times as much energy, consumes eight times as much water, generates twice as much carbon dioxide and nitrogen oxides and three times as much sulphur dioxide.
Recycling also saves 1.8 tons of oil for every ton of polyethylene.
Michael Henstock, author of the study, says these figures represent a "worst-case" scenario: the benefits of recycling may well be even greater.
New Scientist 7 November
Waste and Recycling
Paper recycling picks up
Recycling of paper and cardboard in Europe has been on the increase since 1989.
According to figures published in Le Monde, Denmark recycles nearly 85 per cent of its paper, well ahead of the United Kingdom, Germany, Italy and France, which recycle between 45 and 60 per cent.
The three major paper producers in northern Europe — Finland, Sweden and Norway — recycle only around 10 per cent of their paper.
Le Monde 21 October