

Agriculture & Food
SAFE report on biodiversity
British farmers are growing too few varieties of the main food crops, according to research by the Sustainable Agriculture, Food and Environment Alliance (SAFE).
In a report on biodiversity, entitled Bringing Rio Home: Biodiversity in our Food and Farming, SAFE shows that in 1992 three varieties accounted for more than half of all the seed sown of winter wheat, spring wheat, barley, oats, rye, sugar beet and rapeseed; the highest proportions were for spring wheat (86 per cent) and oats (77 per cent ).
The excessive reliance on a few varieties is making the countryside biologically uniform, and could lead to the proliferation of pests and diseases, according to the report.
Its author, Robin Jenkins, believes that"Agriculture should become more diverse.
This would produce safer food with greater reliability, increase consumer choice and make agriculture more environmentally friendly.
Wildlife would also benefit."
SAFE has called on the House of Commons Select Committee on Agriculture to establish the facts on agricultural biodiversity, identify the main threats to biodiversity, and assess the environmental and nutritional benefits which would follow from increased diversity.
It also calls on the government to act on the relevant commitments it made at the UNCED summit [see ED 59/60], and on the major supermarket chains to provide information on the biodiversity of the foods they stock.
SAFE information, 7 December
Agriculture & Food
Recommendations on gene experiments
The Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution, which advises the UK government, wants scientists to take personal responsibility for experiments involving the genetic modification of plants and animals.
The commission is concerned about the possible risks associated with releasing genetically altered organisms into the environment.
It suggests that only scientists with "relevant experience" be allowed to take charge of trials, and that a register of qualified scientists be drawn up.
It has criticized the government for not stressing the responsibilities of scientists in its draft safety guidelines on working with genetically modified organisms.
Independent 7 November
Agriculture & Food
Warnings on implications of gene patent
Greenpeace and other environmental groups have highlighted the serious dangers arising from the granting of patents on plants genetically engineered to resist herbicides.
The first such patent has recently been granted by the European Patent Office to a Belgian company for any crop resistant to the herbicide Basta.
Greenpeace is deeply concerned that this development will lead to monopoly control over genetic resources and an even greater dependence on herbicides.
Plant Genetic Systems, the company which is developing the herbicide-resistant crops, has made a deal with the Hoechst chemical company which gives the latter the right to exploit the patent on crops resistant to Basta, which is in fact one of Hoechst's own products.
Greenpeace says that farmers will thus be tied into an agricultural system dependent on chemicals by making it attractive for them to buy herbicides in tandem with resistant crops.
There is also a danger that the engineered crops will transfer the gene that makes them resistant to wild plants via pollen, which would force farmers to use ever stronger herbicides, with serious implications for the environment.
Independent 30 December
Agriculture & Food
Fears on irradiated food
Over 50 consumer and public-health organizations from across the European Community, working together as the Food Irradiation Network, have drawn attention to the confused situation concerning food irradiation since the introduction of the EC-wide single market.
From 1 January there are no restrictions on the movement of foods, included irradiated foods, within the EC.
But because EC ministers have not yet agreed a common regime on irradiated food, it can now be put on sale in countries which do not allow food irradiation (such as Germany and Luxembourg).
The Food Irradiation Network has written to all EC food ministers pointing out that the lack of appropriate testing arrangements and labelling provisions constitutes a threat to consumer choice.
The letter calls for a moratorium on irradiated food until (i) it can be controlled by means of tests carried out by hygiene and quality enforcement officers,(ii) agreement is reached on labelling,(iii) its consumption is shown to pose no threat to human health, and (iv) a positive need for this kind of food preparation is identified.
Food Commission press release 14 December
Agriculture & Food
Cork oaks succumbing to fungus
Cork oaks, whose bark is the source of commercial cork, are under attack from one of the world's most virulent plant diseases, a soil-dwelling fungus known as Phytophthora cinnamomi.
C.M. Brasier of the Alice Holt Lodge Forest Research Station has found the fungus, which attacks a plant's roots, in cork oaks in Portugal and Spain, the species' heartland.
Phytophthora cinnamomi is thought to have spread from New Guinea, largely through human activities, and is now attacking hundreds of species throughout the world, including chestnut and fruit trees in the North America, eucalyptus in Australia, and oaks in Eastern Europe.
Because the fungus is now so widespread, it is unlikely that it can be stopped with fungicides.
Instead, scientists are concentrating on breeding fungus-resistant varieties.
In his report Brasier also suggests that since the fungus is more active in warm soils, global warming may be accelerating its diffusion.
Washington Post 14 December
Agriculture & Food
Lower sulphur emissions reduce crop yields
Measures introduced since the 1970s to clean up industrial pollution have reduced levels of aerial deposits of sulphur — a trace element which plants need to grow — to such an extent that crop yields and quality are becoming affected, according to a British scientist.
Eric Evans, of the Department of Agriculture at the University of Newcastle, says that in many areas levels have fallen below the critical 20 kilogrammes per hectare necessary for healthy crop growth.
To counter the falling levels of atmospheric sulphur he advocates the use of sulphur fertilizers.
Scenes (Scottish Environment News) in October 1992
Conservation: Land
Parks plan to save European wildernesses
Some of Europe's last untouched wildernesses are to be preserved in a scheme to create 24 new natural parks.
The Ecological Bricks Initiative will create new parks in Finland, Poland, Germany, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Austria, Hungary, Albania and Bulgaria on unspoilt natural habits, many of them former military training grounds, now threatened by development.
The scheme grew out of the successful campaign to save the Thaya valley, on the Czech-Austrian border, from hydro-electric development.
So far 11 of the 24 parks have been established and it is hoped to have remaining areas protected by the end of 1994.
Some forty environmental organizations are taking part in the Ecological Bricks project, which has received financial assistance from the European Community (EC) and also from the World Wide Fund for Nature.
Areas covered by the plan include the Danube floodplain, woodlands on the Finnish-Russian border, the Biebrza marshes near the Polish-Belorussian border, the Bavarian forest in Germany, Austria's Lake Neusiedel, the Sava floodplain in Yugoslavia, Lake Scutari in Albania and the Nestos Delta of Bulgaria.
Each park will be bordered by a buffer zone where environmentally friendly farming will be encouraged.
East West Environment December 1992 — January 1993 The European 10-13 December
Conservation: Land
Europe's trees sicken
Nearly one in five of all trees in the European Community are severely damaged by the effects of drought and pollution; acid rain is believed to be the major cause of the damage.
The most critically affected European forests, according to a report by the World Wide Fund for Nature, are in the UK, Germany, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Poland, Lithuania and Bulgaria.
A survey by Germany's Union for the Environment and Nature Protection recently found that two-thirds of the country's trees were sick or dying from the effects of traffic and industrial fumes.
Atmospheric levels of sulphur dioxide, an important contributor to acid rain, have begun to fall in Western Europe, but in Eastern Europe remain a severe problem.
Worst of all are the Czech Republic and Slovakia, where 80 per cent of pine trees under 60 years old and almost 50 per cent of oak trees have been damaged by air pollution.
* 27 per cent of Germany's trees are unhealthy, 2 per cent more than last year, according to a report presented by Agriculture Minister Ignaz Kiechle.
Air pollution is still a major cause, he said: "Exposure to sulphur dioxide and nitrogen dioxides has fallen dramatically in the past decade, but forest ecosystems react only gradually." 
The European 12-15 November *New Scientist 21 November
Conservation: Land
Dutch forests dying
The Dutch government says a third of the country's trees are dying because of drought and soil acidification.
The number of diseased trees has doubled in the past year.
The government blames a combination of factors, including an increase in the number of insects and a dry summer, for the poor state of the country's 330,000 hectares of woodland.
The Nature and Environment pressure group claims, however, that the major cause of acidification is the high ammonia levels in animal waste generated by the cattle industry.
Farmers may have to reduce their herds by up to a quarter if they want to save the country's forest, the group says.
The European 12-15 November New Scientist 21 November
Conservation: Land
Logging threatens Siberia's Udege
A vast logging project in south-east Siberia is threatening the livelihood of the indigenous Udege people.
The South Korean conglomerate Hyundai plans to fell 300,000 hectares of forest in the Bikin river area and has not consulted the 2,000 Udege, who hunt and fish in the forest, Survival International reports.
Some groups have already lost their land to logging, lost their livelihood and now face severe problems, such as poverty, disease and alcoholism.
The Udege have received no support from the local administration in their efforts to stop the logging plans and have begun a peaceful blockade of areas where Hyundai has started work.
The Bikin river area is also home to about 40 of the 250 remaining Siberian tigers, regarded as sacred by the Udege.
Survival International November 1992
Conservation: Land
Recommendations on peatlands
A Commission of Inquiry into Peat and Peatlands set up by Plantlife, a plant conservation trust, has submitted its report to the House of Lords.
The commission makes a number of recommendations on the preservation of peatlands in Britain.
It calls on the relevant authorities to designate as Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) all remaining peat bogs with at least some primary vegetation and those damaged but with a potential for rehabilitation.
It urges the government to revoke all existing planning permissions for extracting peat.
And since extraction for horticulture currently presents the main threat to the bogs, it calls for a major initiative to encourage the use of peat-free growing media and soil conditions.
The report also summarizes the global value of peat bogs, their special plant and animal communities, the archaeological evidence preserved in peat, and the role of peatlands as a store of greenhouse gases.
SCENES 11/92
Conservation: Land
Concern over peatlands agreement
Conservationists have expressed concern over the future of Britain's peatlands because a deal aimed at preserving them agreed in January 1992 [see ED 55]has still not been signed and could be abandoned.
Under the agreement between English Nature and the Fisons chemical company, the country's main peat producer, around 8,000 acres of peat bogs would be saved from extraction in return for allowing the company to continue its operations in other areas.
English Nature, the government's official watchdog on nature conservation, was criticized at the time by environmental groups for entering into the deal with Fisons, and for allowing extraction of peat on a site of special scientific interest [see ED 57].
Fisons' horticulture division was put up for sale in April.
Conservationists claim that unless the deal is actually signed a new owner may not feel bound by it.
In the words of Duncan McLaren, of Friends of the Earth: "Undoubtedly the deal reduces the value of Fisons' peat assets and could discourage purchasers.
Obviously, if the company is sold before it is completed there is no guarantee a buyer would honour the agreement."
Research by Friends of the Earth showing that commercial exploitation of peatbogs is not sustainable has been endorsed by English Nature.
Describing the FoE reports, Do Not Disturb and The Global Status of Peatlands and their Role in Carbon Cycling, as a "valuable addition to our existing knowledge of this habitat" , English Nature said in a statement that: "In a commercial sense, bogs…are not a renewable resource.
Bogs are not at all renewable in the strict sense, because the unique historical archive stored in the past can never be replaced."
This view has also received support from the Joint Nature Conservation Committee and from the environmental directorate of the European Commission, although in the UK government itself the Department of the Environment failed to acknowledge receipt of the FoE reports.
Independent 24 December Earth Matters (Friends of the Earth) Spring 1993
Conservation: Land
Mine orders threaten UK countryside
Large areas of unspoilt British countryside are threatened by mineral exploitation, often because of mineral rights granted 30 or 40 years ago that have lain dormant, according to a report by the Royal Society for Nature Conservation.
The report says applications to mine at 652 new sites in England and Wales have been made this year.
Many of the applications result from the 1991 Planning & Conservation Act, which requires owners of mineral rights to register Interim Development Orders granted between 1943 and 1948.
These orders, valid into the next century, carried few conditions when granted and would not meet current environmental regulations.
Rare wildlife, national parks and villages are all threatened.
About 15 per cent of Northamptonshire, for example, is covered by quarrying rights granted in the 1950s and 1960s.
Guardian 7 December
Conservation: Land
Sewage sludge for British forests
Sewage sludge could be a valuable fertilizer for use in British forests, according to the Forests Authority.
The sludge contains large amounts of nitrogen and phosphates that can fertilize tree growth, although used incorrectly it can pollute and damage trees.
The authority has published guidelines for its safe use in forests.
About 80 per cent of British sewage sludge is dumped at sea, but this will be banned under a European convention that takes effect in 1998.
New Scientist 14 November
Conservation: Land
Solway marshes get protection
The Upper Solway flats and marshes, on the borders of England and Scotland, have been designated by the UK government as a special protection area under the EC wild birds directive and a wetland of international importance under the Ramsar Convention.
The 30,000 hectares of mudflats and marshes support 43,000 wildfowl and 79,000 waders in winter, including the entire population of Svalbard barnacle geese and important numbers of other species.
English Nature, the Countryside Commission and local farmers are co-operating on appropriate grazing of the marshes on the English side.
English Nature 30 November
Conservation: Species
SACIM agrees ivory trade plans
Four southern African states have agreed on measures to enable them to resume trading in ivory.
The four countries, Botswana, Malawi, Namibia and Zimbabwe, opposed the ban on ivory trading imposed by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), arguing that their well-managed and expanding elephant herds require culling and that a controlled trade in ivory is the best way to finance conservation and to allow local people to benefit from protecting wildlife.
The Southern Africa Centre for Ivory Marketing (SACIM), set up by the four countries, plans a range of measures to exclude poached ivory from the trade, including marking legally obtained ivory with a hologram, bar code and serial number.
A central database in Gaborone, Botswana, will hold information on tusks traded by the four countries, as well as setting quotas for ivory production.
The SACIM countries already hold stocks of ivory and Zimbabwe's national parks department says elephant numbers have become so large that it will have to start culling next year.
The Hwange national park alone is said to have 45,000 elephants: three times as many as the vegetation can support.
Between them the four countries have some 144,000 elephants.
New Scientist
Conservation: Species
Tigers threatened by poaching
Growing concern is being expressed about an upsurge in tiger poaching, fuelled by increased demand for tiger bones in the medicinal markets of China, Taiwan and Japan [see ED 61].
According to Peter Jackson, chairman of the cat specialist group of the World Nature Union: "Poaching could lead to the virtual extinction of the tiger in the next decade." 
Poaching has been on the increase in the Indian subcontinent since the mid-1980s, when stocks of tiger bone remaining from an officially sanctioned extermination campaign in China in the 1960s were exhausted.
About half the estimated 6,000 wild tigers in Asia live in India, Nepal, Bhutan and Bangladesh; only 30 or 40 remain in China.
Guardian 14 November
Conservation: Species
Taiwan, Singapore ban rhino horn sales
Taiwan and Singapore have both banned sales of rhinoceros horns and other rhinoceros products.
Taiwan is the world's largest consumer of rhinoceros horns, which are used to produce traditional remedies.
The ban on sale or display is backed by tough penalties, including a heavy fine and up to three years' imprisonment.
Campaigners are now calling on the government to destroy the country's stockpile of rhino horns, estimated at between five and 10 tonnes, or the equivalent of 2,000-4,000 dead rhinos.
Traders are reported to have been stockpiling the horns in the hope of higher prices should rhinos become extinct.
The world population of all five species is now fewer than 10,500 animals, with the rapid decline in numbers in the past 30 years put down largely to poaching.
The similar move by Singapore followed allegations that the country was becoming a centre for trade in endangered species.
BBC Wildlife January 1993 Central News Agency, Taipei, 19 November (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) International Herald Tribune, 22 November
Conservation: Species
Single market helps illegal animal trade
Controls on illegal trade in animals and plants will effectively disappear with the introduction of the European single market at the start of 1993.
Customs barriers within the EC will be dismantled throughout most of Europe, although the UK will retain passport controls for humans.
Environmentalists say illicit trade in species protected under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) is likely to enter the EC via countries such as Italy, Greece and Spain, which have the poorest record on animal protection.
All customs barriers will be removed from trade in some 20,000 species not covered by CITES rules, but for which trade is restricted, and in some cases banned, under the UK's Endangered Species (Import and Export) Act, which has no equivalent in most other European countries.
Restrictions on sales will provide protection in some countries, but this will be more difficult to police.
Guardian 2 December
Conservation: Species
Asian countries join CITES
Burma, Laos and Cambodia have announced that they are to join the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).
The Nation, Bangkok 31 October (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Conservation: Species
US agrees to speed up protection of species
A court victory for environmental groups in the US could lead to a doubling or tripling of the number of plant and animal species protected under the country's Endangered Species Act.
Since the act was passed in 1973 some 750 domestic species have been listed as threatened or endangered, but the time between the filing of a petition for a listing and a government decision has lengthened from two to three years.
It is estimated that over 30 species have become extinct while waiting for a listing.
The court ruling in a suit brought by the Fund for Animals and other groups against the Interior Department means that the department's Fish and Wildlife Service has agreed by September 1996 to propose for listing 400 species for which there is substantial evidence of the need for protection.
The service has also agreed to expedite final consideration of 900 species believed worthy of protection.
Perhaps most important is the Fish and Wildlife Service's recognition that it should take "a multispecies, ecosystem approach" to protecting plants and animals, rather than considering each species in isolation.
Washington Post 11 December
Conservation: Species
Stricter sea turtle protection
The US has strengthened protection for sea turtles by requiring shrimp fishermen to ensure that the turtles do not become trapped in their nets.
The fishermen will have to use turtle excluder devices in their nets, which allow turtles to escape before they drown.
Most fishermen operating in offshore waters will have to use the devices immediately; those fishing inshore or using smaller boats will have to use them within two years.
A 1990 study by the National Academy of Sciences found that shrimpers were causing the deaths of as many as 44,000 turtles each year.
Five species of sea turtle are designated as threatened or endangered.
Washington Post 2 December
Conservation: Species
Poachers after red deer antlers
Poachers in search of antlers are preying on red deer on Exmoor, according to local police sources.
About 40 stags are reported to have disappeared in recent months.
The new form of poaching has replaced the killing of deer for meat as the price of venison has dropped; a single set of antlers is reported to fetch several hundred pounds.
Independent 17 November
Conservation: Species
Spanish baboons go wild
Baboons have been found living in the wild in Spain's Cadiz province.
The colony are the survivors of 60 baboons which escaped from a safari park that closed 20 years ago.
Forty of the escapees were killed by local hunters but the remainder appear to have survived by hiding in inaccessible rocky areas and adapted to the local terrain, which is similar to their natural habitat in sub-Saharan Africa.
They were discovered by environmentalists doing a survey of the region's flora and fauna.
The local federation of ecologists, FEPG, hopes to win official protection for the baboons, who appear to have started to breed.
Previously, the Barbary apes of Gibraltar were the only colony of wild primates in Western Europe.
New Scientist 2 January
Conservation: Species
Bandar banned
A hunting trip by Saudi Arabia's Prince Bandar was stopped by environmental police in Niger after 55 bustard falcon carcasses were found.
Hunting is banned in Niger.
Independent 6 January
Conservation: Species
Court saves Pyrenean bears
French government plans to build a road tunnel through the Pyrenees have been blocked by a court ruling.
There had been fears that construction of the tunnel in the scenic Aspe valley, and the increased traffic it would bring, would threaten wildlife, including the 10 remaining Pyrenean bears [see ED 62, passim].
The administrative court in Pau ruled that the government had failed to comply with a 1985 European Community directive that stipulates that the environmental impact of large construction projects must be investigated.
The French government, facing a challenge from environmentalist parties in the forthcoming general elections, announced that it would not appeal against the decision.
The eight-kilometre Somport tunnel, which was to have received funds from the EC, would have cut driving times between France and Spain by two hours and would have been used by an estimated 1,000 trucks a day.
Work on other parts of the route, which is strongly supported by local politicians, is already well under way.
Guardian 3, 5 December, New Scientist 12 December
Conservation: Species
Canada bans beluga exports
Canada has banned the export of beluga whales caught in its waters.
The decision follows the death in a Chicago aquarium of two belugas caught a month earlier in Hudson Bay.
Le Monde 31 December
Conservation: Species
Airlines still carry wild birds
Major airlines are still transporting wild birds from the Far East to Europe, despite assurances to the contrary, according to the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB).
Investigations by the RSPB among wild bird traders in Hong Kong and China found that Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS) was used by many traders, despite the airline's claim that it will only carry captive bird species.
Other airlines mentioned included Alitalia, KLM, Thai Airways and Japan Airlines.
The RSPB has called for the prohibition of imports of wild birds into the EC.
Royal Society for the Protection of Birds information January 1993
Conservation: Species
Blackcaps fly north in winter
Blackcaps have begun wintering in the British Isles, instead of Spain, a change in migratory behaviour that scientists suggest is linked to global warming.
A study by ornithologists from Heidelberg University, published in the journal Nature, finds that blackcaps' migratory routes have changed dramatically in recent years, taking them 1,500 kilometres further north in winter.
The change may be due, the study says, to warmer winter conditions, or to the growing popularity of bird tables.
The change appears to be a genuine evolutionary development that has taken place with unusual rapidity.
Blackcaps wintering in Britain are genetically programmed to migrate north-northwest from Germany, where they spend the summer, rather than south-southwest to Spain as their ancestors would have done.
 "To our knowledge," the ornithologists say, "this is the first case in any vertebrate in which a drastic and recent change of behaviour has been documented and its genetic basis established." 
Independent 18 December
Conservation: Species
Hawks return as pesticide levels fall
As pesticide concentrations in the environment fall, birds of prey are returning to areas of eastern England for the first time in decades.
Widespread use of pesticides DDT, dieldrin and aldrin in the 1950s and 1960s led to the poisoning of many birds of prey and affected their reproduction.
Since these chemicals were banned, between 1963 and 1986, pesticide levels in the environment have been declining and the numbers of birds such as sparrowhawks, kestrels and herons have begun to recover.
The merlin population has yet to recover, because they are still affected by levels of PCBs, which are not easily broken down by the environment and are still leaking from industrial sites.
New Scientist 19 December
Conservation: Species
Waders reach record levels
More waders spent the winter of 1991/92 in British estuaries than ever before, according to the British Trust for Ornithology.
A total of 1.727 million birds was recorded, with almost 1 million of these at six major sites: the Wash, Ribble, Dee, Morecambe Bay, Humber and Thames, which each recorded more than 100,000 each.
These sites together recorded almost 100,000 more birds than the average for the past five years.
The most common species were the dunlin, oystercatcher, knot and lapwing.
British Trust for Ornithology 24 December
Conservation: Species
Pollutants spread whale "AIDS" 
Evidence is emerging of widespread deaths among whales and dolphins due to the collapse of their immune systems.
The epidemic, similar to human AIDS, is being linked to dumping of chemical pollutants in the oceans.
High concentrations of PCBs (poly-chlorinated biphenyls) and of related organo-halogens, which cause tumours, hormone imbalances, genetic deformities and immune system collapse in many species, are being blamed for events like the dolphin plague in the Mediterranean in 1991 and the death of half the bottle-nosed dolphin population on the US east coast in 1989.
Concentrations of PCBs in whales and dolphins have been found to be between five and 20 times the level that would classify them as toxic waste in the US.
According to whale scientist Dr Roger Payne, the toxins are passed from generation to generation through the mother's milk, with the toxin concentration increasing with each successive generation, eventually threatening the species with extinction.
Payne also expresses concern about the lack of research about the effects of organo-halogens on humans; abnormally high concentrations have been found to cause learning deficiencies.
Guardian 12 December
Conservation: Species
France and Italy set up dolphin haven
France and Italy have agreed to set up a sanctuary in which dolphins will be protected from drift-net fishing.
The sanctuary covers 6,600 square miles between France's Hy  res Islands, the northern tip of Corsica and Genoa in Italy.
Independent 13 November
Conservation: Species
Siberian forests under threat
Timber companies could destroy Siberia's forests within the next 40-50 years, according to research by the International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis.
A single state company in Usk-Ilimsk region, for example, is felling a forest the size of Switzerland.
The forests contain a fifth of the world's trees; their role in maintaining global climate stability, to be researched by the institute in co-operation with the Russian Academy of Sciences, may be greater than that of the Amazon rainforests.
The institute will also look at ways of harvesting timber without destroying the forests.
Russia has recently sold timber concessions to Japanese and Korean companies.
New Scientist 9 January
Conservation: Species
Forestry Commission submits last report
The Forestry Commission's (FC's) annual report for the year to March 1992, the last year before its reorganization as the Forest Enterprise and Forestry Authority, shows that private owners planted 10,781 hectares of new woodland and restocked 7,106 hectares during the year, aided by FC grants totalling £17.2 million.
The area of new planting, over 80% of which was in Scotland, was down by 9 per cent on the previous year.
The FC itself planted 2,999 hectares of new ground, all but 125 hectares of it in Scotland.
Timber sales generated an income for the FC of £84.8 million in 1991/92, with other operations bringing in £21.7 million.
Expenditure totalled £183 million.
* The first Caledonian Forest Reserve, at Glenmore Forest Park in Aviemore, has been opened, part of plans by the FC to regenerate native pinewoods in its care.
Fifteen reserves are to be established by 2000, covering 12,000 hectares of pine forest, loch, bog and mountain.
Work has already begun on felling alien species on the 750-hectare Glenmore reserve.
SCENES (Scottish Environment News) November 1992
Conservation: Species
Wild plant trade threatens rare species
A thriving and sometimes illegal trade in wild plants has been uncovered by a survey conducted by TRAFFIC (Trade Records Analysis of Flora and Fauna in Commerce).
The survey aimed to determine the extent of trade in wild-collected plants in Europe and identify conservation problems; nurseries, plant traders and retail outlets in 10 countries were visited.
The survey found that the vast majority of plants on sale were artificially propagated but that there was also a large-scale trade in wild plants.
Most of this trade is legal and involves species not threatened with extinction, although conservationists feel better controls are needed.
The survey also found, however, that there is a smaller specialist trade in plants such as cacti and orchids, for which collectors will pay large sums for specimens collected in the wild.
This trade may be driving some species to extinction.
Rare species of cacti whose import is banned under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) were found on sale in four European countries.
A nursery in France was prosecuted for being in possession of a rare orchid.
TRAFFIC and the World Wide Fund for Nature are publishing a guide to the trade to help consumers to make responsible plant-buying choices.
WWF News Winter 1992/93
Conservation: Species
Bulb trade threatens wild flowers
International trade in garden plants is damaging habitats and threatening some species with extinction.
Conservation charity Plantlife estimates the trade in British wild bulbs is worth £1 million a year; it believes wild bulbs are exported in bulk to the Netherlands, centre of the international trade, and re-exported for retail sale in the UK.
The World Wide Fund for Nature has appealed to buyers to boycott plants dug from the wild on sale in garden centres or nurseries.
Independent 9 December
Economics & Industry
Over one third of World Bank projects "failures" according to internal report
A leaked World Bank internal report shows that more than one-third of Bank-funded projects completed in 1991 were regarded as failures by the Bank's own staff.
The report, Effective implementation: key to development impact, was sent to Bank chairman Lewis Preston.
It looked at 1,800 projects in 113 countries, for which the Bank had lent US$138,000 million, and found that 37.5 per cent of the projects were regarded as failures, compared to 15 per cent in 1981 and 30 per cent in 1989.
In addition, 30 per cent of the projects in their fourth or fifth year of implementation were said already to have serious problems.
Worst affected sectors were water and sanitation, with a 43 per cent failure rate, followed by agriculture (42 per cent).
The Bank's record was particularly bad in some African countries: only 26.3 per cent of loans made to Nigeria were considered successful and 34.8 per cent in Tanzania; Uganda, however, had a 70.2 per cent success rate.
The report contains comments from policymakers in borrowing countries, much of it criticizing Bank officials for ignoring local input while implementing policies decided at Bank headquarters.
Bank staff appeared more interested in meeting lending targets than in ensuring successful implementation, it suggested.
The report provides additional evidence for critics of the Bank's failure to assess fully the environmental impact of projects such as road and dam construction and timber management schemes.
The Bank has quadrupled its investment in environmental projects over the past year, from US$404 million to US$1,600 million, but critics charge that the money is being used to make projects look green rather than cancelling bad projects, which Bank officials are said to be reluctant to do.
Guardian 6 November
Economics & Industry
Taxpayers pay for banks' bad debts
British banks have been granted some £2,250 million in tax relief on bad loans to developing countries, according to official figures.
By comparison, only £65 million in debt cancellation has been granted to developing country borrowers under the British government's "Trinidad terms" , its main debt relief programme.
The total UK overseas aid budget in 1991/92 was £1,800 million.
Melissa Le Marchant of Friends of the Earth commented: "These figures reveal how deplorable government action on Third World debt has been.
There must be a major government-led initiative for large-scale debt cancellation.
The rainforests and the world's poorest people are paying the terrible price of debt repayments while the banks report profits."
The need for developing countries to generate export surpluses to service their debts has been identified as a major cause of environmentally destructive policies such as exploitation of the rainforests.
Total Third World debt rose to £956,000 million in 1992, according to the World Bank.
Friends of the Earth information 26 December
Economics & Industry
Timber firm wins Green Con award
Friends of the Earth (FoE) has awarded its "Green Con of the Year Award" for 1992 to Meyer International, owner of the Jewsons chain of builders' merchants, for attempting to persuade the public that the timber trade has a marginal or even beneficial role in the battle to save the world's forests.
The "Green Con" awards were set up in 1989 to highlight bogus claims to environmental worthiness made by business.
Meyer's corporate publications had claimed that the timber industry helped to slow global climate change, provided economic benefits to developing countries and had a minor role in the destruction of tropical forests compared to those played by farmers and population growth.
Tony Juniper, tropical rainforest campaigner at FoE, said that: "Meyer has used public concern over the destruction of the Earth's forests as a marketing opportunity.
The company's attempts to mislead the public simply highlight how it profits by wrecking one of the Earth's greatest natural treasures."
Friends of the Earth 18 December
Economics & Industry
Animal tests on the rise
Use of animals in experiments in the UK increased in 1991 for the first time in 15 years.
In all 3,164,908 animals were used in tests that year.
The increase is said by industry insiders to reflect demand for environmentally safer products.
Julia Fentem, scientific liaison officer of the Fund for the Replacement of Animals in Medical Experiments (Frame), says that manufacturers have to test new versions of existing products, such as detergents that have been made phosphate-free.
She expresses particular concern about the breeding of animals solely for experimental use, including animals with genetic alterations.
Although recognizing that there are no realistic alternatives to some tests involving animals, Fentem says there are many animal tests for which alternatives do exist.
The European Commission recently voted to ban tests of cosmetics on animals by 1998, but only if alternatives exist.
Tests on cosmetics in the UK fell by 30 per cent in 1991, part of a continuing downward trend.
The Independent 9 November
Energy
Environmental costs of fuels compared
Oil- rather than coal — emerges as the dirtiest fuel in a comparative study on the environmental costs of energy sources carried out by the Centre for Social and Economic Research on the Global Environment (CSERGE).
Commissioned by the Department of Energy (before it was merged with the Department of Trade and Industry), the report, entitled "The Social Cost of Fuel Cycles" , draws on existing information to calculate money values for the non-market costs of fuels.
Thus quantified, the environmental cost of oil comes to 5.56p per kilowatt-hour (kWh), with corrosion and damage to buildings accounting for more than half the total and damage to crops from pollution for just under a fifth; "old" coal burned in conventional power stations without emission controls has a cost of 5.00p/kWh; "new" coal 1.18p/kWh; combined heat and power (CHP) stations 0.45p/kWh; nuclear pressurized-water reactors (PWR) between 0.32p and 0.37p/kWh (not including effects on plants and animals); and solar, wind and hydroelectric power between 0.04 and 0.07p/kWh (not including visual impact or disruption caused by construction of dams, etc).
Financial Times 12 December
Energy
Gabcikovo Dam developments
As predicted by environmentalists, the damming of the Danube at Gabcikovo, part of a huge hydroelectric project sponsored by the Slovak government, has had a devastating impact on the local environment.
And despite negotiations in various forums, the diplomatic efforts to resolve the dispute over the project have failed to bear fruit, not least because of the uncertainty surrounding the dissolution of the Czechoslovak federation.
[For background information on the dispute, see ED64.]
The diversion of the Danube into a new canal in October caused the deaths of thousands of fish and extensive damage to riverside vegetation.
But the most devastating effect has been the reduction of the water table.
The wells on which most villages in the region depend have run dry, causing a serious water shortage and a crisis for farmers.
At the suggestion of the European Community, which had been asked to mediate by the Czechoslovak and Hungarian governments, a panel of experts has been set up to assess the situation.
According to press reports, the experts are trying to work out a compromise solution under which the Danube's water would be divided between the old river bed and the new canal.
They cannot agree on the exact division, however.
Observers have pointed out that the Gabcikovo power plant could only be economically viable if a substantial amount of water is diverted.
A further complication arose in late November when a sharp rise in the Danube's flow (up to three times the normal rate) caused severe flooding and extensive damage to the dam site.
The local project manager had warned of the danger because the partially completed new barriers would not be able to cope with the increased flow.
Construction work had been halted a week earlier in line with EC demands.
New Scientist 5 December Financial Times 7 November CTK and MTI news agency reports (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 5 November — 27 November
Energy
Orimulsion plan put on hold
National Power (NP), Britain's largest energy-generating company, has shelved a plan to use orimulsion at a power station in Pembroke, Wales.
A mixture of heavy oil and water produced in Venezuela, orimulsion has been described by environmentalists as "the world's dirtiest fuel" because of its high sulphur content.
NP had applied to Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution (HMIP) for permission to burn orimulsion without installing equipment for removing sulphur dioxide.
The inspectorate told the company it would be unlikely to give authorization under those conditions.
After some consideration NP then decided to withdraw the application.
A spokeswoman for Friends of the Earth described the withdrawal as a "victory for public pressure and the environmental groups" .
But NP subsequently denied that it had cancelled the plans and said it was merely reviewing its options.
Independent 23 December
Energy
Low targets for renewable energy
The Renewable Energy Advisory Group, set up to advise the government, has recommended that Britain aim to produce 1,500 megawatts of energy from renewable sources by the year 2000.
The target has been widely criticized as too low.
Most environmental groups and renewable-energy experts agree that a target of at least double this amount is not unrealistic, and in April 1992 the House of Commons Energy Select Committee recommended a target of 3,000-4,000 megawatts.
The energy campaigner of Friends of the Earth, Simon Roberts, commented: "This puny target says" don't bother"to renewable energy developers.
It represents a failure of ambition and imagination".
The group expresses support for the introduction of a levy on electricity consumers to finance renewable-energy projects.
Independent 7 November
Environmental Politics
Rise in US fuel taxes proposed
A major overhaul of US environmental policies is recommended in a report published by the National Commission on the Environment.
The report, Choosing a Sustainable Future, is expected to carry considerable weight with the Clinton administration; several members of the team responsible for preparing it are close to the new president.
The report argues that bold measures to protect the environment are compatible with long-term economic growth and a necessary ingredient in a healthy sustainable economy.
The report's recommendations include: an increase in the federal gasoline tax of 20 cents a gallon each year for five years; a carbon tax to diminish global warming; more US assistance for overseas development and efforts to limit population growth; tax and other incentives for environmentally sensitive technology, and development of a national environmental strategy.
Washington Post 10 December
Environmental Politics
French Green alliance threatens Mitterrand
France's two Green parties, Les Verts and Génération Ecologie (GE), have formed an alliance to fight the March general elections.
The parties will field joint candidates in all 577 constituencies.
The alliance is a blow to the ruling Parti Socialiste of President François Mitterrand, which had been hoping for an electoral alliance with the Green parties.
The Green alliance hopes to win 30-40 seats, most of which it would take from sitting Socialist deputies.
and is forecast to take 15 per cent of total votes.
GE is headed by former environment minister Brice Lalonde and was set up with Mitterrand's encouragement, but Lalonde has increasingly distanced himself from the government in recent months, criticizing Socialist policy on the environment.
The alliance is the product of months of negotiations between the two parties, which fielded rival candidates in the regional elections last March.
Then they found that neither party stood a chance of winning seats as rivals, but that the regional distribution of their supporters made it possible to share out constituencies without drawing up a common platform.
Guardian 5 November Le Monde 13, 17 November
Environmental Politics
Kenyan Green party formed
A new environmental party, Green Africa Party, has been registered in Kenya.
The party chairman, Godfrey M'Mwereria, an environmentalist and former lecturer at Kenyatta University, said he would contest the forthcoming presidential elections, as well as standing for the parliamentary seat of Tigania in Meru district.
The party planned to field candidates for other seats in parliament.
The party's symbol is a tree and its colour green.
Kenya Broadcasting Corporation 31 October (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
Election success for Slovene Greens
The Greens of Slovenia (Zeleni Slovenije"ZS), one of the select band of European environmentalist parties represented in parliament, won five of the 90 seats and 3.7 per cent of the vote in the country's first general election since independence, held on Dec. 6, 1992.
The party was founded in June 1989 but Green activity in Slovenia goes back at least 20 years, centring on issue-oriented protests, notably over the nuclear plant at Krsko.
The Greens had eight members in the old republican assembly elected in April 1990 when Slovenia was still part of Yugoslavia, and when the party's pacifist orientation made it an active participant in the nationalist, anti-communist Democratic Opposition.
Embassy of Slovenia, London, December 1992
Environmental Politics
Green "by appointment" 
 "By appointment" warrants awarded by the Prince of Wales will in future comply with a set of environmental criteria.
The first warrants awarded on this basis were to be announced at the end of 1992.
Companies seeking the Prince's warrant will have to show that they are developing an environmental policy and are willing to carry out an internal environmental review and to set green targets, to be reviewed annually.
The Queen, Queen Mother and Duke of Edinburgh, who also issue warrants, have yet to follow the Prince's lead.
Green Magazine December 1992
Environmental Politics
UNEP marks 20th anniversary
The UN Environment Programme (UNEP) marked the 20th anniversary of its foundation on 15 December 1992.
The first UN organization to have its headquarters in a developing country (Nairobi, Kenya), UNEP was established at a time when the need to safeguard the environment from the impact of economic and population growth was not generally recognized.
Writing in a report published to mark the 20th anniversary, Mostafa Tolba, the organization's secretary-general since 1975, complains that apathy about the condition of the environment persists and that there is a lack of political will to tackle serious environmental problems, despite the growth of awareness among the general public.
Le Monde 16 December
Global Warming
Sun's cycles not main cause of warming
Two studies on the link between solar activity and climate change have concluded that the influence of variations in the sun's brightness, which is known to have contributed to climate changes in the past, is far less than that of manufactured greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide, methane and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
Some scientists have pointed to a recent brightening of the sun as an important contributory factor to global warming.
But studies by teams from the University of East Anglia and the University of Illinois put this suggestion into perspective.
The East Anglia team found that solar and climatic variations since 1750 can only be correlated by including the growing influence of the greenhouse effect.
Solar changes were the main cause from 1750 to 1850, but the greenhouse effect has been dominant in recent decades.
The Illinois team reached broadly similar conclusions.
It also points out, however, that if a significant part of global warming this century is indeed due to increased solar activity, then the greenhouse effect may be weaker than previously thought.
They suggest that forecasts of warming may have to revised downwards.
New Scientist 5 December
Global Warming
Maldive islands evacuated
The government of the Maldives has decided to evacuate five small islands threatened by submersion.
The archipelago of the Maldives in the Indian Ocean consists of some 1,200 coral islands, of which around 200 are inhabited.
Erosion and rising sea levels are now posing a serious danger to the lowest-lying islands.
Le Monde 5 January
Global Warming
Malaria "spreading due to warming" 
Global warming may be contributing to the spread of malaria to regions where it was previously not common or endemic, according to the World Health Organization (WHO).
The highland regions of most of Africa, South Asia and Southeast Asia are currently too cold for malaria to flourish, but WHO predicts they may become vulnerable if global warming continues.
The parasite and mosquitoes which carry the disease need a certain temperature to survive.
Global warming may have been a contributory factor in the outbreak of a malaria epidemic in the highlands of Madagascar in 1988 which killed 25,000 people.
Average temperatures in the region have risen by about one degree celsius in the last 30 years.
Green Magazine January 1993
Global Warming
UK policy document unveiled
The government has published a discussion document on climate change which sets out a series of options on how emissions of greenhouse gases can be reduced.
As provided for by the international Climate Change Convention, the government is committed to stabilizing carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000.
The government predicts that on current trends carbon emissions will rise from 160 million tons to 170 million tons in the 1990s.
This means that savings of around 10 million tons will have to be found to meet the target.
Options outlined in the document include introducing a carbon tax on fossil fuels, increasing petrol prices, introducing road pricing in town centres, promoting energy efficiency, and forcing electricity suppliers to generate a proportion of energy from renewable sources.
The document has been criticized by environmentalists for merely offering suggestions and not setting out proposals for action.
Andrew Warren, the director of the Association for Energy Conservation, commented that the document contained no new ideas and "could have been written several years ago" .
It was vital that "this consultation exercise is followed by the swift introduction of new programmes designed to cut energy waste" , he said.
Independent 15 December Financial Times 15 December New Scientist 19-26 December
Nuclear Power
Plutonium ship heads home
Loaded with 1.7 tons of highly toxic plutonium, the Japanese freighter Akatsuki Maru set off from Cherbourg, France, on 7 November to return to Japan.
Following international outrage at the risks of transporting the highly toxic cargo [see ED 63 and 64], the Japanese government promised that the ship would remain at least 200 nautical miles from the coasts of other countries.
The route was officially kept secret, but a Greenpeace ship shadowed the freighter through the Atlantic Ocean and around the Cape of Good Hope.
It then crossed the Indian Ocean and rounded Australia and arrived at the small purpose-built port of Tokai northeast of Tokyo in early January.
Greenpeace claimed its ship had been rammed off the coast of France by a Japanese warship escorting the shipment.
International Herald Tribune 9 November Guardian 9 November, 5 January Independent 5 January
Nuclear Power
Sellafield: discharge limits
Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution (HMIP) has set out new limits for radioactive discharges from the Sellafield nuclear processing plant.
Final recommendations will be made to the government after a period of public consultation.
The inspectorate claims that the new limits will lead to significantly lower discharges into the atmosphere and the Irish sea.
The limits are indeed stricter than those in place today, but they are also higher than actual current discharges.
Friends of the Earth, Greenpeace and other environmental groups have sharply criticized the proposals because they leave British Nuclear Fuels (BNFL), the plant's operator, the option of increasing discharges without breaking the law.
They argue that the HMIP should insist on actual cuts in discharges rather than on reducing maximum permissible levels.
The new limits also cover the controversial Thermal Oxide Reprocessing Plant (THORP), which is due to open in 1993 and will handle spent uranium fuel from decommissioned Magnox reactors.
Its operation is expected to produce a major increase in radioactive discharges.
The public consultation period, due to end in mid January, was extended by two weeks after BNFL had to amend its application when an error in its calculations of radioactive discharges from the site came to light.
The company claimed that the overall impact of the revised figures was small.
Patrick Green, radiation campaigner of Friends of the Earth, commented that"that is probably correct.
But it does show that they have not got a clue what has come out of their chimney stacks in the past".
Independent 17 November, 5 January Guardian 17 November, 8 January Financial Times 8 January
Nuclear Power
Report on Sellafield cancer risks
A new report has confirmed earlier findings of an above-average incidence of leukaemia and other blood cancers among children living near Sellafield.
The study provides new evidence to support the conclusions of a 1984 report, covering a twenty-year period from 1963-83, which showed that the higher incidence of disease was unlikely to be due to chance.
The study's own research spanning the years 1983-90 produced similar results.
The study, by three university-based research centres, concludes cautiously that "the accumulation of further data" since the publication of the Black report in 1984 suggests that chance "is not the correct explanation" .
It does not offer another explanation, however.
It also states that the findings do not support or detract from the Gardner report in 1990, which found that cancers occurred in children whose fathers had been exposed to high levels of radiation before the child was conceived.
Independent 8 January
Nuclear Power
Sellafield "poor site" for repository
An independent consultancy, Environmental Resources, has strongly criticized the selection of a site near Sellafield as a possible underground nuclear waste repository.
Its report is the latest in a series commissioned by Cumbria county council to evaluate a proposal put forward by UK Nirex, the nuclear waste disposal company [see also ED 63 and 64].
The report says that the site does not meet the criterion laid down in 1976 by the Institute of Geological Sciences for the disposal of radioactive waste, which requires the hydrogeology of a site to be "simple and determinable" .
Using Nirex's own figures, the report concludes that groundwater contaminated by the radioactive waste could reach the surface within 300 years, not the tens of thousands of years which the company has claimed.
There may be a geological fault at the site which could carry water to the surface even more quickly.
The report also criticizes Nirex for seeking to rush through its proposals without proper public consultation and expert examination.
In response Nirex declared that "There is no scientifically valid basis for concluding that Sellafield is a poor site" .
Independent 8 January Financial Times 8 January
Nuclear Power
Russian warships still dumping
According to a statement by a Russian government commission, Russian warships are still dumping radioactive waste in the seas off the northern and eastern coasts despite official bans.
This had been "state policy" in the former Soviet Union, according to the commission, but now "it is being done in violation of bans imposed by supervisory bodies" .
The commission does point out, however, that "due to inadequate facilities for removing radionuclides from water, it would be technically difficult immediately to discontinue this form of waste disposal" .
The government is currently considering building facilities for processing liquid radioactive waste and other measures to end dumping at sea by 1995.
Interfax news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 30 December
Nuclear Power
Aid to Eastern Europe delayed
European Community officials have admitted that only around a third of the funds allocated in 1991 and 1992 to help Easter European countries to improve safety at their nuclear power plants has actually been spent.
The delays appear to have been due to administrative confusion and a lack of political will.
Increasingly concerned about the risk of a major nuclear accident in the region, France, Germany, Britain and several other EC countries are now pressing for stronger action.
The International Atomic Energy Authority (IAEA) has identified 26 plants in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union which pose serious risks.
Their ageing reactors suffer from basic design defects in the cooling and containment systems, staff are often poorly trained, and the acute shortage of electricity is increasing pressure to boost production and neglect safety.
European 17-20 December
Nuclear Power
Update: Leaks in England and Russia, safety breaches in Ukraine,
Kozloduy reopened A major leak at the Sellafield nuclear plant in northwestern England in September [see ED 63]was spotted only through "luck" after detector equipment failed to notice it.
The independent Nuclear Installations Inspectorate (NII) has expressed serious concern that there appeared to be no "lines of defence" left after the failure of the instruments, and has insisted on the installation of new equipment and a new system of alarms.
Radioactive water has leaked into a reservoir from a nuclear power plant near Yekaterinburg in Russia.
Senior managers told a press conference that the accident posed no danger to people or the environment.
A parliamentary commission in Ukraine has uncovered gross violations of safety regulations at the Pivdennoukrainsk nuclear plant.
According to Volodymyr Yavorivsky, the head of the commission, automatic safety systems were switched off on three occasions in the past year (reputedly in order to boost power production).
The safety breaches were similar to those which led to the Chernobyl accident in 1986.
Following a major overhaul and reconstruction, the fourth reactor of the Kozloduy plant in Bulgaria has been recommissioned.
It had been shut down in 1991 after an International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) report said it was in "poor condition" [see ED 48].
Independent 19 November ITAR-TASS news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 28 December Financial Times 1 December BTA news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 2 November
Nuclear Power
Armenia to reopen reactor in earthquake zone
The Armenian government has announced plans to reopen the country's nuclear power station, situated near the border with Turkey in an area of seismic instability and closed due to public pressure following the earthquake of 1989.
The decision came in response to an acute fuel shortage which worsened during December.
Many parts of the country, including the capital Yerevan, were without heating and lighting; schools and hospitals were closed and public transport was severely restricted.
The shortages were primarily a consequence of an Azerbaijani blockade — itself a result of the territorial dispute over Nagorno-Karabakh.
Pipelines bringing Turkmen gas to Armenia via Azerbaijan were closed; and gas supplies from Russia via Georgia were also down by a third, due to a combination of pressure from Azerbaijan, pilfering, and local disruption.
According to the ITAR-TASS news agency, Armenia was receiving less than 4 million cubic metres of gas per day — about half its usual daily requirement.
Azeri pressure was also said to be behind Turkey's decision not to go ahead with deliveries of electricity amounting to 30-35 Mw per day, which had been due to start on Dec. 1.
ITAR-TASS news agency 6 & 24 December (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Independent 15 December Le Monde 26 December Guardian 31 December
Nuclear Power
UK quits fast reactor research
The Energy Minister, Tim Eggar, has announced Britain's withdrawal from the European Fast Reactor (EFR) nuclear research programme (in which France and Germany are also partners).
The government would end its support for the programme, amounting to some £13 million annually, in March 1993 because a "fast-breeder reactor was unlikely to become commercially viable until 2030 at the very earliest" , he told the House of Commons.
The decision ends British involvement in the development of fast-breeder reactors, which unlike conventional reactors "breed" their own plutonium fuel.
Successive governments have invested billions of pounds since the 1950s in research on the technology, in which Britain was the world leader for many years.
Some experts believe that the fast-breeder represents a key advance which will realize nuclear power's full potential.
But others argue that, with uranium and plutonium supplies remaining plentiful for the foreseeable future, it is an unnecessary development and that research into nuclear fusion would be more fruitful.
Independent 19 November Financial Times 19 November
Nuclear Power
Japanese ruling on plant locations
The Japanese Supreme Court has ruled that in principle citizens cannot challenge government decisions concerning the siting of nuclear power plants through the courts.
Having considered two cases (one of them going back more than 25 years), it upheld verdicts in lower courts and ruled that in view of the complex scientific issues involved, the government was best placed to decide on sites and to assess their environmental impact.
The courts could only intervene if the authorities' decisions could be shown to lack "reasonable foundation" , it declared.
Le Monde 3 November
Ozone Layer
Ozone levels at historic low
Ozone concentrations in the atmosphere above northern Europe, Russia and Canada were 12 per cent below normal in winter and spring 1992, the lowest level in 35 years of continuous monitoring, according to the World Meteorological Organization.
Ozone levels over the South Pole were also the lowest ever, and 50 per cent destruction of the ozone layer was reported above populated areas of southern Argentina and Chile.
The figures give added weight to fears of the development of a hole in the ozone layer over the Arctic.
A report in the journal Nature by a group of British scientists predicts that a doubling of carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere, which is expected in the next century, could lead to 100 per cent destruction of ozone in the lower stratosphere over the Arctic and northern Europe.
Ozone holes have been opening in the Antarctic each September for the past 15 years.
Different atmospheric conditions in the northern hemisphere would afford some protection, but far larger populations would be at risk of exposure to dangerous ultraviolet light.
* Use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) by British industry, mainly for refrigeration, air conditioning and fire extinguishers, rose by 5 per cent between 1986-89, according to Friends of the Earth.
At the same time, changing consumer habits cut use of CFCs in aerosols by 50 per cent.
Only 13 per cent of available CFC refrigerant was being recovered from domestic fridges in 1991, according to a survey of local authorities.
Financial Times 15 November Independent 19 November Guardian 19 November New Scientist 28 November *Green Magazine January 1993
Ozone Layer
Aircraft threat to ozone layer
The effects of the burning of aviation fuel on the ozone layer may be much worse than feared, according to recent research by Dr Ulrich Schumann of the German Research Institute for Air and Space Travel.
The study shows that on the North Atlantic air route, the world's busiest, 70-80 per cent of aviation fuel, a much higher proportion than previously thought, is burnt in the lower stratosphere, where pollution is known to affect the ozone layer.
 "The lower stratosphere is the really crucial area as far as the ozone layer is concerned," commented Dr John Pyle of the European Ozone Research Co-ordinating Unit in Cambridge.
"While unprecedented measures are being taken to curb CFCs, scientists studying the effects of stratospheric flights and their increasing frequency are still starved of research funds.
There's a very important environmental issue here and the aerospace industry is extremely concerned — or should be."
Guardian 18 December
Ozone Layer
EC brings forward CFC ban
European Community environment ministers have agreed to bring forward by one year, to January 1995, the date for eliminating the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and carbon tetrachloride.
The decision puts the EC ahead of other signatories of the Montreal Protocol, which agreed in November to phase out these chemicals by January 1996.
The ministers also agreed to phase out 85% of production of these chemicals by 1994.
Guardian 16 December
Pollution: Air
UK acid rain maps "misleading" 
The British government's official maps of ecological damage caused by acid rain, to be published in spring 1993, present a misleading picture, according to English Nature, the government's official nature conservation adviser.
The maps will be used to show that current plans to reduce sulphur dioxide emissions from power stations will meet international commitments.
A national survey has been conducted to show the sensitivity of particular soils to acid fallout and the degree by which the fallout will have to be reduced to end damage to soils and vegetation calculated.
But, by lumping the survey's one-square-kilometre test areas into larger 20-kilometre square units, areas of high sensitivity are being ignored, according to Keith Bull of the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, which conducted the survey.
These areas include sites of special scientific interest in the south of England, such as the New Forest and Ashdown Forest.
Removing these areas of high sensitivity will make targets for reduction of sulphur dioxide emissions easier to reach.
These targets are due to be set during negotiations for a "sulphur protocol" to be added to the UN Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution.
The UK is committed to reducing sulphur dioxide emissions to 60% of the 1980 level by 2003.
Emissions fell by 25 per cent between 1980-85 but have remained stable since.
* Some 47 per cent of British soils, vegetation and surface water will still be at risk from acid rain early in the next century, despite the planned 60 per cent cut in sulphur dioxide emissions, according to research conducted for Friends of the Earth by consultancy Earth Resources.
The estimates contrast with the UK government's figure of 8 per cent, the main reason for the difference being that the government does not include vulnerable areas unless they are the dominant ecosystem in a standard grid of 100 square kilometres.
** A report by Scottish National Heritage, English Nature and the Countryside Council for Wales shows that 25 per cent of the area of the UK's sites of special scientific interest (SSIs) have been severely damaged by acid fallout from power stations, industry and vehicle exhausts.
The effects are worst in upland granite areas, where peaty soils have little potential to resist the acidity.
New Scientist 5 December *New Scientist 16 January **SCENES (Scottish Environment News) November 1992
Pollution: Air
Scottish benzene levels
High levels of benzene in the air in Scottish cities have been identified in a survey by Friends of the Earth (Scotland).
Levels of 14.2 parts per billion (ppb) were found in Glasgow, 9.3 ppb in Edinburgh and 4.8 ppb in Aberdeen.
Benzene, known to be a cause of leukemia, is added to unleaded petrol to maintain engine performance.
Standards for exposure to benzene are expected by the UK government to be set in 1993: a level of 3 ppb is under consideration, although according to the World Health Organization there is "no known safe threshold dose" .
SCENES (Scottish Environment News) October 1992
Pollution: Air
Russia's environmental problems mount
The latest report on the state of the environment from Russia's Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources shows the appalling pollution problems created by the country's industries.
Fifty million people breathe air containing more than 10 times the permitted level of pollutants; 60 million more breathe in five times the permitted level of pollutants.
Norilsk, a metal smelting centre in eastern Siberia, has the most polluted air: 2.34 million tonnes of pollutants were pumped into the city's air in 1988.
Moscow comes next with over 1.11 million tonnes.
The report also details severe pollution of water resources and the still greater problem of radioactive wastes, much of which was dumped in ordinary waste tips during the 1950s and 1960s.
Moscow has some 80 old tips, some of which contain radioactive waste and have been built on.
An unpublished report prepared for the Supreme Soviet in 1990 by a commission of independent experts states that 437,000 people have been affected by a series of accidents and contamination at the nuclear weapons production plant at Kyshtym in the southern Urals over the past 45 years.
More than 930 local people in the Techa River area, where nuclear waste was dumped in the 1950s, are suffering from radiation sickness.
New Scientist 2 January
Pollution: Air
Polluted "megacities" listed
Mexico City has the most polluted air of any of the world's largest cities, according to a report by the World Health Organization (WHO) and UN Environment Programme.
Levels of sulphur dioxide, carbon dioxide, lead, airborne dirt and ozone in Mexico City are more than double WHO recommended levels.
The report looks at 20 "megacities" with populations of more than 10 million.
London, New York and Tokyo have the least air pollution.
Traffic fumes are the biggest cause of air pollution in nearly half the cities.
Cairo and Karachi have particularly high lead levels, Los Angeles, Sao Paulo and Tokyo have serious ozone problems and airborne dirt is a problem in 12 of the cities.
* A first stage smog alert was ordered in Mexico City in late December.
Factories were ordered to cut production levels and road repairs were halted in an effort to cut traffic jams.
Ozone levels were recorded which were well above the level which is considered dangerous; the danger level was exceeded on 10 days in 1992, compared to only six in 1991.
Financial Times 2 December *International Herald Tribune December 24-25
Pollution: Air
Bhopal accident due to "sheer negligence" 
Safety controls were poor at the Union Carbide plant in Bhopal, India, at the time of the 1984 gas leak that killed 3,000 people, according to documents presented to an Indian court.
The documents were presented by India's Central Bureau of Investigation to the court in Bhopal hearing charges of culpable homicide against Union Carbide, its Indian subsidiary and their executives.
Adequate safety measures stipulated by the Indian government were not in place at the time of the accident, according to the documents, which state that the accident was due to "sheer negligence" .
Union Carbide admits "moral responsibility" for the accident but blames sabotage.
No compensation has yet been paid out to the victims (see ED 63).
Financial Times 12 November
Pollution: Water
UK convicted on nitrate levels
The European Court of Justice has convicted the British government of failing to meet minimum standards for nitrates in drinking water, as set out in an EC directive which came into force in 1980.
The case was brought by the European Commission in 1987 after Friends of the Earth claimed that the government had failed to keep promises to reduce levels.
The complaint covered parts of East Anglia and the Midlands, home to around a million people.
But figures show that the problem of high nitrate levels in water supplies — the result of decades of intensive farming — is much more widespread.
The Drinking Water Inspectorate estimates that in 1990 around 5.1 million people in England and Wales lived in areas where EC limits were breached.
The government played down the importance of the conviction.
The responsible minister, David Maclean, claimed that the judgment was "mainly about technicalities" .
He also pointed to the substantive efforts being made to rectify the situation.
* Nearly 40 per cent of drinking water in the Czech Republic does not conform to statutory quality standards, according the chair of the state water board.
Independent 26 November Guardian 26 November European 26-29 November
Pollution: Water
UK plans for river standards
The government has proposed a comprehensive scheme to classify up to 10,000 stretches of river in England and Wales according to their use and to set statutory cleanliness standards for them.
Under the scheme, the rivers would be classified into at least six categories of use: fishing, abstraction for drinking water, agricultural, industrial, special ecosystem, and water sports.
Each would have specified permitted levels of chemical and other pollutants and target levels of oxygen.
The scheme will replace current regulations based on the concentrations of chemicals in the water.
Government figures show that although cases of serious river pollution have been falling recently, the overall quality of rivers and canals has deteriorated.
Independent 4 December Financial Times 4 December
Pollution: Water
Repairs reduce Montenegro dam threat"for the moment
An international aid effort has prevented a major ecological disaster in Montenegro in Yugoslavia.
Flash floods in October tore away supporting concrete panels from the base of the Mojkovac dam, bringing it close to collapse.
The scale of the potential danger emerged when it was revealed that the dam holds back an estimated 3.5 million tons of toxic sludge from a now-closed lead and zinc mine nearby, containing harmful levels of these and other metals.
A preliminary report by the Geneva Cantonal Ecotoxological Service, which had been asked to analyse samples of the sludge by United Nations officials, declared that if the dam was breached the toxic elements would be washed down the river Tara, which flows via the Drina and Sava rivers into the Danube just above Belgrade.
In this event all plant and animal life along the rivers could be poisoned, as would the drinking water supplies for millions of people.
UN-sponsored work to prevent further erosion of the dam was completed in late November and further measures to lessen pressure on the structure were being implemented.
By mid December the main flow of the Tara had been diverted away from the base of the dam.
Financial Times 28 November, 1 December Independent 26 November International Herald Tribune 27 November European 3-6 December European 17-20 December
Pollution: Water
NRA proposals for protecting groundwater
The National Rivers Authority (NRA) has published a document setting out ways of protecting groundwater, the source of around a third of Britain's drinking water.
The main aim of the document is to make planners, farmers, mineral extracters and waste disposal contractors aware of the problems of conserving groundwater.
 "Many of our problems have arisen through ignorance and neglect" , a spokesman said.
The document calls for legislation to restrict the use of nitrate fertilizers, pesticides and industrial solvents in areas "mainly agricultural districts" where their overuse poses threat to the quality of the groundwater.
Guardian 15 December
Pollution: Water
Sewage bacteria proposal
A British microbiologist claims he has found a means of using bacteria to dispose of human sewage.
John Pirt has developed a "biocombustion" process by which sewage would be pumped through four bioreactors, in effect tubs of bacteria which would provide their own heat and consume the sewage in a twenty-hour period.
The particular bacteria used, which flourish around the volcanoes and geysirs in Yellowstone National Park in the United States, will digest themselves once they run out of other food.
The residue products would be some discoloured water and carbon dioxide.
Guardian 28 December
Pollution: Water
Sewage found on seabed
Dumping human sewage at sea is having a far greater effect on the marine environment than previously thought, according to US researchers who have conducted a six-year study of dumping off the coast of New Jersey.
By comparing levels of stable isotopes upstream and downstream of the dumping site, the researchers showed that traces of human sewage had entered the foodchain through animals such as urchins and sea cucumbers, which feed on material on the seabed, some 8,000 feet below the surface.
The findings contradict the view that sewage dumped into the ocean would be so diluted and dispersed that it would be harmless to plants and animals on the seabed.
They show that "things are happening much more quickly then we thought" , according to Cindy Lee Van Dover, the head of the research team.
 "We may be having a grave impact on the deep seabed." 
But consumers of seafood need not be alarmed.
 "The food web is so isolated from anything we consume that it is not going to affect people" , she added.
Independent 13 November Washington Post 12 November
Pollution: Water
Sweden's largest lake "too clean" 
The 20-year campaign to clean up Lake Vänern in southern Sweden has been so successful that its waters are in danger of becoming sterile — too clean for fish and plants.
Since the 1970s, water purification plants have cleaned up the lake, which had become seriously polluted by heavy metals and organic compounds discharged by industrial plants.
Göran Petersson, head of an environmental research team, explained: "We are in the ironic situation where the purification work has been too successful.
If the water is too clean, it is more sensitive to current pollution, because there is less plant and fish life to absorb it".
He has proposed closing down one of the purification plants.
But several local councils, which rely on the lake for their drinking water supplies, want to retain the current quality levels.
European 12-15 November
Pollution: Water
Effort to save Lake Victoria
Scientists from various disciplines have set up the "Friends of Lake Victoria" pressure group with the aim of saving Africa's largest freshwater lake, which is under threat from overfishing and industrial pollution [see ED 63].
According to Peter Ochumba, of the Kenya Marine Fisheries Research Institute (KEMFRI), all but three of the lake's 600-odd fish species have died out, oxygen levels have fallen dramatically (owing to an explosion of the algae population), and just under half of the lake is already "dead" .
The group has called on the Kenyan government to take urgent measures to preserve the lake's natural resources.
Caribbean Times 10 November
Pollution: Water
Major oil spill in Spain
The shipwreck of a Greek tanker off the coast of northwestern Spain has caused one of the world's worst oil spills in recent years.
On 3 December the Aegean Sea ran aground while trying to enter the port of La Coruña during bad weather, exploded, broke in two and sank.
Subsequent estimates indicated that it had spilt around 70,000 tons of its cargo.
(This was almost twice the amount spilled in the 1989 Exxon Valdez disaster in Alaska, considered one of the worst oil tanker disasters ever.)
Around 100 kilometres of Galicia's rugged coastline were affected by the spill.
The full impact on the economically important fishing industry, in particular the mussel and shellfish beds, has yet to be determined.
The strong winds and heavy seas which caused the tanker to run aground and the fact that its cargo was a light crude contributed to a wide dispersal of the oil.
The World Wide Fund for Nature and Greenpeace have accused the local authorities of covering up the extent of the damage.
They also criticized the evident lack of contingency plans to prevent or respond to accidents of this kind.
European 10-13 December International Herald Tribune 4, 8, 9 December New Scientist 9 January
Transport
US giants unite for electric car research
The big three US car makers "General Motors (GM), Ford and Chrysler" have signed an agreement to co-operate in the development of electric vehicles.
The move comes as GM, facing severe financial pressures, appears to have abandoned solo development of its Impact plastic-bodied electric vehicle.
The new venture, co-ordinated by the US Council for Automotive Research, will investigate design, development, testing and possible manufacturing of electric vehicle components that could eventually be used in each of the companies' vehicles.
US car makers are under increasing pressure to develop electric vehicles.
California has stated that manufacturers will have to begin marketing "zero-emission" vehicles by 1998 if they are to sell other models in the state.
Japanese manufacturers are also researching electric vehicle technology.
Financial Times 14 December
Transport
Doubts on oilseed rape fuel
Environmentalists are expressing doubts about the benefits of using fuel based on oilseed rape in public transport, as in a recent experiment in the UK [see ED 63].
The fuel, known as rape methyl ester, emits no sulphur dioxide, halves deposits of particulates and reduces carbon monoxide and nitrogen oxide emissions.
However, environmentalists argue that the costs of producing the fuel must also be taken into account.
Oilseed rape is in plentiful supply because of EC subsidies to producers.
Developing a market for it as a fuel is seen as encouraging energy-intensive farm systems.
The energy costs of the production process, which involves mixing the oil with ethanol, must also be allowed for when assessing the environmental benefits.
Guardian 6 November
Tropical Forests
Illegal trading hits timber conservation
Efforts to conserve tropical timber species are being hindered by illegal timber traders concealing information about the timber they are cutting and exporting, according to a new report by TRAFFIC, a network of conservation groups that monitors trade in wildlife.
The Malaysian state of Sabah and Papua New Guinea are two areas where the practice is common, the report says.
The report also documents widespread smuggling and illegal felling of officially protected species, particularly in South East Asia.
New Scientist 14 November
Tropical Forests
Greenpeace launches timber campaign
Greenpeace has launched a campaign against predatory logging in the Amazon.
The campaign began with an occupation of the Maginco sawmill in Brazil's Para state by Greenpeace-Brazil with the support of the Nambikwara indians, whose reserve has been invaded by loggers.
Greenpeace in the UK is calling for a moratorium on imports of Brazilian mahogany, of which the UK is the largest buyer, as well as a consumer boycott.
BBC Wildlife January 1993
Tropical Forests
Timber lobby wins Chilean victory
The Chilean government is to allow landowners to substitute a quarter of native forest with plantations of introduced species.
Chile has one of the largest temperate forests in the southern hemisphere, with many unique species, but the native forests are under threat from plantation of trees for industrial production, which was heavily subsidized by the Pinochet government.
The new law legalizes the already common practice of felling native forests and converting the land to plantation use, reflecting the lobbying of an expanding and powerful forestry industry.
CODEFF, a local affiliate of Friends of the Earth, is calling for forest development to be on a sustainable basis.
The new law does include some conservation measures, including incentives to promote management of native forests and measures to help the public denounce infringements of the regulations.
BBC Wildlife January 1993
Tropical Forests
Cambodian log ban flouted
The ban on Cambodian log exports imposed by the UN Security Council is being flagrantly flouted.
Hundreds of logs were reported to have entered Thailand over the weekend of 2/3 January.
The export ban, imposed at the end of 1992, was intended to penalize the Khmer Rouge, which controls part of the trade, for failing to honour the ceasefire which forms part of the UN-brokered Cambodian peace settlement.
Cambodia's Supreme National Council voted to stop timber exports last September, despite Khmer Rouge opposition, and was backed by the UN, which, however, has no real power to stop the trade.
The ban covers only uncut logs, so large numbers of new sawmills have sprung up in Cambodia to evade the ban.
An export quota for sawn timber has not yet been set.
The Thai government has ordered the border to be closed but Thai logging companies, which stand to lose by the ban, are arguing for a delay in its implementation and have intensified logging in recent weeks.
Guardian 4 January The Nation, Bangkok 4 January (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Waste and Recycling
Belgium plans packaging tax
Belgium is to impose a tax on beer, soft drink and mineral water containers by the end of 1993 as part of plans to curb packaging waste.
The amount of the tax has still to be fixed but would be on a sliding scale according to whether containers can be recycled or not.
Belgium aims to tax all beverage packaging by the end of 1997.
The packaging industry claims the tax will force it to change production methods and cut jobs.
International Herald Tribune 18 November