

Agriculture & Food
Campaign calls Japanese pesticide aid to Cambodia "counter-productive" 
Japan has given Cambodia 30 tonnes of pesticides as part of its development assistance programme.
The donation is in response to Cambodia's request for help in restoring its shattered agriculture and reflects the Cambodian government's desire to make the country self-sufficient in food as quickly as possible, but experts fear any short-term benefits will be outweighed by long-term damage.
Elsewhere in south-east Asia, over-use of pesticides has led to a devastating resurgence of pests by destroying the pests' natural predators.
A campaign against the aid programme is being co-ordinated by Yoichi Kuroda, director of the Japan Tropical Forest Action Network, who has studied the pesticide problem in the region.
 "There are plenty of natural enemies [for pests], such as spiders and bees, so Cambodian farmers have no need for pesticides," according to Koroda.
 "The three pesticides the Japanese government is sending [diazinon, fenvalerate and fenitrothion]have a broad insecticide spectrum, so they kill a wide range of insects including natural predators." 
Kuroda advocates the training of farmers in modern pest control methods, like those successfully applied by Indonesia, which in the mid-1980s banned pesticides such as those being donated to Cambodia and replaced them with a programme of integrated pest management (IPM), which aims to exploit the natural weaknesses of a pest and shift the balance in favour of its predators.
The Japanese government claims that the resurgence of pests is linked to factors other than pesticide use, such as climate change and the introduction of new species.
Environmental groups complain that the government is getting its advice from the pesticide industry.
International organisations such as the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) favour IPM techniques.
New Scientist 13 March
Agriculture & Food
EC policies encourage intensive farming
EC agriculture policies force farmers to exploit their land to the maximum and financial pressures are likely to prevent even those who wish to protect the environment from doing so, according to a report issued by Greenpeace.
Green Fields, Grey Future, finds that 80 per cent of farmers received less than 10 per cent of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) budget in 1990; 37 per cent of the budget went to a small number of large industrial farms, with the rest of the money being spent on storing and disposing of surplus farm products.
The real beneficiaries of EC farm policies are pesticide and fertiliser producers and companies that dispose of EC surpluses, the report claimed.
Greenpeace argues that the recent CAP reform was a missed opportunity; set aside policies and price reductions are unlikely to reduce surpluses, it says, and will encourage further intensification of production.
The report calls on the EC to shift support to organic and other ecological forms of farming, to phase out support for intensive farming, to end subsidies on EC exports and to impose taxes on pesticides and synthetic fertilisers.
Food Magazine, February-April 1993
Agriculture & Food
East German pesticide ban delayed
Farmers in the former East Germany are to be allowed to continue using stocks of illegal pesticides for a further two years.
The chemicals, including substances such as DDT, long banned in the rest of Germany, as well as formulations never subject to safety testing in the West, are left over from the pre-unification production of East German industries.
The eastern states claimed they could not afford to dispose of the chemicals, which would require incineration, and were originally given until the end of 1992 to use them up.
The federal parliament has now agreed to allow some 300 of the pesticide formulations to be both sold and used in the eastern states until the end of 1994.
A further 60 can be used but not sold, while 70 formulations are banned as originally planned.
The German Association of Water and Gas Utilities has protested about the decision because of the extra pollution that will result.
Pesticide levels in drinking water are already above legal limits in many areas; the cost of reducing pesticide levels in the drinking water of 30 eastern towns to acceptable levels has been put at DM450 million.
New Scientist 13 March
Agriculture & Food
Pesticide linked to birth defect in Hungary
A study has linked the high rate of birth defects in a Hungarian village to pesticide use at a local fish farm.
Eleven of the 15 babies born in Rinyaszentkirály in south-west Hungary in 1989-90 had severe abnormalities; four of them had Down's syndrome.
The high level of defects, 223 times the average for the Hungarian population as a whole, prompted an investigation by Hungarian and German scientists.
The study concludes that the most likely cause is environmental, and suggests that the fish farm's use of trichlorophon, an organophosphorous pesticide, might be the culprit.
All the mothers of the affected children were found to have eaten fish contaminated with trichlorophon, which has been found to cause birth abnormalities in rodents.
Trichlorophon is widely used across Europe for treating fruit and vegetables.
New Scientist 6 March
Agriculture & Food
Pesticides found in wide range of UK foods
Pesticide residues are found in a wide range of foods, according to UK government figures described by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF) as "reassuring" .
MAFF says that only 1 per cent of the 2,500 samples analysed in 1990 and 1991 exceeded Maximum Residue Levels, although the Pesticides Trust commented that this was a worryingly high level for staple foods.
Residues were found in 29 per cent of fruit and vegetables, 32 per cent of cereals, 55 per cent of milk and 48 per cent of potatoes.
Residues of the banned pesticides DDT and dieldrin were found in 81 per cent of farmed salmon, implying either long-term environmental contamination or illegal use of banned chemicals.
Food Magazine February-April 1993
Agriculture & Food
Call for UK pesticide reduction policy
A comprehensive policy to reduce pesticide use in the UK is urged in a report produced by the Pesticides Trust for the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF).
Pesticides: Missing the Target says that rather than regulating pesticides on a chemical-by-chemical basis, the government should adopt a comprehensive policy that compares the costs, risks and benefits of chemical and non-chemical control and looks at appropriate pest control for sustainable agriculture.
Pesticide reduction of 50 per cent over five years should be a principal aim of the policy, the report says.
 "At present," said Peter Beaumont, director of the Pesticides Trust,"the burden of deciding how pesticides should be used falls entirely on the user: instead of a policy of minimum pesticide use, there is only a minimal policy for pesticides.
The report compares UK pesticide policy with pesticide reduction policies adopted in Denmark, Sweden and the Netherlands.
It points out that if pesticide use can be reduced with minimal reduction in crop yields, risks to health and the environment can be cut, sustainability promoted and lower input costs protecting profit margins.
Pesticides News December 1992 Food Magazine February-April 1993
Agriculture & Food
Finnish fur farms poison water supplies
Animal waste from fur farms in western Finland is causing widespread environmental damage, anti-fur campaigners warn.
According to activist Mauro Leivi: "The quantity of nutrients in fur animal droppings today is as great as that in the uncleaned sewage of a million people.
The total ammonium emission for the farms is 1,500 tonnes per day, more than those from all other Finnish industries put together."
A recent report by the National Board of Water and the Environment accused many fur producers of ignoring environmental regulations.
Leivi is particularly worried by the high levels of phosphorous and nitrogen in the animals' droppings, which seep into groundwater.
The nutrients cause the growth of algae in rivers and lakes, kill some fish species and deprive the water of oxygen.
Ammonium fumes from the farms are also said to be damaging trees.
European 25-28 February
Agriculture & Food
Toxic shellfish banned in western France
Sales of shellfish from the Charente-Maritime, Vendée and Gironde regions of western France were banned after they were found to be contaminated with an unidentified toxin.
Laboratory mice died within minutes of being fed the shellfish.
The mice showed symptoms of poisoning by the Alexandrium toxins produced by phytoplankton, but comparisons with known Alexandrium toxins proved negative.
New Scientist 27 February
Conservation: Habitat
Plan to save Danube floodplains
A multi-national project, "Greening the Danube" , has been launched to protect the forests and wetlands on the river's banks from environmentally damaging projects such as the Gabcikovo dam [see EDs passim].
The project is co-ordinated by the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) and aims to influence the actions of the eight governments on the river's course.
The campaign aims to rehabilitate the river's floodplains, which have been damaged by intensive agriculture and the planting of foreign tree species.
One of the largest rehabilitation schemes will be in the 600,000-hectare Danube delta in Ukraine and Romania, which is amongst Europe's most important bird breeding areas, but has been severely damaged by reclamation of land for cultivation.
Dams and dykes will be removed to allow the delta to return to its natural state.
WWF also hopes to control the amount of waste water flowing into the Danube; pollution has wiped out 70 of the river's 110 species of fish in the past 10 years and is threatening the ecosystem of the Black Sea.
European 4-7 March
Conservation: Habitat
Netherlands to recreate wetlands
The Dutch government has begun an ambitious plan to return large areas of farmland to their natural state as forest, wetlands and lakes.
The plan seeks in part to reverse centuries of reclamation of low-lying land for agriculture, which has been successful in increasing crop yields but has been accompanied by a deterioration in the natural environment.
Pumping to keep reclaimed land dry has lowered water tables in some areas and the land is sinking as the soil compresses.
Extensive use of agricultural chemicals has driven out many animal and plant species.
Eventually about 600,000 acres, or 10 per cent of present farmland, will be purchased by the government for the scheme.
Progress is being eased by the EC Common Agricultural Policy's set-aside rules, which require farmers to take 15 per cent of their land out of use if they wish to benefit from guaranteed prices.
Guardian 8 March
Conservation: Habitat
Russia creates national park in place of Katun dam project
Construction of the Katun dam in Russia's Gorno Altai republic has been abandoned on the orders of a government commission.
In its place a new national park will be created, covering two ranges of the Altai mountains, home of musk deer, bighorn goats, bears and snow leopards.
Work on the dam began in 1983 but was held up by economic and environmental objections.
The project has now been cancelled, despite continuing support from local politicians, due both to lack of funds and studies which showed that it would operate at only 25 per cent of capacity in winter, when electricity demand is highest.
The reservoir would have submerged cedar forests and rapids which attract 10,000 tourists a year, while releasing mercury from submerged ores.
BBC Wildlife March 1993
Conservation: Habitat
Russia creates Arctic reserve
Russia has declared 4 million hectares of uninhabited tundra on the Tamyr peninsula a reserve.
From July 1993, only scientists will be allowed to enter the park, which is Russia's contribution to a network of Arctic reserves set up by the international treaty signed at Rovaniemi in Finland in 1989.
The area is a summer nesting ground for birds that migrate through Western Europe and also contains a sub-species of walrus.
Equipment to monitor pollution and climate change will be installed in the park.
New Scientist March 1993
Conservation: Species
International bird conservation organisation launched
The first global bird conservation organisation, BirdLife International, has been launched.
The organisation is represented in 112 countries and aims to protect threatened species throughout their life cycle by co-ordinating conservation efforts.
"International bird conservation has until now been rather disjointed with no single organisation big enough to tackle the problem alone.
The launch of BirdLife International is a turning point in the history of world bird conservation,"said Barbara Young, chief executive of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, BirdLife's UK partner.
Nearly 1,000 of the world's 9,700 bird species are threatened with extinction, with the destruction of habitats being regarded as the single most serious threat to their survival; 43 per cent of the threatened birds live in tropical forests, for example.
One of BirdLife's tasks will be to identify and preserve sites that are of critical importance to bird diversity.
BirdLife International has evolved from the International Council for Bird Preservation, which was founded in 1922 and pioneered international co-operation in bird conservation.
Royal Society for the Protection of Birds information 3 March Guardian 4 March
Conservation: Species
Arizona brings back thick-billed parrot
Arizona is reintroducing thick-billed parrots, which became extinct in the state in 1918 after being hunted for their meat.
Sixteen parrots were released in the pine forests of the Chiricahua mountains early this year.
Nine of the birds, confiscated from poachers who had smuggled them into the US from Mexico, have survived and seem to be doing well.
The remaining six, raised in captivity in the US, did not survive.
A further three birds have since been released.
New Scientist 6 March
Conservation: Species
Palm growers dampen monkeys' tourist potential
Oil palm growers in the Malaysian state of Sabah are taking advantage of a loophole in conservation law to threaten the habitat of proboscis monkeys.
Proboscis monkeys are unique to Borneo, of which Sabah forms a part, and one of the state's largest populations live on the banks of the Kinabatangan river.
Oil palms have been planted on a large part of the land behind the river and growers have been granted a draft permit to develop plantations along the river banks, the monkeys' habitat, by the local land authority.
The permit has been challenged by the Ministry of Tourism and the Environment, even though work has begun on felling trees in the area.
The ministry is keen to turn the area into a national park, seeing the monkeys, which show no fear of humans, as a potential attraction for "ecotourists" .
New Scientists 13 March
Conservation: Species
Rwandan civil war threatens gorillas
Scientists studying Rwanda's mountain gorillas have been forced to flee by the country's civil war, leaving the animals at the mercy of poachers.
Five British, American and German researchers were evacuated from the Karisoke Research Centre in February as the war between the government and the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) intensified.
The Karisoke centre, set up by Dian Fossey in 1985, is in Rwanda's Parc National des Volcans on the border with Uganda, where the RPF is based.
The RPF had agreed not to interfere with the centre's work but in February it was ransacked by soldiers wearing Ugandan uniforms.
The RPF denies responsibility and says claims that it has killed gorillas are also untrue.
The closure of the centre means that anti-poaching patrols have ceased and there is also great pressure on the park from the growing number of refugees displaced by the civil war.
The Colorado-based Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund, which finances the centre, says it will wait for a ceasefire before attempting to resume research at Karisoke.
New Scientist 6 March
Conservation: Species
Norway sets date for whaling to resume
Norway has confirmed that it is to resume scientific whaling in April and commercial whaling in May or June [see ED 67].
Fisheries Minister Jan Henry Olsen said a quota would be set after the meeting of the International Whaling Commission (IWC) in Kyoto in May but that he expected it to be in the range of a "few hundred" minke whales a year.
Olsen said he hoped the IWC meeting would lift the ban on whaling, but said Norway would be forced to reconsider its IWC membership if the ban was not lifted.
The IWC's scientific committee agreed last year that the stock of minke whales in the north-east Atlantic amounted to 86,700 and was no longer in danger of depletion.
Last year Norway killed 95 minke whales as part of a scientific research programme which calls for a total of 400 whales to be killed in the period 1992-94.
Financial Times 27-28 February
Conservation: Species
Secret talks on whaling compromise
A deal to avert a possible collapse of the International Whaling Commission (IWC) has been discussed at a secret meeting in Madrid.
The deal envisaged would permit a limited resumption of commercial whaling inside the 200-mile coastal zones of the countries concerned.
The talks were proposed by the US, which is anxious to avoid a damaging confrontation with Japan on the issue at the IWC meeting in May [see ED 67]; if accepted, the deal would mean Japan giving up its current whaling activities in the Antarctic.
Coastal whaling would suit Norway and Iceland, which want to resume hunting and export the meat to Japan, but not the UK and other European anti-whaling nations, which argue that the very whales they are seeking to protect would be killed when they swam further north.
Iceland left the IWC at last year's annual meeting and Norway has threatened to do so this year, saying it will resume whaling whatever the IWC's decision.
Leading anti-whaling nations such as Ireland, France and New Zealand were not represented at the Madrid meeting.
Guardian 19 February
Conservation: Species
Japan promotes whale meat diet
The Japanese goverment has launched a campaign to promote the eating of whale meat, hoping to raise public support for its call for the moratorium on whaling to be lifted at this year's meeting of the International Whaling Commission (IWC) in Kyoto in May.
The fisheries agency is running advertising and school campaigns promoting the health benefits of whale meat and has declared the ninth of every month to be "eating whale meat day" .
Described by the government as a Japanese cultural tradition, the consumption of whale meat only started after the second world war, when it filled a dietary gap.
Most Japanese regard whale meat as overpriced and appear unlikely to throw their weight behind the government's campaign to support the whaling industry.
BBC Wildlife March 1993
Conservation: Species
Satellite watch on Cameroon's elephants
Elephants in northern Cameroon are being tracked by satellite in an effort to save them from attacks by farmers when they damage crops.
Collars equipped with radio transmitters, developed by the University of Leiden in the Netherlands, have been fitted to four elephants in different herds, allowing scientists to follow the movements of the herds.
The elephants have been driven from their normal habitat by the construction of a dam and some have taken to plundering farmers' maize crops.
European 11-14 February
Conservation: Species
Radio tracking to combat rhino poaching
Zimbabwe has begun an experimental scheme to track its remaining rhino by the use of transponders implanted in the animals' skin.
The devices will allow national park staff to monitor rhino movements 24 hours a day.
A central computer will be programmed to contact the transponders at regular intervals and raise the alarm if the rhinos wander into areas where there is a high risk of poaching.
The transponders can sound an alarm if the animal is killed and can also be implanted in the rhino's horn, allowing it, and the poachers, to be tracked if it is cut off.
The pilot scheme is being carried out in the Matusadona national park near the Zambian border, where the rhino population has dropped from 150 to 16 in the last five years.
A similar scheme is being tried in the Umfolozi game reserve in South Africa.
New Scientist 27 February
Conservation: Species
Zimbabwe leaders implicated in rhino trade
The Zimbabwean government is being embarrassed by evidence of high-level involvement in the killing of its dwindling rhino population, which it has long blamed on Zambian poachers.
Benjamin Moyo, a member of parliament and member of the ruling ZANU-PF party, was recently jailed for five years, with five accomplices, for trying to sell two rhino horns.
More sinister are the deaths in suspicious circumstances of two army officers who were investigating the rhino horn trade.
An inquest found that Captain Edwin Nleya, who died in 1989 after collecting evidence of an army poaching ring, was murdered; an earlier army inquiry attributed his death by hanging to suicide.
Lieutenant Shepard Chisango died in police custody in 1991, after gathering evidence of army poaching and smuggling in Mozambique.
Amnesty International has called on the government to investigate the deaths and persistent claims that top army officials are involved in poaching and smuggling.
Last year Zimbabwe was estimated to have about 2,000 black rhinos, the world's last viable breeding herd.
However, a recent count found only 250 left in the wild.
At this rate it is estimated that poachers could finish off Zimbabwe's last rhino by the end of 1994.
Guardian 19 February
Conservation: Species
Paraguay cracks down on animal trade
Paraguay, a centre for the illegal trade in live animals, birds and skins during the military regime of General Alfredo Stroessner, is taking steps to improve its image by tightening up its environmental laws and strengthening their enforcement.
Seizures of skins and animals once openly traded are becoming more frequent, and the government is being advised by the US Fish and Wildlife Service on improving its controls.
The Paraguayans, says Obdulio Menghi of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), "are working like never before, because of the professional and political [commitment]that the country has assumed for the first time." 
Wildlife control operations are being co-ordinated with the army, police and customs, since the animals trade is part of a wider underground market in drugs, arms and stolen cars.
The government is sponsoring a new environmental law and it is hoped to make smuggling animals a criminal, rather than a civil offence.
To compensate hunters, many of them peasants and Indians, for loss of income from the illegal trade, the government is allowing exports of a few species not in danger of extinction, such as the Teyu Guazu iguana, whose skin is used for handbags and belts.
Financial Times 3 March
Conservation: Species
Alaskan tourism boycott halts wolf cull
A boycott by conservationists of Alaskan tourism has forced the state to postpone plans to cull at least 300 grey wolves.
The grey wolf is extinct or endangered in most other US states, but Alaska has a population of about 6,000.
After the state announced plans to kill the wolves to boost herds of caribou and moose, Governor Walter Hickel's office was flooded with protests, and tourists began cancelling their holidays in Alaska.
Hickel a strong supporter of the cull, has called a three-day wolf summit to discuss the issue and will make a final decision after the meeting.
Green Magazine March 1993
Conservation: Species
Toads go into decline
Reports from Norway of a sharp drop in numbers of the common toad, bufo bufo, are raising fears that European toad populations may be following the trend of sudden unexplained declines in frog and toad species already recorded in other parts of the world.
Data collected by Dr Arne Semb-Johansson of Oslo University show that toad populations on the Hvaler islands in the outer Oslo fjord have plummeted since 1966.
Very common in earlier years, toads completely failed to appear in more recent surveys.
Dr Semb-Johansson speculates that acid rain may be to blame, as toad tadpoles would not survive in acidified ponds.
Other studies show that toad populations do suffer large fluctuations from year to year, but the length of the Norwegian study, covering 25 years and four or five generations of toads, suggests a worrying trend.
BBC Wildlife March 1993
Economics & Industry
Business forms environmental lobby
A new organization, the World Industry Council for the Environment (WICE), has been set up by the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) to lobby on environmental issues for business interests.
The ICC, says WICE, which held its inaugural meeting on 26 February, will"advise governments on environmental questions as they affect business, and also make its own recommendations, both at the national level and also to the UN and other international bodies.
It will promote sound environmental management and publicise companies' progress in implementing the ICC's green code for business, the Business Charter for Sustainable Development."
WICE's chairman is Patrick Gillam, chairman of the Asda Group of the UK and chairman-elect of Standard Chartered Bank.
He said it was essential that world business "should have an institutional mechanism enabling it to speak with a powerful voice as it seeks to influence governments and international organisations." 
Over 60 international companies are founder members of WICE.
International Chamber of Commerce information 16 February
Economics & Industry
BT environment report wins award
British Telecom has been presented with an award for its first environmental performance report.
The award, made by the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants, was given to BT because, the judges said, the report "was clear and methodical and could be commended as a model for all companies to follow." 
It gives details of BT's consumption of energy and includes specific targets for activities which have an environmental impact.
BT promises to produce a second report in May, which will cover progress on reaching these targets.
Reports by British Airways and Body Shop were also commended by the judges, and the shortlist included chemical companies Dow and ICI, as well as IBM and BP.
But only 20 companies entered the competition.
Guardian 11 February
Energy
World Bank ignores green recommendations in Chile project
The World Bank board has approved a loan towards Chile's Pangue dam project, even though the project has not received the full environmental assessment required under the bank's operating guidelines.
The loan is being made through the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the bank's private sector arm, which environmentalists accuse of acting as if it were exempt from the Bank's environmental directions.
The project was recently the target of Chile's largest ever environmental protest, when 5,000 people demonstrated outside the offices of sponsoring electricity company Endesa.
The dam is to be built on the Bio Bio river, Chile's largest, and environmentalists fear that it will open the way for a further six dams on the river, as well as damaging the monkey puzzle Araucaria araucana pine forests, which the government has declared a national monument.
The project also faces legal challenges from the Santiago-based Grupo de Acción por el Bio Bio and fishermen concerned about the impact on fisheries downstream.
BBC Wildlife March 1993
Energy
Gabcikovo dam talks break down
EC-sponsored talks on the Gabcikovo dam dispute between Hungary and Slovakia in Brussels have broken down without agreement.
No date was set for a futher meeting.
The EC's delegate to the talks, Pablo Benavides, said afterwards that he thought further talks would be unproductive and that the two parties should refer their dispute to the International Court of Justice.
Later Hungary said that it would act unilaterally to supply water to areas threatened by environmental catastrophe after Slovakia diverted the Danube's waters to the dam [see ED 67].
Le Monde 7 February, Hungarian Radio, Budapest, 16 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Guardian 20 February
Energy
Dounreay site for wave energy project
An experimental wave power device is to be built offshore of the Dounreay nuclear site in Scotland.
The device, developed by Applied Research and Technology of Inverness, is expected to be in operation by 1994.
Dounreay was chosen because it possesses cable links to the national grid and a suitable coastal site.
The experimental fast breeder nuclear reactor at Dounreay is due to close in March 1994 with the ending of government funding for fast breeder research.
The wave power device has received funding of £50,000 from the government for the research stage and £15,000 from the Highland Region's development department for the prototype.
Guardian 8 March
Energy
Tidal power test to start in Scotland
An underwater turbine, capable of generating electricity from the rise and fall of the tides, is to be tested in Scotland.
The test machine contains a 10-kW turbine and a 4-metre rotor, which is turned by both incoming and outgoing tides; it will be anchored to the sea bed and therefore needs none of the costly and environmentally damaging civil engineering works associated with other tidal power schemes such as barrages.
The £200,000 pilot project is being carried out by Scottish Nuclear, research and consultancy company IT Power, and NEL, the research organisation that operates the UK wind turbine centre.
Larger schemes could follow if the experiment is a success.
Financial Times 22 February
Energy
Coal closures divide environmentalists
British environmental groups are divided in their response to the government's pit closure plans.
The closure of 31 pits announced in October, linked to a reduction of burning of coal by British power stations, would appear to make the government's commitment to stabilise carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels by 2000 easier to reach.
Greenpeace, however, argues that the priority must be the closure of nuclear power stations, not coal mines, implying an increase in the burning of coal rather than a decrease.
Friends of the Earth, also opposed to nuclear power, wants to see coal mines saved because of concern about the fate of mining communities, an issue on which Greenpeace does not express a view, preferring to stick to environmental issues.
Both groups favour investment in energy efficiency and renewable energy sources.
Financial Times 19 February
Energy
Threat to funding of Coal Research Establishment
The UK government is expected to halt funding to the Coal Research Establishment (CRE) at Cheltenham, part of British Coal and recognised as a world leader in research into "clean" coal technology.
The centre has an annual budget of £14 million and is pioneering research into a "topping cycle" which could produce a cheaper and more efficient way of burning coal in power stations.
The move, expected to form part of the imminent white paper on the coal industry, would come at a time when the US, Japan and Germany are pumping greater resources into clean coal research.
The CRE was recently refused government funding of £140,000 to continue research into a method of extracting carbon dioxide produced by power stations and pumping it into depleted North Sea oil and gas wells, neutralising its environmental impact.
Guardian 24 February
Environmental Politics
Clinton outlines energy taxes and nuclear cuts
The Clinton administration has announced plans for taxes to encourage energy conservation.
New taxes will be imposed on all forms of energy except renewable sources such as solar, geothermal and wind power, with the amount of the tax based on the fuel's energy content.
Oil will be taxed at the highest rate, adding about US$3.50 to the cost of a barrel of oil, with the aim of discouraging dependence on imported oil.
Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary said that by boosting energy efficiency it was hoped to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by an annual 25 million tonnes by the year 2000.
O'Leary's department will spend about US$2,500 million over the next five years on promoting energy conservation and the use of renewable energy.
Over the same period, research on advanced nuclear reactors will be eliminated and one of the two uranium enrichment plants closed.
Spending on the US nuclear weapons programmes will be cut by US$4,500 million.
Clinton has already moved to strengthen the hand of environmental bodies by upgrading the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), giving it the status of a fully fledged department.
EPA director Carol Browner will have cabinet status [see ED 67].
New Scientist 27 February
Environmental Politics
Secrett to take over as FoE head
Charles Secrett takes over as executive director of Friends of the Earth in April.
Secrett, aged 38 and formerly at the International Institute of Environment and Development, spent eight years with FoE in the 1980s, when he campaigned on wildlife, rain forests and the countryside.
Observers say Secrett faces a difficult task at a time of falling income for the organisation.
He may have to make redundancies among the 100 staff and could be forced to appoint an assistant director to handle internal matters.
Secrett has refused to comment on his plans until he takes up the post.
Green Magazine March 1993
Environmental Politics
Polish ecological council appointed
An ecological council set up to advise Poland's President Lech Walesa held its inaugural meeting in February.
The council is chaired by Professor Stefan Kozlowski, the president's adviser on ecology and environmental protection, who said that the inclusion of the environment among areas governed by special government decree allowed rapid action to be taken.
Opening the meeting, Walesa highlighted Poland's severe problems with air pollution and the catastrophic ecological situation in the Upper Silesia and Walbrzych regions.
Polish Radio and Television, Warsaw, 16 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Forests
Swiss trees sicken
One in every six trees in Switzerland is showing signs of ill-health — double the level recorded eight years ago.
Some 16 per cent of trees lost more than a quarter of their leaves or needles last year, although Swiss forests are better off than their German neighbours, where the figure was 27 per cent[see ED 65/66].
Green Magazine March 1993
Forests
Private tree plantings rise under UK grant scheme
Over 100 million trees have been planted by private owners in the UK since the Forestry Commission introduced its Woodland Grant Scheme in 1988, according to Forestry Minister Lord Howe.
He added that the government was especially pleased that the scheme had encouraged not just the planting of large forests but also of small woodlands for recreational purposes.
About half the planting under the scheme had been of broadleaved trees or native pinewoods.
Howe was speaking at the launch of a community woodland scheme on an old colliery site in Swadlincote, Derbyshire.
Forestry Commission information, 26 February
Forests: Tropical
Logging loophole threatens alerce
Timber from Chile's rare giant redwood, the alerce Fitzroya cupressoides, is still being exported, despite the fact that it is a protected species.
The alerce is now found only in remote mountain regions of the Andes and Chile's coastal cordillera, where there are also extensive areas of dead trees, for reasons as yet unexplained.
Chile banned the cutting of living trees in 1976, and in 1987 added the alerce to Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), but with the stipulation that trees that had died or been cut before 1976 could still be exported.
The difficulty in checking the date on which a tree has been felled has led, however, to illegal logging and export of the felled timber.
CODEFF, the local affiliate of Friends of the Earth, has mounted a campaign to monitor logging.
Forty cases of illegal logging have been brought to court in the last three years, but the loophole in the regulations makes it difficult to prove charges, so a technique is being developed to date the year of felling, using tree rings.
Even if logging of living trees is stopped, the removal of the dead trees also threatens the regeneration of the species, as the process also destroys young trees.
BBC Wildlife March 1993
Forests: Tropical
Austria to scrap timber labelling
Austria is to abandon a law, adopted last September, requiring mandatory labelling of tropical timber imports [see ED 64].
The move follows a threat by Malaysia and Indonesia, which argued that the law discriminates against them, to introduce an economic boycott of Austria.
A boycott would have hit Austrian road and dam projects in Asia.
New Scientist 13 March
Forests: Tropical
Awa Guajá face extinction
The nomadic Awa Guajá tribe of Brazil are being condemned to extinction because of government delays in demarcating their land, according to Survival International.
About 200-300 Awa Guajá are thought to be left alive, of whom about 150 have had no contact with outside society.
The tribe has suffered from repeated massacres by prospectors and settlers and their land has been opened up by the construction of the Carajás railway.
So desperate has the tribe's situation become that the government Indian foundation FUNAI is attempting to contact all the remaining uncontacted Awa, an action it only takes as a last resort.
The government in July 1992 proclaimed an area of land as the permanent possession of the Awa, but the land has still not been physically demarcated.
No steps have been taken to protect the Awa or to remove settlers from their land.
Demarcation of the land was to be funded by CVRD, the company responsible for the Carajás project, as part of the conditions for a World Bank loan; this has not been done, Survival says, and the World Bank has chosen to ignore the fact.
Survival International information, February 1993
Forests: Tropical
Chico Mendes' killers escape
The killers of Brazilian rain forest activist Chico Mendes have escaped from prison in Rio Branco.
The escape came as no surprise to the Acre state authorities, who claim they cannot afford to maintain the prison.
 "If a prisoner does not escape from here, it is because he does not want to," said the state government's acting secretary, Americo Carneiro Paes.
The Chico Mendes Committee, which represents rubber tappers and human rights activists, alleged complicity by the authorities in the escape.
Rancher Darli Alves da Silva and his son Darci Alves Perreira were sentenced to 19 years' imprisonment in 1990 for the killing of Mendes in 1988.
They are thought to have escaped across the border into Bolivia.
Guardian 16 February New Scientist 27 February
Forests: Tropical
Brazilian court orders halt to illegal logging
A Brazilian federal judge has ordered a halt to logging on Indian lands in south Para state.
The judge ordered the Perachi, Maginco and Impar logging companies to remove their employees and machinery from three Indian reserves, and called on the government and Indian agencies to control access to the reserves.
The companies may also have to compensate the Araweté and Parakaña Indians for the destruction of the forest.
The case against the logging companies was brought by the Nucleus for Indigenous Rights, on behalf of a coalition of some 70 Brazilian citizens' groups waging a campaign against the logging of mahogany.
The case may mark the end of the political protection long enjoyed by the logging companies.
It will also strengthen the hand of campaigners seeking to end the import of Brazilian mahogany into the UK.
According to Friends of the Earth, one of the companies involved, Maginco, is a supplier of mahogany to British companies James Latham and John Boddy Timber.
Until recently it also supplied M & N Norman Timber, but this company has since stopped taking mahogany from Maginco on environmental grounds.
BBC Wildlife March 1993
Forests: Tropical
Brazilian president signs Atlantic forest decree
Brazil's President Itamar Franco has signed a decree regulating the exploitation of the Atlantic forest.
The decree will allow state governments and environment councils to carry out sustainable development projects in the region.
The decree will also allow the resumption of work to widen highway BR-116.
Voz do Brasil 4 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Forests: Tropical
FAO reduces forest loss estimate
The UN Food & Agriculture Organisation (FAO) has reduced its estimate of the annual rate at which tropical forests were cut down during the 1980s.
The FAO's new estimate of 15.4 million hectares a year is down from the 16.9 million hectare estimate presented at last year's Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, but well above the 11.4 million hectare estimate of 1980.
The total area lost between 1981 and 1990 was 154 million hectares, with 1,750 million hectares of tropical forest remaining.
Most of the loss is attributed to population growth and rural poverty, leading to land clearance for agriculture.
The FAO expects at least 10 million hectares a year to be cleared between now and 2050 because of population pressures.
Re-afforestation is estimated at only 18 million hectares during the 1980s.
Financial Times 9 March
Forests: Tropical
Timber labelling complaint upheld
The UK's Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) has upheld a complaint from the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) about advertising claims made by NHG Timber.
The company had claimed that sapele wood imported from Congo and Cameroon came from sustainable sources.
The ASA agreed with WWF that there was no evidence to support the claim.
NHG was advised to withdraw the advertising.
This was the first complaint that WWF has made to the ASA.
World Wide Fund for Nature information 17 February
Global Warming
EC set to miss emissions target
EC countries are likely to miss their target for carbon dioxide emissions in 2000 by atleast 4 per cent, according to a report on member countries' plans submitted to the European Commission.
The report shows that the 12 members' emissions of CO2 are likely to total 2,878 million tonnes, compared to the 1990 level of 2,775 million tonnes, which is the target.
Germany, the largest emitter of CO2, has the most ambitious plans, to reduce emissions in 2005 to 75 per cent of 1987 levels.
Denmark, the Netherland and Belgium are also aiming for a cut in emissions.
The UK, the second largest emitter, is one of those "like France and Italy" seeking only to stabilise emissions at 1990 levels.
Greece and Spain expect emissions to rise by at least 25 per cent and Portugal is expecting rise of between 29-39 per cent, depending on economic growth.
Financial Times 12 February
Global Warming
Insurers worried by storm losses
Insurance companies are warning that premiums on property in areas that have suffered from severe storms in recent years are rising because of global warming fears.
Worldwide the insurance industry has lost US$56,000 million in the past two years from storm damage alone.
In Europe, storms in 1987 and 1990 caused losses of US$12,000 million.
Southern England, the Netherlands and the northern coasts of Germany and France are all now rated as high-risk areas by insurance companies, with global warming blamed for an increase in the frequency and severity of storms.
Greenpeace has warned that the insurance industry could face catastrophic losses if it fails to take action.
Measures being taken include increasing the amount a property owner must pay towards an insurance claim.
European 11-14 February
Global Warming
Volcanoes lead to warmer winters
The winter after a large volcanic eruption is often warmer than average in Eurasia and North America, despite the overall cooling effect on the earth's climate, according to researchers at the University of Maryland.
The effect was particularly pronounced after the Mount Pinatubo eruption of 1991 [see ED 67].
The cooling effect is due to large amounts of material being injected into the stratosphere, preventing the sun's heat reaching the ground.
But the warming of the stratosphere by trapped heat from the sun also changes wind patterns.
The effect is to bring warm maritime air over the continents in high latitudes in the winter after the eruption.
New Scientist 6 March
Global Warming
Fresh information on bovine methane
Australian scientists are attempting to measure the contribution cattle make to the greenhouse effect.
Previous estimates of the amount of methane emitted by cattle as they digest their food have been based on experiments in sealed chambers, where cattle's behaviour is different from when they are outside.
Now a special paddock has been built at the Australian government's Ginnindera Experimental Station, surrounded by piping which collects air from the field and analyses its gas content.
The research team has already discovered that the cows emit more methane in the evening, when they are resting and ruminating.
New Scientist 6 March
Nuclear Power
Computer software bugs threaten safety of UK nuclear power stations
A back-up safety system for the UK's nuclear power station controllers may not work properly because bugs in the computer software have not been eliminated, according to a former employee of the company that wrote the software.
Bob Hodson-Smith warned Active Business Services (ABS) of Sheffield that the software, the Safety Related Plant Status Monitoring System or Status, had not been fully tested and that Nuclear Electric should be warned of the potential difficulties.
He was subsequently dismissed and is suing ABS for unfair dismissal.
ABS describes his fears as "irrational" but Nuclear Electric is understood to be seriously concerned at the implications.
The Status software programme was designed to avoid the kind of accident that took place at Three Mile Island in the US, where shift workers faced with a breakdown in equipment switched to substitute systems, unaware that they had been taken out of service by a previous system.
Status would allow operators to see at a glance which items of safety-related equipment were in proper working order.
Hodson-Smith says, however, that the software has not been fully debugged and thus cannot be relied on in an emergency.
The system has been in operation at a Magnox power station in Gloucestershire for a year, and is coming onstream at Dungeness A in Kent and Hinkley Point A in Somerset.
ABS says the system is being fully tested and technical manuals on the software are being written.
Hodson-Smith has sent papers detailing his fears to the three stations involved and Nuclear Electric is studying them, although it emphasises that the software has not yet been fully integrated into the control system for the reactors.
Guardian 4 March
Nuclear Power
BNFL fined for Sellafield safety breach
British Nuclear Fuels (BNFL) has been convicted of violating safety rules at its Sellafield reprocessing plant.
The company pleaded guilty to four charges brought by the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate (NII) and was fined a total of £6,000 with costs of £10,757 awarded to the NII.
This was BNFL's third conviction for violating safety rules.
The case was brought following an NII investigation into an incident in April 1992 in a building that stores containers of highly radioactive waste.
The incident involved the overriding of a safety interlock, enabling the inadvertent opening of a radiation-shielding door.
The incident resembled an earlier one in 1991, which the NII had investigated but decided not to prosecute.
"We had hoped that they would have eliminated that shortcoming from their safety systems.
That was spelt out to them,"said Jim Furness, an NII inspector.
Furness said he was satisfied with the safety measures put into place following the latest incident.
Independent 27 February
Nuclear Power
Eye cancers linked to Sellafield
A study has shown that children whose mothers lived near the Sellafield nuclear reprocessing plant are at greatly increased risk of developing eye cancer.
Five cases of the rare tumour retinoblastoma had been found in these children, 20 times more than the usual number.
Scientists from Lancaster Moor Hospital and Lancaster University, who discovered the link, are calling for more studies to be done to see if other childhood cancers have increased in the 4,000-5,000 children born between 1950 and 1990 to mothers in the target group.
A second study examined the higher incidence of childhood leukemia around the nuclear weapons establishments at Aldermaston and Burghfield.
The study makes a link between fathers exposed to radiation and child cancers but suggests that this is not due directly to exposure to radiation but to hazards such as chemicals or other radioactive substances which are breathed in or swallowed.
The Oxford Survey of Childhood Cancers compared the job histories of the fathers of children with cancers to those of the fathers of healthy children and found that those who worked with nuclear materials were at risk.
Independent 5 March Guardian 5 March
Nuclear Power
Information of Sellafield leak withheld
British Nuclear Fuels (BNFL) may face prosecution for withholding information about an accident at the Sellafield plant from the Department of the Environment for 36 hours.
The incident involved the release of radiocative dust amounting to five times the company's average annual gaseous emissions; the dust is thought to have been deposited over the neighbouring towns of Workington and Whitehaven.
Jack Cunningham, MP, who was touring the site at the time, was not told of the incident.
He told parliament there had been a totally unacceptable series of events.
Environment Minister David Maclean said that the release of 1,000 megabecquerels of radioactivity, although serious, was well within the plant's current authorised limits of 4,300MBq a year.
He promised, however, that there would be a full investigation and said that the results would be made public.
MacLean later took the unusual step of amending his original statement to parliament, describing BNFL's failure to inform Cunningham of the leak as "a rather extraordinary discourtesy" .
A further abnormal discharge, of 10 times the normal weekly level of radioactive iodine-29, occurred on the day officials from the Inspectorate of Pollution and the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate arrived to investigate the earlier leak.
Information about this second incident was not made public for about two weeks, because, according to BNFL, of the time required for its staff to analyse the discharges.
The incidents came at a time when Sellafield was already facing prosecution for allegedly not taking proper safety precautions at its high-level waste processing plant (see above) and when it is seeking new authorisations for discharges into the air.
Guardian 16 February Financial Times 16 February Independent 27 February
Nuclear Power
Nuclear power update
Incidents occurred at nuclear power stations in Spain and Lithuania during February.
One of the two reactors of Spain's Asco power station was shut down as the result of a leak, although there was no discharge of radioactivity into the atmosphere.
One of the generators in reactor number 2 of the Ignalina power station in Lithuania was taken out of circuit because of a mechanical failure which was quickly repaired, according to the authorities.
The Ignalina reactors are a newer model of the type used at Chernobyl.
Le Monde 16 February
Nuclear Power
Bulgarian soil contaminated by uranium mining
Soil near uranium mines in Bulgaria is contaminated with radioactivity, according to a study by the National Centre for Radiobiology and Radiological Protection.
The contamination could endanger the health of tens of thousands of people.
The study of areas in the regions of Smolyan in southern Bulgaria and Mikhaylovgrad in the north-west found levels of radioactivity up to 400 becquerels a kilogram.
People living in the areas had been exposed to three times the acceptable level of ionising radiation.
The equivalent of US$2 million was allocated last year for cleaning up the polluted areas, but specialists say this is not nearly enough.
BTA 17 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Nuclear Power
Russia investigates seabed clean-up
Russian President Boris Yeltsin has appointed a committee to look into lifting nuclear waste and other poisonous materials from the seabed.
The committee will investigate the raising of sunken military equipment, ammunition and nuclear waste containers.
Greenpeace claims that the former Soviet Union dumped 17,000 containers of nuclear waste and 15 reactors from nuclear submarines into the waters of the Barents and Kara seas.
Russia refuses to comment on the allegations.
It is not yet known whether Russia will attempt to salvage the nuclear submarine that sank off northern Norway in April 1989.
This contains nuclear weapons, but is believed by Norway not to present a threat to the environment as long as it remains on the seabed and does not break up.
Green Magazine March 1993
Ozone layer
Northern hemisphere ozone levels at record low
Ozone levels over much of North America and Europe were at the lowest levels on record in February, at between 9 and 20 per cent below normal, following a winter of persistently depleted levels.
The World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) said possible causes included the continuing release of ozone destroying chemicals into the atmosphere and weather conditions pushing ozone-depleted air further north.
Ozone depletion in the northern hemisphere has yet to reach the massive levels experienced over Antarctica, with holes in the ozone layer appearing for relatively short periods and over smaller areas, but this year's figures show depletions in excess of last year's record lows [see ED 65/66].
A WMO spokesman said danger to humans was reduced because periods of high ozone depletion coincided with a low sun and frequently cloudy skies, limiting ultra-violet radiation.
It urged governments to speed up the phasing out of ozone-destroying chemicals, however.
Guardian 6 March Financial Times 6 March Independent 6 March New Scientist 6 March
Pollution
Call for methyl bromide to be phased out
Friends of the Earth is calling for use of the toxic gas methly bromide to be phased out by 1995.
Methyl bromide, used as a soil and food fumigant, is a major contributor to ozone depletion, acting five times faster than chloroflourocarbons (CFCs) but the November 1992 meeting on the Montreal Protocol agreed only that consumption should be frozen at 1991 levels from 1995.
The Netherlands, where methyl bromide was heavily used, phased it out completely between 1981-89, replacing it with safer alternatives, but this has been an isolated example; world production and sales of methyl bromide increased by 5 per cent in the late 1980s.
If that rate of increase continues it is estimated that methyl bromide could account for one-sixth of ozone loss by 2000.
As well as its impact on the ozone layer, the gas is highly toxic, having been found to be the cause of 34 deaths in California alone since 1974.
Low-level chronic exposure can result in problems such as tremors, poor co-ordination, headaches and dizziness, as well as the risk of skin burns and eye damage.
There is some evidence that the chemical is carcinogenic in animals.
Pesticides News December 1992 Food Magazine February-April 1993
Pollution
UK beach pollution on the increase
A survey of beaches in the UK has found an "alarming decline" in coastal cleanliness.
The Norwich Union Coastwatch UK survey found that almost half of the 2,185 kilometres of coastline surveyed by 6,000 volunteers showed evidence of litter and pollution.
Coastwatch co-ordinator Gareth Rees said it was the fourth year in succession that the survey had shown a deterioration and called on the government and regulatory bodies to act.
Volunteers recorded 170,000 pieces of litter, with increases over last year in 13 of the 16 litter categories.
Independent 23 February
Pollution: Air
Bohemian pollution "national disaster" 
Pollution in northern Bohemia is "close to a national disaster" according to Czech Environment Minister Frantisek Benda.
Concentrations of sulphur dioxide from burning of low-grade coal at the region's power stations led to a heavy smog in mid-February; children were told not to go to school and some pregnant women were evacuated.
The local authorities in the heavily polluted region of Chomutov threatened to close the town to all traffic and call a general strike unless the government took immediate environmental measures, including the fitting of all power stations in the region with desulphurisation devices within two years.
Power stations in the region were ordered to reduce their output to about half normal levels, with electricity imported from elsewhere in eastern Europe to meet demand.
Total capacity of the six coal-fired power stations in northern Bohemia is now 5,000 MW; this will be reduced to 1,980 MW by 2000 and the government has promised that the remaining stations will be fitted with desulphurisation equipment.
Coal industry experts argue that an improvement in air quality could be achieved by replacing the lignite now burnt at the power stations with hard coal.
The Czech Electricity Company has in the past resisted using hard coal because of its higher cost.
The opening of the Temelin nuclear power station in southern Bohemia will contribute 2,000 MW to power supplies.
The Czech government has allocated 1,160 million crowns to help resolve environmental problems in the region.
Czech television 11-14 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) International Herald Tribune 16 February
Pollution: Air
Dipper birds provide indicator of acid rain
The dipper, a small bird that feeds underwater in fast-flowing streams, has been found to be a good indicator of water acidity, Studies in Scotland by Dr Juliet Vickery of Oxford's Edward Grey Institute of Field Ornithology found a clear correlation between acidity in a stream and dippers' breeding success.
Pairs breeding along acidic streams laid their eggs slightly later, laid fewer, lighter eggs and fed their chicks less often.
As a result, chicks grew more slowly and were less likely to survive.
Dr Vickery found that there appeared to be a critical acidity level which affected both dippers' breeding success and a stream's population of the invertebrates on which the birds feed.
Dr Vickery's research may have wider relevance, as similar species are found in Western Europe, North and South America and the Western Pacific islands, allowing dippers to be used as a cheap and easy test of stream acidity.
BBC Wildlife March 1993
Pollution: Air
Europe to set tougher sulphur targets
Representatives of 30 European countries, meeting in Geneva, have given near-unanimous support to proposals to set stiffer targets for reductions in emissions of sulphur dioxide.
The negotiations, under the auspices of the UN Economic Commission for Europe, aim to reach agreement on a new "sulphur protocol" , due to be ready for signing by the end of the year.
It is envisaged that there will be different targets for different countries, based on assessments of the "critical loads" of acid rain that ecosystems can tolerate.
The targets which won support at the Geneva meeting involve reducing the gap between acid fallout and critical load by at least 50 per cent.
This would require an average reduction in acid emissions of 63 per cent from 1990 levels, but with some countries being expected to make much higher cuts: a reduction of 89 per cent would be necessary in the case of the UK.
No date for the target to be met has yet been set, although several nations called for a deadline of 2000 for western Europe and 2005 for eastern Europe.
The British delegation was reported to have suggested a deadline of 2010, claiming that an earlier target date would force countries to waste money on fitting desulphurisation equipment to power stations nearing the end of their useful life.
The UK is currently aiming to cut emissions by 48 per cent by 2000 and 60 per cent by 2003.
According to estimates by the UN Commission, the UK would have to spend DM3,500 million a year to meet the new targets, or DM2,900 million more than it had planned.
Current British plans to burn less coal and to install desulphurisation equipment are modest compared to those of other European countries.
New Scientist 13 March Financial Times 1 March
Pollution: Water
British industry must pay for water clean-up
The National Consumer Council has called for industry and motorists to pay more towards the cost of cleaning up the British water supply.
The council, backing the "polluter must pay" argument, says it is unfair for householders to bear the brunt of the cost; a tax should be levied on pesticide manufacturers, it argues, and motorists should pay for road drainage through the car licence duty.
In submissions to the Department of the Environment and the Office of Water Services, the industry regulator, the council opposes water metering, which carries serious health consequences, and says attention should be paid to leaking mains, responsible for water losses of up to 38 per cent in some areas.
Independent
Pollution: Water
EC to enforce sea safety rules
The European Commission is to introduce legislation to force member countries to comply with minimum rules on safety, ship maintenance and training set by the International Maritime Organisation (IMO).
The Commission said, however, that it would be up to member states to propose and enforce measures protecting environmentally sensitive areas from shipping, as this was a matter of national, rather than Community, jurisdiction.
The paper published by the Commission is to be submitted to EC transport ministers; it had been in preparation for some time, but work was speeded up following the recent tanker accidents in the Shetlands and at La Coruna in northern Spain [see ED 67].
The Commission's legislative proposals include minimum training requirements for seafarers, minimum reporting requirements for vessels carrying dangerous and polluting goods, common rules on technical safety standards and the establishment of a "committee on safe seas" .
The main aim, according to Transport Commissioner Abel Matutes, is to enforce the existing IMO rules.
 "There's a great deal of leeway," he said, "between adopting an international convention and actually applying it: that can lead to a lax approach, which can lead to accidents." 
Financial Times 25 February
Pollution: Water
Tokyo's water in bad odour
Citizens of Tokyo are increasingly concerned about the quality of their water supplies.
Complaints centre on the foul-smelling green algae in tap water.
Sales of bottled water are booming.
The problem is caused by a massive increase in household effluent poured into the water system, combined with the large doses of chlorine used by the authorities to deal with it.
The sharp increase in effluent has deprived aquatic organisms of oxygen.
The organisms are normally capable of breaking down much of the effluent.
Japan has always prided itself in the high quality of its water supply.
The Tokyo water authorities say that there is a rapidly growing environmental threat and that the public needs to be educated about water matters and conservation.
BBC Wildlife March 1993
Transport
Airlines rebuff pollution charges
The airline industry has reacted to claims that flying is one of the most environmentally damaging forms of travel.
A report by the European Regional Airlines Association says that only 2 per cent of transport emissions come from aircraft, compared to 94 per cent from motor vehicles.
The Association, which represents small regional airlines, says that discouraging people from using internal air travel would be counter-productive, because most travellers would go by road instead.
The report argues that the best way to cut emissions from aircraft would be to reduce fuel burn; reductions of up to 40 per cent "seem possible" , it claims.
Reducing congestion around major airports would also cut emissions.
Dr Mike Barratt of Earth Resources Research, who carried out research on air travel for the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), says that the rapid rate of growth of air travel is a particular problem, as is the fact that the pollution it causes is injected directly into the atmosphere.
The worst case scenario suggests aircraft could be responsible for up to 43 per cent of the projected rise in global temperature.
Green Magazine March 1993
Transport
Sweden-Denmark bridge rejected by environment commission
Sweden's environment commission has ruled against the construction of a bridge to link the country with Denmark across the Oresund strait, on the grounds that it would damage the strait's sensitive marine environment and cause an unacceptable rise in car pollution.
Commission chairman Ulf Bjallas said the government could not fulfil its pledge to reduce carbon dioxide emissions if the bridge went ahead, adding that the six-year construction period would disrupt the flow of water from the North Sea, vital to the maintenance of marine life in the Baltic.
The decision is embarrassing for the two governments, which last year signed a treaty for joint financing of the Ecu3,000 million project.
Swedish Prime Minister Carl Bildt said he expected the project to proceed, but did not say whether the government would take the unprecedented step of overriding the commission; environmentalists have pressed for a tunnel to be built instead.
The four-party Swedish coalition is likely to be split on the issue, with Environment Minister and Centre Party leader Olof Johansson under strong pressure to drop the project.
In Denmark, work has already begun on demolishing homes to make way for the bridge.
Guardian 27 February European 4-7 March,
Transport
France pushes ahead with biofuel
The French government has signed agreements with the major French oil companies, Elf and Total, to increase production of fuel made from oilseed rape, despite recent studies showing that growing crops to produce "biofuels" for vehicles is neither environmentally nor economically justifiable.
The three-year experimental scheme will cost £40 million and involve using 100,000 hectares of land to produce 175,000 cubic metres of rape methyl ester (RME).
The decision to go ahead follows strong lobbying by French farmers for the promotion of plant fuel and comes in spite of a study commissioned by the government from Raymond Levy, former head of Renault.
Levy's study concluded that including 5 per cent biofuel in all French fuel could cost £800 million a year, while reducing production of greenhouse gases by less than 1 per cent.
Growing, transporting and manufacturing RME would burn fossils fuels equivalent to 53 per cent of RME's energy value.
Levy's conclusions are similar to those in a recent report by Germany's Federal Environment Office [see ED 67].
France lifted energy taxes on biofuels last year and several cities are experimenting with RME-fueled buses.
New Scientist 27 February
Transport
Hungary bans trucks at weekends
Hungary is to ban heavy truck traffic at weekends and on holidays to protect the environment.
The move will also help ease traffic congestion and prevent the country becoming a magnet for heavy vehicle traffic across Europe, the government claims.
Green Magazine March 1993
Transport
Two-wheelers choke Delhi
Delhi has more two-wheel powered vehicles than any other city in the world: 2 million of them, producing 1.4 million kilos of pollutants daily, according to a Bombay-based environment group.
Every year the number of two-wheelers grows by 100,000.
Vehicular exhaust is reponsible for 93 per cent of the carbon dioxide in the city's air, the group says.
Press Trust of India 9 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Transport
UK campaigners lose road battles
The UK High Court has ruled against environmental campaigners attempting to stop two major road schemes.
The court ruled against the London Borough of Greenwich and nine local residents in their attempt to prevent Oxleas Wood, a Site of Special Scientific Interest in south-east London, from being compulsorily purchased to allow construction of the East London River Crossing [see ED 67].
Mr Justice Hutchison acknowledged the special quality of the wood, but ruled that the Secretary of State for the Environment had not acted unreasonably or unlawfully in issuing a compulsory purchase order.
The judge dismissed claims that alternative land offered at Woodlands Farm was not of comparable quality.
The Secretary of State was awarded half his costs, reflecting his defeat on the legal point of whether the court had jurisdiction to consider the case.
The nine, facing costs of £30,000, said they would consider an appeal if funds could be found.
A Friends of the Earth spokesman said: "Mr Justice Hutchison has given the government extremely wide powers to take our best open spaces and give any land they like in exchange.
This judgment means the environment secretary can ignore the fact that unique wildlife habitats are irreplaceable."
In the second case, Waltham Forest and Hackney councils failed to prevent the government taking common land on Hackney marshes to build a link between the A2 and M11.
Mr Justice Owen ruled that the government was "entitled and reasonable" to conclude that holding a public enquiry into the scheme was "not expedient" .
He also concluded that Waltham Forest council had suffered "no substantial prejudice" over the land being offered in exchange.
The council said it would appeal against the decision.
Independent 20 February Guardian 20 February
Waste and Recycling
Fish change sex due to pollution
Sexual hormones in sewage can cause some fish to change sex, according to research funded by the UK Department of the Environment.
The research began after the discovery of hermaphrodite carp next to a large sewage outfall.
Male carp and trout caged next to outfalls began producing vitellogin, a protein found in fish eggs: the rough equivalent of a man beginning to lactate.
The researchers also found that very low concentrations of a synthetic oestrogen hormone found in contraceptive pills affected fish in the same way.
A consultant gynaecologist claimed that some female hormones in sewage are so strong in the Thames during the summer low water period that tap water will sometimes give a positive result in a pregnancy test.
Independent 10 February Guardian 19 February
Waste and Recycling
Taiwan bans waste imports
Taiwan is to ban imports of polychlorobiphenyls (PCBs), lead batteries and transformers with effect from March.
Waste copper, lead, zinc, cadmium and chromium can now only be imported with approval from the Environmental Protection Administration, whose approval is also required for exports of such items.
Central News Agency Taipei 13 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Waste and Recycling
Germany to take back toxic waste from Romania
The German government has agreed to finance the return from Romania of toxic waste illegally shipped there by German companies, following a threat by Greenpeace to return the waste itself and invoice Germany for the work.
Greenpeace workers had begun packaging the 425 tonnes of waste, dumped in the Sibiu area of central Romania, for safe transport back to Germany and said they would remain at the site until the transport promised by German Environment Minister Klaus Töpfer arrived.
Germany agreed to provide DM 2.1 million to finance the return of the waste.
The waste, including banned pesticides and fungicides, much of it in inadequate containers, was produced by companies in the former East Germany.
Le Monde 13 February DPA 10 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Waste and Recycling
UK recycling target in doubt
A consultants' report casts doubt on the feasibility of the UK government's recycling targets.
Meeting the target to recycle half of the country's domestic waste by 2000 could cost each household an extra £50 a year, according to the report, commissioned by the government from Environmental Resources Limited (ERL).
The report concludes that only kerbside collection of recyclable waste could hope to achieve the target, announced by then Environment Minister Chris Patten in 1990.
Universal kerbside collection schemes could collect up to 5.5 million tonnes a year, almost a third of total household waste, but the cost would come to £196 per household a year, even if every single household took part.
Revenues from sale of materials collected and savings on rubbish disposal would be vastly outweighed by the extra cost of collecting and sorting reusable material.
A total of 9.7 million tonnes a year of waste could be recycled, ERL estimates, compared to 900,000 tonnes at present.
The report proposes the granting of government subsidies to councils to promote recycling, together with increased charges for dumping waste.
Independent 1 March Economist 20 February