

Agriculture & Food
Dutch doubts on genetic engineering
A 15-member panel chosen to represent a cross section of the Dutch public has called for a moratorium on all commercial exploitation of genetically manipulated animals because there are still too many unknowns in genetic engineering.
Particular concern was expressed about animal welfare and the chance that "runaway" genes could cross into other animals and plants.
The panellists were selected from a group of 111 people who had responded to newspaper advertisements.
They were briefed extensively by experts about different aspects of the subject, and then took part in a three-day debate organized by the government-funded Foundation for Public Information on Science, Technology and the Humanities.
The panel's report, which has been submitted to a parliamentary committee, set out two lines of argument.
Nine members (i) criticized the government for its inadequate and inconsistent policies on genetic engineering and for giving higher priority to economic considerations than to animal welfare,(ii) criticized scientists for lacking clear research goals, and (iii) expressed deep anxiety about the human genome project, fearing that it might increase opportunities for eugenics.
The other six members, although they were also concerned about genetic engineering, stressed its potential benefits, for example in the development of new drugs, and said that genetic engineering of animals was acceptable provided it was carefully regulated.
New Scientist 5 June
Agriculture & Food
Tests on new rice genes
Chinese scientists have reported encouraging results in trials of a new rice variety genetically engineered to be resistant to one of the crop's major diseases.
Biotechnologists at the Institute of Microbiology of the Chinese Academy of Sciences have been testing rice modified to resist the red stripe virus, which can destroy entire harvests in Southeast Asia.
They used a technique called "biolistics" , which involves "shooting" metal beads coated with genetic material into cells.
The material consisted of a gene which manufactures the protein coats of the red stripe virus.
Tests in other transgenic plant species show that protein coats taken from viruses appear to confer protection against them.
It is not known why.
Ten of the 16 transgenic plants remained completely healthy when infected with the red stripe virus in this way, while the other six showed much milder symptoms than those afflicting the control plants.
Scientists in Japan have also successfully bred rice plants resistant to the red stripe virus.
Rice — the staple food for more than two billion people — is a monocotyledon, one of the hardest types of plant to manipulate genetically.
New Scientist 12 June
Conservation: Habitat
Japan hosts Ramsar amid threats to wetlands
Japan has become the centre of a storm over its plans to build a canal that threatens one of the wetland sites protected under the Ramsar Convention, whose three-yearly meeting it hosts in June.
The convention, drawn up in 1971, requires signatories to list wetland sites for protection and notify the Ramsar bureau of any possible changes that could affect the sites' ecosystems.
Since it joined in 1980 Japan has listed only four sites for protection and one of these, Lake Utonai on the northern island of Hokkaido, is now said to be threatened by secret plans to build a 40-kilometre flood control canal.
The canal plans were not included in Japan's report to the convention, but details were leaked to the Japanese press.
The government's environmental agency claims there is no evidence that the canal will affect Lake Utonai, home to more than 100 species of waterfowl.
Critics say the project will cut across the Bibi river, cutting off most of the water that feeds the lake.
Japan is the only one of the 37 Ramsar signatories not to involve environmental organisations in drawing up its report to the convention.
One such group, the Japanese Wetland Action Network (JAWAN), has put together a list of 24 internationally important wetlands — out of Japan's total of 85 — in particularly urgent need of protection.
These include the "Big Four" — Hakata Bay and Isahaya Bay on Kyushu and the Fujimae tidal flats and Tokyo Bay on Honshu — all mudflats threatened by developments opposed by local opinion [see ED 70].
Japan was expected to announce some new wetlands sites for protection at the meeting, but there was speculation that these would only cover small parts of the areas in need of conservation.
New Scientist 12 June, BBC Wildlife June 1993
Conservation: Habitat
China plans Tibetan reserve
China is to set up what is described as the world's biggest nature reserve, covering 200,000 square kilometres in the Qangtang grasslands of northern Tibet.
Yaks, antelopes, blue sheep, snow leopards, argali, bears and donkeys are among the area's 60 rare species.
About a quarter of the area of Tibet, about 325,000 square kilometres of land, is already designated as nature reserve.
Green Magazine June 1993.
Conservation: Habitat
Debt swap aids Malagasy plants
Missouri Botanical Garden has agreed a debt-for-nature swap with a French bank, enabling it to double the amount of money available for botanical research in Madagascar.
The botanists will "buy" US$750,000 of Madagascar's debt from the bank, paying up to half the value of the debt in dollars, receiving the face value in local currency.
The deal means the French bank will get some of the money it is owed, Madagascar will get debt relief and the Missouri garden will be able to increase its efforts to conserve rare plants, which include training botanists and collecting plants to screen them for medicinal value.
New Scientist 5 June
Conservation: Habitat
EC funds for raft spider's fen
Some £3 million, half of it provided by the European Community habitats committee, is to be spent to prevent the Redgrave and Lopham Fen, near Diss in Norfolk, from drying out.
The 325-acre fen, headwaters of the Waveney river, will be designated a national nature reserve.
It contains several rare species and is the home of Britain's rarest spider, the great raft spider, which is known in only one other site in the UK (at Pevensey in East Sussex) and has all but disappeared elsewhere in Europe because of the draining of its fenland habitats.
Work has already started on saving the fen, which is drying out because of the extraction of drinking water from a borehole by the Suffolk Water Company.
The water company, which is also helping to fund the project, along with the National Rivers Authority, will drill a new borehole far enough away not to effect the water level in the fen.
Guardian 2 June
Conservation: Habitat
Hedgerow bill killed off
A private member's bill requiring landowners to notify local councils before destroying more than 60 feet of hedgerow has failed to make progress in the UK parliament.
The Hedgerow Protection Bill introduced by Conservative MP Peter Ainsworth was "talked out" by fellow Conservatives from rural areas and will receive no further parliamentary time.
Guardian 8 May
Conservation: Species
Biodiversity experts meet
Experts from 24 countries met in Trondheim, Norway, in May under the auspices of the UN Environment Programme (UNEP) to discuss implementation of the biodiversity treaty drawn up at last year's Earth Summit in Rio.
One priority identified by participants was to attempt a census of living species, of which only 1.4 million are known, out of a total estimated at between 5 million and 50 million.
Conducting a census of plant and animal species in tropical regions alone, according to biologist Daniel Janzen of the University of Pennsylvania, would require 30 years of work, at a cost of US$60 million a year.
More research is also needed on the role that biodiversity plays in ecosystems; on existing relationships between fauna and flora, and on means of using natural resources within the context of sustainable development.
Le Monde 26 May
Conservation: Species
USA signs biodiversity pact
Reversing the policy of the Bush administration, the USA has signed the UNCED biodiversity treaty.
US ambassador to the UN Madeleine Albright, who signed the treaty, said: "This signature reflects the Clinton administration's determination to treat environmental threats as seriously as other threats to our security." 
International Herald Tribune 5 June
Conservation: Species
Whale numbers rise
A large increase in the numbers of blue whales has been recorded off the California coast.
More than 2,000 were found, compared to only about 500 in 1979/80.
The numbers of humpback and fin whales had undergone similar increases.
While the increase is encouraging, scientists at the National Marine Fisheries Service warn that the blue whale is still a long way from being taken off the endangered species list.
Some of the increase must be due to migration as the maximum increase biologically possible in the time would be a doubling of the population.
New Scientist 8 May
Conservation: Species
IWC retains whaling ban
The 45th meeting of the International Whaling Commission (IWC) ended in Kyoto, Japan, in defeat for countries which had sought a lifting of the moratorium on commercial whaling [see ED 70].
The attempt to overturn the ban by introducing a system of managed quotas for commercial whaling, led by Norway and Japan, was defeated by 18 votes to six, with six abstentions.
A Japanese proposal for a "coastal community whaling" quota was also defeated.
Norway immediately announced its intention to go ahead with commercial whaling this year while remaining in the IWC.
Later it announced that it would catch 296 minke whales this year —a level based on the recommendations of the IWC scientific committee and regarded as inadequate by many Norwegian whalers.
Japan announced that it would abide by the IWC's decision, although it would continue to catch about 300 minke whales a year for "research purposes" .
Its decision was thought to be motivated by concern about pressure from the US, which threatened during the meeting to impose trade sanctions on countries that resumed commercial whaling.
Both Norway and Japan argue that stocks of minke whales have recovered sufficiently to allow commercial whaling to take place without threatening the species' survival.
There are now estimated to be about 760,000 minke whales in the Antarctic, up from less than 200,000 in the early 1970s, and some supporters of whaling argue that the increase in minke numbers is putting pressure on food stocks and hampering the recovery of more seriously endangered whale species.
A French proposal to turn the Antarctic into a whale sanctuary failed to win the necessary three-quarters majority for adoption, being supported by 19 countries and opposed by eight, but the proposal will be discussed again at next year's meeting after a working group has met to discuss the boundaries of the sanctuary and other details.
The plan would protect whales south of latitude 40° South and would run for 50 years with a review after 10 years.
Again, opposition to the sanctuary plan was led by Japan and Norway, backed by several small Caribbean nations and the Solomon Islands, all recipients of substantial Japanese aid.
A paper presented to the meeting by the British government sought to draw the attention of pro-whaling nations to the attractions of whale-linked tourism, arguing that preserving whales could provide greater financial benefits than killing them.
Four million people went on whale-watching trips in 1991, the paper says, generating income of £185 million worldwide.
The meeting agreed to set up a working group on whale-watching but a British proposal to give the IWC a role in monitoring whale-watching and preparing guidelines to minimise disturbance to the animals was opposed by Japan and Norway and their supporters.
New Scientist 22 May Guardian 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 19, 21 May, Independent 10, 11, 13, 15 May Financial Times 12, 14, 15-16, 17, 19 May Le Monde 13, 16-17 May Kyodo News Service 10 May (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Conservation: Species
Campaign to save lory
The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) has called on the Indonesian government to halt exports of the red and blue lory, Eos histrio, to save it from extinction.
Exports of the bird have increased sharply in recent years; last year it is estimated that 500 of the remaining 2,000 birds were exported from Indonesia, while 200 more died in an Indonesian export house.
A dealer in Singapore will pay US$1,000 for a single specimen.
The birds live on three small Indonesian islands and until recently the main threat to their survival came from loss of habitat.
In 1990, however, the Indonesian wildlife department authorised the capture of 1,000 of the birds.
New Scientist 29 May
Conservation: Species
Ivory trade in Ethiopia
Ivory carving is reported to be still a flourishing industry in Ethiopia, despite the ban on the ivory trade.
Workshops in Addis Ababa, the capital, buy tusks from the south of the country at a cost of about US$50 a kilogram; the products are on sale in the city's markets and gift shops.
The trade is though to be encouraging the poaching of Ethiopian elephants, and possibly also the smuggling of ivory from neighbouring countries such as Kenya.
Smugglers have also been intercepted taking tusks out of Ethiopia, which is estimated to have only about 2,400 elephants, down from about 8,700 in 1986.
BBC Wildlife June 1993
Conservation: Species
China bans rhino horn and tiger bone trading
China has published a ban on trading in rhino horns and tiger bones, coveted ingredients for Chinese traditional medicines.
China has belonged to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) since 1981 but has previously not enforced its provisions.
Observers speculate that its decision to issue the ban now is connected with a desire to demonstrate adherence to international treaties, in an effort to bolster its bid to host the Olympics in the year 2000.
The ban takes the form of a circular stating that it is illegal to sell, purchase, import, export or even carry tiger bones or rhino horns and that they may not be used in medicines.
The ban is to take effect after six months, allowing merchants time to liquidate their existing stocks.
Tiger hunting has been banned in China since the 1960s, but the ban has not been rigorously enforced.
International Herald Tribune 7 June
Conservation: Species
Death for panda poachers
Deng Tianshun and Zhu Xiuying were sentenced to death in Guangzhou, China, for selling three giant panda skins between April 1988 and May 1989.
Independent 1 June
Conservation: Species
British birds have better year
1992 was a better year for waterway birds in the UK, according to the annual survey by members of the British Trust for Ornithology.
The survey of annual changes in breeding populations for 19 species associated with rivers and canals found significant increases in numbers of the Mute Swan, Moorhen, Pied Wagtail and Whitethroat and a significant decline in only one species, the Common Sandpiper.
There were smaller declines in the numbers of two other waders, the Lapwing and Redshank.
The most impressive increase, of 56 per cent between 1991 and 1992, was in Whitethroats, which suffered badly from the impact of the Sahel drought 25 years ago on its wintering areas.
Another BTO survey found that 1992 had been a good breeding season for songbirds.
Of the 23 species surveyed, there were significant increases in numbers for three (Wren, Reed Warbler and Blackcap) and significant decreases for a further three (Whitethroat, Willow Warbler and Blue Tit).
For five species (Song Thrush, Lesser Whitethroat, Willow Warbler, Blue Tit and Reed Bunting), numbers were lower than at any time since the surveys started in 1981.
However, the survey found significant increases in the number of young birds in eight species, with only two decreases, and increases in the percentage of juveniles in six species, with no decreases.
British Trust for Ornithology information 28 May
Conservation: Species
RHS lacks conservation policy
The Royal Horticultural Society (RHS) has made clear that it has yet to develop a conservation policy and will continue to give awards for plants collected in the wild.
At a meeting in London organised by the Flora and Fauna Preservation Society (FFPS), RHS council member Alasdair Morrison said the society did not have a conservation policy because its interests were "too diverse" .
Worries about the collection and trading of wild plants were overemphasised, he said.
Mike Read of FFPS said that the RHS was continuing to behave irresponsibly: "The RHS could take a lead in this issue.
Yet it still seems to consider that collecting threatened species is something worthy of admiration."
At last year's Chelsea Flower Show, an RHS gold medal was awarded to a display including wild plants whose exhibitor had been convicted of illegal import of wild orchids.
The FFPS is involved in schemes to promote small-scale propagation by communities currently paid by wholesalers to collect wild plants.
BBC Wildlife June 1993
Conservation: Species
Four new projects for Species Recovery Programme
English Nature has announced the addition of four new projects to its Species Recovery Programme, bringing the total number of projects to 22.
The new projects involve the fen violet, the New Forest cicada, the water beetle Graphoderis zonatus and threatened Breckland lichens.
The budget of the programme, launched in April 1991, has been increased to £250,000.
The programme aims to achieve the long-term self-sustained survival, in the wild, of species under threat of extinction.
The projects focus on maintaining and protecting the species' habitats, and in some cases establishing them in new habitats.
The fen violet has been found at only two sites, and the New Forest cicada and the water beetle at only one each.
Three of the rarest lichens in the Brecklands are suffering from factors such as acid rain, nitrate pollution and conifer invasion, and specimens have been transferred to other sites, where they are thriving.
Other species covered by the programme include the dormouse, natterjack toad, red squirrel and stinking hawk's-beard.
English Nature information 25 May
Conservation: Species
Rajasthan tiger numbers fall
Only 28 tigers, including three cubs, were found in a census conducted in the Ranthambhore National Tiger Park in Rajasthan, India.
The previous census, in 1991, reported 45 tigers in the park.
No disturbances had been reported in the park, apart from one poaching incident.
The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) recently claimed that tigers would be extinct within 10 years unless governments did more to protect them [see ED 69].
Press Trust of India 28 May (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Conservation: Species
Uzbekistan fights poaching
Uzbekistan has stepped up anti-poaching measures.
Poachers caught with poisonous snakes will be fined 5,000 roubles; for a giant Central Asian lizard the fine will be 10,000 roubles.
The state environmental bodies and the militia are joining forces to set up mobile anti-poaching units.
APN Uzbekistan news agency, Tashkent, 13 May (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Conservation: Species
Voles in decline
Up to 94 per cent of the UK's water voles will have been lost by the end of this century, according to a recent survey.
Green Magazine June 1993.
Conservation: Species
Zimbabwe to change course on wildlife policy?
Zimbabwe may be on the verge of abandoning its controversial policy of treating wildlife as a valuable resource, which has led the country to lobby for a revival of the ivory trade and has attracted criticism from conservationists.
Signs of a policy shift towards a more protectionist approach have already been detected.
This year's expected cull of 5,000 elephants has yet to take place; and one of the controversial wildlife management policy's most vocal proponents has now lost his job as assistant director of the Department of National Parks and Wildlife.
Rowan Martin, who had worked for 20 years with the department, had been widely tipped to get the new post of deputy director of the department, until his arrest in mid-1992 on corruption charges, on which he was later exonerated.
His departure now is seen as the result of a power struggle between those who believe that some wildlife can be privately owned and managed for profit, and those who think all wildlife should belong to the state.
Some Western conservationists have welcomed Martin's departure but local conservationist groups generally supported his policy of giving local communities an interest in preserving wildlife by allowing them to benefit from wildlife management schemes.
New Scientist 12 June
Conservation: Species
US introduces shark quotas
The US has imposed quotas for the catching of sharks in American waters in the Atlantic, Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean.
The measures are designed to halt the sharp decline in shark populations caused by overfishing in recent years.
The quotas cover 39 species; the National Marine Fisheries Service can halt fishing if it finds the catch has reached the quota for the first six months of the year.
The practice of taking only shark fins, for soup, while discarding the rest of the carcase is banned, as is catching of sharks by foreign boats.
New Scientist 15 May
Conservation: Species
Pyrenean bears doomed
The last Pyrenean brown bears will disappear within 15-20 years, even if strict conservation measures are taken now, according to a group of scientists reporting to the French government.
The fate of the bears has become the focus for battles between conservationists and developers.
Last year a court blocked government plans to build a road tunnel through the Aspe valley, which would have threatened the bears' habitat [see ED 65/66].
Bear experts conclude that the only way to maintain a bear population in the Pyrenees would be by importing bears from other parts of Europe.
New Scientist 29 May
Economics & Industry
UK to stamp on bogus green claims
UK Environment Minister David Maclean has said that the government will seek new powers to penalise companies that make bogus environmental claims for their products.
Urgent consideration was being given to changing the Trades Description Act, he told the House of Commons.
Financial Times 27 May
Economics & Industry
Chile pioneers environmental accounting
Chile is to study incorporating environmental accounting in national economic statistics such as gross national product.
A working group has been set up to study the change, which, it is hoped, would give a truer idea of the country's wealth and output.
Green Magazine June 1993
Economics & Industry
WWF calls for greening of world trade body
The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) has said that current proposals for a powerful new multilateral trade organisation (MTO) are not compatible with the goal of sustainable development set by last year's Earth Summit in Rio.
The MTO, it says, should recognise "the need to set limits on trade in order to adequately protect the environment" .
WWF argues that discussion of the MTO, designed to replace the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), has been "unacceptably secretive" and should be taken out of the framework of GATT's Uruguay Round and opened up to public consultation.
Opponents of the MTO claim it would institutionalise the primacy of free trade over environmental protection and make it easier to challenge high national standards on environmental protection as unfair barriers to trade.
They point out that the recent North American Free Trade Agreement signed by the USA, Canada and Mexico contains more explicit environmental protection language than so far proposed for the MTO.
WWF proposes that environmental protection and the eradication of poverty should be made explicit objectives of the MTO, and that non-governmental organisations should be given consultation rights, enabling them to make submissions to investigations of trade disputes.
Financial Times 1 June
Economics & Industry
Body Shop recognises Kayapo intellectual property rights
The Body Shop is to sign an intellectual property rights agreement with the Kayapo Indians of Brazil, who already harvest and process brazil nuts for the Body Shop.
The agreement, the first of its kind between a company and an indigenous group, aims to ensure that the Kayapo benefit from any commercial development of other materials which they harvest on their lands.
The agreement will be overseen by the Oxford-based Foundation for Ethno-biology, which is engaged in recording and evaluating the environmental knowledge accumulated by different cultures.
By guaranteeing their intellectual property rights, the Body Shop says, "we can help indigenous peoples conserve their environment, their culture and their knowledge" .
Intellectual property rights, it says, recognise that the accumulated wisdom of centuries of tribal lore is a valuable commodity — and one that in the past has been exploited without acknowledgement or compensation by Western interests.
Body Shop information 26 May
Economics & Industry
Ecolabelling to cover animal testing
The European Commission has requested that the criteria document for the "ecolabel" for hair spray should include reference to animal testing and the EC Cosmetics Directive, which envisages a cessation of animal testing of cosmetics by 1998.
According to the Body Shop, the Commission's latest move undermines the claim of the UK Ecolabelling Board that animal testing did not form part of its remit.
The Body Shop had brought a complaint against the Board, claiming that it was prejudging the Commission's view, and that it was paying too much attention to industrial lobby groups and not enough to the concerns of consumers and environmental organisations.
The Body Shop had also said that it would not apply for an ecolabel for its hair spray, because the standards would allow virtually any manufacturer to claim environmental virtue [see ED 67].
Body Shop information 20 May
Economics & Industry
Hotel groups' green charter
Leading international hotel groups have signed a green charter organised by the Prince of Wales's Business Leaders Forum.
The initiative, based on ideas introduced by the Inter-Continental group, focuses on areas such as energy-saving heating, recycling waste and buying eco-friendly products.
Hilton International, Forte and Holiday Inn are among the groups that have signed the charter.
Cutting down the amount of laundry, consuming large quantities of detergent and water, might be one aspect of the charter's influence that guests would notice first.
Speaking at the charter's launch, Jonathon Porritt said that it was extraordinary that "people who are paying perhaps £200 a night are so dirty that they need a new towel every night" .
Bill Webster of Hilton said that at first it might be voluntary for guests to use their towels twice.
Guardian 22 May
Economics & Industry
Greenpeace warns Poland of foreign exploitation
Poland must exercise greater control over the environmental impact of foreign investment projects in the country, Greenpeace warns in a recent report.
The report, Open Borders, Broken Promises, claims that Poland faces "a future of economic exploitation and further environmental decay as it seeks international capital with which to rebuild its industry and economy" .
Contractual undertakings on environmental protection should be included in privatisation programmes and other foreign investment projects.
The report criticises a number of existing projects.
It points out that in February 1990 European Community "aid" to Poland took the form of pesticides worth about US$60 million, some of which were banned or severely restricted in Western countries.
Guardian 5 June
Economics & Industry
Israelis tap desert heat
Scientists at the Israeli Institute of Technology are working on a project to produce power from salt water and the heat of the desert.
The plan involves building an enormous tapering chimney, up to 3,000 feet high and 1,000 feet across the base.
Salt water would be pumped to the top and released to fall as artificial rain, meeting hot air rising from openings at the bottom.
The rapidly cooled air would fall, turning electricity-generating turbines.
The rain would meanwhile be desalinated by evaporation and filtration, providing fresh water as a bonus.
The scientists have used a model to test the technology, which was an official secret until recently.
They envisage a series of towers along a canal linking the Dead Sea and Red Sea.
The construction costs would be huge, although the actual cost of producing electricity could be as low as US$0.02-0.03 a kilowatt hour.
Guardian 24 May
Energy
Energy advice "inadequate" 
Advice on energy conservation provided by British gas and electricity companies is "hopelessly inadequate" , according to the Consumers' Association.
Concerned that the imposition of VAT on domestic power and light next year will cause hardship, the Consumers' Association wants better advice to help people reduce bills and conserve energy.
The association, which contacted companies for advice on draught proofing and insulation for elderly people on income support, described the advice provided by the energy advice lines of the British Gas regions and the electricity supply companies as poor overall, and sometimes wrong.
Half the British Gas regions did not tell callers that grants were available to cover most of the cost.
Only three of the electricity companies gave satisfactory advice.
The association called for the standard of advice offered to be monitored by the industry watchdogs.
It also criticised conservation advice from shops and do-it-yourself stores.
Only one DIY store in 30 provided adequate advice on draught-proofing and insulation.
Independent 3 June
Energy
Three Gorges Dam opposed
International environmental activists are campaigning against World Bank funding for China's controversial Three Gorges Dam project.
A "letter of concern" delivered by nine environmental groups to a UN-sponsored environmental meeting and the Chinese Finance Ministry claims China has grossly underestimated the financial and environmental costs.
Far Eastern Economic Review 10 June
Energy
Narmada families vow to die
In a last bid to stop construction of the Sardar Sarovar dam, 22,500 families in India's Narmada Valley have pledged to drown in the rising waters this monsoon season.
With the dam wall now standing at 57 metres, this year's monsoon is expected to flood the first few villages.
If completed the dam would displace 100,000 people (60,000 of them tribal) and submerge 40,000 hectares.
The dam will mainly benefit industry and cities.
Local villagers are prepared to sacrifice their lives rather than move to the inadequate, drought-prone resettlement areas; many who moved to the resettlement areas in past years are now returning to their threatened villages.
Local and international campaigning forced the World Bank to stop funding the dam project but the Indian government appears determined to continue with it [see EDs 61, 64, 69].
Since October 1982 more than 800 protesters are reported to have been arrested on false charges and many have been tortured, according to Survival International.
Survival International Urgent Action Bulletin, May
Energy
Wind lights Scottish station
A railway station at Corrour in the Scottish Highlands is now lit by a wind turbine.
The station, seven miles from the nearest road, has no mains electricity.
Now, thanks to the turbine and an automatic lighting system, the lights come on half an hour before a train arrives and go off half an hour after it leaves.
Green Magazine June 1993
Energy
Germans buy Norwegian hydro-power
Norway's electricity utility Statkraft has signed a 25-year agreement to supply hydroelectric power to PreussenElektra, one of the big three German power companies, a further step in Germany's move away from dependence on nuclear and coal-fired power stations.
The deal, for an initial 2,000 million kWh to be supplied to the German grid, was welcomed by the Green Party as "a step towards abandoning nuclear energy" , although PreussenElektra denied that this was the intention.
A cable link from Norway to Germany, perhaps via Denmark, is also to be built.
PreussenElektra is also involved in laying a cable link to Sweden for future exchanges of power.
Financial Times 18 May
Environmental Politics
Western clean-up plan for East
A common strategy to help clean up Central and Eastern Europe has been adopted by 50 environment ministers from Europe, the US, Canada and Japan.
The Environmental Action Programme, prepared by the World Bank and OECD, lists air pollution as the region's most serious health hazard, followed by the need to improve and protect drinking water.
A third priority is to stop irreversible damage to the natural environment.
The programme makes no mention, however, of highly expensive tasks of cleaning up toxic waste dumps and military sites.
The programme is not binding on any of the signatories but is likely to influence the lending and spending of Western donors.
It is the West's firmest commitment so far to helping clean up environmental damage in the East but also its clearest statement yet that it is not willing or able to pay for the process.
It is hoped that the plan will help to release funds that have been held up because of shortages of data or skilled staff in the East.
The main emphasis of the plan is to look for small and inexpensive solutions, and it places the onus on governments in the East to take steps that make economic sense.
Delegates to the signing conference in Lucerne warned that funding for environmental projects would be extremely constrained for the next five to 10 years.
International Herald Tribune 5 May
Environmental Politics
Gorbachev to head new environmental body
A new organisation has been launched to provide scientific expertise during environmental emergencies.
The first president of International Green Cross (IGC) is to be former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, who suggested the idea three years ago.
IGC will eventually have offices in Geneva, The Hague and Moscow and a staff of 100.
At the moment it is still looking for funding from private and public sources; the Netherlands has provided an initial grant of US$1.5 million.
IGC intends to have three programme areas: facilitating attempts to prevent "impending man-made disasters" ; "promoting value change through education and communication" , and developing an "international ecological law" .
Creation of an "environmental catastrophe response unit" is being discussed and a database of scientists with expertise to help in environmental emergencies is to be set up.
 "My conviction," says Gorbachev,"is that the state of the environment should have absolute priority above all the other problems facing us today.
We need an environmental revolution."
BBC Wildlife June 1993 New Scientist 5 June
Environmental Politics
France to develop eco-citizens
France's new Environment Minister Michel Barnier says that his priority is to strengthen education and training on environmental issues.
Addressing the 25th congress of the environmental federation France Nature Environnement in Paris, he said he wanted an understanding of ecology and the environment to form part of education from primary to university levels, and in particular at the "grandes écoles" responsible for educating the elite of French officialdom.
Launching an education action programme called "A Thousand Challenges for the Plant" , Barnier said he wanted to make every young French man or woman an eco-citizen, developing environmental consciousness for future generations.
Barnier also expressed confidence in the future of renewable energy sources, especially solar power.
He said he thought it possible that, within five years, one French house in a hundred would be equipped with solar power, compared with one in a thousand today.
Le Monde 11 May
Environmental Politics
Second Brazilian activist killed
A second leading Brazilian environmentalist campaigner has been murdered, following the assassination of Greenpeace activist Paulo Cesar Vinha [see ED 70].
Arnaldo Ferreira, a local leader of the Rural Workers' Union in Eldorado do Carajas, Amazonia, was shot dead as he slept, four days after the discovery of Vinha's body.
Ferreira had strong connections with Greenpeace Brazil, whose director Rubem Almeida described him as "a dedicated rainforest activist" .
New Scientist 15 May
Environmental Politics
Mediterranean ministers meet
Environment ministers from countries bordering the Mediterranean met in Casablanca from 24-26 May.
Israel's Environment Minister Yossi Sarid attended the meeting, the first time an Israeli official has attended a regional conference in an Arab state, although delegates were at pains to play down this aspect, stressing that environmental problems went beyond political differences.
The conference, organised by the World Bank and European Investment Bank and successor to one held in Barcelona in 1989, aimed to draw up a programme of technical assistance to protect the Mediterranean from pollution.
Le Monde 28 May Middle East Economic Digest 4 June
Environmental Politics
Green Realignment suffers early defection
Green Realignment, a splinter group from the British Green Party, has held its inaugural conference, at which it was decided that the group would aim to steer a middle course between acting as a political party and as a pressure group.
Green Realignment's independent existence got off to an uncertain start when one of the six members of its steering group, Lou Betts, announced that he had decided to rejoin the Green Party.
Independent 8 June
Environmental Politics
Green House awards for MPs
Chris Smith, Labour member of parliament for Islington South & Finsbury, received the accolade of "Best MP" in the second annual Green House Political Awards, organised by Green Magazine and Environmental Policy Consultants to recognise the contributions of individual politicians to protecting the environment.
Smith received the award for his commitment to "greening" the Labour Party, his efforts to keep the environment on the Westminster agenda, and his radical thinking on integrating economic and environmental policy.
Peter Ainsworth, Conservative member for Surrey East, was "Best Campaigning MP" for his willingness to promote the controversial — and ultimately unsuccessful — Hedgerows Bill [see page 3, this issue]and his skill in negotiating with the conflicting interest groups.
Cynog Dafis, the Plaid Cymru MP for Ceredigion & Pembroke North, was judged "Best Newcomer" for articulating the "Green Philosophy" at Westminster and his energetic campaign for his Energy Conservation Bill.
A special international award was given to Alexey Yablokov, Russian President Boris Yeltsin's special environmental adviser, for his willingness to alert Yeltsin to the extent of Russia's ecological problems.
The Booby Prize went to Transport Secretary John MacGregor for the environmental destruction caused by his road building programme.
The Green House Awards are sponsored by Severn Trent, B&Q and the Combined Heat and Power Association.
Environmental Policy Consultants information 7 June
Environmental Politics
Labour's green commission
The UK Labour Party has set up a commission to draw up policies on the environment.
Speaking at the launch, party leader John Smith said that adapting to environmental changes could create 700,000 jobs and generate business worth £140,000 million by the end of the century.
Labour was convinced, he said, that sensible environment policy could both promote employment and open up new areas of opportunity for industry.
The commission, whose members include Labour's environmental spokesman Chris Smith, will produce a policy document for the 1994 party conference.
Smith admitted that one of its tasks will be to educate the party's own members about the environmental message.
Guardian 8 June Independent 8 June
Environmental Politics
Environmental agency goes back on the shelf
The UK government has shelved plans to set up an environmental agency because of lack of parliamentary time in the next session for the necessary legislation.
The move means further delay in implementing one of the Conservative Party's election promises, putting off passage of the bill until 1995 at the earliest, and it gives a clear signal that the environment, in the eyes of ministers, has become less important on the political agenda than issues such as law and order and education.
The party's election manifesto promised to establish an agency combining the functions of the National Rivers Authority, the Inspectorate of Pollution and the local councils' waste regulation activities.
Legislation to create the agency has been delayed by a dispute between the Department of the Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture over its role.
This dispute has been settled too late for the bill to be included in the parliamentary session that starts in November.
Financial Times 7 June
Environmental Politics
Warren Spring labs to close
The UK's leading environmental research laboratory, at Warren Spring in Hertfordshire, is to close in March 1994.
The decision was taken by the Department of Trade & Industry following the sale of the laboratory site for £25 million.
A secret report into the laboratory's future concluded that the cheapest option was to close the laboratory, lay off half of the 200 scientists and move the rest to the government laboratories run by AEA Technology at Harwell in Oxfordshire.
Founded in 1959, Warren Spring has provided data on factory emissions, acid rain, recycling, land contamination and industrial waste.
Its biggest customer is the Department of the Environment (DoE), which, however, was not consulted about its closure.
Last year Warren Spring carried out research worth £5 million for the DoE and some current work may now have to be put out to tender.
PA Consulting, which prepared the secret report on Warren Spring's future, has also competed against it for government contracts.
Guardian 12 May, Independent 12 May New Scientist 22, 29 May
Forests
Europe loses ancient forests
Europe's ancient woodlands are being felled more quickly than the tropical rain forests: about 90 per cent of the temperate forest that once covered the continent has disappeared and the remaining pockets of old growth woodland are being replaced by monoculture timber plantations.
The World Wide Fund for Nature is pressing European agriculture and forestry ministers to decide on "real action" at a summit on forestry protection in Helsinki in June.
Remaining large areas of old-growth forest in Eastern Europe are proving a tempting source of hard currency at a time of rising world timber prices.
Environmentalists are pressing for a ban on logging in ancient forests throughout Europe.
Trees cut in old-growth forests are usually replaced with a single, usually fast-growing, species, destroying the diversity that previously nourished wildlife.
Plantations of exotic non-native trees use up large quantities of water, which can have adverse affects on natural habitats.
There is also growing concern about the threat of acid rain, pollution and forest fires across Europe.
European countries refused to include themselves in the Rio summit agreement requiring developing countries to introduce sustainable forest management by 2000.
Their attitude is seen as giving Third World nations a licence to opt out themselves.
European 6-9 May
Forests
Clayoquot forests to be felled
British Columbia has announced plans to allow logging to continue in the ancient temperate rainforests of Vancouver Island and Clayoquot Sound, despite growing local and international opposition [see ED 70].
In an effort to meet election promises of environmental reform, however, the province's New Democratic Party government says it will create "one of the largest areas of protected old-growth rainforest on the west coast of North America" , covering 33 per cent of the sound.
The government's critics charge that the area to be protected includes bogs, rock and tundra and that over 86 per cent of the surviving big trees will be cut by MacMillan Bloedel, a logging company in which the government recently invested C$50 million.
The logging plans are opposed by the sound's Native American population and environmental groups, including Greenpeace, the Friends of Clayoquot Sound and the Western Canada Wilderness Committee.
Stephen Owen of the Commission of Resources and the Environment, a body set up by the province's government to reach a consensus on forestry issues, has called for the area to be designated a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve, covered by the Biodiversity Treaty.
BBC Wildlife June 1993
Forests: Tropical
Mining and oil threaten Bari and Yukpa
The Bari and Yukpa Indians, who live in the forested mountains of the Venezuela/Colombia border, are threatened by the expansion of coal mining and oil exploration on to their lands.
Neither the 2,000 Bari or the 6,000 Yukpa have been granted full land rights.
The Venezuelan state coal mining company Corpozulia has continued to develop open-cast mining on Yukpa lands despite it being declared illegal by the Venezuelan Agrarian Office.
One Yukpa village has responded to repeated harassment by setting up a barricade to stop the company setting up mining equipment on their land.
The Bari lands are also threatened by coal mining, and national oil company Maraven has begun seismic tests in the area.
Some Bari are reported to be working in the oil camps under semi-slavery conditions.
Road and bridge construction is under way to serve the coal and oil operations, opening the way for further settlement.
Survival International Urgent Action Bulletin May 1993
Forests: Tropical
Malaysia seeks compensation
Malaysia is calling for industrial countries to compensate tropical timber producers for introducing sustainable forest management.
 "Buyers should be made to pay a sustainability premium for the products over and above the market prices," said Malaysian Primary Industries Minister Lim Keng Yaik at a meeting of the International Tropical Timber Organisation.
The organisation has set 2000 as the target for tropical timber producers to introduce sustainable policies.
Producers, he said, need "appropriate and adequate incentives for their efforts in producing sustainable tropical timber products" .
The Malaysian state of Sarawak, Lim said, planned to cut timber output to 9.2 million cubic metres a year by 1994 as recommended by the organisation.
Lim put forward a plan to break the deadlock between tropical and temperate timber producers over the introduction of production limits and sustainable forest management policies.
International Herald Tribune 18 May
Forests: Tropical
Vietnamese felling goes on
Vietnam's forests are still being depleted, despite bans on logging and the export of logs.
Logging remains crucial to the economy in the central provinces of Binh Dinh and Gia Lai and the bans are seen as being largely for international consumption, with little effort made to enforce them on the ground.
Vietnam also allows the transit of logs and sawn timber from neighbouring Cambodia and Laos to the ports of Qui Nhon and Ho Chi Minh City.
Exports of logs and timber are a vital source of foreign exchange earnings for Vietnam, according to foreign traders.
Timber traders from Hong Kong, Taiwan and Singapore are active in the market, and most of the timber ends up in Thailand, where it is made into furniture, plywood and parquet flooring.
Forest loss is also caused by migratory slash-and-burn agriculture, especially by minority peoples of the central highlands.
Bangkok Post, 18 May
Forests: Tropical
Guarani campaign to stop dam
Brazil's 217 remaining Guarani Indians are campaigning to stop the building of a dam on the headwaters of the Cipivari river in Sao Paulo state.
The US$180 million project, for which funding has been promised by the World Bank, would reduce the flow of water to the Branco river, on which the Guarani depend, and result in 700 construction workers being camped on the edge of their 6,744-acre forest reserve for several years.
Working with environmentalist groups, the Guarani Indians argue that Brazil cannot afford to lose any more of the few remaining areas of Atlantic rainforest, of which only 5 per cent is intact.
The campaigners have won a temporary court ban on construction work and persuaded the Sao Paulo state government's environmental department to reject four successive environmental impact studies by the project's promoter, state water company Sabesp.
If Sabesp fails to get its fifth study approved by the end of August it will lose US$110 million in World Bank funding and would have to abandon the project.
Sabesp claims that the project is needed to supply more than 500,000 people in the state who are still without running water and a further 2 million suffering severe shortages.
Campaigners claim that the company has not examined other approaches, such as water conservation and the cleaning of existing reservoirs.
Guardian 3 June
General Reports
EC discussion on remedying environmental damage
The European Commission has published a Green Paper on remedying environmental damage.
The paper, designed to provoke discussion, considers the usefulness of civil liability as a means of allocating responsibility for the costs of remedying environmental damage and of preventing future damage.
It looks at joint compensation schemes cases in which civil liability principles do not apply.
Article 130 of the EEC Treaty enshrines the principle that the polluter should pay.
Civil liability for the cost of cleaning up environmental contamination would be a concrete application of this principle.
There are two approaches: with fault and strict liability.
The first requires proof of negligence, the second does not require that fault be established but does require that the injured party prove that damage was caused by someone's action.
The Commission points out that it is often difficult to attribute responsibility, especially when damage is the cumulative result of activities undertaken by many parties.
Difficulties also arise in the case of damage done in the past, or when the effects do not manifest themselves for some time.
Some legal definitions need to be agreed before progress can be made, including a definition of the environment and what constitutes damage.
Community-wide action involving the doctrine of civil liability has been taken in the area of product safety and consumer protection, but is concerned only with losses by a private consumer.
Draft directives on civil liability for damage caused by waste are under discussion.
Joint compensation schemes use funds collected through charges and contributions to clean up or restore the environment.
Schemes set up by the oil industry are one example; another is the Superfund in the USA, for the clean-up of hazardous waste sites.
The Commission has already proposed establishing a compensation fund for damage caused by waste.
The Commission proposes a system combining the strengths of a liability regime with the advantages of compensation systems, providing a means to repair environmental damage even in cases where liability could not be established.
The Commission invites comments on its Green Paper before October 1993, after which formal discussions will begin.
Commission of the European Communities 7 May
Global Warming
No climatic apocalypse yet
The effects of global warming have been fairly benign so far, according to scientists in the USA, with most of the temperature rise taking place at night and in the winter and spring.
Studies published in the National Geographic Society's journal Research & Exploration show that the phenomenon thought to account for the warming at night —increased cloud cover — is probably caused by the warming itself and will thus continue to moderate the effect as long as the warming continues by keeping day temperatures lower.
Other studies suggest, however, that the cloudiness is caused by fossil fuel pollution, which will gradually diminish.
 "The popular vision of climate apocalypse is wrong" according to Patrick Michaels of the University of Virginia, who suggests one effect of the trend, if it continues, could be longer growing seasons.
James Hansen of the Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York, one of the first to warn of the dangers of global warming, agrees that most of the warming has been at night but expects warming factors eventually to overtake cooling factors, leading to significant rises in daytime temperatures.
International Herald Tribune 2 June
Global Warming
Coastal erosion hits east coast
Parts of the British coastline are being eroded at rates of up to six metres a year — but coastal defences, used to combat erosion, may be causing problems elsewhere on the coast.
For example, if the rapid erosion from a cliff edge is feeding sediment to a low-lying area nearby, then the low-lying area may be placed in danger if the cliff erosion is interrupted.
According to Dr John Pethick, a coastal geomorphologist at Hull University, the best solution is to avoid building in the worst-affected areas, and to compensate landowners for loss of land to the sea.
The compensation should be arranged at a European level, because sediment washed from the UK's east coast can end up strengthening natural sea defences in Belgium, the Netherlands and Germany.
Global warming is contributing to rising sea levels around the world, according to Pethick, at the rate of about one millimetre a year.
The softer rocks of the UK east coast are particularly vulnerable.
Current thinking on coastal protection is to surrender land wherever possible and to imitate or encourage natural defences, such as beach building.
Independent 9 June
Global Warming
New compressor could cut emissions
A new compressor for fridges and air conditioners could reduce carbon dioxide emissions in the USA, where it was developed, by the equivalent of taking 2 million cars off the road.
The new compressor is between 9 and 15 per cent more efficient than current models, according to the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), which helped finance its development.
The new compressor eliminates the crank used in existing models, increasing efficiency.
If it was used in all refrigerators in the USA, carbon dioxide output would fall by 9 million tonnes, according to the EPA.
New Scientist 12 June
Global Warming
El Niño back early
El Niño, the periodic reversal of winds and ocean currents in the southern Pacific, has returned earlier than expected.
The phenomenon, which disrupts climatic conditions across the globe, normally appears every three or four years, but the latest El Niño, thought to have ended last summer, appears to have revived this spring, to the surprise of researchers who successfully predicted previous occurrences.
Severe recent flooding in the Andes was one of the first consequences of El Niñshow the impact of global warming, with a 0.041° C mean increase between 1963 and 1990.
The underground measurements, taken 12.8 metres below ground by researchers from the University of Minnesota, show less variation from year to year and season to season, making them more useful in determining long-term trends.
The researchers say that the value of the data will increase as the record becomes longer.
New Scientist 15 May
Nuclear Power
French nuclear power costs
The government's annual report on the production costs of electricity in France has confirmed that nuclear-powered stations are the most cost-effective means of producing electricity provided they operate for at least 6,000 hours per year.
Coal-and gas-powered stations are more economical when used for a shorter period.
The calculations compare new installations which would be operational by 2003 and include research and development costs as well as reprocessing and waste-disposal costs.
The costs for nuclear energy are considerably below those in the USA and Britain.
The government attributes this to the improvements in efficiency achieved during the course of the country's intensive reactor building programme.
Le Monde 2 June
Nuclear Power
The blue hills of Snowdonia
Seven years after the Chernobyl explosion, 80 per cent of the radioactive contamination suffered by the hills of Snowdonia and Cumbria is still in the soil.
The biggest culprit is caesium-137, which has a half-life of 30 years.
The best way to "lock up" the caesium, to prevent it being taken up by plants and into the food chain, is by spreading the affected areas with certain minerals, most successfully ammonium ferric hexacyanoferrate, or Prussian blue, which turns the hills blue.
According to the Institute of Grassland and Environmental Research in Aberystwyth, if no action is taken, government controls on sheep grazing in the affected areas will have to stay "for the foreseeable future" .
New Scientist 29 May
Nuclear Power
£40 billion clean-up bill
The cost of decommissioning nuclear power stations and reprocessing spent nuclear fuel in Britain could reach £40 billion, according to a report by the National Audit Office (NAO).
The NAO report concentrates on the £18 billion bill faced by the industry in closing down and dismantling stations (of which the government has agreed to cover a third).
It points out, however, that decommissioning costs are spread over a long period, while those of reprocessing spent fuel are more immediate.
It concludes: "The generators will be called upon to meet other nuclear liabilities before most of the decommissioning costs arise.
This will deplete future income streams."
It says that reprocessing costs will have to be met in the short term from proceeds of the fossil fuel levy (a 10 per cent charge on all electricity bills) and other income.
Guardian 4 June
Nuclear Power
Safety fears on Sellafield deep storage
Plans to set up a deep repository for nuclear waste near Sellafield in Cumbria are attracting growing criticism.
The annual report by the UK government's Radioactive Waste Management Advisory Committee suggested that water could seep from deep volcanic rocks beneath the site to sandstone nearer the surface, introducing a continuous rivulet of radioactive waste into the environment.
The target date for establishing the repository was also attacked as unrealistic; the earliest any burial could begin would be 2010, the report said, more than three years after the date set by nuclear waste disposal company Nirex, which is to build the repository.
Both the committee and Nirex agree that there is at present insufficient information about underground water flows at the site to state categorically whether it would be safe or not.
The underground caverns would hold up to 2 million cubic metres of low- and medium-level waste from the UK's Magnox reactors and British Nuclear Fuel's (BNFL's) thermal oxide reprocessing plant (Thorp) at Sellafield.
Uncertainty about the safety of the deep repository has implications for the Thorp project, which is still awaiting permission to start operations from HM Inspectorate of Pollution.
The committee chairman, Professor John Knill, said that the full range of environmental impact assessments had not been carried out to establish whether BNFL's proposed policy of "radioactive substitution" at Thorp — storing low- and medium-level waste permanently for foreign customers while sending back a "radiological equivalent" of high-level waste to reduce transport costs — would be environmentally neutral.
 "The principle behind substitution is that it should carry no environmental penalty," he said.
 "But before you can say it is environmentally neutral, you need to know the safety case behind the deep underground repository." 
Knill added that although the commercial and strategic logic for the Thorp project had collapsed with the end of the cold war, it might still be needed to help nations that could not cope with their own nuclear waste.
According to a government report, by 2030 the amount of high-level nuclear waste stored in the UK will be at least 8 per cent and could up to 20 per cent higher than previous estimates if the Thorp project goes ahead.
Friends of the Earth urged the government to delay any decision on Thorp until after the advisory committee completes its review of radioactive waste disposal for the next 20 years, which is expected next year.
Guardian 12 May, Financial Times 12, 14 May, Independent 12 May, New Scientist 22 May
Nuclear Power
Russia details submarine reactor threat
The Soviet nuclear submarine Komsomolets, which sank off Norway in 1989, could soon begin leaking plutonium and poison rich fishing grounds, the submarine's designers claim.
However, Western scientists allege that the Russians are exaggerating the dangers in a bid to raise funds to clean up the wreck.
Rubin, the designers of all Soviet nuclear submarines, says leakage of plutonium from corroded nuclear torpedoes is not expected to start until 1995 or 1996, but when it starts strong currents could disperse the contamination over distances of up to 100 kilometres.
Western scientists argue that the plutonium is more likely to sink to the bottom and stay there.
The submarine sank after a fire in April 1989, killing 42.
The wreck lies 500 kilometres off the Norwegian coast in waters nearly 1.5 kilometres deep.
An expedition is to visit the site later this year to assess the situation, and the European Community is considering whether to provide financial support for the expedition.
A report submitted to the International Maritime Organisation warns that hundreds of Russian sailors are at risk of serious contamination because accommodation shortages force them to live on dangerous nuclear submarines.
Around 100 submarines withdrawn from service are moored at sea because there are no facilities for treating their radioactive components.
The decaying submarines, with their crews still living on board, are tied to buoys near the submarine bases at Murmansk and Vladivostok.
The most urgent task, the report says, is to remove spent reactor fuel and store it in sealed containers on land.
The report estimates it would cost 6,000 million roubles to build reprocessing facilities, which Russia cannot afford.
Russia is appealing for Western aid to deal with the problem.
The report also give details of the dumping at sea of nuclear materials, both accidentally and deliberately, by the Soviet and Russian navies [see ED 69, 70].
Twenty nuclear reactors have been dumped at sea, mostly in the Arctic, seven of them containing nuclear fuel.
International Herald Tribune 22 May, European 6-9 May
Nuclear Power
Tomsk-7 radioactivity measured in Sweden
A radioactive cloud released by the explosion at the Tomsk-7 nuclear plant in Siberia on 6 April was detected over northern Europe [see ED 70].
The Swedish Defence Research Institute said, however, that the radioactivity it had detected was a million times less than that released by the Chernobyl explosion in 1986.
Western experts have been reconstructing the course of events that led to the explosion in a tank containing uranium and plutonium, with the help of reports from the International Atomic Energy Agency, which visited the site after the incident.
The explosion appears to have occurred during an operation to extract plutonium 239, in which too high a concentration of nitric acid was used, causing a violent reaction.
Le Monde 13 May
Ozone layer
Polish bureau established
Poland's Institute of Industrial Chemistry has set up a bureau for the protection of the ozone layer.
It will coordinate scientific and technical research, prepare advice on the elimination of ozone-destroying substances, and build up a database on the production, consumption, use, export and import of such substances.
PAP news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 19 May
Ozone layer
Volcanic chlorine ruled out
Chlorine emitted during volcanic eruptions is not responsible for damage to the ozone layer, two US researchers have concluded.
The findings by A. Tabazadah and Richard Turco of the University of California in Los Angeles (UCLA) put into question the view held by some scientists that ozone depletion is caused not only by manufactured chlorine-containing chemicals like chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) but also by "natural" processes such as emissions into the stratosphere of volcanic chlorine.
The study shows that although large amounts of hydrogen chloride are released during some volcanic eruptions, this is effectively washed out in the rain that invariably accompanies an eruption.
The researchers did find that volcanic eruptions encourage the destruction of stratospheric ozone by providing a profusion of aerosol particles, which act as catalysts for the reactions that destroy ozone.
However, these reactions only take place because of the presence of manufactured chlorine in the stratosphere.
New Scientist 5 June
Pollution
China lists polluters
The State Administration for Environmental Protection has made public the names of 3,000 businesses which it says are responsible for the lion's share of China's industrial pollution.
According to Wang Yangzu, deputy director of the agency, these businesses account for only 4 per cent of polluters but are responsible for over 60 per cent of the total industrial pollution caused.
 "China will be much cleaner if major efforts are made…to control these enterprises" , he said.
The list includes some of the country's leading industrial plants.
Xinhua news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 25 May
Pollution
Czech claim on environmental improvements
The Prime Minister of the Czech Republic, Vaclav Klaus, has said that the accelerating degradation of the country's environment typical of the 1980s has been curbed.
Following a cabinet discussion of a report on the environmental situation, he said that since 1989 the emissions of solid pollutants had fallen by 12 per cent, sulphur oxides by 11 per cent and nitrogen oxides by 21 per cent .
CTK news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 19 May
Pollution
NAFTA environmental fund plan
The US and Mexican governments are examining a proposal to set up an environmental fund to help tackle pollution problems on the border between the two countries.
The proposal, put forward by the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), appears to be aimed at defusing the strong US opposition on environmental grounds to the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) between Canada, Mexico and the United States.
Members of the US Congress and environmentalists are concerned that the agreement, which has been signed but has yet to be ratified, will encourage US companies to transfer operations across the border to Mexico to take advantage of lax enforcement of labour and environmental standards.
The capital for the fund would be put up by the three governments.
It would be administered by the IADB, which has experience in lending for environmental projects in Latin America.
Funds would be made available to Mexican regional and local authorities and utilities for specific projects.
Financial Times 22-23 May
Pollution
Russian pollution records
Monitoring of air pollution has shown that levels of certain pollutants in up to 20 Russian towns are as much as ten times above permitted maximums.
Air pollution is particularly bad in Aleksandrovsk-Sakhalinsky, Saint Petersburg, Volgograd, Moscow, Vyborg and Magnitogorsk.
Water pollution levels are also alarmingly high.
The Volga and its tributaries the Oka and Kama and the Ob and its tributaries Irtysh and Tobol are the most polluted.
Traces of pesticides in the water are 10-15 times above permissible levels in one district, and traces of ammonium and nitrogen are 10-25 times above the limit in three districts.
RFE/RL Research Report June
Pollution
Agreement on "Black Triangle" 
The governments of the Czech Republic, Germany and Poland have signed an agreement to clean up the "Black Triangle" , the border region of the three countries, which is heavily polluted by emissions from power stations and industrial plants.
The three governments will fund specific environmental projects in the region.
A coordination centre has been established in the Czech Republic.
CTK news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 30 April
Pollution
Ukraine's new policy
In response to the country's worsening environmental crisis, Ukraine has launched a new environmental policy centred on seeking active international cooperation.
As a first step, joint financing has been arranged for cleaning up the Dnepr river, one of the main polluters of the Black Sea.
According to the environment minister, Yuriy Kostenko, environmental problems and having to deal with them is costing the country between 15-20 per cent of its gross national product.
Ukrinform news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 26 May
Pollution
Krakow appeals for help
The Polish city of Krakow, Poland's ancient royal capital and one of Central Europe's most important historical cities, has launched a campaign for foreign assistance to reduce pollution and clean up its ancient monuments.
Krakow suffers from three major problems:(i) the proximity of the giant Nowa Huta steel mill, which emitted 1,000 tons of carbon monoxide into the air every year until 1990 and somewhat less since then because of a fall in production;(ii) its geographical location in a valley which traps polluted air from the Silesian industrial region to the west; and (iii) the burning of untreated coal for domestic heating.
Since the collapse of communist rule in 1989 some improvements to the cityscape have been made, but the damage to buildings is so serious that the government has declared the city a disaster zone.
The US government recently allocated $20 million to reduce pollution in the city.
Independent 11 May
Pollution
Ho Chi Minh City at risk
Ho Chi Minh City in Vietnam has held a "clean and green" week to highlight its worsening pollution problems.
The city's environmental problems are due to rapid urbanization, poor infrastructure and ineffective enforcement of regulations.
The 100 kilometres of rivers and canals which criss-cross the city are heavily polluted because most industrial plants and utilities have no waste-treatment systems.
Other serious problems are the exhausts from motorcycles and other vehicles, an overstretched public sanitation system, and a rapid loss of trees and green areas.
Voice of Vietnam (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 18 May
Pollution: Air
Acid rain climbdown
Negotiators from 24 European countries drafting a UN-sponsored agreement to reduce emissions of sulphur dioxides, a prime cause of acid rain, have decided to exclude the continent's worst-hit areas from its provisions on the grounds that it would be too costly to reduce acid levels in them.
Earlier rounds of negotiations had agreed that the aim of a new treaty should be to reduce acid rain by half of current levels.
This was to be done by calculating the "critical load" of acid that each ecosystem could absorb without adverse effect, and then seeking to reduce by half the gap between that and the level of acid rain in 1980, the base year for the calculations.
But subsequently negotiators retreated from these targets.
They abandoned as unrealistic the "50 per cent gap reduction" formula for eleven zones with the most damaged soils, forest and lakes.
Covering over 250,000 square kilometres, they include parts of Norway, Sweden, Germany and the Netherlands.
It was decided instead to adopt less strict targets for these areas and to tighten the target for the rest of the continent to a 60 per cent gap reduction.
Once formally approved, the targets would come into force by the year 2000 in Western Europe and 2005 in Eastern Europe.
New Scientist 12 June
Pollution: Air
Arctic air cleaner
The springtime air over the Arctic region has become cleaner in the last decade as a result of anti-pollution measures introduced in Europe, North America and the former Soviet Union, researchers have discovered.
Two scientists from the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration have observed a fall of as much as 50 per cent since 1982 in what is known as the "Arctic haze" , a cloud of pollutants that forms over the region each spring.
Industrial emissions from Europe, Asia and North America are believed to be responsible for the phenomenon.
Left unchecked, the haze could absorb solar radiation, warming the Arctic and in turn aggravating global warming by melting the ice and snow that reflect some of the sun's rays back into space.
New Scientist 5 June
Pollution: Air
Threat to Welsh bogs
Around two-thirds of the Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) in Wales are at risk of damage by acid rain unless current targets for sulphur dioxide emissions are tightened, according to the Countryside Council for Wales.
The country's blanket bogs, with their rare mosses and sundews, are under particular threat.
The government is committed to reducing sulphur dioxide emissions by 60 per cent to their 1980 levels by 2005.
But they will need to be reduced by 80 per cent to reduce the amount of sulphur dioxide in the soil to levels that plants in the SSSIs can cope with, the Council claims.
New Scientist 15 May
Pollution: Air
FoE berates government on ozone reporting
Friends of the Earth has claimed that the British government is failing to alert the public adequately when ozone levels in the atmosphere cause a deterioration of air quality.
Ozone irritates the eyes, nose, throat and respiratory system.
It can aggravate asthma and bronchitis and cause coughing, choking and impaired lung function, particularly in people who exercise.
FoE has published analysis which shows that government data show a total of 177 "incidents" in 1991 when the World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines on ozone levels were exceeded.
(An incident is defined as a day on which levels exceed guidelines at one monitoring site.)
But government air-quality bulletins warned of "poor" air quality for ozone on only three days.
On the days of the other 174 incidents, the government phoneline described air quality as "good" .
Moreover, FoE also criticizes the authorities for alerting the public only to short-lived peak incidents, whereas it is the sustained eight-hour incidents which tend to affect vulnerable groups.
FoE's air pollution campaigner, Fiona Weir, commented: "The public has a right to know when air quality is poor.
The government is failing to provide reliable timely information to people who need protection from the effects of pollution."
Friends of the Earth press release 13 June
Pollution: Air
 "Clean" air still lethal
A US study has concluded that tiny airborne particles from car exhausts may cause disease and death even at levels that meet air pollution standards.
The study, by a team from the Harvard School of Public Health, tracked 8,111 adults in six cities — all of which met current standards — for about 15 years, taking account of smoking habits, obesity, exposure to occupation risks and other variables.
It found that people in the most polluted of the six cities were still 26 per cent more likely to die than those in the least polluted city.
The study found that average concentrations of particles under 2.5 micrometres ranged from 11 micrograms per cubic metre in the least polluted city to 30 in the most polluted.
Such particles are considered dangerous because they penetrate deep into the lungs, where they can cause disease.
They come from many sources, but the Harvard team suspects that the particles from byproducts of fossil fuel burning are the most dangerous.
New Scientist 29 May
Pollution: Air
PCB "fingerprinting" 
Researchers at the University of Liverpool have developed a method of identifying polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) which indicates their source and may help to follow them through the environment.
PCBs stem from industrial components such as transformer coolants and jet engine lubricants.
They enter the environment as mixtures of over 200 different compounds known as congeners.
Most are thought to be harmless, but about a dozen appear to be toxic.
There is evidence that they damage the immune system and cause cancer in animals; the effects on humans are disputed.
In the "fingerprinting" technique developed at the university's Industrial Ecology Research Centre, concentrations of congeners are separated into 92 types.
Each source of PCBs produces a distinctive pattern of amounts of congeners in each type.
This would allow a pollution sample to be matched with reasonable certainty to its source.
New Scientist 12 June
Pollution: Water
Cleaner beaches in the EC…
Beaches in the European Community (EC) are getting cleaner, according to a report issued by the European Commission.
The tenth annual review of coastal and fresh waters showed that 81 per cent of waters monitored met EC standards.
Greece had the cleanest beaches, with 97 per cent of its coastal waters and all its fresh-water beaches meeting the standards.
Ireland also had a perfect record in the second category.
Britain had the worst record, with only 79 per cent of beaches meeting standards.
Belgium has the worst record in the freshwater categories, with only 60 per cent of lakes and rivers meeting standards.
International Herald Tribune 4 June
Pollution: Water
Cleaner beaches in Britain too
A study of bathing beaches in England and Wales conducted by the National Rivers Authority (NRA) has shown that they are getting cleaner.
Only 88 of the 416 beaches monitored in 1992 (compared with 102 in 1991) failed to meet the standards set by the European Community directive on bathing waters.
Blackpool's emerged as the dirtiest beach.
New Scientist 12 June
Pollution: Water
China tackles water shortages
The Chinese government has announced new policies to deal with the growing water shortage — currently estimated at around 10 million cubic metres per day — in the country's 514 cities.
The new measures aim to (i) encourage water conservation by increasing public awareness and improving technical facilities;(ii) increase research into water-saving technologies;(iii) extend the use of water-saving techniques and equipment;(iv) establish a rational water-pricing system, including surcharges for wastage; and (v) develop the exploitation of polluted water and seawater resources.
China has had considerable success in conserving water since 1983, according to an official of the construction ministry, but these efforts needed to be intensified.
Xinhua news agency 3 May (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution: Water
Dyeing improvements possible
German scientists have developed a way of using carbon dioxide rather than water as a medium for dyeing materials.
This could help solve one of the textile industry's biggest problems, removing colouring and chemicals from waste water.
Rather than investigate ways of cleaning waste water, researchers at the German Textile Research Centre decided to explore the possibility of not using water in the dyeing process at all.
They chose carbon dioxide subjected to heat and pressure so that it acquires a state between liquid and gas known as a "supercritical fluid" .
In this environment a material can be dyed without producing waste products, since the carbon dioxide simply evaporates once the pressure is reduced to normal.
Moreover, far fewer chemicals need to be used in the process since dyes which are insoluble in water are soluble in supercritical carbon dioxide.
New Scientist 12 June
Pollution: Water
Greenpeace v ICI test case
In what has been described as the first case of its kind in Britain, Greenpeace is taking the chemical concern ICI to court, accusing it of illegally discharging pollutants.
 "Our objective is to test the law on the system of consents, by which companies are allowed to discharge limited amounts of pollutants over the course of a year" , explained a Greenpeace spokeswoman, Debbie Adams.
A spokesman for ICI said that the company is "committed to reducing emissions of all kinds" and had reduced discharges of hazardous waste by 48 per cent over the past two years.
Greenpeace has analysed industrial discharges from 34 outflow pipes of chemical companies and found 100 organochlorine compounds and related chemicals for which no consents had been given.
It has called on the government to adopt a "zero emissions" policy which would prohibited any discharge of organochlorides.
New Scientist 3 May
Pollution: Water
Larger tanker no-go areas around Shetlands
The government is proposing to extend the areas around the Shetland Islands from which loaded oil tankers are banned.
Initial bans were imposed after the Braer ran aground off Shetland in January and spilt its cargo of light crude oil [see ED 67].
A junior transport minister, Steven Norris, announced that the new proposals had been drawn up following consultation with the Shetland and Orkney local authorities, fishing and shipping interests, tanker operators and others.
They had been submitted to the International Maritime Organization (IMO) for endorsement.
Guardian 19 May
Pollution: Water
Exxon view on Valdez impact
The Exxon oil company has claimed that the massive spill from the Exxon Valdez tanker in 1989 has had little lasting effect on the wildlife of Alaska's Prince William Sound.
Scientists hired by Exxon claim, for instance, that the spill's impact on salmon and herring, the mainstay of the local economy, have been negligible and that the numbers of sea otters and guillemots, two of the worst-hit species, have already recovered.
In general they claim that recovery of the polluted parts of the Sound is almost complete.
These and other findings — reported at a meeting of the American Society of Testing and Materials — contradict extensive evidence of damage to the local environment presented by government researchers over the last four years.
Government scientists accused Exxon's researchers of being selective with their data, deliberately ignoring the worst areas of pollution, and basing their generalizations about recovery on evidence from a small number of sites.
According to Doug Wolfe of the National Oceanic and Atmosphere Administration (NOAA), Exxon's definition of "recovery" of wildlife is questionable; and Michael Fry, a seabird expert hired by the trust which is overseeing a ten-year restoration programme, claimed that "Exxon selectively funded studies with an apparently unlimited budget to prove specific points" .
New Scientist 8 May
Transport
Czech delay on converters
The implementation of a decision by the city council of Prague to make catalytic converters obligatory for all Czech-made business vehicles has been postponed.
The new rule, which should have come into effect on 1 April, will now be brought in when it is felt that more companies can afford the 5,000 koruny (US$160) needed to fit the device.
The introduction of national legislation requiring all new cars to be fitted with converters and setting tighter exhaust limits, planned for October, may also be postponed on economic grounds.
East West Environment newsletter May
Transport
Toxic emissions from lorries to "rise considerably" 
Emissions of carbon dioxide and nitrogen oxides from lorries can only be cut by reducing the demand for road freight and not just by improving their fuel consumption, according to the consultants Earth Resources Research (ERR).
The European Community (EC) is introducing measures aimed at stabilizing carbon dioxide emissions at their 1990 levels.
But ERR, carrying out research for the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), found that emissions of this type will "rise considerably above their 1990 levels and remain there" .
It says that the EC will have to look at other policies, such as shifting freight from road to rail.
ERR also described new regulations aimed at cutting emissions of nitrogen oxides as "a temporary fix" .
It said that further technical measures of this kind will only lead to increases in carbon dioxide emissions.
New Scientist 8 May
Transport
Surprise help for Oxleas campaign
The campaign to save Oxleas Wood, the ancient woodland in southeast London, from a road-building scheme [see EDs 70, 69, 61]has been given an unexpected fillip because the British Road Federation has switched sides and proposed an alternative plan.
The Federation, hitherto the scheme's main supporter, has proposed that the extension of the East London River Crossing through Oxleas Wood be abandoned.
The crossing had a vital role to play in the economic regeneration of the region, it argued in a statement, and controversy over the Oxleas link should not delay construction of the bridge itself.
A spokesman for Friends of the Earth described the statement as an important breakthrough.
Barry Gray, spokesman for People Against the River Crossing, also described it as an "astonishing change of heart" .
But he questioned the Federation's motives, suggesting that "once the crossing is built and there is congestion, the campaign for the [Oxleas]link will start all over again" .
Guardian 21 May
Waste and Recycling
Hong Kong introduces free collections
In an effort to deal with the growing problem of industrial pollution, the Hong Kong government has started to collect chemical waste and dispose of it free of charge.
The waste is being processed in a new government-owned plant which can treat a wide range of organic and inorganic materials.
According to current estimates, around 2 million tons of largely untreated industrial waste is discharged into Hong Kong's coastal waters every day.
The effluent includes acids, alkalis and industrial solvents, many of them byproducts of making printed circuit boards.
The build-up of heavy metals in coastal areas has reached critical levels.
The decision to provide free waste collection reflects the government's concern over the environmental damage caused by the discharges.
But it has stressed its commitment to the polluter-pays principle, and plans to introduce charges that will eventually cover the scheme's costs.
New Scientist 5 June
Waste and Recycling
Waste as power?
Household waste should be incinerated to generate electricity and provide heat, rather than be dumped in landfill sites, argues a report by Britain's Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution.
This would be a much more environmentally friendly method of disposing of rubbish, according to the report.
To make incineration more economical, a tax should be imposed on each load of rubbish sent to a landfill site.
Switching from burying waste to burning it would represent a change of government policy.
The Commission criticized the government for delaying action on household waste management by passing responsibility for it on to the Environment Agency, which has not yet been set up.
Greenpeace in turn criticized the Commission's proposals on the grounds that they would give industry a licence to burn waste rather than encourage it to minimize the production of waste.
Guardian 21 May
Waste and Recycling
Sweden ahead in aluminium can recycling
Some 84 per cent of aluminium cans used in Sweden are recycled, the non-profit government agency running the scheme has announced.
This makes it one of the most efficient recycling schemes of its kind.
The corresponding figures for returns in Switzerland and the United States, for instance, are 60 and 68 per cent .
Under the scheme, a small deposit is levied on every can bought, supermarkets have special bins for returns, and the profits go to a nature conservation organization.
International Herald Tribune 27 May
Waste and Recycling
Greenpeace allegations on toxic waste transports
Around 230 tons of "highly toxic chemicals" have been illegally exported from Germany to Ukraine since the beginning of this year and the German authorities have been aware of the transports, Greenpeace has claimed.
Greenpeace said that its members had found rusty drums —labelled "industrial goods for further use" — at a barracks in Rovno, Ukraine, containing liquid mercury, old paints made with heavy metals, pure DDT, hydrogen cyanide and other hazardous chemicals.
DPA news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 25 May