

the annual general meeting of the above-named Society to be held in Rainhill village hall, Thursday the second of December nineteen ninety three at seven thirty P M.
Society being the Rainhill Garrick Society.
Good  and Tracy, can we have apologies first.
Yes.
Apologies from Lindsey, Alec and    Sue,and Richard   , from Margaret .
Any more er  apologies 
Dave, Jackie, David  David 
Oh, Lindsey!


 

Right, any more erm  apologies?
Right  then I take it  the minutes of the last Annual General Meeting haven been circulated already?
Yes.
That so?
Everyone got a copy?
Yes.
Yes.
And that's .
Erm  so we'll move on to matters arising and Alan has asked me  er  in the role erm erm  of chairman .
er  to raise two matters  or comments rather than matters  erm  seating  er, new cushions have now been purchased and were used with great success  at the October  production and Alan has asked whether there are any comments we can draw about the success or otherwise of the October production and whether the experiment is worth  continuing.?
Certainly was  much more comfortable at any rate.
We actually sold some tickets from the  that we had.


Seriously  
 
realize that they had cushions on the seats.
Ah right.
 

before or after?
 

I thought it was a Garrick tradition that if you wasn't in any sore in the second act, you know  you weren't really there.


everybody  anyone did not feel it was a good idea?
Yes, send them all back.


So is that pretty well er  approval?
Good.
And  from Alan  the new flats   here, Norman   helped by Dave  and other members  has been constructing substantial timber stroke hardboard flats  although a bit heavier than the conventional canvas they will last for years  and they really do provide superb sets as has been proved with all three plays  presented  this year.
Thanks are due to Norman and his helpers.
It says in brackets, ask for comments.
Send them back!


Would you like to make a gracious acknowledgement of that er you know  suitably modest, Norman.
Erm 
No.
sufficient flats to do more or less anything er  that you care to choose now.
I would like to acknowledge Norman's excellence because  the Garrick was sort of stuck in the past for a long time  box set imitation stuff  and Norman has sort of revitalized it  made it  extremely professional and it really did make a difference to the  performances and I'd like to  
 
I would like to thank    er for the use of his er  workshop  and his power tools facilitated  to acquire the raw materials at a  very low cost.
happy with that er   right  good  well those were the chairman's  er comments, matters arising from the minutes of the last A G M  erm  any further matters arising from the A G M, you probably don't need to be told  any other business comes later, this is purely on the minutes of the last A G M  any matters arising?
No  it would appear not.
Right  we'll now see chairman's remarks  which erm since Alan is not here has asked me  to read.
So  it's Alan's voice even though it's coming out of my mouth.
Er, first of all may I give my sincere and abject apology for not being here to chair the Garrick's A G M, this is due to a longstanding appointment  made before I realized that the first Thursday in December is traditionally the day for the A G M.
It's been another year of achievement for the society  the panto Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves was a great success  and gave a great start to the year.
The February play was A Thriller of the Year, with an all-female cast  our original choice of play was A Death Trap  we couldn't cast it because of a lack of men auditioning.
Now where have I heard that before?
The May play, Tea For Two, was performed for five nights  the proceeds from the extra performance going to the Whiston Hospital cancer day- care ward  a cheque for three hundred pounds being gratefully received by the hospital.
Following the performance, officials at the hospital and members of the audience were invited to an informal get-together  an event which was so successful  it was to repeated at the October production and hopefully will become a feature at every future production.
This is seen to be an excellent P R exercise  an opportunity for the audience to meet the cast.
Wuthering Heights, the October production was also  casting difficulties which were only resolved in August  unfortunately due to a severe bout of flu I didn't get to see it   hear that all reports spoke of yet another quality production.
On behalf of the society I should like to thank all those who contributed to the success of these productions  the actors and actresses, backstage staff  sound and stage management, props  front of house  tea, coffee makers  programme and raffle ticket sellers  thanks also to Adrian  who has patrolled the car park on occasions.
In particular, thanks are due to the directors of the four productions  Julie  for Ali Baba  John  for Thriller of the Year  Joan  for Tea for Two  and May  for Wuthering Heights.
Our very best wishes go to Margaret  for her continuing speedy recovery  I know that our recently appointed archivist will be very disappointed at not being able to take part in the Steel Magnolias  our February production  get well quickly, Margaret, and we look forward to seeing you very soon.
Two of our members have married during the year  Peter  and Denise   not to each other I hasten to add 
 

Mrs .
Congratulations also to Liz and Phil  on the birth of their daughter.
At this stage I should like to thank the committee collectively for the tremendous amount of hard work and dedication put in during the year, and for the support which I have received.
I'm sure the other members of the committee will forgive me if I mention Tracy  and David  and Norman   of the last year  as secretary, treasurer and stage director respectively.
All three offices are extremely arduous and take up much of your free time.
There was one resignation from the committee in June, Elise  felt she could not longer continue as publicity officer  and we asked Rosetta  to step into that office.
Thank you Rosetta for doing so willingly and for demonstrating such enthusiasm  ideas  and flair for the job.
The appointment of Rosetta  we have another husband and wife team on the committee  Joyce  and Fred .
So  Alan suggested that er the pre-show  committee .


The final thank you goes to the village hall management committee and er particularly to Margaret   not only for her cooperation in arranging show rehearsal dates etcetera  but also her ticket selling.
Er  there seems to have been a rash of resignations recently, it all started with David Gower, then Graham Taylor  and last week we heard that Mary Whitehouse is standing down  now it's Joan  and    thank you Joan for your sterling work as ticket subscription secretary  Joan reorganized the system and I'm sure that whoever takes over from Joan will start with an immaculate set of facts and figures.
After three enjoyable years as chairman  I believe it's time to stand down  I shall miss those monthly meetings at   thank you Betty for all the tea and coffee making  but I shall have many happy memories, I suppose to me the highlights were the fiftieth anniversary celebration  and the brilliant production of Stepping Out.
I very much hope that Rainhill Garrick Society continues to present quality plays  extending and satisfying the talents of our members in every department  while at the same time attracting large audiences.
The Garrick has  a fine reputation  long may this continue  I wish the society every success in the future.
That is Alan's  chairman's remarks.
Tracy,normal to ask for comments or just to accept the ?
 
ought to be said really, since Alan is not here and is erm  is resigning, well perhaps that could come  a little later on  because I think both Joan and  Alan  er there should be some record other than this about the work they have put in for the  Society  er  I mean the only idea I have, I don't know how much of a  a precedent this is, whether, whether anybody should be offered life membership of the  the society  or is that only for  do you have to reach a certain age 
Fine  I'll be guided by that.
personally  I, I, I felt, I mean so many people have been uncommitted and  the Garrick 
Mhm
I think it would  wouldn't be 
Well, I think at the very least the Society 
 
ought to pass a vote of thanks to both of them for the sterling work they have done and I would be more than happy to er  thank you  
 
er  well, is it the members' wish to, to  thank Joan  Alan for the sterling work they have put in  as members and officers.
Show of hands?
Perhaps you would be .
Would it be nice to , would it be nice to send a letter from the Society putting this in writing?
I think so.
That he can pin up on the 
 
on the wall 
 

To be used in emergencies!
 
Right  well that's the chairman's remarks so  Tracy, the  sorry, you're still  writing for your letter 
 
Well, I think I can't stretch the secretary's report much longer than one and a half  
 
Right, first of all I'd like to apologize for the fact that Alan's report and my report  especially the first half, are very similar.
I'm sorry about that.
But   anyway  nineteen ninety three has been another successful year for the Garrick, which started, so far as the productions are concerned  with the pantomime, Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves  directed by Jill   her debut as a director, hopefully not her last.
It was also great to see some new faces in the pantomime this year and let's hope that will be a continuing trend.
As you are all probably aware, Death Trap, originally planned for February, had to be scrapped  despite valiant efforts by the casting committee and John   the directors get around the problem of the men  or rather the lack of them.
Nevertheless, Thriller of the Year, an all-female cast, was very successful with house numbers totalling four hundred and thirty.
The main play, Tea for Two, directed expertly as usual by Joan , attracted audiences totalling four hundred and sixty and was thoroughly enjoyed by all.
The extra performance on the Tuesday in aid of the new cancer day-care ward at Whiston Hospital raised three hundred pounds  and special thanks go to Betty  who came up with the original idea  and everyone involved who organized the marvellous spread for the soiree afterwards.
Wuthering Heights, our October play, gave May in her role as director, a challenge which she conquered admirably  well done, May.
There were  a few problems with the casting of the men  and staffing for the kitchen, but these were overcome and an excellent play resulted  a sentiment that I think the four hundred and thirty seven strong audience would agree with.
The lighting was also a ma of major importance and Richard  did an excellent job as stage manager    thank you, Richard, even though.
October also saw the arrival of the much discussed cushions  what will we talk about now that?


I'm sure we'll think of something!
These were given their first test run and  enthused about by the audiences for Wuthering Heights  a very worthwhile investment.
Talking of worthwhile investments, the new flats constructed by Norman  and David  have been put to good use this year  and indeed Nor indeed Norman's sets get better and better.
The success of the wine evening on the Friday of the October play, was a pleasant surprise to us all  with approximately forty people staying after the performance for a glass of wine, a look round the set and backstage.
As well as involving our audiences more, it may also help to attract new members which can only be of benefit to the Society  let's hope it will be a regular event.
Unfortunately, there have been no social events this year  hopefully we can make up for this in nineteen ninety four.
I have enjoyed my twelve months as secretary and would like to thank the other committee members for their help and support, especially Alan.
All that remains is to wish you all a merry Christmas and happy new year.
 

Well, would anyone like to move and second that we accept  Tracy's report and  
there's a young mover here.
Yes  and I'm bound to say, too  while doing so  that when Pam  went  erm  as was the case when Kay  went, I thought oh blimey  how are we gonna replace her?
And yet another  has emerged from the ranks!
 

So   
 
Right then, all comments on the second , I know we've got any other business coming up, but I mean Ken's offered a sort of  er word of praise for Tracy, anyone bursting to say something about the secretary's report .
the er  secretary's re treasurer's  balance sheet has been er  has been issued  I don't  broken down  er  would the  am I the only one ?
No, no, everyone has  
Has everyone got a copy of them here?
Has everyone got a copy of
No.
the treasurer's report?
Right, erm  I'll just go to the   thing.
We started off with five thousand six hundred and ninety one pounds last year  this year we've ended up with four thousand seven hundred and eighty eight pounds.
Erm  basically we've spent more than we've  erm  taken in  but that was a deliberate policy agreed on by the committee  we've already mentioned Norman's flats  erm  that has been a most worthwhile expenditure  and  we've got to look at that as a long-term investment because we've got flats which are going to last for years and our  expenditure which was getting on for fifteen hundred pounds  will not have to be repeated.
Other things we have purchased  which have reduced the balance, again the cushions, but it, this  is a long-term investment and we should recoup that with extra bums on cushions rather than on seats.
Erm  the three  plays have erm  produced two surpluses and one  deficit, the panto a thundering surplus.
We made two hundred and forty five pounds  on Thriller of the Year  one hundred and nineteen pounds on Tea for Two  but that is after we've made the three hundred pounds  donation to Whiston Hospital  we made a thousand and eighteen pounds on the panto  Wuthering Heights  we lost four hundred and nine pounds, but that was basically that we do  costume plays and have to hire the  erm  fixtures and  set pieces from Wrightsons or wherever  we're always going to be in this position and I think it's the tradition of the Garrick that we continue to do them, and I think  we have to accept that we may have losses in future on those particular  erm  things.
I think it's true to say as well, isn't it, Mr Treasurer, that there's some money  ticket money still to come.
Oh yes.
I've still got a few odds and ends that are late 
 
late monies which will go in 
Yeah.
which will actually reduce that figure 
That's right.
but  we obviously have to cut off at a certain time to er  get the accounts  and audited in time.
So there will be a slight improvement on that position  but erm  I do feel that we have to continue to do them  the costume plays  we can't just say oh we don't make a profit on it, we can't do it, I think that would be a very shortsighted  erm  philosophy.
They are basically the nuts and bolts of the er the report, if anyone has any questions   questions  I'd rather not hear it,
 
Has anyone anything they would like to ask  the treasurer, or comment, Kenneth?
Where did the er  donation of sixty seven pounds seventy five come?
They were from people who were at Tea for Two who made donations specifically towards the cancer  erm 
I see.
that, that is included on the other side in the three hundred pounds that went out.
They made specific donations on the night  in the knowledge that it  all the proceeds were going to  the cancer day ward and that helped to boost the figure.
Any further  questions for David?
What, what happens to the car park then?
We didn't have one on the last play.
Yeah, but  er  normally Alan   er  organizes this  with our  car park warden, but unfortunately as was stated  it was struck with the flu.
 
Yes.
I, I agree that it is something that we must make sure that we arrange in future because people do get nervous about the cars out there  unattended and er 
I think it would be a  a very good point.
So is everyone erm happy with  the treasurer's report?
If so  could we have a proposer and a seconder that  it been accepted.
Thank you.
Thank you very much .
Well now we  move on to the election of officers and as you've heard  two  er officers are, have tendered their resignation, Alan  and Joan.
Erm  if, if it means   well, basically I'd better say how many  erm  proposals are there for .
Would you like er Tracy now to 
There have been five proposals for the er chairman  chairman's position  and nil proposals for the .
So we 
Well  the quickest way of doing is that those officers who are remaining in office  erm  could be voted back into office and then we can have a vote on  on the others   those that are unopposed as it were.
Yeah.
Tracy will read the, the officers who will, who are, are standing again and are unopposed.
Er  treasurer, David   house manager, May , stage director, Norman   play secretary, Lynne , publicity officer, Rosetta  and secretary, Tracy .
Well since there is a  return unopposed, it might be nice if we can have a unanimous endorsement of that.
Do we approve that those officers remain in office?
Show of hands, please.
Purely a formality.
I think that erm er  my thanks obviously through, through erm Alan and the meeting for all the hard work that those officers have put it  and for their willingness to stand again.
Erm, amateur societies just can't exist without loyal officers  and those officers have shown their loyalty by s standing again  and we know the special circumstances appertaining to the  , which brings us to the nitty- gritty now  erm  you said we have, Tracy, five  erm  perhaps you'd better read those names out for us and then I think the best thing to do is to have a closed vote, where we give you all a piece of paper on which you state your nomination  folded up so nobody else can see  we'll put them in a bag  and then  we'll appoint a couple of  to count the vote so that we do not  the chairman .
I've had two, sorry, I've had two nominations for chairman.
What I meant was when I said five proposals 
Okay  a, a rethink  two members' 
Sorry.
proposals for chairman.
Makes it slightly easier anyway.
I was counting the forms.
Er  the nominations for chairman are    and Graham .
Right.
So I think  erm those two gentlemen  will have to leave the room, I think  while  is taken .
Will you come back?
Right and now Tracy will give you all a piece of paper  er, keep it secret  write your name, fold it  and .
You know who the two candidates are, don't you?
David and I will act as  and er  .
Yes, I've got  it's a precedent of our 
Erm  it's a pretty close run thing but by a narrow majority, your new chairman is Graham.
Perhaps you could give him a round of applause.


As the new chairman  you'd like to come and take over from me now .
Sure?
Er we'd like to thank Bert, too, for  standing.
pretty close run thing I can assure you.
historical interest 
Yeah.
I think it's possibly the thirteenth  consecutive year I've been on the committee  and for the first time I've managed to be elected.
patience  do you feel wanted  
 
Well congratulations, Graham, and thank you Bert also for standing.
Now we  committee  erm  with the resignation of Joan as ticket and subscription secretary, so all I can do is ask for any nominations from the floor, please  or any volunteer who would like to  follow  Joan.
You heard Alan say that erm  Joan has laid the guidelines down and made the job  easier.
The trouble is that er erm 
Yes


Is that a yes or a no  
 

someone nominate  
 
Anne   not to be undone  
 
Bert, thank you very much indeed, you're now ticket and subscription 
Thank you.
er  secretary.
That's excellent.
Now in the election of auditors, I gather it's, it's down to a formality, David?
Well, Bert has audited  erm these, I, I don't know whether he's er  prohibited from doing so by his  being ticket secretary  not knowing the er 
I think it would be a bit unusual.
Yes  but not against the  constitution  
I don't think it's against the constitution that er  it would be a bit unusual to find him involved in handling money  to be involved in  he went to Majorca or Tenerife or  in a bid to see each other it's a possibility.
 

no problem  it's just  it's  I think it's a bit er   just a conflict of interests.
Well that's right.
Any nomina any nomination for   then?
The only one I could suggest is Tim, but he's not here unfortunately.
Could he be approached?
He'll probably be in the pub later on.
Er  I'll approach him if you want.
Anyone second Bert's nomination then?
He's the next treasurer isn't he?
Yeah.
Right, so Tim  is nominated by Bert,has to be approached, I think  be approached.
Well that's got all the short bits done  now, out of ten  any other business.
And as Tracy said, the cushions is no longer an issue, but erm 
One thing we did discuss at committee but  I think it ought to be put to  the A G M  we discussed the increase in the cost of  er, admission  erm  we held our prices down for at least a couple of years  we had a  heavy outlay on  cushions  I do feel that erm  we ought to put in to the meeting what we discussed at committee that be raised from two fifty and one twenty five  to three pounds and two pounds for the concessions  including students  and  erm  the youngsters.
I feel it ought to go before the A G M rather than just be agreed .
Ken.
Why Mr Treasurer  do you propose this increase?
Well they're getting comfy seats  and  we're star well as you can see from the last play, Wuthering Heights  that erm  we actually lost money on that  I know  it will happen but I feel that we ought to  erm  go along and get into a healthier position again.
I would suggest that if you put the tickets up to actually give them  a raffle ticket on, on entrance  you know, so that they feel they're getting sort of and 
Yes 
and members of the cast  donate the prizes, you know, just  one prize each or something, a box chocolates  which I'm sure  won't hurt.
 
I, I know I agree with the committee but  on the year  we have actually made money, is that right?
Yes.
No  we were actually twelve hundred pounds worse off this year 
The actual show has actually made money.
Yes  a lot.
So  if we take  forget the cushions  and the scenery which are  you know  
Non-returning 
Yeah.
Yeah.
Is it er justified?
Do you really think it's justified?
It's very  to keep the prices down as low as possible, I think 
Yeah  and you 
And if we are making money on the shows  is it justified?
Perhaps you'll open that to  
in fact I feel the price we charge for concessions and youngsters is a giveaway  we might as well give them away for nothing.
I, I really feel that no  four twenty five is  is absolutely silly 
I think  I think  
Yeah 
I'm thinking of either three pounds a ticket  you're getting close to the price of a special chauffeur.
Erm  I feel for the quality of the show that they're seeing, two pound fifty is  is  nothing.
I, I really feel two pound fifty is low for the quality of, of play that they're seeing  I mean  other amateur groups  not that we're comparing ourselves, but they certainly charge more than us and quite honestly the end product  on some of them is not up to our end product.
Pam, you wanted to make a comment.
Well, you're   you're raising  er  the  price of tickets by fifty pence, aren't you?
And the concessions by seventy five, why don't you 
I'll raise them both by  seventy five .
No  it, it's because they are nice round amounts, one twenty five is  has been such a derisory amount  it, it's  it really has.
One twenty five   irrespective of who's going in, it, it really is a  a giveaway amount.
Yeah I think that the 
What about the range of concessions of  pensioners erm  you know, free tea and coffee?
So that they're not having to  find money for that  as well as their ticket  they get it sort of all in one price.
tea and coffee 
You'd have to know in advance.
Mm  right.
Linda.
I think erm  I think  is quite fair  maybe if concessions could be raised to one fifty or two pounds  but overall I think that people who can afford it spend such a lot of money on the raffle  and we therefore give raffle tickets to those who can afford it could  jealousy  and on the raffle generally about a hundred pounds is made   and if there, if there was more charge for tickets, people might not give so much for the raffles  and also if you give   but if you charge them a nominal sum and then shove other things at them on their options  they might be more willing to give  to optional choices like a raffle.
I think the problem is  that if you're not careful this will leave the  counterproductive  erm, somebody said well I don't mind paying  two fifty or three quid  so what you'd gain on the seats you'd lose on the  side.
Er  I mean that, that's not an attempt to dissuade  or anyone  but it, it  you know people are very traditional  and if the Garrick has always charged  reasonably  and suddenly there seems to be  rate of inflation and this sort of thing, you know, as Linda said, they might think okay, I'll pay three quid  but I'm damned if I'm buying any raffle tickets.
So really it is a case of swings and roundabouts.
Any more comments   obviously I think we're gonna have to take  er 
Oh, well obviously 
 
before anything else.
Any anyone else like to make a comment 
Oh yes, I'd like to erm  er concur on what Linda just said about options, I don't think we should give erm  raffle tickets away as has been suggested.
I think some people do give generously when buying raffle tickets  and particularly they like the fact that the tickets are so cheap, so we should continue to give them that option.
Erm  for what it's worth, I'll give you my suggestions about what we should do as far as ticket prices are concerned  er, having taken in a view of the most important factor of the treasurer's comments  but also bearing in mind that we did have high recurring expenses this year, which  won't apply in future and we're not here to make money.
I suggest that the erm  ticket price should be two pounds fifty as it is now  and that the concessionary price should be increased to two pounds.
That's what I suggest.
Yeah  that's what I said.
Yes, I agree with that.
I'm not asking for a vote on it  I'm simply giving you my opinion.
Are you qualified for two  for, for the concessionary 
Concessions are  pensioners  er  and students  and that's students with a student card  and children.
And children.
And children as well 
 

yes.
Actually one twenty five to two pounds is quite a steep increase.
For pensioners.
Yes.
Well concessions 
Yes.
Erm  oh, obviously we're going to have to vote on specifics eventually.
one fifty.
One fifty I think would be more reasonable.
I think to jump from one twenty five to, to two pounds is .
If we do that  we're only adding twenty five pence more revenue 
The last play I worked out that w we had one four hundred and thirty seven  of those thirty seven would be er  freebies to the homes  in, in  to bring it down to about four hundred  and on the ticket money we took in, I would say about a hundred and twenty  of those were erm  er concessions.
How many over the year, roughly?
I would have to  guess at the others because I didn't do erm  sums on the other ones  it was only on the last play  but if it's on the same sort of erm  proportions, then I would say  somewhere around thirty percent of the audience are concessions.
I just have to multiply  that, the, the figure by twenty five or divide by four  pounds, it's no small sum.
Even though twenty five er 
two fifty to one fifty I think will be er 
Yes  I think so.
about five hundred over the year or six hundred or  talking about a maximum of twenty pounds taken over   right, thank you.
It could be included in the  of course ticket would increase the potential .
The trouble is that there's  there's the, a  a vast difference in the concessions
Yes.
to the full price ticket and I think 
Oh, it's half price.
Yeah.
Two fifty, would you  do you think two fifty and one fifty is the closest it can go?
I mean, when is a concession not a concession?
If it's too close together it's like  it's not really a concession.
I think that's fair enough, one fifty to 
Well shall we have a vote on those two figures then?
You see if that goes through there's no point in  trying another one.
As a matter of interest  on the raffle side, David, is it basically the two pound fifty person  that buys  the majority of the raffle tickets?
Yes.
I would say 
Yes.
so, the 
So they're the ones then that like Linda said  are paying two pound fifty 
then they are 
So they're spending three pounds
whereas erm 
to concessions
perhaps will buy in couples
That's right.
  

and two pounds for concessions  children and students.
That is the proposal so the   suggested a maximum first  could we have a show of hands on  ticket prices of two pounds fifty  and one pound fifty.
Can we have a show of hands on that?
May well 
Yes.
the erm  proposal falls  by  so  er Tracy and, and David have made a, a, a note of this and thank you for  
backup check.
Why don't you want ?
Because  from one
he said he would do it.
I think we should up  up it from eight pounds  it's worth it isn't it?
We arrived, didn't we, at the eight pounds mark because 
Yes.
that was what we were sort of we gathered in 
 
and we broke even
We broke even on Thriller of the Year and lost twenty eight pounds on the panto.
I think it ought to be  a regular feature, a regular feature for everywhere  regardless, because it was felt that  er  during the  the May play   which proved to be wrong 
er  you know, I think it should be for everywhere
It should.
I, I've had 
So  sorry 
people coming to me, audiences, members of the audience coming to me and saying, oh  what about the car park 
Yeah  yes.
you know  on the couple of occasions not arranged anything.
Well would, would you like to propose that the matter be referred  to the committee  er  to make a suitable appointment or appointments?
Yes, I'll propose 
Make it official rather than just  
Get some publicity out of it as well.
And, and a seconder?
I'll second that 
Fine.
So we have a proposer and a seconder that the committee take on board the  provision of a car park steward, for want of another word.
Thanks for the suggestion.
May I suggest that er we get some money together specially to pay this.
Say we have a social event  I'll do that  
 
raise say a hundred pound or seventy five  and then that can go towards payment er the payment for someone to patrol the car park for the plays.
Or thirty two pounds or whatever.
Even if we raise  twenty pounds a performance for it.
Well  
 

or should that be referred  erm    er  well, do we accept that suggestion that Linda's ?
You are lumbered with a social event  to raise money for a car park steward 
 
Right.
Any oth other business is still open.
Two and half hours before the pubs close.
to say something.
Yeah.
It 
we're not quite getting this clear  it's an excellent idea.
Erm  but  one of the reasons that, that we got  the audience was, was so  that they, they obviously the audience were prepared to pay   for the fact that 
There's nothing to stop us still asking   nice little earner  as they say.
 
Yes,i i it, it could be a nice little earner as er  you suggested.
A nice social event.
This really is committee work  but I, it does occur to me that  mention it  that erm, if in our advertising  we point out  that we have a car park attendant  and if that car park attendant were to let one slip through his fingers  me were, we may well then be liable to be sued by the person who  
 
Oh yes.
I mean this is the kind of comment we will get  from somebody who has spent the past five years on the village hall management committee.
I think that  I think we've agreed that that is to be taken on board by the 
Committee
by, by the committee.
We'll put it in 
Any other business 
Can I express thanks to the president for taking this meeting  it's been  very interesting.
What, that I have or the meeting has?


Thank you.
Can I second that.


Well 


Erm  all that remains is to say thank you all for taking the trouble to  turn up and show an interest in the  administration of the society.
The remainder of the evening is  at your disposal.

