

What you do now, is er 
 
is er, Robert you can come up and take us through the four steps of selling.
However, to make it a little bit more interesting, you can't use your notes.
listen to Robert 
 
and see how it goes then .
 

Good morning all.
Good morning Robert
survived this far.
Right last Friday we went through the four stages of selling.
Now I must admit my first thoughts of it were  it really gets my back up for some reason or other.
I don't know whether anybody else feels like that but I do.
Now having said that and looking at it with an open mind  I think it was certainly a very useful day.
The structure was there and I think anybody who's been in this business for any number of years, some of us have been in it longer than others er know that you actually need a structure er of that, of that little .
If you actually go out there without one and I  know you find that eventually that is the structure that you come up with.
You start off by asking questions  by the  if you like and talking to people, getting to know people, getting next to people.
Because it's no good just going in there and throwing products at them, it doesn't work, I know I tried it and, so you need to start off by getting close to people, talking to them, finding out all about .
You then move on and to find out what you actually can do.
find out what they actually need which is the second part and to do that  once you do that it's quite easy, as I say once you've actually made contact with them and you are on a friendly basis, you then, you can hold very very useful conversation and let them come over quite naturally.
For the second part  finding out what their needs are.
The third part is perhaps something that erm, we find a little more difficult, I do  found that er number two, number three and number four if you weren't careful blends very much into one another and actually then part three as far as I'm concerned actually putting across the benefits  is really the main part I think  and that really is putting into everyday English what we know as professionals as in technical terms, cos if you go and talk to somebody  whatever it is, they haven't got a clue  we have, we talk about it all the time and I think the biggest criticism of the insurance industry as a whole is the fact that you don't talk to people in English and that's why it's got such a  foot in the door  and I think the third part for me really is the most important part of the sales process, relating our cock-ups in English, the benefits  the client.
That really is I think er the part that I erm are most useful in those .
I sold three  and  one of the reasons why  and I think we got tremendous opportunity to develop an enormous part  by just going in and speaking to people to explain to  and they can relate  to write lots and lots of  and you can get a good grip  we won't do it overnight, it is something you have got to develop.
Th that, that to me is the most important part of .
not supposed to laugh  always got to close people down and make sure we do get the order.
So as I say I, I found Friday very useful, I found the er, the renewed routines, although we, I mean we all had lots of problems with the videos, they didn't come out  but it didn't really matter because the three of us in our group sat there and very openly, very honestly, and without any personal animosity whatsoever  helped each other and that again, as I say very useful  and so above all a and I think it's something that I  feel very strongly about because we haven't talked to people we've, in English, understandable language about what this is all about.
Okay well done, thank you very much.


That gave us an overview


of Friday and we looked at the individual steps but we know, everybody says yes we ask the business, we came across  and to put  Gareth, can you take it through  and explain what it is, and explain each stage  so let's hear from Gareth then.
 

Thank you, oh sorry, erm  explain  come forward, sometimes you've got to watch for  to  erm 
To get back to  what method did they come up with ?
Well the  erm I think  sales subject  asking questions  was  erm  asking a lot of questions and
give an example on the .
Give an example on the board how you do that.
Er
Let's have it in  explain .
Go on   what did you prepare last night  thinking.
I've already .
Oh dear, never mind.
Erm   erm first one  .
actually asked in the first place.
The first thing to acknowledge  make sure 
to answer  er .
Good, well done, thank you very much.


Okay that was an overview of Friday's successful sales course day and the purpose of  is to watch  why do you come  overflow  acknowledge, we probe, we answer and confirm.
The temptation to answer the .
Now straight on we haven't got the real reason why we are projecting, quite intense you will find you may be like today  acknowledge, you probe projection, you answer  you confirm the over  you overcome that objection.
So you'd only look in that projection what will happen, right.
It will  
 
try and close .
There is still, I am sure, of specific areas and you have to highlight those areas and get them out of the way.
Right, so that was Friday.
What you do today.
Before you move on, I'd like to introduce you to Maggie  who will be one of the role play customers for today and tomorrow.
Maggie is one of the senior advisers, one of the successful senior advisers at the Brecon branch and the chap next to her, who hasn't turned up yet is,


is, he was on a Christmas bash last night, he did, he has told me he'd be late, he'll be here oh about ten o'clock- ish.
His   who is the Branch Manager at the Horsham branch and he'll be the other role play customer.
You may  see a guy wandering in and out  groups and that's a guy called Geoff  who works for the British National Corpus and these are the people who are trying to have or produce ten million words of the written word and a hundred million erm spoken words, which is a corpus whereby, er  come and look at the English language at some time in the future and identify and listen to some of your  and your dialects and what you said  so make sure you have lots of input as we've got quite a broad spectrum of different dialects today but he'll be wandering in and out er throughout today.
So introductions out of the way,of today is to look at


the first two steps of the full centre rota,open and step two the exploration of need which will come if you like after  objective is that  utilizing easy steps of the full step sound process.
So that's what we're going to do today.
But before we look at each step in turn.
I'll take you back to erm, if you like, the ignition key of the whole sales structure.
What starts the whole sales .
Bill?
Er project sociability.
No, no, before that.
Sorry.
Much before that the whole biblical use that starts the whole sales project going.
Yeah, telephone call.
Yeah, so we have made our telephone call, we've made an appointment for say seven o'clock in the evening.
What time would you get there?
What time would you turn up there?
Couple of minutes.
quarter to.
Yeah about quarter to or, give yourself time to get there but why do you want to get there early?
Organize yourself, obviously be punctual and be on time so that they can set you up, their clock by you.
Yes.
Yeah, what else?
know what their name is.
Yeah.
How old they are, anything that might .
Yeah, that's right, plan preparation and what else?
Suss the area.
Yeah, look at the area.
Yeah but don't prejudge.
Cos you could get there and there could be a  four o'clock  there and you might think oh my God  what a waste of time this is.
That could  be  ever right and the  true.
It could be  yes, rub your hands with glee  forty pound back.
What a waste of time that was.
So don't prejudge,the purpose of being there is to organize yourself, get a prime preparation about the customer, look at the area because that could be part of er your talking point so  appropriate  thing.
So we go, we knock at the door, we assume it's the right address, he comes to the door and what will be the first thing you should say?
Yeah, yes,hi, you know  with warm  both hands , the boat.
What would be the first thing, people tend to do when they've met for the very first time?
Shake hands .
Yes shake hands, shake hands with them.
And again.
Yeah.
What was it the difference between the first hand and the second handshake?
You may not see it at the back there  a lot stronger, okay.
Well a thing called power handshakes, which I thought were the biggest load of gobbledegook until I watched them, a specific chat show host.
There is a story  don't give the answer away but who would you say is very positive, one of the most aggressive chat show hosts in, say, today could be I T V or B B C?
no, Clive  no.
Gloria .
is she,Des , how about Des .
Now what tends to happen is, as you know, there is lots and lots of different guests on his chat show and if he feels threatened by them in any way shape or form, what he does he relaxes her,comes in over the top, turns them over, takes them by the shoulder and pushes them into the chair and what he is saying, he is saying, this is my chat show, don't you submit.
And the next time I saw that happen was when erm Colin  who was the coloured guy during the gulf crisis met erm our m John .
Bill Clinton had gone for his inaugurations now  President of the United States so John  high  U K  John  and he met Colin  and we had about two sort of erm semi heads of state battling in the  what went on.
So, so John  came in over the top, Colin  put his hands on top line, so John said I'm in charge, over the top, Colin said, no .
He said no i'm not and John says, well no actually i'm in charge here and  cosy


not at all.
What it was was I'm in charge, no you're not and if you meet two people  give me two people who are both power like  
 
pin it on the top as well.
What it is you have a bit of a power  twist that easy and of course that's embarrassing so when John  met Maggie  he thought well I can't twist her over and  get stuck in there.
So what he does now he always comes in over the top , so every time you see John  shake hands with anybody he'll always do that and come in over the top  actually I'm in charge and he sort of er sort of stamps his authority on the individual.
So what I'm saying to you is, don't go in over the top, you know,five, just a normal  but a firm handshake because a man would expect it because a weak  ha ha handshake can be irritating  and the same thing if she is a woman 
 
don't be conversational 
 
just  pinch her hand,give her a firm handshake  because you've got about ninety seconds in which to make your first impression and of the ninety seconds about ninety five percent of that time is made through visual images and that can be your dress sense, the way you carry yourself, present yourself, erm body language, don't invade his personal space, only I think about erm I think about twelve, twelve seconds off of ninety seconds, or there thereabouts is spent on what you say.
The large proportion of the impressions made to what they see, how they visualize you, so if you look a mess you're backing on the wrong foot, you give, you're getting off to a bad start straight away and be aware of hidden signals that you'll give your emanating .
successful sales people, if you have a hole in your shoe, that can be intensely embarrassing and they'll spot that .
So the head of a major  I can't think of the guy's name and he just had a major acquisition and this guy was 


mega bucks and the company had gone  escalated and then  opportunity of this guy, you know, saying what a super guy he was, what an entrepreneur and what he done is, you know, I've had something  head, you know, I'm in charge and he put his feet on the desk there and he had a hole in his shoe and s spread across all the papers the next day was this guy with a hole in his shoe and this was a multi million pound corporate er corporate body, he couldn't afford to buy a decent pair of shoes 
 
so check your shoes.
Women tend to look for three to four things, your shoes, your fingernails, ties and socks, okay so make sure you look the part.
Don't wear overpowering aftershave, that says more about your sexuality and sensuality than about your business acumen.
overpowering  dress .
So we set the scene, we look good, we haven't crushed them to death and he's gonna take us into one or two areas


either the living room or the study or maybe the kitchen.
So if we look at the living room  I would say this is our, our living room, right into the hall  erm  the T V in the corner there  settee there  so you wander in there, Gill where would you put yourself, where would you sit down?
Just there?
Yeah okay,
 


Why would you go there ?
Because I, I want to sit in the room where they're both gonna be facing  not sitting like an odd dog right .
Yes .
The  could be if you pop yourself there, he sits there and she sits there, you're asking him a question, he's not sure, he looks at her, so if you look  you can't see what you're doing, you want to be able to maintain eye contact with them both, yeah, one of the effective ways, well they're going to be aware of the layout of the living room, this is their , this is their stage.
As we come across, you know, slippers there and a hot steaming mug of tea  embarrassed  in there.
All of a sudden you're infringing upon his  his stamping ground, his authority and he won't take it too kindly.
According to if you change the settee, you are knocking the T V because on about two calls er last week, the T V never went off.
So what you're doing is to take the focal point away from them and they're having to look at you if you know what I mean.
What so you would go there then?
I would go there, simply because of the situation where the T V never is switched off.
tend to try and get rid of the T V because you don't want the distraction in the background.
Spoil  never switched it off.
We need it now, we need, we are a nation that needs continual visual stimulation.
Take the T V away and conversation collapses and dies and in a survey a former German couple, they took away lots of  and they were nearly suicidal and they were nearly murdering


the wife, the husband and the children because they hadn't got the continual visual simulation  a picture paints a thousand words, this is where we have O H P.
This is where we have erm er  as opposed to standing here and delivering erm an  otherwise.
If we are gonna start switching off  a heavy night the night before and you need visual stimulation to get you up and .
So personally I'd be satisfied you are there or there.
Well  effective ways of starting putting your authority wh where you wanna go is by using the .
There is no right or wrong way and personally I always take a briefcase with me because there you have the tools of my trade in there.
If you feel comfortable going in  second  one of these and these alone, that's fine by him  do what we did come  in the first place, you can go in, take your briefcase  pop it down there, this says to them,this is where I'm gonna work from, is that okay with you?
Rather than plonking  
 
down there and getting everybody's  
 
So the suit so the suit the briefcase rather, does have an effective purpose  So let's say we haven't gone into there  and we go into the study  he sits there, where would you put yourself there ?
Straight 
Just there  yes okay why would you go there ?
Because the desk is consultation.
Could be seen yeah.
see what you're doing if you're writing.
Yeah.
Yeah okay I think to go across there, won't be so board room style, can be seen as confrontational.
We used to have the layout on  course, not like this but in


that sort of case is where I'm in the middle there and you're all sat around there.
I said they would be noticed  because you got a better response from people who put you in small  groups  feel there is less pressure on them.
Which if you imagine you've got  twenty,twenty four, twenty four people all sat around in that particular format and I nominate somebody within the group, twenty p pairs of eyes focus on this one guy, if he doesn't know the answer to the question he's incredibly embarrassed.
If you spread the group up and as far as you're concerned there's only a couple of guys looking at you and  within the group  more supportive than just one big body and if you're feeling comfortable then the chances are you retain more information and  part information to  not just sat there.
Those  you find general public make no difference.
So yeah, be aware and try not to be .
There may well be there's a chair there and a chair there  there well, I guess he'd want you to sit there, don't be tempted to pull the chair when it  authority I'm here, you're there  do with me, let's see how it goes and I trust you.
Okay he stamps his authority.
Again be aware if you have a desk, the temptation is that you  using a folder here and if your  is laid on the desk, what would he be able to do?
Roger?
read it.
Yeah he'd be able to read it, now the problem with that might produce  is what?
What his potential problem would be,pick it up .


What 
psychological barrier up, there's a psychological barrier  you reckon you can sell me something.
He might start asking you why  answer to that  question.
got there .
That starts the key thinking, why do I  the field  list of .
Why do I just  time, why do I do that?
You can go through the points one at a time.
I want you to concentrate on a specific area, so you want to retain control.
You are the main  you're in charge there, so again be aware.
This is why I think this sort of folder  worth its weight in gold  put the C C Q in there and it doesn't become a barrier if you have it like that.
Something which is called the best of and at the same time this  barrier , so again be aware.
So if I was to say we've  we've picked our area, what potential instructions do we have do you think, let's say we've got a good, quite  now, what potential instruction do we have with that particular area, that arena rather?
T V.
Yeah the T V could do with a few big ones, alright okay body stopper, they want you to have a T V on and  be tempted, depends on what, how it went, to ask them to turn it off but if you can't that would  upon them then you'll have to work with it because what you don't want to be seeing is okay they are there, you're here and they're concentrating on this.


Okay what other obstructions would we have?
Pets yeah.
Pets, he just wants to say hello, you knock at the door and this Afghan wolfhound is playing in the back there, take it in the kitchen and they say to you he only wants to say hello, that's right  
 
This dog is bounding out and going to sniff and then calms down.
I went into one house and er you so I came in and I got to about sort of I don't know, roughly there I think it was and she said, do you have any objection to cats?
I said no not particularly  that little grey Persian, cats in the  so I went in there and then six of them, cats and two gerbils  oh my God what am I getting into?
So you can actually look at your jokes.
So nothing to do with pets really, just put up with the hope  or you can always take yourself  with you  miaow spreading the .


What other obstructions do we have?
How can we pre-empt that?
Ask the time they go to bed?
Yeah,
yeah you could do yeah if you have young children because they are far better sales people than we will ever be.
You could think of course do have children, dad, can I, can I, can I,bed you go, just to shut them up so if you have two small children there, the chances are you will lose the woman  put them to bed or .
If you lose the woman what have you potentially lost?
sale.
Unfortunately.
The decision maker


Then you've lost them in  maker, he's going to do nothing without her being there.
Again you want both people there.
So just a few ideas, not let you know exhaustive but a few ideas to be aware of  you've got  appropriate .
So, three ca get there on time, let them set the clock by you, people are more forgiving for somebody I think if you are a little bit late, than if you're too early.
Cos people are geared up to see you at seven o'clock.
Five to seven, that's not a problem, but quarter to seven, that sets the whole, the whole sale process the wrong .
seven o'clock, well I thought I'd come a bit earlier  forget that they want a tidy living room, they want to get the toys out of the way, they want to present themselves in the best possible light so they'd be more forgiving if you're late than if you're too early  to be on time.
Right, so, here we go then, let's look at step one the open  right so, okay so what would be the first part of this particular sales process?
introduction.
Yes.
Reaching an appropriate sociability and the business to be won or lost  short space of time and wanted to set the scene and make a right, a right impression at the right .
Then  appropriate  too short, too long,accept the  so  appropriate sociability, how long have you been there  just moved in, do you know the neighbours  that bit of information you've gathered  especially late at night now  on someone's door that's already set back  whatever.
Nothing more embarrassing than going up right underneath, oh he's got the wrong one and the door opens.
Very embarrassed to get a  to  searchlight  the panning down the street  so we have  responsibility to accept the team  sat down and start .
What would you  point?
five .
Can I worry about that?
Yes.
Don't say I'll give you a bit of my advice  on a lead, because er you haven't had the call so you ought to be on your best level.
Wise guy merely states who you are and who you represent and what advice you can give and that's it, it's no big deal.
If they wanna read it


let them.
See cos very few people will actually say stop I need to speak with independent  advise  because he's working in my best interests, where you are entirely with an independent company.
Very few people  at all would ever ever ever ever say that and we look at the, when we look at the, the erm  format you'll find  called it a sadist because  chains on him from  because  on him  so that we .
However, if you feel the buyer's going to present a business problem we show them the buyer's guide and a business card so you can give them the buyer's guide, explain what it's for  and then give them your business card and then that  buyer's guide to look for business card.
Yeah, the buyer's guide  but let's not get bogged down with this, this isn't the problem  something we have to do.
so he looks at the buyer's guide, business card and it's thoroughly .
What will we do  there ?
yeah, introduce Bob  for referrals.
Then how do you  tea  how would you have tea?
Well depending on the situation er you would ask him how he did came to be  client.
Yes okay  carry on you're right there .
Erm
So 
erm  come to .
With clients like this walking down  just wanna go down quality.
That's the usual answer I get.
Yeah.
Erm  you may have heard that we've grown big by being recommended.
Er by word of mouth recommendations erm 
Sorry Robert
Oh yeah we've
carry on.
You can erm by word of mouth recommendations it means that we, we have to spend less money on advertising, now that means that in the long run we can pass that on to the  client like yourself
Ha ha.
by way of reducing and charges or increasing the benefits wherever possible.
Right.


Just in the course of our competence.
Right in the course of our er er com our meetings Danny erm I will be asking you to recommend me to people but if, but only if you feel that this meeting has been of some benefit to you.
Will that be okay?
We'll, seriously gentleman we'll take it from there, there  there's a cup of tea out in the .
introduce it get my view of


I'd give you the introduction  one point  commitment that you didn't get.
Yeah.
but hopefully it won't be the  so what you're saying was you you'd recommend it to us, yeah  plan  this is the way we do our business, by recommendations okay.
You have to learn that script, it's got to roll off the tongue, if you don't know the script, you'll have it  you'll leave it out, you won't do it, you haven't planned for tea which means what?
You won't, you definitely won't ask at the end of the first  not a hope in hell  begin the second, cos you might ask at the end of the second appointment.
comes a shock to the guy, who 


depends on my advice  there's my business card  I will now  give me a ring.
Yeah sure yeah lovely, thanks a lot.
What is it  was, what did they tell you anyway?
Erm hash it  back to referrals, thirty one weeks  six hundred  any of the  thirty one weeks and they're gone.
Okay so make sure we plant the seed and  and we're planting the seed to go back to later on.
So we've planted the seed  makes sense, we'll see what you can do, get mortgaged up, what would we do now?
Yes 
Yeah.
Why do there?
And what would be 
And the reason Pauline is to  service 
That's one of the reasons, yeah.
One other.
Yeah, good one other.
To make sure .
Yeah good.
Well the first  want to say hi  two to look at the policy we have with us to make sure they're so good as originally intended.
Well what always follows the statement  professional salesman?
Invalidate it good.
And what will be a tentative .
Well what do they mean by a tentative benefit?


tentative benefit 
Yeah  we don't want  say well  you know I can save you tax.


Well if you save tax yes it is  or bad  planning  try to keep it as broad as we possibly can.
So what attempted benefit would you undertake?
benefit .
Yeah.
is making money work harder for you.
Yeah.
Try to keep it as broad as you can to do the  well alright then I know why it is, what's in it for me.
What game  an hour in the future increasing your income like today or some time in .
Then what would follow .
What would be my first 
Yeah.
A tentative .
Salesman.
We call it a  proceed, then why do we check  proceed should be part of the whole self process and not just  in .
to be delivered in one statement  show you what  the chances are you'll be doing it anyway but not erm what you are actually doing  purpose you'll always be followed by a tentative benefit  always be followed by cheque  standing or in this case  tell me how does that .


What are we gonna do now?
Yes .
I need to take down one or two details, will that be alright.
it's part of the sales process.
For you to give better advice,C C Q  no you don't but to get past the  yes you do.
If you don't  you could use an A four pad  building up a picture of the guy and trying  at some time


 
with that one,if you do, don't have it.
do obviously, do business, you're gonna need some form of  I D card .
The final session would be to introduce er the C C Q.
That's basically, that is step one  can you follow?
Each part of that particular structure, you've done a good step one, what must that lead to?
Before step one we did what?
And before step two we do?
you're not too sure what he wants, he's agreed to see you next week, he doesn't know why he's seeing you but you go back and you present,so try and overcome rejection but the thing was he wants to  in the first place.
So you  that one  second time  instructions from that point  unlikely  very very unlikely so you've set the scene with a good strong step one, so looking at each indiv individual part of the open, which parts do you think you could leave out?
None of them.
None of them,so make sure you don't.  step one.
Any questions or  comments?
unlikely  and he said no I don't want to go, it's easy  sorry to have, thanks for your time.
Yeah, yeah.
I wouldn't, I wouldn't  C C Q, I  just go back to, erm  and to start  chat basically and see what contact .
Now acknowledgement could be , can be .
That's a good question  the temptation to fill the void is quite intense.
How, how long do you think it'll take for give up  how long will it take before that person feels uncomfortable and has to respond?
How long does it take roughly?
ten .
Specially  fifth, a fifth of a second  and they start to feel uncomfortable.
By one second, two seconds, they are starting to perspire and they will have to say something unless you get a real swine  to sell people, one  we sell to, two, the one that says I know the stuff  a hope in hell  
 
he did that and he was quiet for twenty minutes.
Twenty minutes 
I just sat with him 
Yeah.
He sold, he sold it to them in the end.
Ninety minutes .
He just sat there.


forget what you're there for 
Yeah 
horrible.
Pretty intense that  twenty minutes, my God.
Yeah.
For those of you that don't know how to  the C C Q


then this might be a guide  but a step in the right direction hopefully.
During our discussions with the client I'll be making notes  can  the situation but one foot in your own  regarding your own future plans.
I'll just  once more track, don't say all  give you the best possible advice.
effective way in achieving your future plans.
How does that sound?
Bit long winded   C C Q then put your back up .
to say  okay and then  quite often you say my God that's that whopper.
If in the unlikely event, if they want to feel a C C Q, let them have it, don't, don't  because that person may be a tax  he, he buys  he has to feel what he's buying and to deprive him from that you really are up against it.
People buy in three different modes, visual and audible or a connective touchy, feel mode, if he wants to be touchy feeling you give it to him.
He'll be touchy feeling and he wants to complete application form, give it to him  okay if he's an original  he'll want to see conceptual presentations, he'll want to see illustrations, he'll want to see erm, sales aids, if he's in audible mode he will  far more readily to what you tell him as opposed to, let me show you something, okay and there's a specific technique 
You have to 
don't be afraid of P M you're right there  you'll find  don't be afraid to give him the C C Q, it's no big deal.
If he comes back and says, well this is, this is a bit of a whopper, this document 


Just takes a lot of .
Yeah.
It certainly may not be, it may be a very good artificial  you see 
H M A  that he is recoverable, he may be a .
So er right  loads of you have been  away, I'm going to hand  
 
And you can use this when we move into the role play


which will be I don't know about ten o'clock-ish  is that a problem  the er  a copy of a buyer's guide in for you  Before we move into the role play for  cycle, what I have to do is show you erm a training video that is produced by the department, you may have seen it before I don't know  
 

     

 

who's technical, anyone know what they're doing with these things?
No 
You don't have much luck with 
I don't normally, no, this was set up yesterday 
change 
That, that is the problem I can't change that here  that and not particularly that problem    back up usually here  Right, it's important to see this, so can we have a quick ten minute break and I want  somebody
Very very hard.
Yeah can we be back here at ten to ten please  sociability 


Now it's gone now I'm afraid.


Yeah.
 

The reason this figure was produced is erm because one of the comments we had back from the other induction courses er Gareth,the reason we had produced this video was erm  structure  you've never shown it, so it's not necessarily tongue in cheek but it is a strictly sales structure but it will give you a clearer idea of our guide what to do to the role plays this morning, Saturday and tomorrow.
So here we go.
The sales structure take two.
Friends  all steps to selling.
We are trying to break the selling process down to  areas, this takes place over two separate appointments, that sets out the  of selling process easier to understand.
Step one the opening, this book  the introduction from the purpose of the appointment.
Step two, exploration of needs.
This looks at finding out about your client and comes from the C C Q  the confidential client questionnaire, step three, present, this looks at presenting your recommendations based on the C C Q and finally step four the close.
This is where you  for the business, complete the paperwork and  away the future business.
Steps one and two takes place at the first appointment and steps three and four at the second.
In the following two appointments our client's wife was unable to attend, however, it's important that all decision makers should be present where possible.
Step one the open, this looks at the introduction and the purpose of the appointment.
This would be the first opportunity that your potential client has to meet you, remember first impressions do count.
You never get a second chance to make a first impression.
Good afternoon Mr   to meet you.
Okay.
Come right in.
Thank you.
A smile and a firm handshake accompanied by your announcement of who you are, where your  should be the first impression that you make.
Appropriate sociability means saying the right things to strike up a rapport with your client, helping them to relax, feel comfortable and get to know you before cutting the business.
With some clients that can be five minutes discussing the house, the garden or a hobby of theirs with others it could mean a short exchange of pleasantries followed by a suggestion to proceed with your intended business.
It's also a good time to decide where you're going to sit for example, in the dining room or the lounge.
It can mean your client a guide about how you can advise followed by your business card, then help smooth into the area of business.
I'd like to give you this which spells out clearly my status and what I can do for you, it simply states that I work for  
Well we have production course  you have made your appointment to see Mr and Mrs  who are existing clients of , you will now conduct the first appointment starting with greeting and appropriate sociability which is the first part of step one, through to producing the C C Q and then  further copy pages two and four of the attached C C Q in your booklet, so  two and four are er  we've got four and two, the personal details and  may be the wrong way round there, so it's advisable to say you complete the first part of it, page two and then the employment details okay, so you doing a little bit of exploring there so if you like you can be doing all of step one and a little bit of step two, buying in this particular role playing.
Is that clear to everybody?
So the customers will be myself, Maggie  sales people throughout the day and tomorrow we'll not be customers in any way, shape or form.
Now I'll put you in these erm  particular groups and you each have an allotted task as it were, so group A which is you people there, you will stay here okay and group B and C  I'll put you, that's what we keep doing with that,so Barry you are in the jurassic er  Gareth you are in  as well .
So the previous manager will be Robert,and Gareth, it's your responsibility to control the role plays, make sure the  the managers should not do that,keep it  and make sure the whole role play scenario runs on track.
Joan, Diane and Matt, so we'll see if we can get  good this time so  show you how  the same .
Bill, Roger and Vincent you will be the respective time keepers okay I'll give you timing in due course but remember to give a two minute warning which is the rap on the desk  make sure  going on and you will find out the role plays will or may run over time.
you will notice  B and C only has three people in it.
What that means in your particular groups you will nominate amongst yourselves who will be the fourth role play.
So each of the groups  four role plays  amongst yourselves who will do er the extra role play.
If there are four to do, so you'll all  again at least twice and the best thing you have is you have more practice er   so are you all clear on what you have to do, what you're allotted to have to sell?
Now  and that's for my benefit alone okay, what that means is that I'll see each and every one of you in a, a role play so the first person in each role play will be Robert, Barry and Gareth, followed by Gill,, followed by Bill, Roger and Vincent and Robert again  you do not deviate from that order.
That means I will see you at least once.
Right here  feedback to your respective manager as regards to your sales figures  so please stick to that format for today and tomorrow  everyone clear on what we have for today, yeah?.
 

So we're looking at five minutes preparation, fifteen minutes role play, fifteen minutes play back, followed by twenty minutes feedback.
Each cycle should take fifty five minutes  so we do three sets of role play, well we look at them, look for the cycle to start at quarter past ten   first cycle must start at quarter past ten, there  four  that should be for one o'clock  so we commence the third and final role play, come back here and break for lunch and have an hour for lunch  final role play at two o'clock.
That  is everyone clear in what they have to do?
Yeah  the actual  as you did  successful sales course  we can note your comments down okay, I'll give you a set of these now, write the sales person's name across there and write your comments, criticisms, what was done well, what was done badly, what could be improved on and  it's his role play cycle, give this to the sales person.
Remember the format  controls  he will normally  start off, sell  first  routine, then he or she will have er say, right at the very end, say why he  say why he or she   and that's the format I want to follow.
That  performance but not the applicant, so don't take it to heart as  not necessarily .
Can I have the any spares   Right if there are no, anyone got any questions at all?
Right okay so this group of study here, you can get all your stuff and your videos, follow me and I'll take you to the  rooms .
Do not start until quarter past 
Yeah you don't start 
Yeah.
Make sure you bring your videos and your notes and all that sort of stuff with you, I am sure we'll need it.
And make sure you bring the key as well?
Try and remember that  okay let's go 


Thanks Bob.
  

 

I suppose.
Come on then camera operator 
technical .
Yeah it's been engaged on Friday 
Are you are you gonna use this table?
Probably 
I would think so.
You're welcome.
You alright?
I'm fine.
How do you feel ?
Well done .
I don't actually know where  all those troubles with videos.
Well there's er   lots .
they, they suggest that we do 
Are you going to use my tape rather than yours?
What?
No I'll just go and, I'll just quickly clean  erm I'll just set the camera up that's all.
that one.
I don't know .
What erm what  today ?
Oh well I'm officially on leave at the moment.
I was taking leave this week
Oh right.
so I'm wound up  anyway but erm
Anything happening?
I've got an appointment already booked.
They wouldn't have got me to come if I hadn't had, if I .
Oh well you're as experienced as anyone now this  trying to get 
Okay 
Daniel 
Action.
one of the nice parts about this is that you are getting paid on ninety percent  cycle.
When, when I started you only got payment .
The problem that I had with the 
Where you don't get it, if it's clean bid there erm you're going to be getting it 
Right.
Erm actually it may be better if you .
Yes you haven't got much space there have you?
No .
I don't know  
.
Which is good, considering you know  closed down.
Sure  
 
Oh yes.
Well this is  about  make sure that you want  
Does your wife know about this?
Oh  right .
Right who's got any  well if you could just move a little bit closer.
 
 
Now, now.
You can see we, we've done very well on this .
That's very  I mean this  see what you think about that  actually it's got .
Let's just look and see .
but other  I'm in control.
 

See you've just got .
that way  see all the 
Yes.
We can do all those all  that.
It's a personal  sales process
a complete evaluation of the 
Spot them 
I can't do it  

