

Er  er I was with you then  selling then.
Er you also  basically er the first thing you did was  erm the second thing you mentioned was these two hurdles, the third thing you did was check when you was to proceed.
Er the fourth thing you did was introduction to the C C Q.
So you went four, in one to seven you went four, three, six, seven and I think you missed out  and appropriate sociability .
I didn't  ten minutes later.


I wasn't sure if there  or well there may be  so whatever reasons it just went out the window.
Erm still friendly  still relaxed which is very important part  er and er  tried.
Once you got into the C C Q erm for me it sounded like a string of questions  erm I couldn't hear any  at all or any open  questions into any of the answers that were given to you on  question.
Erm  there was, there was one module,and develop that .
How did it go?
Nothing at all erm there was something there  important time of the year .
Again with the Royal Navy Reserve  mentioned just, just question, you  register the answer and on you went.
Er  I'll just put Miss  signal  to probe into areas.
First one was worked abroad
expand on that.
I think the proof of the pudding was that y you know you finished up in twelve minutes and arguably you have three minutes could have been spent floating around just chatting about this, that and the other.
Er I was, I was surprised erm because it was, it wasn't as good as I started.
So there we are it's a bitter critique.
Very relaxed, good effort Pete.
I've got the feeling that I was th there to talk about it  break erm, Doris  all of it.
she did all those steps .
right order.
In fact erm I've ticked them all eventually erm you actually did them  out of order.
There was a potential benefit and I can't remember exactly  
 
Erm  p pro probes, nearly all closed erm we were taking notes of sort to follow up things.
Yes.
You weren't asking to expand it.
Tell me about these things, so you don't smoke, you don't  and there's all sorts of  problems.
Erm when  said, said it all and then  should say that but there's nothing more I can say and so the overall  thing was great.
relax, just put the guy  talk themselves till the cows come home, I would have done erm this, got the structure the wrong way round 
Over to you.
Right erm a lot of good things there erm empathy is I think the second thing I wrote down on, on the strength, brilliant very  see that obviously open up  erm there was interest in what I was doing, you, you were confident.
I thought you did ask some, there were a lot of good overall questions to start with but I think they tailed away very quickly.
Erm  fact that you set up the scene for the introductions and you asked for it that you, you know, took and reduced those people to an image of which was good.
Erm you had a statement of Barbara's,if it was in there, it was planned so that you crew can work harder  erm although you filled in the bonus question well,the there was a tend  dangerous tendency for you be sucked in to go into the bonus and I think you did well to say yeah well we'd better walk along to that so you held out  which was nice because if I had if you hadn't tackled that you might have been shown the door once you'd gone through that .
Erm  yeah you will see you, you will seek an application and er you've checked on the completeness of the information.
A lot of people would have just kept it, that thirty five thousand, nothing else but you went in, you picked up the R N V R.
Erm well what's come out you see, you did finish early and there are a lot of, if you like, no, they weren't red herrings but  laissez needed a bit further probing like on the income, thirty five thousand, yeah, but is there anything else, well yeah there's the car, there's the  all of those are pensionable.
You could have 
 
Yeah so, there's a bit more, more could have been written down on that.
I saw you write down crafty  so you picked up his little circle, it could be used for referrals, there's the R A R obviously is another one so they're things that can be er picked up.
You didn't ask a question about my  you accepted at face value the thing about health.
Is there not a question in there, unless I'm going, er does it ask you er alright you can talk fast something like that  
 
whether you've had a serious illness or  
just put there what's your present state of health, present state of health.
take any regular medication 
Present state of health  
That's right you did ask me that


you did erm, I think you've not been asked to do, to say anything about have you had any serious illnesses at all.
Yeah it has cropped up.
Yeah.
Something ag again you when you're doing it, in other areas of the industry if you're not taught the structure you, you are not taught properly, you get these very bad habits and  essential thing which is coming out  by not following the structure in order I actually wrote down er by missing the business card and the buyer's guide at the beginning, I was actually  I've got to slip this in somewhere and not listening to what you were saying and some of what you said went straight over my head which is bad because you're missing things then.
Er some of the .
Yeah some, some of ours .


Get away from there.
I usually get round people like that though because if somebody said that
not at all but, you know, there are tax advantages in it sort of thing erm .
Yeah it's just a small volume, you've just got one channel for, yeah currently I'm in pretty good shape but only a year ago I had a major bypass operation.
So you've just got to watch out that you you're gonna miss those things if you're not careful.
Okay with education of children, does that not crop up on this?
Mm.
Yes .
Erm, what else was there, tennis?
Did you, did you think there was
Tennis Club yes .
Because there were, there were easily three  lists of influence on referrals that you need to be attuned to, that I gave you in that one erm praise, give a bit of praise to my wife because all I'm proud of  crafty , I thought, you know, why didn't you say that was a beautiful brief.
Yeah.
And when you go home  
Because I would think it's that I hadn't given you the  
 

I knew
Is that when it clicked?
Yeah,th well no just before then I kept thinking 
 
God I haven't  the buyer's guide and all that bit just went straight over my head that's .
I wasn't listening and it was important that I should have picked that up.
I mean you obviously did well because you've realized you've forgotten it and you know you've gotta, the ideal two worst steps over  to, the person who's sitting here is not gonna say, hold on, where's the buyer's guide,
It's not that important sir .
unless it's the  but er if you've forgot it  back  good reason for handing it over  so yeah I mean I, I think that  well I've given you the, the, the strength if you like  we can see it, perhaps a little bit more open questioning wouldn't go amiss would it?
No.
did it so well the other Friday when  in the
It was preparation that did it 
wasn't  the preparation, but yours was the best, best one of  Friday 
because we had to sit and prepare what we were doing.
Er I'd, I'd picked out because I knew a lot about the client whereas here I know nothing about the client.
the case in fact in real life is there 
Yeah, yeah.
but if you, if you looking at some things that came up there are crafty marks
That's interesting where do they meet, walk down to the local church and that's great well what sort of time do they meet oh you know eleven till five?
Now if you can go there all you're doing is if you're showing interest and you qualify like you reckon is it going to be worth my while, what sort of people go there, you know the R N I.
How often do you meet and how many people there, you're showing interest but you're also qualifying at the same time and it's not padding, it's actually useful information because you're thinking well that's worth pursuing  the R N I, yes but there's money there.
The, they really convert bibles for doing that is because I've always done that of er right that's, that's out of the way, jump the paperwork, now what about talking about your clubs and that t to sort of close down the call and relax the client for getting into referral mode and I've always done it tail end on so the introduction to the referral is at the beginning and perhaps looking for them during i is totally unfamiliar, I mean I do note the odd thing as I go through and note them down on the, the  but I'd never been used to actually  although we were told  referrals  how and why that went with it.
I think that's very valuable here because we've given all that stuff up front.
It's very easy to do it because all you do is  how many people go there, you know, who runs it   runs it stuff like that and you just, you're exploring and you're getting more information and it's that's great, fine.
Now if we get back to what we were talking about due to today so then you do a bit more and then it's back to the sort of  really.
It's not quite the pressure, I mean I always find those two pages which is facts and that's it but that's the new dimension to it so that helps a lot.
The other thing I wondered when I was watching the video, you sat there at one stage, while I was writing  and I thought, I thought, what are you thinking?
Why didn't you ask me?
Because I didn't notice it when I was actually doing it.
Oh right.
on the video  because I was writing, I wasn't watching you,
Yeah.
I was writing and on the video you're sitting there going.
Well what's going through your mind  she writing the answer to those questions.
And as you said, firing one question after another.
Do you think that was the reason why you missed it?write it down.
the reaction to  but if you do see them you should always ask, you say you're very puzzled aren't you.
Mm.
well I'm a bit puzzled why, why you want to know all this  and you think because I haven't given, given a good benefit that's why  a good temporary benefit, that's why I'm puzzled, say well let me just take you back to why I'm h why I'm here,let me get out of our meeting  you're gonna find this extremely valuable, perhaps for the first half we will spend time looking at your financial  put you on the path to achieve financial .
Well that's what we're here today to look at.
What's a good answer to that because I found a lot of people, we had that actually on our  and one of them was that she .
Now to put that into a phrase I found quite difficult to do er and but some people wouldn't question it but other people would say well what do you mean by that, what  you know you plan for the future so that you can retire  will be financially independent but it works and you  your money work for you.
Means when it's put out to pasture 
Give you an income 
Right 


Means you're gonna live in a field.
Means when you can choose when you retire  decide  you have to retire and you will enjoy proper, you can have an income erm which is going to be erm commensurate with what you are currently earning.
So that's the trouble.
Which  say have er retire in dignity and comfort, that's the difference between being an old man and being a gentleman.
Is that right.
Rightio, well I hope you've rewound your tape so it's
alright don't worry about that 
Anything else on that one?
Manager whatever you call it.
Do we, do we move on to 
Yes, we just move on to the  what we need is a five minute preparation or whatever.
Do you, do you collect these?
I'm not sure we're going to 
It would be useful to have it.
route now you see.
Yes I do I'm moving on I've got to find my way to somewhere else now.
Well where did you start?
well  hang on to it just in case but I'm sure you'll be getting these 
Do you do you want the one I did?
Ah
Do you want that one?
Yeah I think they would be helpful


Alright.
I always lock that one.
I was surprised as much as anything Diane.
you can keep it .
If, if that's wrong then I'm sure it 
Well I'm not going to lose it 
Right anyone know where cl 
I'm trying to think where the one  
Oh that's his erm gentleman dialect I think 
Dialect.
Picking up the dialect 
corpus, British corpus corporation they want to get have so many millions of spoken words 
so many millions of words.
Excuse me.
Yes.
it's the next one along  
What did I do  took my key out of here 
They've gone.
This key here.
No that's not mine, mine's only  got fifteen on the back  one there I thought, that's strange having one 
Now comes the problem.
Yeah I was aware that that
Is to know it all and can sit down and watch you two  
yes that's er
It's a different world when you get out there.
Right which is your tape?
Have you just left that running?
 
I'm not sure where it is  film, we'll have to just  er last week.
Right


hear  and get you to the right part.
I am not sure if we rewound it or what.
Want to keep on it  
Well thanks a lot for your time
Okay.
and I'll see you  goodbye.
That's something else I picked up from watching 
Okay
Thank you for your help today, thank you for .
I've never been used to doing that and it makes such a lot of difference when you actually speak to the people.
Mm
It helps a lot.
I, I, what I try to do is switch off erm, and be myself.
Mm mm.
Because I find that er I can talk to people now, we chat away as I would in a pub, or in someone's house but then this is the bit that worries me.
Just try and get the structure right 
I went wrong I'm just me when I go in, erm it's getting the structure in there.
I mean, as you say, I cover all the points but because you don't do them in the right order perhaps you muck them up 
Oh yeah I er sat there and thought oh crikey  
 
and I looked across at Barry and he got cross, cross, cross and
Yeah, where did mine go I did one on Barry but I don't know what I've done with it.
Yeah.
but then suddenly you you're back into it.
scripts 
Show me what you can do.
It's this erm, as mentioned on the telephone the purpose of my visit is er erm the whole review should take about forty five minutes, well that's up to now are we supposed to say.
Erm, well we've got, I'll take a few notes erm during this, during the course of our conversation, I'll take them away, study them in complete confidence and come back to you next week with my recommendations.
Does this sound okay to you?
Well there, erm you, you've introduced your C C Q
And what are you going to do?
Good start and I've found by adopting this approach I've been able to erm help clients in many areas which has saved them tax or making their money work harder for them.
How does that sound?
Well I've done it but all in the wrong order.
Mm mm
Well I'd like you to try that one today but I  go to pieces  
Now I, they could, erm one thing that I found b b b b picked up from doing my own reading and studying was that it's always good to go through with the customer step by step which is to a certain extent what we do do
as you said the steps of it and that you will come back with your recommendations and that.
Now I missed that out totally there so I've got a lot of learning to do on the scripts 
Why do you think you missed it
I find that difficult
was it, was it, was it because he just er turned up, was it, was it, did that throw you off a bit?
Yeah there was no preparation for it really and I haven't learnt the scripts properly,
Right
they're not going in.
Old habits die hard erm
Yes it's easier said than done 
just going in and sort of lying by the seat of your pants.
And you can also get lost even if you do say the script because I said to Roger I, I've
Er
tried it to remember the script but then I 
Hang on why
I've lost the statement of the person
What's going on here?
I'm just forwarding my tape
Oh right.
There's yours.
No I know that's there cos it's Roger  
Yeah yes 
I think you know I was con trying to concentrate on getting the facts over and doing it properly and not listening for the comments so much and thinking more you know what, what can I get out of this here erm
You get drawn into, you know, too much unnatural  structure don't you really?
Mm.
I've lost my buyer's guide.
 

talk.
So I didn't do any appropriate sociability there but I think what threw me off is cos I'd already said Helen to Stephen, I know you and everything and it was as if it was part of the same thing
Yeah 
and to switch off and then go into role play after  very strange  
I don't know 
percent.
I think he's got .
Right.
I like Stephen  
Yeah.
Really good company.
I'll tell you why  
 
Yeah I, I would say, I would say that's yeah 
I'm trying to find  paper somewhere, oh here we are 
it's much harder than erm the  was.
Yeah, yeah.
I would  say that.
 
Yeah certainly.
Yeah but that's what it's all about .
He was more erm realistic as a real situation.
Constructive as well.
Yeah he was more real I mean when you sort of just sit there she, she threw me off track a few times but er he was more realistic so therefore.
What's all this about bonuses  bonus.
where's me structure gone, that's not me structure.
 
Yeah I think it's erm  Martin aren't I and he was going to throw you .
All over the place .
Yeah.
I shouldn't worry.
Just do your best I think
Is your tape still running?
Yes it is it's still going.
 
It's you learn as much from your mistakes
Erm
you learn more from your mistakes than you actually learn from doing it right I think.
You do, yes 
You do 
Yeah.
I mean you know when it works 
Is that your business card?


picked up .
This must be an ideal situation for you actually cos we're being, we're sitting here being recorded and being watched so we're used to that sort of thing but not particularly conscious of it 
What tape?
I supposed you've a bit of scan 
Got a second  tomorrow, so that's seven  the whole bit the whole week is all about that until we get to the presentation   presentations, what does he mean by  presentations?
I don't know.
Because two of them don't have to be done are they 
 
That's when they've got to do their, their resits.
They had the choice of doing it erm this afternoon
Oh right.
but erm I don't think Joan, at the time,last night, Joan said that she was a bit too tired to  Bob was having to just fit in with that so I don't know what they're gonna do.
last night  I went  half past ten cos  
I  was at half past, quarter past one.
I would have loved to have stayed because I really enjoy things like that, I love discos and get up and have a dance but I knew damn well that if I did I'd be absolutely shattered today and I, I just wouldn't be with it so I, I said to Matthew I'm going up .
Yeah.
So and I went down in the pool this morning 
At the time you enjoy it but then the next day you  pay 
Feel sorry about it yeah.
Well that's why I did it because I don't often get the opportunity to go out and enjoy myself like that .
Yeah.
I was tempted now, no  
Yeah basically why I didn't, I wasn't going to consume all that Guinness either .
Well I remember feeling quite niffed because Matt was really off on Friday because he'd been up so late
Yeah.
and I think that rather ruined the whole afternoon erm
role plays he was just so tired, he 
He was just out of it.
He was like a zombie .
He's a stroppy little sod isn't he?
Can be.


He was trying to, he was doing a laugh laughing fit last night, he was, he, he couldn't tell me what he was trying to tell me.
Every time he told me, he started laughing.


Oh dear,we he wen got up


I still didn't know what it was he was trying to tell me 
No, I was told before I came on the course, you're going on the course to learn to make maximum use out of it, you're not going on an almighty second holiday and
booze up.
We were given the, a right old drumming down before we left for here.
Mm.
You are all representing these branches
Oh no it wasn't quite that bad.
and you all .
Get up at two, I don't think got much mention to them at all from what I was 


Oh no, it was just because I went to talk to my manager about it before I went and I went through my diary with him and everything.
My appointments and everything I'd got before I came along and erm he went on to tell me, if  company .
Mm.
He feels I've got to take the client back  
 
over to  or something.
waiting it's just getting on your nerves now, I was quite calm and relaxed 
 
Organize yourself a bit, what you're gonna say and how long you're gonna  to the other.
Well no, I started to do that, then I, then I thought  we don't play the customer .
If I get into a structure, if I, if I start trying to learn it I'm gonna do it all.
Slow it down.
Mm mm.


Turn that off for a minute 
I liked that bit you said, greeting an appropriate sociability,.
yeah.
Lorraine  door.
our erm assistant manager.
They're agents  Matt and I are in her team.
Hard task master.
Apparently there was a woman A B M at our branch until recently and apparently she was very good too.
That's what Joan was saying the other day as a woman you have to be, otherwise you don't get there.
Yeah and she's totally focused, she's er, I think she's got two children erm her husbands works, she's got two children she's brought up and developed herself to be a branch manager or assistant branch manager er she's got a degree  h now don't listen to this Lorraine, who it said  mid thirties  
 
and actually she's excellent  and I like her  not  like working for a female boss  good people er
the victim
I'm the victim.
Now you're the victim are you?
I'm the victim.
I think if you've, if you've got a woman that's  then you're lucky 
How you going, alright, yes 
Whoosh.
Ta.
When you're ready, then.
There was a 
Right so I'll be the timekeeper  
 
Yes please
I think if it makes any difference to you we've got a thingy whirring away there.
No that's not a problem.
It's just recording  
A thingy whirring away.
Yes
Yeah that's fine.
Am I 
Erm you covered it slightly, you need to be sort of in, either any  yeah 
 
Do you want  ask you to sit in the other chair?
Don't mind.
It's recording now anyway.
Yeah.
Come in.
Got Roger  instructions.
Hello Roger.
The chef.
very much.
Okay.
garden you've got.
I couldn't help noticing as I walked up the path.
Is that you?
No no, they're the 
Really.
I try not to though, I mean that's her responsibility, I buy the plants and she puts them in the garden, er in the .
What sort of hobbies do you do when ?
Oh I do D I Y around the house you know I've got these rather er sexy lamps up there  different aren't they.
Where did you see those?
.
Do a job lot you know, four something, four eighty  keeps the wife happy.


They need to be, yes.
Okay Martin, I know you are a busy man, may I call you Martin ?
Well I'd rather you didn't actually.
Right okay that's no problem.
Erm before we go, go into  I've got to introduce myself, business card and the buyer's guide.
Buyer's guide tells you that I work for  and, and that I'm authorized to discuss  's products only.
When I'm going through the recommendations with you.
Right.
Sorry, do you want to know more?
Do I need to know more?
Well, no, it's yours to keep, you can read it a at your leisure  erm if you've got any problems with that you've got my card and you can ring .
Great.
Fine.
Before we er knuckle down to this list, tell me, how m 
Knuckle down, what do you want to knuckle down to, business?
Before we talk about the er er getting to the purpose of our meeting, erm, how long were you, how did you come to  in the first place?
I think er  of time now what five or six years ago   came to  presentation .
I  the time on the , think what they're saying was trying to act .
So you could say he recommended you to us?
Well he seemed quite keen on the company so .
We find that erm, most of our clients are recommended erm you may well have heard the expression we grow big, by being recommended.
Can't remember that.
You find that building erm er building and business buying  our recommendation means we can erm, we don't need to advertise er,
rarely need to advertise and the  there  for the benefits of our clients.
Yeah.
Erm in areas that erm produce charges erm interest benefits whenever possible.
Sorry what do we need to ?
Increased bonuses.
Oh right, sorry.
Er so how does that sound to you, is does that way of building a business sound to you?
Erm well it makes sense but I'm, I'm glad you  cos I mean my bonuses have gone down, I mean they haven't gone up then why is that?
Okay, can I come back to that erm on the bonuses a bit later on?
Alright okay yeah.
So erm going back do y felt that er  mouth to mouth   recommendations    
case you've got that have we?
 

Erm, erm we've found that erm 
 
it's helped to build our business and erm in fact we thought it was a good idea er  during the course of this conversation that I'm having with you
I, I  you can introduce others to me.
. Erm if and only if you find there's been some real benefits you .
Well I'll see what you can do first.
get  work.
Who said  I'll answer me up the end and we can see how we go.
Yeah fine.
Okay.
Right, erm the purpose of me being here, why am I here you may ask.
Why indeed?
Well it's better than telephoning and 


that we've erm, firstly, I want to say hello, I'm Roger  I'm with the   your policies.
Erm, secondly to introduce you to our new review system whereby we do a complete item review  the situation to see how your existing policies are working and how they fit into what you want out of life.
Erm during the course of the meeting I'll take a few notes, erm 
book here.
Erm I will take those notes away with me in the strictest confidence, go through them erm work out some recommendations, how you could hit the goals that you will go for at the end of the day.
Mm.
Erm and come back to you, perhaps in a week's time and  you talk me through those recommendations.
I found by adapting that approach erm I've been able to help clients in such areas as er tax saving or making their money work that little bit harder for them.
Well how would that in the future.
If you could make my look, my money work a bit harder it would make sense to me, after all .
So, are you happy to proceed Sir?
So can you take me thr 
Oh yes sure.
Yeah.
 
Okay good.
Erm a few hard facts just to confirm first of all
Hard, what's a hard fact?
Your name and your address.
Oh right.
So why are they called hard facts?
As opposed to soft facts, soft facts can be something along the lines of what you want out of life er
What you're, what you're aiming for in the future?
Something could change er whereas a hard fact erm, it's very rarely you're gonna change your name.
What?
I do.
What you've obviously got to  why did I mention yeah, you marry, but if something's  be down, isn't gonna change.
Interest may change but .
So if the address changes, is that a soft fact or a hard fact?
A good point,I think that's a very good point .
I think that's a medium fact.
A medium fact,I 'll I'll accept that.
Alright then.
But, but you ca can see what I'm trying to get at.
The facts are gonna be something that, I have to write down here soft facts.
There gonna be something that er, as you would tell me about.
Really, oh  fine, I don't drink
That'll be interesting
So it was erm Mr ?
Yeah.
And the first name's Martin.
That's right  
Are you married, Martin?
Sorry.
You are married and your wife's christian name's  okay.
The address is obviously .
  

Key to the front door.
I spoke to you on the phone at work er have you got your home number?
Yeah.




Okay erm and you're U K resident, you're
Yeah.
working here .
Your wife?
My wife what?
She's a U K resident as well.
Yes she is yeah.
Your date of birth Sir is it the twenty first of August nineteen ?
Your wife's date of birth.
Er the  twenty sixth of the sixth .
Okay, now we talked about you and your wife erm you told me that you had two well you've got two kids erm
Alex is the eldest, he's nine, er Catherine she's eight
Their date of birth.
Alex is the third of the third eighty five, Catherine's the .
That's Alexander.
Yeah 
Okay  So they're at school?
Yes.
You've got the problems of going through their early life.
Are they at private school or public school?
It erm  school .
Right, what are your thoughts on private education?
I'm quite happy, I'm quite happy with the er the .
You wouldn't be er interested if er you were able to afford  perhaps?.
No no, I li I think maybe higher education, that would be the first  I'm quite happy .
To tell you the truth .
I'd like to, they may, they may not want to  sixteen .
Very possibly.
Yes okay.
Erm  health-wise
Er have  just been in hospital this last three or four years.
Three or four years.
You 
Why I had too much .
Oh no, just keep calm, that's all.
Erm so your, your state of health er have to go to hospital  go to the doctor?
What do you mean ?
Will it create problems?
No.
No  and, and your wife?
She's fine.
no problems.
Right.
Do you smoke?
Er she does, I don't.
How many does she smoke?
About five a day .
hobbies .
Pastimes.
Well I do a little bit of yachting.
Yachting?
Yeah, there's a boating lake nearby  in the big white sea as it were down there .
what you just go on your own?
Well I take my son, he comes with me, he  for me.
So you're ?
Yeah .
You've got to join .
Oh yes you come in, it's, it's not a membership, you just go along and pay your fees and .
Well it  on my doorstep and that makes sense to use it, so I sort of wriggle down there and have  to keep me out of er Southampton er Boat Show.
Mm.
Yeah   it costs you much  
No I don't  it's just a, a small .
erm so you got it ?
He won't?
catchment is.
Is she?
Yeah.
That's the television?
Yes.
Afraid so ,
Don't we all?
Okay erm what sort of work do you do?.
Erm I'm a Technical Author.
Technical Author?
hate this .
Yeah.
diagram  make sure you have part of the engine room.
Well I do at the .
I see you write it up or you draw the pictures?
I write  yeah.
photographs to the drawings, then I write the technical explanation of how  artwork that interrelates with each other.
 
Marvellous how they do that.
at school I used to  trying to do something er 