

Explaining the very improbable
We animals are the most complicated things in the known universe.
The universe that we know, of course, is a tiny fragment of the actual universe.
There may be yet more complicated objects than us on other planets, and some of them may already know about us.
But this doesn't alter the point that I want to make.
Complicated things, everywhere, deserve a very special kind of explanation.
We want to know how they came into existence and why they are so complicated.
The explanation, as I shall argue, is likely to be broadly the same for complicated things everywhere in the universe; the same for us, for chimpanzees, worms, oak trees and monsters from outer space.
On the other hand, it will not be the same for what I shall call "simple" things, such as rocks, clouds, rivers, galaxies and quarks.
These are the stuff of physics.
Chimps and dogs and bats and cockroaches and people and worms and dandelions and bacteria and galactic aliens are the stuff of biology.
The difference is one of complexity of design.
Biology is the study of complicated things that give the appearance of having been designed for a purpose.
Physics is the study of simple things that do not tempt us to invoke design.
At first sight, man-made artefacts like computers and cars will seem to provide exceptions.
They are complicated and obviously designed for a purpose, yet they are not alive, and they are made of metal and plastic rather than of flesh and blood.
In this book they will be firmly treated as biological objects.
The reader's reaction to this may be to ask, "Yes, but are they really biological objects?" 
Words are our servants, not our masters.
For different purposes we find it convenient to use words in different senses.
Most cookery books class lobsters as fish.
Zoologists can  with greater justice call humans fish, since fish are far closer kin to humans than they are to lobsters.
And, talking of justice and lobsters, I understand that a court of law recently had to decide whether lobsters were insects or "animals" (it bore upon whether people should be allowed to boil them alive).
Zoologically speaking, lobsters are certainly not insects.
They are animals, but then so are insects and so are we.
There is little point in getting worked up about the way different people use words (although in my nonprofessional life I am quite prepared to get worked up about people who boil lobsters alive).
Cooks and lawyers need to use words in their own special ways, and so do I in this book.
Never mind whether cars and computers are "really" biological objects.
The point is that if anything of that degree of complexity were found on a planet, we should have no hesitation in concluding that life existed, or had once existed, on that planet.
Machines are the direct products of living objects; they derive their complexity and design from living objects, and they are diagnostic of the existence of life on a planet.
The same goes for fossils, skeletons and dead bodies.
I said that physics is the study of simple things, and this, too, may seem strange at first.
Physics appears to be a complicated subject, because the ideas of physics are difficult for us to understand.
Our brains were designed to understand hunting and gathering, mating and child-rearing: a world of medium-sized objects moving in three dimensions at moderate speeds.
We are ill-equipped to comprehend the very small and the very large; things whose duration is measured in picoseconds or gigayears; particles that don't have position; forces and fields that we cannot see or touch, which we know of only because they affect things that we can see or touch.
We think that physics is complicated because it is hard for us to understand, and because physics books are full of difficult mathematics.
But the objects that physicists study are still basically simple objects.
They are clouds of gas or tiny particles, or lumps of uniform matter like crystals, with almost endlessly repeated atomic patterns.
They do not, at least by biological standards, have intricate working parts.
Even large physical objects like stars consist of a rather limited array of parts, more or less haphazardly arranged.
The behaviour of physical, nonbiological objects is so simple that it is feasible to use existing mathematical language to describe it, which is why physics books are full of mathematics.
Physics books may be complicated, but physics books, like cars and computers, are the product of biological objects — human brains.
The objects and phenomena that a physics book describes are simpler than  a single cell in the body of its author.
And the author consists of trillions of those cells, many of them different from each other, organized with intricate architecture and precision-engineering into a working machine capable of writing a book (my trillions are American, like all my units: one American trillion is a million millions, an American billion is a thousand millions).
Our brains are no better equipped to handle extremes of complexity than extremes of size and the other difficult extremes of physics.
Nobody has yet invented the mathematics for describing the total structure and behaviour of such an object as a physicist, or even of one of his cells.
What we can do is understand some of the general principles of how living things work, and why they exist at all.
This was where we came in.
We wanted to know why we, and all other complicated things, exist.
And we can now answer that question in general terms, even without being able to comprehend the details of the complexity itself.
To take an analogy, most of us don't understand in detail how an airliner works.
Probably its builders don't comprehend it fully either: engine specialists don't in detail understand wings, and wing specialists understand engines only vaguely.
Wing specialists don't even understand wings with full mathematical precision: they can predict how a wing will behave in turbulent conditions, only by examining a model in a wind tunnel or a computer simulation — the sort of thing a biologist might do to understand an animal.
But however incompletely we understand how an airliner works, we all understand by what general process it came into existence.
It was designed by humans on drawing boards.
Then other humans made the bits from the drawings, then lots more humans (with the aid of other machines designed by humans) screwed, rivetted, welded or glued the bits together, each in its right place.
The process by which an airliner came into existence is not fundamentally mysterious to us, because humans built it.
The systematic putting together of parts to a purposeful design is something we know and understand, for we have experienced it at first hand, even if only with our childhood Meccano or Erector set.
What about our own bodies?
Each one of us is a machine, like an airliner only much more complicated.
Were we designed on a drawing board too, and were our parts assembled by a skilled engineer?
The answer is no.
It is a surprising answer, and we have known and understood it for only a century or so.
When Charles Darwin first explained the matter, many people either wouldn't or couldn't grasp it.
I myself flatly refused to believe Darwin's theory when I first heard about it as a child.
Almost everybody throughout history, up to the second half of the nineteenth century, has firmly believed in the opposite — the  Conscious Designer theory.
Many people still do, perhaps because the true, Darwinian explanation of our own existence is still, remarkably, not a routine part of the curriculum of a general education.
It is certainly very widely misunderstood.
The watchmaker of my title is borrowed from a famous treatise by the eighteenth-century theologian William Paley.
His Natural Theology — or Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity Collected from the Appearances of Nature, published in 1802, is the best-known exposition of the "Argument from Design" , always the most influential of the arguments for the existence of a God.
It is a book that I greatly admire, for in his own time its author succeeded in doing what I am struggling to do now.
He had a point to make, he passionately believed in it, and he spared no effort to ram it home clearly.
He had a proper reverence for the complexity of the living world, and he saw that it demands a very special kind of explanation.
The only thing he got wrong — admittedly quite a big thing!— was the explanation itself.
He gave the traditional religious answer to the riddle, but he articulated it more clearly and convincingly than anybody had before.
The true explanation is utterly different, and it had to wait for one of the most revolutionary thinkers of all time, Charles Darwin.
Paley begins Natural Theology with a famous passage: In crossing a heath, suppose I pitched my foot against a stone, and were asked how the stone came to be there; I might possibly answer, that, for anything I knew to the contrary, it had lain there for ever: nor would it perhaps be very easy to show the absurdity of this answer.
But suppose I had found a watch upon the ground, and it should be inquired how the watch happened to be in that place; I should hardly think of the answer which I had before given, that for anything I knew, the watch might have always been there.
Paley here appreciates the difference between natural physical objects like stones, and designed and manufactured objects like watches.
He goes on to expound the precision with which the cogs and springs of a watch are fashioned, and the intricacy with which they are put together.
If we found an object such as a watch upon a heath, even if we didn't know how it had come into existence, its own precision and intricacy of design would force us to conclude that the watch must have had a maker: that there must have existed, at some time, and at some place or other, an artificer or artificers, who formed it for the purpose which we find it actually to answer; who comprehended its construction, and designed its use.
Nobody could reasonably dissent from this conclusion, Paley insists, yet that is just what the atheist, in effect, does when he contemplates the works of nature, for: every indication of contrivance, every manifestation of design, which existed in the watch, exists in the works of nature; with the difference, on the side of nature, of being greater or more, and that in a degree which exceeds all computation.
Paley drives his point home with beautiful and reverent descriptions of the dissected machinery of life, beginning with the human eye, a favourite example which Darwin was later to use and which will reappear throughout this book.
Paley compares the eye with a designed instrument such as a telescope, and concludes that "there is precisely the same proof that the eye was made for vision, as there is that the telescope was made for assisting it" .
The eye must have had a designer, just as the telescope had.
Paley's argument is made with passionate sincerity and is informed by the best biological scholarship of his day, but it is wrong, gloriously and utterly wrong.
The analogy between telescope and eye, between watch and living organism, is false.
All appearances to the contrary, the only watchmaker in nature is the blind forces of physics, albeit deployed in a very special way.
A true watchmaker has foresight: he designs his cogs and springs, and plans their interconnections, with a future purpose in his mind's eye.
Natural selection, the blind, unconscious, automatic process which Darwin discovered, and which we now know is the explanation for the existence and apparently purposeful form of all life, has no purpose in mind.
It has no mind and no mind's eye.
It does not plan for the future.
It has no vision, no foresight, no sight at all.
If it can be said to play the role of watchmaker in nature, it is the blind watchmaker.
I shall explain all this, and much else besides.
But one thing I shall not do is belittle the wonder of the living "watches" that so inspired Paley.
On the contrary, I shall try to illustrate my feeling that here Paley could have gone even further.
When it comes to feeling awe over living "watches" I yield to nobody.
I feel more in common with the Reverend William Paley than I do with the distinguished modern philosopher, a well-known atheist, with whom I once discussed the matter at dinner.
I said that I could not imagine being an atheist at any time before 1859, when Darwin's Origin of Species was published.
 "What about Hume?" , replied the philosopher.
 "How did Hume explain the organized complexity of the living world?" ,
I asked.
 "He didn't" , said the philosopher.
 "Why does it need any special explanation?" 
Paley knew that it needed a special explanation; Darwin knew it, and I suspect that in his heart of hearts my philosopher companion knew it too.
In any case it will be my business to show it here.
As for David Hume himself, it is sometimes said that that great Scottish philosopher disposed of the Argument from Design a century before Darwin.
But what Hume did was criticize the logic of using apparent design in nature as positive evidence for the existence of a God.
He did not offer any alternative explanation for apparent design, but left the question open.
An atheist before Darwin could have said, following Hume: "I have no explanation for complex biological design.
All I know is that God isn't a good explanation, so we must wait and hope that somebody comes up with a better one."
I can't help feeling that such a position, though logically sound, would have left one feeling pretty unsatisfied, and that although atheism might have been logically tenable before Darwin, Darwin made it possible to be an intellectually fulfilled atheist.
I like to think that Hume would agree, but some of his writings suggest that he underestimated the complexity and beauty of biological design.
The boy naturalist Charles Darwin could have shown him a thing or two about that, but Hume had been dead 40 years when Darwin enrolled in Hume's university of Edinburgh.
I have talked glibly of complexity, and of apparent design, as though it were obvious what these words mean.
In a sense it is obvious — most people have an intuitive idea of what complexity means.
But these notions, complexity and design, are so pivotal to this book that I must try to capture a little more precisely, in words, our feeling that there is something special about complex, and apparently designed things.
So, what is a complex thing?
How should we recognize it?
In what sense is it true to say that a watch or an airliner or an earwig or a person is complex, but the moon is simple?
The first point that might occur to us, as a necessary attribute of a complex thing, is that it has a heterogeneous structure.
A pink milk pudding or blancmange is simple in the sense that, if we slice it in two, the two portions will have the same internal constitution: a blancmange is homogeneous.
A car is heterogeneous: unlike a blancmange, almost any portion of the car is different from other portions.
Two times half a car does not make a car.
This will often amount to saying that a complex object, as opposed to a simple one, has many parts, these parts being of more than one kind.
Such heterogeneity, or"many-partedness', may be a necessary condition, but it is not sufficient.
Plenty of objects are many-parted and heterogeneous in internal structure, without being complex in the sense in which I want to use the term.
Mont Blanc, for instance, consists of many different kinds of rock, all jumbled together in such a  way that, if you sliced the mountain anywhere, the two portions would differ from each other in their internal constitution.
Mont Blanc has a heterogeneity of structure not possessed by a blancmange, but it is still not complex in the sense in which a biologist uses the term.
Let us try another tack in our quest for a definition of complexity, and make use of the mathematical idea of probability.
Suppose we try out the following definition: a complex thing is something whose constituent parts are arranged in a way that is unlikely to have arisen by chance alone.
To borrow an analogy from an eminent astronomer, if you take the parts of an airliner and jumble them up at random, the likelihood that you would happen to assemble a working Boeing is vanishingly small.
There are billions of possible ways of putting together the bits of an airliner, and only one, or very few, of them would actually be an airliner.
There are even more ways of putting together the scrambled parts of a human.
This approach to a definition of complexity is promising, but something more is still needed.
There are billions of ways of throwing together the bits of Mont Blanc, it might be said, and only one of them is Mont Blanc.
So what is it that makes the airliner and the human complicated, if Mont Blanc is simple?
Any old jumbled collection of parts is unique and, with hindsight, is as improbable as any other.
The scrap-heap at an aircraft breaker's yard is unique.
No two scrap-heaps are the same.
If you start throwing fragments of aeroplanes into heaps, the odds of your happening to hit upon exactly the same arrangement of junk twice are just about as low as the odds of your throwing together a working airliner.
So, why don't we say that a rubbish dump, or Mont Blanc, or the moon, is just as complex as an aeroplane or a dog, because in all these cases the arrangement of atoms is "improbable" ?
The combination lock on my bicycle has 4,096 different positions.
Every one of these is equally "improbable" in the sense that, if you spin the wheels at random, every one of the 4,096 positions is equally unlikely to turn up.
I can spin the wheels at random, look at whatever number is displayed and exclaim with hindsight: "How amazing.
The odds against that number appearing are 4,096:1.
A minor miracle!"
That is equivalent to regarding the particular arrangement of rocks in a mountain, or of bits of metal in a scrap-heap, as "complex" .
But one of those 4,096 wheel positions really is interestingly unique: the combination 1207 is the only one that opens the lock.
The uniqueness of 1207 has nothing to do with hindsight: it is specified in advance by the manufacturer.
If you spun the wheels at random and happened to hit 1207 first time, you would be able to steal the bike, and it would seem a minor miracle.
If you struck lucky on one of those multi-dialled  combination locks on bank safes, it would seem a very major miracle, for the odds against it are many millions to one, and you would be able to steal a fortune.
Now, hitting upon the lucky number that opens the bank's safe is the equivalent, in our analogy, of hurling scrap metal around at random and happening to assemble a Boeing 747.
Of all the millions of unique and, with hindsight equally improbable, positions of the combination lock, only one opens the lock.
Similarly, of all the millions of unique and, with hindsight equally improbable, arrangements of a heap of junk, only one (or very few) will fly.
The uniqueness of the arrangement that flies, or that opens the safe, is nothing to do with hindsight.
It is specified in advance.
The lock-manufacturer fixed the combination, and he has told the bank manager.
The ability to fly is a property of an airliner that we specify in advance.
If we see a plane in the air we can be sure that it was not assembled by randomly throwing scrap metal together, because we know that the odds against a random conglomeration's being able to fly are too great.
Now, if you consider all possible ways in which the rocks of Mont Blanc could have been thrown together, it is true that only one of them would make Mont Blanc as we know it.
But Mont Blanc as we know it is defined with hindsight.
Any one of a very large number of ways of throwing rocks together would be labelled a mountain, and might have been named Mont Blanc.
There is nothing special about the particular Mont Blanc that we know, nothing specified in advance, nothing equivalent to the plane taking off, or equivalent to the safe door swinging open and the money tumbling out.
What is the equivalent of the safe door swinging open, or the plane flying, in the case of a living body?
Well, sometimes it is almost literally the same.
Swallows fly.
As we have seen, it isn't easy to throw together a flying machine.
If you took all the cells of a swallow and put them together at random, the chance that the resulting object would fly is not, for everyday purposes, different from zero.
Not all living things fly, but they do other things that are just as improbable, and just as specifiable in advance.
Whales don't fly, but they do swim, and swim about as efficiently as swallows fly.
The chance that a random conglomeration of whale cells would swim, let alone swim as fast and efficiently as a whale actually does swim, is negligible.
At this point, some hawk-eyed philosopher (hawks have very acute eyes — you couldn't make a hawk's eye by throwing lenses and light-sensitive cells together at random) will start mumbling something about a circular argument.
Swallows fly but they don't swim; and whales swim but they don't fly.
It is with hindsight that we decide  whether to judge the success of our random conglomeration as a swimmer or as a flyer.
Suppose we agree to judge its success as an Xer, and leave open exactly what X is until we have tried throwing cells together.
The random lump of cells might turn out to be an efficient burrower like a mole or an efficient climber like a monkey.
It might be very good at wind-surfing, or at clutching oily rags, or at walking in ever decreasing circles until it vanished.
The list could go on and on.
Or could it?
If the list really could go on and on, my hypothetical philosopher might have a point.
If, no matter how randomly you threw matter around, the resulting conglomeration could often be said, with hindsight, to be good for something, then it would be true to say that I cheated over the swallow and the whale.
But biologists can be much more specific than that about what would constitute being "good for something" .
The minimum requirement for us to recognize an object as an animal or plant is that it should succeed in making a living of some sort (more precisely that it, or at least some members of its kind, should live long enough to reproduce).
It is true that there are quite a number of ways of making a living — flying, swimming, swinging through the trees, and so on.
But, however many ways there may be of being alive, it is certain that there are vastly more ways of being dead, or rather not alive.
You may throw cells together at random, over and over again for a billion years, and not once will you get a conglomeration that flies or swims or burrows or runs, or does anything, even badly, that could remotely be construed as working to keep itself alive.
This has been quite a long, drawn-out argument, and it is time to remind ourselves of how we got into it in the first place.
We were looking for a precise way to express what we mean when we refer to something as complicated.
We were trying to put a finger on what it is that humans and moles and earthworms and airliners and watches have in common with each other, but not with blancmange, or Mont Blanc, or the moon.
The answer we have arrived at is that complicated things have some quality, specifiable in advance, that is highly unlikely to have been acquired by random chance alone.
In the case of living things, the quality that is specified in advance is, in some sense, "proficiency" ; either proficiency in a particular ability such as flying, as an aero-engineer might admire it; or proficiency in something more general, such as the ability to stave off death, or the ability to propagate genes in reproduction.
Staving off death is a thing that you have to work at.
Left to itself and that is what it is when it dies — the body tends to revert to a state of  equilibrium with its environment.
If you measure some quantity such as the temperature, the acidity, the water content or the electrical potential in a living body, you will typically find that it is markedly different from the corresponding measure in the surroundings.
Our bodies, for instance, are usually hotter than our surroundings, and in cold climates they have to work hard to maintain the differential.
When we die the work stops, the temperature differential starts to disappear, and we end up the same temperature as our surroundings.
Not all animals work so hard to avoid coming into equilibrium with their surrounding temperature, but all animals do some comparable work.
For instance, in a dry country, animals and plants work to maintain the fluid content of their cells, work against a natural tendency for water to flow from them into the dry outside world.
If they fail they die.
More generally, if living things didn't work actively to prevent it, they would eventually merge into their surroundings, and cease to exist as autonomous beings.
That is what happens when they die.
With the exception of artificial machines, which we have already agreed to count as honorary living things, nonliving things don't work in this sense.
They accept the forces that tend to bring them into equilibrium with their surroundings.
Mont Blanc, to be sure, has existed for a long time, and probably will exist for a while yet, but it does not work to stay in existence.
When rock comes to rest under the influence of gravity it just stays there.
No work has to be done to keep it there.
Mont Blanc exists, and it will go on existing until it wears away or an earthquake knocks it over.
It doesn't take steps to repair wear and tear, or to right itself when it is knocked over, the way a living body does.
It just obeys the ordinary laws of physics.
Is this to deny that living things obey the laws of physics?
Certainly not.
There is no reason to think that the laws of physics are violated in living matter.
There is nothing supernatural, no "life force" to rival the fundamental forces of physics.
It is just that if you try to use the laws of physics, in a naive way, to understand the behaviour of a whole living body, you will find that you don't get very far.
The body is a complex thing with many constituent parts, and to understand its behaviour you must apply the laws of physics to its parts, not to the whole.
The behaviour of the body as a whole will then emerge as a consequence of interactions of the parts.
Take the laws of motion, for instance.
If you throw a dead bird into the air it will describe a graceful parabola, exactly as physics books say it should, then come to rest on the ground and stay there.
It behaves as a solid body of a particular mass and wind resistance ought to behave.
But if you throw a live bird in the air it will not describe a parabola and come to rest on the ground.
It will fly away, and may not touch land this side of the county boundary.
The reason is that it has muscles which work to resist gravity and other physical forces bearing upon the whole body.
The laws of physics are being obeyed within every cell of the muscles.
The result is that the muscles move the wings in such a way that the bird stays aloft.
The bird is not violating the law of gravity.
It is constantly being pulled downwards by gravity, but its wings are performing active work — obeying laws of physics within its muscles — to keep it aloft in spite of the force of gravity.
We shall think that it defies a physical law if we are naive enough to treat it simply as a structureless lump of matter with a certain mass and wind resistance.
It is only when we remember that it has many internal parts, all obeying laws of physics at their own level, that we understand the behaviour of the whole body.
This is not, of course, a peculiarity of living things.
It applies to all man-made machines, and potentially applies to any complex, many-parted object.
This brings me to the final topic that I want to discuss in this rather philosophical chapter, the problem of what we mean by explanation.
We have seen what we are going to mean by a complex thing.
But what kind of explanation will satisfy us if we wonder how a complicated machine, or living body, works?
The answer is the one that we arrived at in the previous paragraph.
If we wish to understand how a machine or living body works, we look to its component parts and ask how they interact with each other.
If there is a complex thing that we do not yet understand, we can come to understand it in terms of simpler parts that we do already understand.
If I ask an engineer how a steam engine works, I have a pretty fair idea of the general kind of answer that would satisfy me.
Like Julian Huxley I should definitely not be impressed if the engineer said it was propelled by "force locomotif" .
And if he started boring on about the whole being greater than the sum of its parts, I would interrupt him: "Never mind about that, tell me how it works." 
What I would want to hear is something about how the parts of an engine interact with each other to produce the behaviour of the whole engine.
I would initially be prepared to accept an explanation in terms of quite large subcomponents, whose own internal structure and behaviour might be quite complicated and, as yet, unexplained.
The units of an initially satisfying explanation could have names like fire-box, boiler, cylinder, piston, steam governor.
The engineer would assert, without explanation initially, what each of these units does.
I would accept this for the moment, without asking how each unit does its own particular  thing.
Given that the units each do their particular thing, I can then understand how they interact to make the whole engine move.
Of course, I am then at liberty to ask how each part works.
Having previously accepted the fact that the steam governor regulates the flow of steam, and having used this fact in my understanding of the behaviour of the whole engine, I now turn my curiosity on the steam governor itself.
I now want to understand how it achieves its own behaviour, in terms of its own internal parts.
There is a hierarchy of subcomponents within components.
We explain the behaviour of a component at any given level, in terms of interactions between sub-components whose own internal organization, for the moment, is taken for granted.
We peel our way down the hierarchy, until we reach units so simple that, for everyday purposes, we no longer feel the need to ask questions about them.
Rightly or wrongly for instance, most of us are happy about the properties of rigid rods of iron, and we are prepared to use them as units of explanation of more complex machines that contain them.
Physicists, of course, do not take iron rods for granted.
They ask why they are rigid, and they continue the hierarchical peeling for several more layers yet, down to fundamental particles and quarks.
But life is too short for most of us to follow them.
For any given level of complex organization, satisfying explanations may normally be attained if we peel the hierarchy down one or two layers from our starting layer, but not more.
The behaviour of a motor car is explained in terms of cylinders, carburettors and sparking plugs.
It is true that each one of these components rests atop a pyramid of explanations at lower levels.
But if you asked me how a motor car worked you would think me somewhat pompous if I answered in terms of Newton's laws and the laws of thermodynamics, and downright obscurantist if I answered in terms of fundamental particles.
It is doubtless true that at bottom the behaviour of a motor car is to be explained in terms of interactions between fundamental particles.
But it is much more useful to explain it in terms of interactions between pistons, cylinders and sparking plugs.
The behaviour of a computer can be explained in terms of interactions between semiconductor electronic gates, and the behaviour of these, in turn, is explained by physicists at yet lower levels.
But, for most purposes, you would in practice be wasting your time if you tried to understand the behaviour of the whole computer at either of those levels.
There are too many electronic gates and too many interconnections between them.
A satisfying explanation has to be in terms of a manageably small number of interactions.
This is why, if we want to  understand the workings of computers, we prefer a preliminary explanation in terms of about half a dozen major subcomponents — memory, processing mill, backing store, control unit, input-output handler, etc.
Having grasped the interactions between the half-dozen major components, we then may wish to ask questions about the internal organization of these major components.
Only specialist engineers are likely to go down to the level of AND gates and NOR gates, and only physicists will go down further, to the level of how electrons behave in a semiconducting medium.
For those that like "-ism" sorts of names, the aptest name for my approach to understanding how things work is probably "hierarchical reductionism" .
If you read trendy intellectual magazines, you may have noticed that "reductionism" is one of those things, like sin, that is only mentioned by people who are against it.
To call oneself a reductionist will sound, in some circles, a bit like admitting to eating babies.
But, just as nobody actually eats babies, so nobody is really a reductionist in any sense worth being against.
The nonexistent reductionist — the sort that everybody is against, but who exists only in their imaginations — tries to explain complicated things directly in terms of the smallest parts, even, in some extreme versions of the myth, as the sum of the parts!
The hierarchical reductionist, on the other hand, explains a complex entity at any particular level in the hierarchy of organization, in terms of entities only one level down the hierarchy; entities which, themselves, are likely to be complex enough to need further reducing to their own component parts; and so on.
It goes without saying — though the mythical, baby-eating reductionist is reputed to deny this — that the kinds of explanations which are suitable at high levels in the hierarchy are quite different from the kinds of explanations which are suitable at lower levels.
This was the point of explaining cars in terms of carburettors rather than quarks.
But the hierarchical reductionist believes that carburettors are explained in terms of smaller units which are explained in terms of smaller units…, which are ultimately explained in terms of the smallest of fundamental particles.
Reductionism, in this sense, is just another name for an honest desire to understand how things work.
We began this section by asking what kind of explanation for complicated things would satisfy us.
We have just considered the question from the point of view of mechanism: how does it work?
We concluded that the behaviour of a complicated thing should be explained in terms of interactions between its component parts, considered as successive layers of an orderly hierarchy.
But another kind of question is how the complicated thing came into existence in the first place.
This is the  question that this whole book is particularly concerned with, so I won't say much more about it here.
I shall just mention that the same general principle applies as for understanding mechanism.
A complicated thing is one whose existence we do not feel inclined to take for granted, because it is too "improbable" .
It could not have come into existence in a single act of chance.
We shall explain its coming into existence as a consequence of gradual, cumulative, step-by-step transformations from simpler things, from primordial objects sufficiently simple to have come into being by chance.
Just as "big-step reductionism" cannot work as an explanation of mechanism, and must be replaced by a series of small step-by-step peelings down through the hierarchy, so we can't explain a complex thing as originating in a single step.
We must again resort to a series of small steps, this time arranged sequentially in time.
In his beautifully written book, The Creation, the Oxford physical chemist Peter Atkins begins: I shall take your mind on a journey.
It is a journey of comprehension, taking us to the edge of space, time, and understanding.
On it I shall argue that there is nothing that cannot be understood, that there is nothing that cannot be explained, and that everything is extraordinarily simple A great deal of the universe does not need any explanation.
Elephants, for instance.
Once molecules have learnt to compete and to create other molecules in their own image, elephants, and things resembling elephants, will in due course be found roaming through the countryside.
Atkins assumes the evolution of complex things — the subject matter of this book — to be inevitable once the appropriate physical conditions have been set up.
He asks what the minimum necessary physical conditions are, what is the minimum amount of design work that a very lazy Creator would have to do, in order to see to it that the universe and, later, elephants and other complex things, would one day come into existence.
The answer, from his point of view as a physical scientist, is that the Creator could be infinitely lazy.
The fundamental original units that we need to postulate, in order to understand the coming into existence of everything, either consist of literally nothing (according to some physicists), or (according to other physicists) they are units of the utmost simplicity, far too simple to need anything so grand as deliberate Creation.
Atkins says that elephants and complex things do not need any explanation.
But that is because he is a physical scientist, who takes for granted the biologists"theory of evolution.
He doesn't really mean that elephants don't need an explanation; rather that he is satisfied that biologists can explain elephants, provided they are allowed to take  certain facts of physics for granted.
His task as a physical scientist, therefore, is to justify our taking those facts for granted.
This he succeeds in doing.
My position is complementary.
I am a biologist.
I take the facts of physics, the facts of the world of simplicity, for granted.
If physicists still don't agree over whether those simple facts are yet understood, that is not my problem.
My task is to explain elephants, and the world of complex things, in terms of the simple things that physicists either understand, or are working on.
The physicist's problem is the problem of ultimate origins and ultimate natural laws.
The biologist's problem is the problem of complexity.
The biologist tries to explain the workings, and the coming into existence, of complex things, in terms of simpler things.
He can regard his task as done when he has arrived at entities so simple that they can safely be handed over to physicists.
I am aware that my characterization of a complex object — statistically improbable in a direction that is specified not with hindsight — may seem idiosyncratic.
So, too, may seem my characterization of physics as the study of simplicity.
If you prefer some other way of defining complexity, I don't care and I would be happy to go along with your definition for the sake of discussion.
But what I do care about is that, whatever we choose to call the quality of being statistically-improbable-in-a-direction-specified-without-hindsight, it is an important quality that needs a special effort of explanation.
It is the quality that characterizes biological objects as opposed to the objects of physics.
The kind of explanation we come up with must not contradict the laws of physics.
Indeed it will make use of the laws of physics, and nothing more than the laws of physics.
But it will deploy the laws of physics in a special way that is not ordinarily discussed in physics textbooks.
That special way is Darwin's way.
I shall introduce its fundamental essence in Chapter 3 under the title of cumulative selection.
Meanwhile I want to follow Paley in emphasizing the magnitude of the problem that our explanation faces, the sheer hugeness of biological complexity and the beauty and elegance of biological design.
Chapter 2 is an extended discussion of a particular example, "radar" in bats, discovered long after Paley's time.
And here, in this chapter, I have placed an illustration (Figure 1)— how Paley would have loved the electron microscope!— of an eye together with two successive "zoomings in" on detailed portions.
At the top of the figure is a section through an eye itself.
This level of magnification shows the eye as an optical instrument.
The resemblance to a camera is obvious.
The iris diaphragm is responsible for constantly varying the aperture, the f stop.
The lens, which is really only part of a compound lens system, is responsible for the variable part of the focusing.
Focus is changed by squeezing the lens with muscles (or in chameleons by moving the lens forwards or backwards, as in a man-made camera).
The image falls on the retina at the back, where it excites photocells.
The middle part of Figure 1 shows a small selection of the retina enlarged.
Light comes from the left.
The light-sensitive cells ( "photocells" ) are not the first thing the light hits, but they are buried inside and facing away from the light.
This odd feature is mentioned again later.
The first thing the light hits is, in fact, the layer of ganglion cells which constitute the "electronic interface" between the photocells and the brain.
Actually the ganglion cells are responsible for preprocessing the information in sophisticated ways before relaying it to the brain, and in some ways the word "interface" doesn't do justice to this.
 "Satellite computer" might be a fairer name.
Wires from the ganglion cells run along the surface of the retina to the "blind spot" , where they dive through the retina to form the main trunk cable to the brain, the optic nerve.
There are about three million ganglion cells in the "electronic interface" , gathering data from about 125 million photocells.
At the bottom of the figure is one enlarged photocell, a rod.
As you look at the fine architecture of this cell, keep in mind the fact that all that complexity is repeated 125 million times in each retina.
And comparable complexity is repeated trillions of times elsewhere in the body as a whole.
The figure of 125 million photocells is about 5,000 times the number of separately resolvable points in a good-quality magazine photograph.
The folded membranes on the right of the illustrated photocell are the actual light-gathering structures.
Their layered form increases the photocell's efficiency in capturing photons, the fundamental particles of which light is made.
If a photon is not caught by the first membrane, it may be caught by the second, and so on.
As a result of this, some eyes are capable of detecting a single photon.
The fastest and most sensitive film emulsions available to photographers need about 25 times as many photons in order to detect a point of light.
The lozenge-shaped objects in the middle section of the cell are mostly mitochondria.
Mitochondria are found not just in photocells, but in most other cells.
Each one can be thought of as a chemical factory which, in the course of delivering its primary product of usable energy, processes more than 700 different chemical substances, in long, interweaving assembly-lines strung out along the surface of its intricately folded internal membranes.
The round globule at the left of Figure 1 is the nucleus.
Again, this is characteristic of all animal and plant cells.
Each nucleus, as we shall see in Chapter 5, contains a digitally coded  database larger, in information content, than all 30 volumes of the Encyclopaedia Britannica put together.
And this figure is for each cell, not all the cells of a body put together.
The rod at the base of the picture is one single cell.
The total number of cells in the body (of a human) is about 10 trillion.
When you eat a steak, you are shredding the equivalent of more than 100 billion copies of the Encyclopaedia Britannica.
Good design
Natural selection is the blind watchmaker, blind because it does not see ahead, does not plan consequences, has no purpose in view.
Yet the living results of natural selection overwhelmingly impress us with the appearance of design as if by a master watchmaker, impress us with the illusion of design and planning.
The purpose of this book is to resolve this paradox to the satisfaction of the reader, and the purpose of this chapter is further to impress the reader with the power of the illusion of design.
We shall look at a particular example and shall conclude that, when it comes to complexity and beauty of design, Paley hardly even began to state the case.
We may say that a living body or organ is well designed if it has attributes that an intelligent and knowledgeable engineer might have built into it in order to achieve some sensible purpose, such as flying, swimming, seeing, eating, reproducing, or more generally promoting the survival and replication of the organism's genes.
It is not necessary to suppose that the design of a body or organ is the best that an engineer could conceive of.
Often the best that one engineer can do is, in any case, exceeded by the best that another engineer can do, especially another who lives later in the history of technology.
But any engineer can recognize an object that has been designed, even poorly designed, for a purpose, and he can usually work out what that purpose is just by looking at the structure of the object.
In Chapter 1 we bothered ourselves mostly with philosophical aspects.
In this chapter, I shall develop a particular factual example that I believe would impress any engineer, namely sonar ( "radar" ) in bats.
In explaining each point, I shall begin by posing a problem that the living machine faces; then I shall consider possible solutions to the problem that a sensible   engineer might consider; I shall finally come to the solution that nature has actually adopted.
This one example is, of course, just for illustration.
If an engineer is impressed by bats, he will be impressed by countless other examples of living design.
Bats have a problem: how to find their way around in the dark.
They hunt at night, and cannot use light to help them find prey and avoid obstacles.
You might say that if this is a problem it is a problem of their own making, a problem that they could avoid simply by changing their habits and hunting by day.
But the daytime economy is already heavily exploited by other creatures such as birds.
Given that there is a living to be made at night, and given that alternative daytime trades are thoroughly occupied, natural selection has favoured bats that make a go of the night-hunting trade.
It is probable, by the way, that the nocturnal trades go way back in the ancestry of all us mammals.
In the time when the dinosaurs dominated the daytime economy, our mammalian ancestors probably only managed to survive at all because they found ways of scraping a living at night.
Only after the mysterious mass extinction of the dinosaurs about 65 million years ago were our ancestors able to emerge into the daylight in any substantial numbers.
Returning to bats, they have an engineering problem: how to find their way and find their prey in the absence of light.
Bats are not the only creatures to face this difficulty today.
Obviously the night-flying insects that they prey on must find their way about somehow.
Deep-sea fish and whales have little or no light by day or by night, because the sun's rays cannot penetrate far below the surface.
Fish and dolphins that live in extremely muddy water cannot see because, although there is light, it is obstructed and scattered by the dirt in the water.
Plenty of other modern animals make their living in conditions where seeing is difficult or impossible.
Given the question of how to manoeuvre in the dark, what solutions might an engineer consider?
The first one that might occur to him is to manufacture light, to use a lantern or a searchlight.
Fireflies and some fish (usually with the help of bacteria) have the power to manufacture their own light, but the process seems to consume a large amount of energy.
Fireflies use their light for attracting mates.
This doesn't require prohibitively much energy: a male's tiny pinprick can be seen by a female from some distance on a dark night, since her eyes are exposed directly to the light source itself.
Using light to find one's own way around requires vastly more energy, since the eyes have to detect the tiny fraction of the light that bounces off each part of the scene.
The light source must therefore be immensely brighter if it is to be used as a headlight to illuminate the path, than if it is to be used as a signal to  others.
Anyway, whether or not the reason is the energy expense, it seems to be the case that, with the possible exception of some weird deep-sea fish, no animal apart from man uses manufactured light to find its way about.
What else might the engineer think of?
Well, blind humans sometimes seem to have an uncanny sense of obstacles in their path.
It has been given the name "facial vision" , because blind people have reported that it feels a bit like the sense of touch, on the face.
One report tells of a totally blind boy who could ride his tricycle at a good speed round the block near his home, using "facial vision" .
Experiments showed that, in fact, "facial vision" is nothing to do with touch or the front of the face, although the sensation may be referred to the front of the face, like the referred pain in a phantom (severed) limb.
The sensation of "facial vision" , it turns out, really goes in through the ears.
The blind people, without even being aware of the fact, are actually using echoes, of their own footsteps and other sounds, to sense the presence of obstacles.
Before this was discovered, engineers had already built instruments to exploit the principle, for example to measure the depth of the sea under a ship.
Alter this technique had been invented, it was only a matter of time before weapons designers adapted it for the detection of submarines.
Both sides in the Second World War relied heavily on these devices, under such code names as Asdic (British) and Sonar (American), as well as the similar technology of Radar (American) or RDF (British), which uses radio echoes rather than sound echoes.
The Sonar and Radar pioneers didn't know it then, but all the world now knows that bats, or rather natural selection working on bats, had perfected the system tens of millions of years earlier, and their "radar" achieves feats of detection and navigation that would strike an engineer dumb with admiration.
It is technically incorrect to talk about bat "radar" , since they do not use radio waves.
It is sonar.
But the underlying mathematical theories of radar and sonar are very similar, and much of our scientific understanding of the details of what bats are doing has come from applying radar theory to them.
The American zoologist Donald Griffin, who was largely responsible for the discovery of sonar in bats, coined the term "echolocation" to cover both sonar and radar, whether used by animals or by human instruments.
In practice, the word seems to be used mostly to refer to animal sonar.
It is misleading to speak of bats as though they were all the same.
It is as though we were to speak of dogs, lions, weasels, bears, hyenas, pandas and otters all in one breath, just because they are all carnivores.
Different groups of bats use sonar in radically different ways, and they  seem to have "invented" it separately and independently, just as the British, Germans and Americans all independently developed radar.
Not all bats use echolocation.
The Old World tropical fruit bats have good vision, and most of them use only their eyes for finding their way around.
One or two species of fruit bats, however, for instance Rousettus, are capable of finding their way around in total darkness where eyes, however good, must be powerless.
They are using sonar, but it is a cruder kind of sonar than is used by the smaller bats with which we, in temperate regions, are familiar.
Rousettus clicks its tongue loudly and rhythmically as it flies, and navigates by measuring the time interval between each click and its echo.
A good proportion of Rousettus's clicks are clearly audible to us (which by definition makes them sound rather than ultrasound: ultrasound is just the same as sound except that it is too high for humans to hear).
In theory, the higher the pitch of a sound, the better it is for accurate sonar.
This is because low-pitched sounds have long wavelengths which cannot resolve the difference between closely spaced objects.
All other things being equal therefore, a missile that used echoes for its guidance system would ideally produce very high-pitched sounds.
Most bats do, indeed, use extremely high-pitched sounds, far too high for humans to hear — ultrasound.
Unlike Rousettus, which can see very well and which uses unmodified relatively low-pitched sounds to do a modest amount of echolocation to supplement its good vision, the smaller bats appear to be technically highly advanced echo-machines.
They have tiny eyes, which, in most cases, probably can't see much.
They live in a world of echoes, and probably their brains can use echoes to do something akin to "seeing" images, although it is next to impossible for us to "visualize" what those images might be like.
The noises that they produce are not just slightly too high for humans to hear, like a kind of super dog whistle.
In many cases they are vastly higher than the highest note anybody has heard or can imagine.
It is fortunate that we can't hear them, incidentally, for they are immensely powerful and would be deafeningly loud if we could hear them, and impossible to sleep through.
These bats are like miniature spy planes, bristling with sophisticated instrumentation.
Their brains are delicately tuned packages of miniaturized electronic wizardry, programmed with the elaborate software necessary to decode a world of echoes in real time.
Their faces are often distorted into gargoyle shapes that appear hideous to us until we see them for what they are, exquisitely fashioned instruments for beaming ultrasound in desired directions.
Although we can't hear the ultrasound pulses of these bats directly, we can get some idea of what is going on by means of a translating machine or "bat-detector" .
This receives the pulses through a special ultrasonic microphone, and turns each pulse into an audible click or tone which we can hear through headphones.
If we take such a "bat-detector" out to a clearing where a bat is feeding, we shall hear when each bat pulse is emitted, although we cannot hear what the pulses really "sound" like.
If our bat is Myotis, one of the common little brown bats, we shall hear a chuntering of clicks at a rate of about 10 per second as the bat cruises about on a routine mission.
This is about the rate of a standard teleprinter, or a Bren machine gun.
Presumably the bat's image of the world in which it is cruising is being updated 10 times per second.
Our own visual image appears to be continuously updated as long as our eyes are open.
We can see what it might be like to have an intermittently updated world image, by using a stroboscope at night.
This is sometimes done at discotheques, and it produces some dramatic effects.
A dancing person appears as a succession of frozen statuesque attitudes.
Obviously, the faster we set the strobe, the more the image corresponds to normal "continuous" vision.
Stroboscopic vision "sampling" at the bat's cruising rate of about 10 samples per second would be nearly as good as normal"continuous' vision for some ordinary purposes, though not for catching a ball or an insect.
This is just the sampling rate of a bat on a routine cruising flight.
When a little brown bat detects an insect and starts to move in on an interception course, its click rate goes up.
Faster than a machine gun, it can reach peak rates of 200 pulses per second as the bat finally closes in on the moving target.
To mimic this, we should have to speed up our stroboscope so that its flashes came twice as fast as the cycles of mains electricity, which are not noticed in a fluorescent strip light.
Obviously we have no trouble in performing all our normal visual functions, even playing squash or ping-pong, in a visual world "pulsed" at such a high frequency.
If we may imagine bat brains as building up an image of the world analogous to our visual images, the pulse rate alone seems to suggest that the bat's echo image might be at least as detailed and "continuous" as our visual image.
Of course, there may be other reasons why it is not so detailed as our visual image.
If bats are capable of boosting their sampling rates to 200 pulses per second, why don't they keep this up all the time?
Since they evidently have a rate control "knob" on their "stroboscope" , why don't they turn it permanently to maximum, thereby keeping their perception of the world at its most acute, all the time, to meet any emergency?
One reason is that these high rates are suitable only for near targets.
If a pulse  follows too hard on the heels of its predecessor it gets mixed up with the echo of its predecessor returning from a distant target.
Even if this weren't so, there would probably be good economic reasons for not keeping up the maximum pulse rate all the time.
It must be costly producing loud ultrasonic pulses, costly in energy, costly in wear and tear on voice and ears, perhaps costly in computer time.
A brain that is processing 200 distinct echoes per second might not find surplus capacity for thinking about anything else.
Even the ticking-over rate of about 10 pulses per second is probably quite costly, but much less so than the maximum rate of 200 per second.
An individual bat that boosted its tickover rate would pay an additional price in energy, etc., which would not be justified by the increased sonar acuity.
When the only moving object in the immediate vicinity is the bat itself, the apparent world is sufficiently similar in successive tenths of seconds that it need not be sampled more frequently than this.
When the salient vicinity includes another moving object, particularly a flying insect twisting and turning and diving in a desperate attempt to shake off its pursuer, the extra benefit to the bat of increasing its sample rate more than justifies the increased cost.
Of course, the considerations of cost and benefit in this paragraph are all surmise, but something like this almost certainly must be going on.
The engineer who sets about designing an efficient sonar or radar device soon comes up against a problem resulting from the need to make the pulses extremely loud.
They have to be loud because when a sound is broadcast its wavefront advances as an ever-expanding sphere.
The intensity of the sound is distributed and, in a sense, "diluted" over the whole surface of the sphere.
The surface area of any sphere is proportional to the radius squared.
The intensity of the sound at any particular point on the sphere therefore decreases, not in proportion to the distance (the radius) but in proportion to the square of the distance from the sound source, as the wavefront advances and the sphere swells.
This means that the sound gets quieter pretty fast, as it travels away from its source, in this case the bat.
When this diluted sound hits an object, say a fly, it bounces off the fly.
This reflected sound now, in its turn, radiates away from the fly in an expanding spherical wavefront.
For the same reason as in the case of the original sound, it decays as the square of the distance from the fly.
By the time the echo reaches the bat again, the decay in its intensity is proportional, not to the distance of the fly from the bat, not even to the square of that distance, but to something more like the square of the square — the fourth power, of the distance.
This means that it is very very quiet indeed.
The problem can be partially overcome if the bat  beams the sound by means of the equivalent of a megaphone, but only if it already knows the direction of the target.
In any case, if the bat is to receive any reasonable echo at all from a distant target, the out-going squeak as it leaves the bat must be very loud indeed, and the instrument that detects the echo, the ear, must be highly sensitive to very quiet sounds — the echoes.
Bat cries, as we have seen, are indeed often very loud, and their ears are very sensitive.
Now here is the problem that would strike the engineer trying to design a bat-like machine.
If the microphone, or ear, is as sensitive as all that, it is in grave danger of being seriously damaged by its own enormously loud outgoing pulse of sound.
It is no good trying to combat the problem by making the sounds quieter, for then the echoes would be too quiet to hear.
And it is no good trying to combat that by making the microphone ( "ear" ) more sensitive, since this would only make it more vulnerable to being damaged by the, albeit now slightly quieter, outgoing sounds!
It is a dilemma inherent in the dramatic difference in intensity between outgoing sound and returning echo, a difference that is inexorably imposed by the laws of physics.
What other solution might occur to the engineer?
When an analogous problem struck the designers of radar in the Second World War, they hit upon a solution which they called "send/receive" radar.
The radar signals were sent out in necessarily very powerful pulses, which might have damaged the highly sensitive aerials (American"antennas') waiting for the faint returning echoes.
The "send/receive" circuit temporarily disconnected the receiving aerial just before the outgoing pulse was about to be emitted, then switched the aerial on again in time to receive the echo.
Bats developed "send/receive" switching technology long long ago, probably millions of years before our ancestors came down from the trees.
It works as follows.
In bat ears, as in ours, sound is transmitted from the eardrum to the microphonic, sound-sensitive cells by means of a bridge of three tiny bones known (in Latin) as the hammer, the anvil and the stirrup, because of their shape.
The mounting and hinging of these three bones, by the way, is exactly as a hi-fi engineer might have designed it to serve a necessary "impedance-matching" function, but that is another story.
What matters here is that some bats have well-developed muscles attached to the stirrup and to the hammer.
When these muscles are contracted the bones don't transmit sound so efficiently — it is as though you muted a microphone by jamming your thumb against the vibrating diaphragm.
The bat is able to use these muscles to switch its ears off temporarily.
The muscles contract immediately before the bat emits each outgoing pulse, thereby switching the ears off so that they are not damaged by the loud pulse.
Then they relax so that the ear returns to maximal sensitivity just in time for the returning echo.
This send/receive switching system works only if split-second accuracy in timing is maintained.
The bat called Tadarida is capable of alternately contracting and relaxing its switching muscles 50 times per second, keeping in perfect synchrony with the machine gun-like pulses of ultrasound.
It is a formidable feat of timing, comparable to a clever trick that was used in some fighter planes during the First World War.
Their machine guns fired "through" the propeller, the timing being carefully synchronized with the rotation of the propeller so that the bullets always passed between the blades and never shot them off.
The next problem that might occur to our engineer is the following.
If the sonar device is measuring the distance of targets by measuring the duration of silence between the emission of a sound and its returning echo — the method which Rousettus, indeed, seems to be using — the sounds would seem to have to be very brief, staccato pulses.
A long drawn-out sound would still be going on when the echo returned, and, even if partially muffled by send/receive muscles, would get in the way of detecting the echo.
Ideally, it would seem, bat pulses should be very brief indeed.
But the briefer a sound is, the more difficult it is to make it energetic enough to produce a decent echo.
We seem to have another unfortunate trade-off imposed by the laws of physics.
Two solutions might occur to ingenious engineers, indeed did occur to them when they encountered the same problem, again in the analogous case of radar.
Which of the two solutions is preferable depends on whether it is more important to measure range (how far away an object is from the instrument) or velocity (how fast the object is moving relative to the instrument).
The first solution is that known to radar engineers as "chirp radar" .
We can think of radar signals as a series of pulses, but each pulse has a so-called carrier frequency.
This is analogous to the "pitch" of a pulse of sound or ultrasound.
Bat cries, as we have seen, have a pulse-repetition rate in the tens or hundreds per second.
Each one of those pulses has a carrier frequency of tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands of cycles per second.
Each pulse, in other words, is a high-pitched shriek.
Similarly, each pulse of radar is a "shriek" of radio waves, with a high carrier frequency.
The special feature of chirp radar is that it does not have a fixed carrier frequency during each shriek.
Rather, the carrier frequency swoops up or down about an octave.
If you think of it as its sound equivalent, each radar emission can be thought of as a swooping wolf-whistle.
The advantage of chirp radar, as opposed to the fixed pitch pulse, is the following.
It doesn't matter if the original chirp is still going on when the echo returns.
They won't be confused with each other.
This is because the echo being detected at any given moment will be a reflection of an earlier part of the chirp, and will therefore have a different pitch.
Human radar designers have made good use of this ingenious technique.
Is there any evidence that bats have "discovered" it too, just as they did the send/receive system?
Well, as a matter of fact, numerous species of bats do produce cries that sweep down, usually through about an octave, during each cry.
These wolf-whistle cries are known as frequency modulated (FM).
They appear to be just what would be required to exploit the "chirp radar" technique.
However, the evidence so far suggests that bats are using the technique, not to distinguish an echo from the original sound that produced it, but for the more subtle task of distinguishing echoes from other echoes.
A bat lives in a world of echoes from near objects, distant objects and objects at all intermediate distances.
It has to sort these echoes out from each other.
If it gives downward-swooping, wolf-whistle chirps, the sorting is neatly done by pitch.
When an echo from a distant object finally arrives back at the bat, it will be an "older" echo than an echo that is simultaneously arriving back from a near object.
It will therefore be of higher pitch.
When the bat is faced with clashing echoes from several objects, it can apply the rule of thumb: higher pitch means farther away.
The second clever idea that might occur to the engineer, especially one interested in measuring the speed of a moving target, is to exploit what physicists call the Doppler Shift.
This may be called the "ambulance effect" because its most familiar manifestation is the sudden drop in pitch of an ambulance's siren as it speeds past the listener.
The Doppler Shift occurs whenever a source of sound (or light or any other kind of wave) and a receiver of that sound move relative to one another.
It is easiest to think of the sound source as motionless and the listener as moving.
Assume that the siren on a factory roof is wailing continuously, all on one note.
The sound is broadcast outwards as a series of waves.
The waves can't be seen, because they are waves of air pressure.
If they could be seen they would resemble the concentric circles spreading outwards when we throw pebbles into the middle of a still pond.
Imagine that a series of pebbles is being dropped in quick succession into the middle of a pond, so that waves are continuously radiating out from the middle.
If we moor a tiny toy boat at some fixed point in the pond, the boat will bob up and down rhythmically as the waves pass under it.
The frequency with which the boat bobs is analogous to the pitch of a sound.
Now suppose that the  boat, instead of being moored, is steaming across the pond, in the general direction of the centre from which the wave circles are originating.
It will still bob up and down as it hits the successive wavefronts.
But now the frequency with which it hits waves will be higher, since it is travelling towards the source of the waves.
It will bob up and down at a higher rate.
On the other hand, when it has passed the source of the waves and is travelling away the other side, the frequency with which it bobs up and down will obviously go down.
For the same reason, if we ride fast on a (preferably quiet) motorbike past a wailing factory siren, when we are approaching the factory the pitch will be raised: our ears are, in effect, gobbling up the waves at a faster rate than they would if we just sat still.
By the same kind of argument, when our motorbike has passed the factory and is moving away from it, the pitch will be lowered.
If we stop moving we shall hear the pitch of the siren as it actually is, intermediate between the two Doppler-shifted pitches.
It follows that if we know the exact pitch of the siren, it is theoretically possible to work out how fast we are moving towards or away from it simply by listening to the apparent pitch and comparing it with the known "true" pitch.
The same principle works when the sound source is moving and the listener is still.
That is why it works for ambulances.
It is rather implausibly said that Christian Doppler himself demonstrated his effect by hiring a brass band to play on an open railway truck as it rushed past his amazed audience.
It is relative motion that matters, and as far as the Doppler Effect is concerned it doesn't matter whether we consider the sound source to be moving past the ear, or the ear moving past the sound source.
If two trains pass in opposite directions, each travelling at 125 m.p.h., a passenger in one train will hear the whistle of the other train swoop down through a particularly dramatic Doppler Shift, since the relative velocity is 250 m.p.h.
The Doppler Effect is used in police radar speed-traps for motorists.
A static instrument beams radar signals down a road.
The radar waves bounce back off the cars that approach, and are registered by the receiving apparatus.
The faster a car is moving, the higher is the Doppler shift in frequency.
By comparing the outgoing frequency with the frequency of the returning echo the police, or rather their automatic instrument, can calculate the speed of each car.
If the police can exploit the technique for measuring the speed of road hogs, dare we hope to find that bats use it for measuring the speed of insect prey?
The answer is yes.
The small bats known as horseshoe bats have long been known to emit long, fixed-pitch hoots rather than staccato clicks or descending wolf-whistles.
When I say long, I mean long by bat  standards.
The "hoots" are still less than a tenth of a second long.
And there is often a "wolf-whistle" tacked onto the end of each hoot, as we shall see.
Imagine, first, a horseshoe bat giving out a continuous hum of ultrasound as it flies fast towards a still object, like a tree.
The wavefronts will hit the tree at an accelerated rate because of the movement of the bat towards the tree.
If a microphone were concealed in the tree, it would "hear" the sound Doppler-shifted upwards in pitch because of the movement of the bat.
There isn't a microphone in the tree, but the echo reflected back from the tree will be Doppler-shifted upwards in pitch in this way.
Now, as the echo wavefronts stream back from the tree towards the approaching bat, the bat is still moving fast towards them.
Therefore there is a further Doppler shift upwards in the bat's perception of the pitch of the echo.
The movement of the bat leads to a kind of double Doppler shift, whose magnitude is a precise indication of the velocity of the bat relative to the tree.
By comparing the pitch of its cry with the pitch of the returning echo, therefore, the bat (or rather its on-board computer in the brain) could, in theory, calculate how fast it was moving towards the tree.
This wouldn't tell the bat how far away the tree was, but it might still be very useful information, nevertheless.
If the object reflecting the echoes were not a static tree but a moving insect, the Doppler consequences would be more complicated, but the bat could still calculate the velocity of relative motion between itself and its target, obviously just the kind of information a sophisticated guided missile like a hunting bat needs.
Actually some bats play a trick that is more interesting than simply emitting hoots of constant pitch and measuring the pitch of the returning echoes.
They carefully adjust the pitch of the outgoing hoots, in such a way as to keep the pitch of the echo constant after it has been Doppler-shifted.
As they speed towards a moving insect, the pitch of their cries is constantly changing, continuously hunting for just the pitch needed to keep the returning echoes at a fixed pitch.
This ingenious trick keeps the echo at the pitch to which their ears are maximally sensitive — important since the echoes are so faint.
They can then obtain the necessary information for their Doppler calculations, by monitoring the pitch at which they are obliged to hoot in order to achieve the fixed-pitch echo.
I don't know whether man-made devices, either sonar or radar, use this subtle trick.
But on the principle that most clever ideas in this field seem to have been developed first by bats, I don't mind betting that the answer is yes.
It is only to be expected that these two rather different techniques, the Doppler shift technique and the "chirp radar" technique, would be  useful for different special purposes.
Some groups of bats specialize in one of them, some in the other.
Some groups seem to try to get the best of both worlds, tacking an FM "wolf-whistle" onto the end (or sometimes the beginning) of a long, constant-frequency "hoot" .
Another curious trick of horseshoe bats concerns movements of their outer ear flaps.
Unlike other bats, horseshoe bats move their outer ear flaps in fast alternating forward and backward sweeps.
It is conceivable that this additional rapid movement of the listening surface relative to the target causes useful modulations in the Doppler shift, modulations that supply additional information.
When the ear is flapping towards the target, the apparent velocity of movement towards the target goes up.
When it is flapping away from the target, the reverse happens.
The bat's brain "knows" the direction of flapping of each ear, and in principle could make the necessary calculations to exploit the information.
Possibly the most difficult problem of all that bats face is the danger of inadvertent "jamming" by the cries of other bats.
Human experimenters have found it surprisingly difficult to put bats off their stride by playing loud artificial ultrasound at them.
With hindsight one might have predicted this.
Bats must have come to terms with the jamming-avoidance problem long ago.
Many species of bats roost in enormous aggregations, in caves that must be a deafening babel of ultrasound and echoes, yet the bats can still fly rapidly about the cave, avoiding the walls and each other in total darkness.
How does a bat keep track of its own echoes, and avoid being misled by the echoes of others?
The first solution that might occur to an engineer is some sort of frequency coding: each bat might have its own private frequency, just like separate radio stations.
To some extent this may happen, but it is by no means the whole story.
How bats avoid being jammed by other bats is not well understood, but an interesting clue comes from experiments on trying to put bats off.
It turns out that you can actively deceive some bats if you play back to them their own cries with an artificial delay.
Give them, in other words, false echoes of their own cries.
It is even possible, by carefully controlling the electronic apparatus delaying the false echo, to make the bats attempt to land on a "phantom" ledge.
I suppose it is the bat equivalent of looking at the world through a lens.
It seems that bats may be using something that we could call a "strangeness filter" .
Each successive echo from a bat's own cries produces a picture of the world that makes sense in terms of the previous picture of the world built up with earlier echoes.
If the bat's brain hears an echo from another bat's cry, and attempts to incorporate it into the  picture of the world that it has previously built up, it will make no sense.
It will appear as though objects in the world have suddenly jumped in various random directions.
Objects in the real world do not behave in such a crazy way, so the brain can safely filter out the apparent echo as background noise.
If a human experimenter feeds the bat artificially delayed or accelerated "echoes" of its own cries, the false echoes will make sense in terms of the world picture that the bat has previously built up.
The false echoes are accepted by the strangeness filter because they are plausible in the context of the previous echoes.
They cause objects to seem to shift in position by only a small amount, which is what objects plausibly can be expected to do in the real world.
The bat's brain relies upon the assumption that the world portrayed by any one echo pulse will be either the same as the world portrayed by previous pulses, or only slightly different: the insect being tracked may have moved a little, for instance .
There is a well-known paper by the philosopher Thomas Nagel called "What is it like to be a bat?" .
The paper is not so much about bats as about the philosophical problem of imagining what it is "like" to be anything that we are not.
The reason a bat is a particularly telling example for a philosopher, however, is that the experiences of an echolocating bat are assumed to be peculiarly alien and different from our own.
If you want to share a bat's experience, it is almost certainly grossly misleading to go into a cave, shout or bang two spoons together, consciously time the delay before you hear the echo, and calculate from this how far the wall must be.
That is no more what it is like to be a bat than the following is a good picture of what it is like to see colour: use an instrument to measure the wavelength of the light that is entering your eye: if it is long, you are seeing red, if it is short you are seeing violet or blue.
It happens to be a physical fact that the light that we call red has a longer wavelength than the light that we call blue.
Different wavelengths switch on the red-sensitive and the blue-sensitive photocells in our retinas.
But there is no trace of the concept of wavelength in our subjective sensation of the colours.
Nothing about "what it is like" to see blue or red tells us which light has the longer wavelength.
If it matters (it usually doesn't), we just have to remember it, or (what I always do) look it up in a bk.
Similarly, a bat perceives the position of an insect using what we call echoes.
But the bat surely no more 0thinks in terms of delays of echoes when it perceives an insect, than we think in terms of wavelengths when we perceive blue or red.
Indeed, if I were forced to try the impossible, to imagine what it is like to be a bat, I would guess that echolocating, for them, might be  rather like seeing for us.
We are such thoroughly visual animals that we hardly realize what a complicated business seeing is.
Objects are "out there" , and we think that we "see" them out there.
But I suspect that really our percept is an elaborate computer model in the brain, constructed on the basis of information coming from out there, but transformed in the head into a form in which that information can be used.
Wavelength differences in the light out there become coded as "colour" differences in the computer model in the head.
Shape and other attributes are encoded in the same kind of way, encoded into a form that is convenient to handle.
The sensation of seeing is, for us, very different from the sensation of hearing, but this cannot be directly due to the physical differences between light and sound.
Both light and sound are, after all, translated by the respective sense organs into the same kind of nerve impulses.
It is impossible to tell, from the physical attributes of a nerve impulse, whether it is conveying information about light, about sound or about smell.
The reason the sensation of seeing is so different from the sensation of hearing and the sensation of smelling is that the brain finds it convenient to use different kinds of internal model of the visual world, the world of sound and the world of smell.
It is because we internally use our visual information and our sound information in different ways and for different purposes that the sensations of seeing and hearing are so different.
It is not directly because of the physical differences between light and sound.
But a bat uses its sound information for very much the same kind of purpose as we use our visual information.
It uses sound to perceive, and continuously update its perception of, the position of objects in three-dimensional space, just as we use light.
The type of internal computer model that it needs, therefore, is one suitable for the internal representation of the changing positions of objects in three-dimensional space.
My point is that the form that an animal's subjective experience takes will be a property of the internal computer model.
That model will be designed, in evolution, for its suitability for useful internal representation, irrespective of the physical stimuli that come to it from outside.
Bats and we need the same kind of internal model for representing the position of objects in three-dimensional space.
The fact that bats construct their internal model with the aid of echoes, while we construct ours with the aid of light, is irrelevant.
That outside information is, in any case, translated into the same kind of nerve impulses on its way to the brain.
My conjecture, therefore, is that bats "see" in much the same way as we do, even though the physical medium by which the world "out there" is translated into nerve impulses is so different — ultrasound  rather than light.
Bats may even use the sensations that we call colour for their own purposes, to represent differences in the world out there that have nothing to do with the physics of wavelength, but which play a functional role, for the bat, similar to the role that colours play to us.
Perhaps male bats have body surfaces that are subtly textured so that the echoes that bounce off them are perceived by females as gorgeously coloured, the sound equivalent of the nuptial plumage of a bird of paradise.
I don't mean this just as some vague metaphor.
It is possible that the subjective sensation experienced by a female bat when she perceives a male really is,"say, bright red: the same sensation as I experience when I see a flamingo.
Or, at least, the bat's sensation of her mate may be no more different from my visual sensation of a flamingo, than my visual sensation of a flamingo is different from a flamingo's visual sensation of a flamingo.
Donald Griffin tells a story of what happened when he and his colleague Robert Galambos first reported to an astonished conference of zoologists in 1940 their new discovery of the facts of bat echolocation.
One distinguished scientist was so indignantly incredulous that he seized Galambos by the shoulders and shook him while complaining that we could not possibly mean such an outrageous suggestion.
Radar and sonar were still highly classified developments in military technology, and the notion that bats might do anything even remotely analogous to the latest triumphs of electronic engineering struck most people as not only implausible but emotionally repugnant.
It is easy to sympathize with the distinguished sceptic.
There is something very human in his reluctance to believe.
And that, really, says it: human is precisely what it is.
It is precisely because our own human senses are not capable of doing what bats do that we find it hard to believe.
Because we can only understand it at a level of artificial instrumentation, and mathematical calculations on paper, we find it hard to imagine a little animal doing it in its head.
Yet the mathematical calculations that would be necessary to explain the principles of vision are just as complex and difficult, and nobody has ever had any difficulty in believing that little animals can see.
The reason for this double standard in our scepticism is, quite simply, that we can see and we can't echolocate.
I can imagine some other world in which a conference of learned, and totally blind, bat-like creatures is flabbergasted to be told of animals called humans that are actually capable of using the newly discovered inaudible rays called "light" , still the subject of top-secret  military development, for finding their way about.
These otherwise humble humans are almost totally deaf (well, they can hear after a fashion and even utter a few ponderously slow, deep drawling growls, but they only use these sounds for rudimentary purposes like communicating with each other; they don't seem capable of using them to detect even the most massive objects).
They have, instead, highly specialized organs called "eyes" for exploiting "light" rays.
The sun is the main source of light rays, and humans, remarkably, manage to exploit the complex echoes that bounce off objects when light rays from the sun hit them.
They have an ingenious device called a "lens', whose shape appears to be mathematically calculated so that it bends these silent rays in such a way that there is an exact one-to-one mapping between objects in the world and an" image "on a sheet of cells called the" retina".
These retinal cells are capable, in some mysterious way, of rendering the light "audible" (one might say), and they relay their information to the brain.
Our mathematicians have shown that it is theoretically possible, by doing the right highly complex calculations, to navigate safely through the world using these light rays, just as effectively as one can in the ordinary way using ultrasound — in some respects even more effectively!
But who would have thought that a humble human could do these calculations?
Echo-sounding by bats is just one of the thousands of examples that I could have chosen to make the point about good design.
Animals give the appearance of having been designed by a theoretically sophisticated and practically ingenious physicist or engineer, but there is no suggestion that the bats themselves know or understand the theory in the same sense as a physicist understands it.
The bat should be thought of as analogous to the police radar trapping instrument, not to the person who designed that instrument.
The designer of the police radar speed-meter understood the theory of the Doppler Effect, and expressed this understanding in mathematical equations, explicitly written out on paper.
The designer's understanding is embodied in the design of the instrument, but the instrument itself does not understand how it works.
The instrument contains electronic components, which are wired up so that they automatically compare two radar frequencies and convert the result into convenient units — miles per hour.
The computation involved is complicated, but well within the powers of a small box of modern electronic components wired up in the proper way.
Of course, a sophisticated conscious brain did the wiring up (or at least designed the wiring diagram), but no conscious brain is involved in the moment-to-moment working of the box.
Our experience of electronic technology prepares us to accept the  idea that unconscious machinery can behave as if it understands complex mathematical ideas.
This idea is directly transferable to the workings of living machinery.
A bat is a machine, whose internal electronics are so wired up that its wing muscles cause it to home in on insects, as an unconscious guided missile homes in on an aeroplane.
So far our intuition, derived from technology, is correct.
But our experience of technology also prepares us to see the mind of a conscious and purposeful designer in the genesis of sophisticated machinery.
It is this second intuition that is wrong in the case of living machinery.
In the case of living machinery, the "designer" is unconscious natural selection, the blind watchmaker.
I hope that the reader is as awestruck as I am, and as William Paley would have been, by these bat stories.
My aim has been in one respect identical to Paley's aim.
I do not want the reader to underestimate the prodigious works of nature and the problems we face in explaining them.
Echolocation in bats, although unknown in Paley's time, would have served his purpose just as well as any of his examples.
Paley rammed home his argument by multiplying up his examples.
He went right through the body, from head to toe, showing how every part, every last detail, was like the interior of a beautifully fashioned watch.
In many ways I should like to do the same, for there are wonderful stories to be told, and I love storytelling.
But there is really no need to multiply examples.
One or two will do.
The hypothesis that can explain bat navigation is a good candidate for explaining anything in the world of life, and if Paley's explanation for any one of his examples was wrong we can't make it right by multiplying up examples.
His hypothesis was that living watches were literally designed and built by a master watchmaker.
Our modern hypothesis is that the job was done in gradual evolutionary stages by natural selection.
Nowadays theologians aren't quite so straightforward as Paley.
They don't point to complex living mechanisms and say that they are self-evidently designed by a creator, just like a watch.
But there is a tendency to point to them and say "It is impossible to believe" that such complexity, or such perfection, could have evolved by natural selection.
Whenever I read such a remark, I always feel like writing "Speak for yourself" in the margin.
There are numerous examples (I counted 35 in one chapter) in a recent book called The Probability of God by the Bishop of Birmingham, Hugh Montefiore.
I shall use this book for all my examples in the rest of this chapter, because it is a sincere and honest attempt, by a reputable and educated writer, to bring natural theology up to date.
When I say honest, I mean honest.
Unlike some of his theological colleagues, Bishop Montefiore is not  afraid to state that the question of whether God exists is a definite question of fact.
He has no truck with shifty evasions such as"Christianity is a way of life.
The question of God's existence is eliminated: it is a mirage created by the illusions of realism".
Parts of his book are about physics and cosmology, and I am not competent to comment on those except to note that he seems to have used genuine physicists as his authorities.
Would that he had done the same in the biological parts.
Unfortunately, he preferred here to consult the works of Arthur Koestler, Fred Hoyle, Gordon Rattray-Taylor and Karl Popper!
The Bishop believes in evolution, but cannot believe that natural selection is an adequate explanation for the course that evolution has taken (partly because, like many others, he sadly misunderstands natural selection to be "random" and"meaningless').
He makes heavy use of what may be called the Argument from Personal Incredulity.
In the course of one chapter we find the following phrases, in this order: there seems no explanation on Darwinian grounds It is no easier to explain It is hard to understand It is not easy to understand It is equally difficult to explain I do not find it easy to comprehend I do not find it easy to see…
I find it hard to understand it does not seem feasible to explain I cannot see how neo-Darwinism seems inadequate to explain many of the complexities of animal behaviour it is not easy to comprehend how such behaviour could have evolved solely through natural selection It is impossible How could an organ so complex evolve?
It is not easy to see It is difficult to see
The Argument from Personal Incredulity is an extremely weak argument, as Darwin himself noted.
In some cases it is based upon simple ignorance.
For instance, one of the facts that the Bishop finds it difficult to understand is the white colour of polar bears.
As for camouflage, this is not always easily explicable on neo-Darwinian premises.
If polar bears are dominant in the Arctic, then there would seem to have been no need for them to evolve a white-coloured form of camouflage.
This should be translated: I personally, off the top of my head sitting in my study, never having visited the Arctic, never having seen a polar bear in the wild, and having been educated in classical literature and theology, have not so far managed to think of a reason why polar bears might benefit from being white.
In this particular case, the assumption being made is that only animals that are preyed upon need camouflage.
What is overlooked is that  predators also benefit from being concealed from their prey.
Polar bears stalk seals resting on the ice.
If the seal sees the bear coming from far-enough away, it can escape.
I suspect that, if he imagines a dark grizzly bear trying to stalk seals over the snow, the Bishop will immediately see the answer to his problem.
The polar bear argument turned out to be almost too easy to demolish but, in an important sense, this is not the point.
Even if the foremost authority in the world can't explain some remarkable biological phenomenon, this doesn't mean that it is inexplicable.
Plenty of mysteries have lasted for centuries and finally yielded to explanation.
For what it is worth, most modern biologists wouldn't find it difficult to explain every one of the Bishop's 35 examples in terms of the theory of natural selection, although not all of them are quite as easy as the polar bears.
But we aren't testing human ingenuity.
Even if we found one example that we couldn't explain, we should hesitate to draw any grandiose conclusions from the fact of our own inability.
Darwin himself was very clear on this point.
There are more serious versions of the argument from personal incredulity, versions which do not rest simply upon ignorance or lack of ingenuity.
One form of the argument makes direct use of the extreme sense of wonder which we all feel when confronted with highly complicated machinery, like the detailed perfection of the echo-location equipment of bats.
The implication is that it is somehow self-evident that anything so wonderful as this could not possibly have evolved by natural selection.
The Bishop quotes, with approval, G. Bennett on spider webs: It is impossible for one who has watched the work for many hours to have any doubt that neither the present spiders of this species nor their ancestors were ever the architects of the web or that it could conceivably have been produced step by step through random variation; it would be as absurd to suppose that the intricate and exact proportions of the Parthenon were produced by piling together bits of marble.
It is not impossible at all.
That is exactly what I firmly believe, and I have some experience of spiders and their webs.
The Bishop goes on to the human eye, asking rhetorically, and with the implication that there is no answer, "How could an organ so complex evolve?" 
This is not an argument, it is simply an affirmation of incredulity.
The underlying basis for the intuitive incredulity that we all are tempted to feel about what Darwin called organs of extreme perfection and complication is, I think, twofold.
First we have no intuitive grasp of the immensities of time available for evolutionary  change.
Most sceptics about natural selection are prepared to accept that it can bring about minor changes like the dark coloration that has evolved in various species of moth since the industrial revolution.
But, having accepted this, they then point out how small a change this is.
As the Bishop underlines, the dark moth is not a new species.
I agree that this is a small change, no match for the evolution of the eye, or of echolocation.
But equally, the moths only took a hundred years to make their change.
One hundred years seems like a long time to us, because it is longer than our lifetime.
But to a geologist it is about a thousand times shorter than he can ordinarily measure!
Eyes don't fossilize, so we don't know how long our type of eye took to evolve its present complexity and perfection from nothing, but the time available is several hundred million years.
Think, by way of comparison, of the change that man has wrought in a much shorter time by genetic selection of dogs.
In a few hundreds, or at most thousands, of years we have gone from wolf to Pekinese, Bulldog, Chihuahua and Saint Bernard.
Ah, but they are still dogs aren't they?
They haven't turned into a different "kind" of animal?
Yes, if it comforts you to play with words like that, you can call them all dogs.
But just think about the time involved.
Let's represent the total time it took to evolve all these breeds of dog from a wolf, by one ordinary walking pace.
Then, on the same scale, how far would you have to walk, in order to get back to Lucy and her kind, the earliest human fossils that unequivocally walked upright?
The answer is about 2 miles.
And how far would you have to walk, in order to get back to the start of evolution on Earth?
The answer is that you would have to slog it out all the way from London to Baghdad.
Think of the total quantity of change involved in going from wolf to Chihuahua, and then multiply it up by the number of walking paces between London and Baghdad.
This will give some intuitive idea of the amount of change that we can expect in real natural evolution.
The second basis for our natural incredulity about the evolution of very complex organs like human eyes and bat ears is an intuitive application of probability theory.
Bishop Montefiore quotes C. E.Raven on cuckoos.
These lay their eggs in the nests of other birds, which then act as unwitting foster parents.
Like so many biological adaptations, that of the cuckoo is not single but multiple.
Several different facts about cuckoos fit them to their parasitic way of life.
For instance, the mother has the habit of laying in other birds' nests, and the baby has the habit of throwing the host's own chicks out of the nest.
Both habits help the cuckoo succeed in its parasitic life.
Raven goes on: It will be seen that each one of this sequence of conditions is essential for the success of the whole.
Yet each by itself is useless.
The whole opus perfectum must have been achieved simultaneously.
The odds against the random occurrence of such a series of coincidences are, as we have already stated, astronomical.
Arguments such as this are in principle more respectable than the argument based on sheer, naked incredulity.
Measuring the statistical improbability of a suggestion is the right way to go about assessing its believability.
Indeed, it is a method that we shall use in this book several times.
But you have to do it right!
There are two things wrong with the argument put by Raven.
First, there is the familiar, and I have to say rather irritating, confusion of natural selection with"randomness'.
Mutation is random; natural selection is the very opposite of random.
Second, it just isn't true that"each by itself is useless'.
It isn't true that the whole perfect work must have been achieved simultaneously.
It isn't true that each part is essential for the success of the whole.
A simple, rudimentary, half-cocked eye/ear/ echolocation system/cuckoo parasitism system, etc., is better than none at all.
Without an eye you are totally blind.
With half an eye you may at least be able to detect the general direction of a predator's movement, even if you can't focus a clear image.
And this may make all the difference between life and death.
These matters will be taken up again in more detail in the next two chapters.
Accumulating small change
We have seen that living things are too improbable and too beautifully "designed" to have come into existence by chance.
How, then, did they come into existence?
The answer, Darwin's answer, is by gradual, step-by-step transformations from simple beginnings, from primordial entities sufficiently simple to have come into existence by chance.
Each successive change in the gradual evolutionary process was simple enough, relalive to its predecessor, to have arisen by chance.
But the whole sequence of cumulative steps constitutes anything but a chance process, when you consider the complexity of the final end-product relative to the original starting point.
The cumulative process is directed by nonrandom survival.
The purpose of this chapter is to demonstrate the power of this cumulative selection as a fundamentally nonrandom process.
If you walk up and down a pebbly beach, you will notice that the pebbles are not arranged at random.
The smaller pebbles typically tend to be found in segregated zones running along the length of the beach, the larger ones in different zones or stripes.
The pebbles have been sorted, arranged, selected.
A tribe living near the shore might wonder at this evidence of sorting or arrangement in the world, and might develop a myth to account for it, perhaps attributing it to a Great Spirit in the sky with a tidy mind and a sense of order.
We might give a superior smile at such a superstitious notion, and explain that the arranging was really done by the blind forces of physics, in this case the action of waves.
The waves have no purposes and no intentions, no tidy mind, no mind at all.
They just energetically throw the pebbles around, and big pebbles and small pebbles respond differently to this treatment so they end up at different levels of the beach.
A small amount of order has come out of disorder, and no mind planned it.
The waves and the pebbles together constitute a simple example of a system that automatically generates non-randomness.
The world is full of such systems.
The simplest example I can think of is a hole.
Only objects smaller than the hole can pass through it.
This means that if you start with a random collection of objects above the hole, and some force shakes and jostles them about at random, after a while the objects above and below the hole will come to be nonrandomly sorted.
The space below the hole will tend to contain objects smaller than the hole, and the space above will tend to contain objects larger than the hole.
Mankind has, of course, long exploited this simple principle for generating non-randomness, in the useful device known as the sieve.
The Solar System is a stable arrangement of planets, comets and debris orbiting the sun, and it is presumably one of many such orbiting systems in the universe.
The nearer a satellite is to its sun, the faster it has to travel if it is to counter the sun's gravity and remain in stable orbit.
For any given orbit, there is only one speed at which a satellite can travel and remain in that orbit.
If it were travelling at any other velocity, it would either move out into deep space, or crash into the Sun, or move into another orbit.
And if we look at the planets of our solar system, lo and behold, every single one of them is travelling at exactly the right velocity to keep it in its stable orbit around the Sun.
A blessed miracle of provident design?
No, just another natural "sieve" .
Obviously all the planets that we see orbiting the sun must be travelling at exactly the right speed to keep them in their orbits, or we wouldn't see them there because they wouldn't be there!
But equally obviously this is not evidence for conscious design.
It is just another kind of sieve.
Sieving of this order of simplicity is not, on its own, enough to account for the massive amounts of nonrandom order that we see in living things.
Nowhere near enough.
Remember the analogy of the combination lock.
The kind of non-randomness that can be generated by simple sieving is roughly equivalent to opening a combination lock with one one dial: it is easy to open it by sheer luck.
The kind of non-randomness that we see in living systems, on the other hand, is equivalent to a gigantic combination lock with an almost uncountable number of dials.
To generate a biological molecule like haemoglobin, the red pigment in blood, by simple sieving would be equivalent to taking all the amino-acid building blocks of haemoglobin, jumbling them up at random, and hoping that the haemoglobin molecule would reconstitute itself by sheer luck.
The amount of luck that would be required for this feat is unthinkable, and has been used as a telling mind-boggler by Isaac Asimov and others.
A haemoglobin molecule consists of four chains of amino acids twisted together.
Let us think about just one of these four chains.
It consists of 146 amino acids.
There are 20 different kinds of amino acids commonly found in living things.
The number of possible ways of arranging 20 kinds of thing in chains 146 links long is an inconceivably large number, which Asimov calls the "haemoglobin number" .
It is easy to calculate, but impossible to visualize the answer.
The first link in the 146-long chain could be any one of the 20 possible amino acids.
The second link could also be any one of the 20, so the number of possible 2-link chains is 20 x 20, or 400.
The number of possible 3-link chains is 20 x 20 x 20, or 8,000.
The number of possible 146-link chains is 20 times itself 146 times.
This is a staggeringly large number.
A million is a 1 with 6 noughts after it.
A billion (1,000 million) is a 1 with 9 noughts after it.
The number we seek, the "haemoglobin number" , is (near enough) a 1 with 190 noughts after it!
This is the chance against happening to hit upon haemoglobin by luck.
And a haemoglobin molecule has only a minute fraction of the complexity of a living body.
Simple sieving, on its own, is obviously nowhere near capable of generating the amount of order in a living thing.
Sieving is an essential ingredient in the generation of living order, but it is very far from being the whole story.
Something else is needed.
To explain the point, I shall need to make a distinction between "single-step" selection and "cumulative" selection.
The simple sieves we have been considering so far in this chapter are all examples of single-step selection.
Living organization is the product of cumulative selection.
The essential difference between single-step selection and cumulative selection is this.
In single-step selection the entities selected or sorted, pebbles or whatever they are, are sorted once and for all.
In cumulative selection, on the other hand, they "reproduce" ; or in some other way the results of one sieving process are fed into a subsequent sieving, which is fed into…"and so on.
The entities are subjected to selection of sorting over many "generations" in succession.
The end-product of one generation of selection is the starting point for the next generation of selection, and so on for many generations.
It is natural to borrow such words as "reproduce" and "generation" , which have associations with living things, because living things are the main examples we know of things that participate in cumulative selection.
They may in practice be the only things that do.
But for the moment I don't want to beg that question by saying so outright.
Sometimes clouds, through the random kneading and carving of the winds, come to look like familiar objects.
There is a much published photograph, taken by the pilot of a small aeroplane, of what looks a bit like the face of Jesus, staring out of the sky.
We have all seen clouds that reminded us of something — a sea horse, say, or a smiling face.
These resemblances come about by single-step selection, that is to say by a single coincidence.
They are, consequently, not very impressive.
The resemblance of the signs of the zodiac to the animals after which they are named, Scorpio, Leo, and so on, is as unimpressive as the predictions of astrologers.
We don't feel overwhelmed by the resemblance, as we are by biological adaptations — the products of cumulative selection.
We describe as weird, uncanny or spectacular, the resemblance of, say, a leaf insect to a leaf or a praying mantis to a cluster of pink flowers.
The resemblance of a cloud to a weasel is only mildly diverting, barely worth calling to the attention of our companion.
Moreover, we are quite likely to change our mind about exactly what the cloud most resembles.
Hamlet.
Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?
Polonius.
By the mass, and"tis like a camel, indeed.
Hamlet.
Methinks it is like a weasel.
Polonius.
It is backed like a weasel.
Hamlet.
Or like a whale?
Polonius.
Very like a whale.
I don't know who it was first pointed out that, given enough time, a monkey bashing away at random on a typewriter could produce all the works of Shakespeare.
The operative phrase is, of course, given enough time.
Let us limit the task facing our monkey somewhat.
Suppose that he has to produce, not the complete works of Shakespeare but just the short sentence "Methinks it is like a weasel" , and we shall make it relatively easy by giving him a typewriter with a restricted keyboard, one with just the 26 (capital) letters, and a space bar.
How long will he take to write this one little sentence?
The sentence has 28 characters in it, so let us assume that the monkey has a series of discrete"tries', each consisting of 28 bashes at the keyboard.
If he types the phrase correctly, that is the end of the experiment.
If not, we allow him another "try" of 28 characters.
I don't know any monkeys, but fortunately my 11-month old daughter is an experienced randomizing device, and she proved only too eager to step into the role of monkey typist.
Here is what she typed on the computer: UMMK JK CDZZ F ZD DSDSKSM S SS FMCV PU I DDRGLKDXRRDO RDTE QDWFDVIOY UDSKZWDCCVYT H CHVY NMGNBAYTDFCCVD D RCDFYYYRM N DFSKD LD K WDWK JJKAUIZMZI UXKIDISFUMDKUDXI  She has other important calls on her time, so I was obliged to program the computer to simulate a randomly typing baby or monkey: WDLDMNLT DTJBKWIRZREZLMQCO P Y YVMQKZPGJXWVHGLAWFVCHQYOPY MWR SWTNUXMLCDLEUBXTQHNZVJQF FU OVAODVYKDGXDEKRVMOGGS VT HZQZDSFZIHIVPHZPETPWVOVPMZGF GEWRGZRPBCTPGQMCKHFDBGW ZCCF And so on and on.
It isn't difficult to calculate how long we should reasonably expect to wait for the random computer (or baby or monkey) to type METHINKS IT IS LIKE A WEASEL.
Think about the total number of possible phrases of the right length that the monkey or baby or random computer could type.
It is the same kind of calculation as we did for haemoglobin, and it produces a similarly large result.
There are 27 possible letters (counting "space" as one letter) in the first position.
The chance of the monkey happening to get the first letter — M — right is therefore 1 in 27.
The chance of it getting the first two letters-ME-right is the chance of it getting the second letter- E-right (1 in 27) given that it has also got the first letter — M — right, therefore 1/27 x 1/27, which equals 1/729.
The chance of it getting the first word-METHINKS — right is 1/27 for each of the 8 letters, therefore (1/27) x (1/27) x (1/27) x (1/27).,
etc. 8 times, or (1/27) to the power 8.
The chance of it getting the entire phrase of 28 characters right is (1/27) to the power 28, i.e. (1/27) multiplied by itself 28 times.
These are very small odds, about 1 in 10,000 million million million million million million.
To put it mildly, the phrase we seek would be a long time coming, to say nothing of the complete works of Shakespeare.
So much for single-step selection of random variation.
What about cumulative selection; how much more effective should this be?
Very very much more effective, perhaps more so than we at first realize, although it is almost obvious when we reflect further.
We again use our computer monkey, but with a crucial difference in its program.
It again begins by choosing a random sequence of 28 letters, just as before: WDLMNLT DTJBKWIRZREZLMQCO P It now "breeds from" this random phrase.
It duplicates it repeatedly, but with a certain chance of random error — "mutation" — in the copying.
The computer examines the mutant nonsense phrases, the "progeny" of the original phrase, and chooses the one which, however slightly, most resembles the target phrase, METHINKS IT IS LIKE A  WEASEL.
In this instance the winning phrase of the next "generation" happened to be: WDLTMNLT DTJBSWIRZREZLMQCO P Not an obvious improvement!
But the procedure is repeated, again mutant "progeny" are "bred from" the phrase, and a new "winner" is chosen.
This goes on, generation after generation.
Alter 10 generations, the phrase chosen for "breeding" was: MDLDMNLS ITJISWHRZREZ MECS P Alter 20 generations it was: MELDINLS IT ISWPRKE Z WECSEL By now, the eye of faith fancies that it can see a resemblance to the target phrase.
By 30 generations there can be no doubt: METHINGS IT lSWLIKE B WECSEL Generation 40 takes us to within one letter of the target: METHINKS IT IS LIKE I WEASEL And the target was finally reached in generation 43.
A second run of the computer began with the phrase: Y YVMQKZPFJXWVHGLAWFVCHQXYOPY, passed through (again reporting only every tenth generation): Y YVMQKSPFTHWSHLIKEFV HQYSPY YTHINKSPITXISHLIKEFA WQYSEY METHINKS IT ISSLIKE A WEFSEY METHINKS IT ISBLIKE A WEASES METHINKS IT ISJLIKE A WEASEO METHINKS IT IS LIKE A WEASEP and reached the target phrase in generation 64.
In a third run the computer started with: GEWRGZRPBCTPGQMCKHFDBGW ZCCF and reached METHINKS IT IS LIKE A WEASEL in 41 generations of selective "breeding" .
The exact time taken by the computer to reach the target doesn't matter.
If you want to know, it completed the whole exercise for me, the first time, while I was out to lunch.
It took about half an hour.
(Computer enthusiasts may think this unduly slow.
The reason is that  the program was written in BASIC, a sort of computer baby-talk.
When I rewrote it in Pascal, it took 11 seconds.)
Computers are a bit faster at this kind of thing than monkeys, but the difference really isn't significant.
What matters is the difference between the time taken by cumulative selection, and the time which the same computer, working flat out at the same rate, would take to reach the target phrase if it were forced to use the other procedure of single-step selection: about a million million million million million years.
This is more than a million million million times as long as the universe has so far existed.
Actually it would be fairer just to say that, in comparison with the time it would take either a monkey or a randomly programmed computer to type our target phrase, the total age of the universe so far is a negligibly small quantity, so small as to be well within the margin of error for this sort of back-of-an-envelope calculation.
Whereas the time taken for a computer working randomly but with the constraint of cumulative selection to perform the same task is of the same order as humans ordinarily can understand, between 11 seconds and the time it takes to have lunch.
There is a big difference, then, between cumulative selection (in which each improvement, however slight, is used as a basis for future building), and single-step selection (in which each new "try" is a fresh one).
If evolutionary progress had had to rely on single-step selection, it would never have got anywhere.
If, however, there was any way in which the necessary conditions for cumulative selection could have been set up by the blind forces of nature, strange and wonderful might have been the consequences.
As a matter of fact that is exactly what happened on this planet, and we ourselves are among the most recent, if not the strangest and most wonderful, of those consequences.
It is amazing that you can still read calculations like my haemoglobin calculation, used as though they constituted arguments against Darwin's theory.
The people who do this, often expert in their own field, astronomy or whatever it may be, seem sincerely to believe that Darwinism explains living organization in terms of chance — "single- step selection" — alone.
This belief, that Darwinian evolution is "random" , is not merely false.
It is the exact opposite of the truth.
Chance is a minor ingredient in the Darwinian recipe, but the most important ingredient is cumulative selection which is quintessentially nonrandom.
Clouds are not capable of entering into cumulative selection.
There is no mechanism whereby clouds of particular shapes can spawn daughter clouds resembling themselves.
If there were such a mechanism, if a cloud resembling a weasel or a camel could give rise to  a lineage of other clouds of roughly the same shape, cumulative selection would have the opportunity to get going.
Of course, clouds do break up and form "daughter" clouds sometimes, but this isn't enough for cumulative selection.
It is also necessary that the "progeny" of any given cloud should resemble its "parent" more than it resembles any old "parent" in the "population" .
This vitally important point is apparently misunderstood by some of the philosophers who have, in recent years, taken an interest in the theory of natural selection.
It is further necessary that the chances of a given cloud's surviving and spawning copies should depend upon its shape.
Maybe in some distant galaxy these conditions did arise, and the result, if enough millions of years have gone by, is an ethereal, wispy form of life.
This might make a good science fiction story — The White Cloud, it could be called — but for our purposes a computer model like the monkey/Shakespeare model is easier to grasp.
Although the monkey/Shakespeare model is useful for explaining the distinction between single-step selection and cumulative selection, it is misleading in important ways.
One of these is that, in each generation of selective "breeding" , the mutant "progeny" phrases were judged according to the criterion of resemblance to a distant ideal target, the phrase METHINKS IT IS LIKE A WEASEL.
Life isn't like that.
Evolution has no long-term goal.
There is no long-distance target, no final perfection to serve as a criterion for selection, although human vanity cherishes the absurd notion that our species is the final goal of evolution.
In real life, the criterion for selection is always short-term, either simple survival or, more generally, reproductive success.
If, after the aeons, what looks like progress towards some distant goal seems, with hindsight, to have been achieved, this is always an incidental consequence of many generations of short-term selection.
The "watchmaker" that is cumulative natural selection is blind to the future and has no long-term goal.
We can change our computer model to take account of this point.
We can also make it more realistic in other respects.
Letters and words are peculiarly human manifestations, so let's make the computer draw pictures instead.
Maybe we shall even see animal-like shapes evolving in the computer, by cumulative selection of mutant forms.
We shan't prejudge the issue by building-in specific animal pictures to start with.
We want them to emerge solely as a result of cumulative selection of random mutations.
In real life, the form of each individual animal is produced by embryonic development.
Evolution occurs because, in successive generations, there are slight differences in embryonic development.
These differences come about because of changes (mutations — this is the small random element in the process that I spoke of) in the genes controlling development.
In our computer model, therefore, we must have something equivalent to embryonic development, and something equivalent to genes that can mutate.
There are many ways in which we could meet these specifications in a computer model.
I chose one and wrote a program that embodied it.
I shall now describe this computer model, because I think it is revealing.
If you don't know anything about computers, just remember that they are machines that do exactly what you tell them but often surprise you in the result.
A list of instructions for a computer is called a program (this is standard American spelling, and it is also recommended by the Oxford Dictionary: the alternative, "programme" , commonly used in Britain, appears to be a Frenchified affectation).
Embyronic development is far too elaborate a process to simulate realistically on a small computer.
We must represent it by some simplified analogue.
We must find a simple picture-drawing rule that the computer can easily obey, and which can then be made to vary under the influence of"genes'.
What drawing rule shall we choose?
Textbooks of computer science often illustrate the power of what they call "recursive" programming with a simple tree-growing procedure.
The computer starts by drawing a single vertical line.
Then the line branches into two.
Then each of the branches splits into two sub-branches.
Then each of the sub-branches splits into sub-sub-branches, and so on.
It is "recursive" because the same rule (in this case a branching rule) is applied locally all over the growing tree.
No matter how big the tree may grow, the same branching rule goes on being applied at the tips of all its twigs.
The "depth" of recursion, means the number of sub-sub- branches that are allowed to grow, before the process is brought to a halt.
Figure 2 shows what happens when you tell the computer to obey exactly the same drawing rule, but going on to various depths of recursion.
At high levels of recursion the pattern becomes quite elaborate, but you can easily see in Figure 2 that it is still produced by the same very simple branching rule.
This is, of course, just what happens in a real tree.
The branching pattern of an oak tree or an apple tree looks complex, but it really isn't.
The basic branching rule is very simple.
It is because it is applied recursively at the growing tips all over the tree — branches make sub-branches, then each sub-branch makes sub-sub-branches, and so on— that the whole tree ends up large and bushy.
Recursive branching is also a good metaphor for the embryonic development of plants and animals generally.
I don't mean that animal   embryos look like branching trees.
They don't.
But all embryos grow by cell division.
Cells always split into two daughter cells.
And genes always exert their final effects on bodies by means of local influences on cells, and on the two-way branching patterns of cell division.
An animal's genes are never a grand design, a blueprint for the whole body.
The genes, as we shall see, are more like a recipe than like a blueprint; and a recipe, moreover, that is obeyed not by the developing embryo as  a whole, but by each cell or each local cluster of dividing cells.
I'm not denying that the embryo, and later the adult, has a large-scale form.
But this large-scale form emerges because of lots of little local cellular effects all over the developing body, and these local effects consist primarily of two-way branchings, in the form of two-way cell splittings.
It is by influencing these local events that genes ultimately exert influences on the adult body.
The simple branching rule for drawing trees, then, looks like a promising analogue for embryonic development.
Accordingly, we wrap it up in a little computer procedure, label it DEVELOPMENT, and prepare to embed it in a larger program labelled EVOLUTION.
As a first step towards writing this larger program, we now turn our attention to genes.
How shall we represent "genes" in our computer model?
Genes in real life do two things.
They influence development, and they get passed on to future generations.
In real animals and plants there are tens of thousands of genes, but we shall modestly limit our computer model to nine.
Each of the nine genes is simply represented by a number in the computer, which will be called its value.
The value of a particular gene might be, say 4, or -7.
How shall we make these genes influence development?
There are lots of things they could do.
The basic idea is that they should exert some minor quantitative influence on the drawing rule that is DEVELOPMENT.
For instance, one gene might influence the angle of branching, another might influence the length of some particular branch.
Another obvious thing for a gene to do is to influence the depth of the recursion, the number of successive branchings.
I made Gene 9 have this effect.
You can regard Figure 2, therefore, as a picture of seven related organisms, identical to each other except with respect to Gene 9.
I shan't spell out in detail what each one of the other eight genes does.
You can get a general idea of the kinds of things they do by studying Figure 3.
In the middle of the picture is the basic tree, one of the ones from Figure 2.
Encircling this central tree are eight others.
All are the same as the central tree, except that one gene, a different gene in each of the eight, has been changed — "mutated" .
For instance, the picture to the right of the central tree shows what happens when Gene 5 mutates by having +1 added to its value.
If there'd been room, I'd have liked to print a ring of 18 mutants around the central tree.
The reason for wanting 18 is that there are nine genes, and each one can mutate in an "upward" direction (1 is added to its value) or in a "downward" direction (1 is subtracted from its value).
So a ring of 18 trees would be enough to represent all possible single-step mutants that you can derive from the one central tree.
Each of these trees has its own, unique "genetic formula" , the numerical values of its nine genes.
I haven't written the genetic formulae down, because they wouldn't mean anything to you, in themselves.
That is true of real genes too.
Genes only start to mean something when they are translated, via protein synthesis, into growing-rules for a developing embryo.
And in the computer model too, the numerical values of the nine genes only mean something when they are translated into growing rules for the branching tree pattern.
But you can get an idea of what each gene does by comparing the bodies of two organisms known to differ with respect to a certain gene.
Compare, for instance, the basic tree in the middle of the picture with the two trees on either side, and you'll get some idea of what Gene 5 does.
This, too, is exactly what real-life geneticists do.
Geneticists normally don't know how genes exert their effects on embryos.
Nor do they know the complete genetic formula of any animal.
But by  comparing the bodies of two adult animals that are known to differ according to a single gene, they can see what effects that single gene has.
It is more complicated than that, because the effects of genes interact with each other in ways that are more complicated than simple addition.
Exactly the same is true of the computer trees.
Very much so, as later pictures will show.
You will notice that all the shapes are symmetrical about a left/right axis.
This is a constraint that I imposed on the DEVELOPMENT procedure.
I did it partly for aesthetic reasons; partly to economize on the number of genes necessary (if genes didn't exert mirror-image effects on the two sides of the tree, we'd need separate genes for the left and the right sides); and partly because I was hoping to evolve animal-like shapes, and most animal bodies are pretty symmetrical.
For the same reason, from now on I shall stop calling these creatures "trees', and shall call them" bodies "or" biomorphs'.
Biomorph is the name coined by Desmond Morris for the vaguely animal-like shapes in his surrealist paintings.
These paintings have a special place in my affections, because one of them was reproduced on the cover of my first book.
Desmond Morris claims that his biomorphs "evolve" in his mind, and that their evolution can be traced through successive paintings.
Back to the computer biomorphs, and the ring of 18 possible mutants, of which a representative eight are drawn in Figure 3.
Since each member of the ring is only one mutational step away from the central biomorph, it is easy for us to see them as children of the central parent.
We have our analogue of REPRODUCTION, which, like DEVELOPMENT, we can wrap up in another small computer program, ready to embed in our big program called EVOLUTION.
Note two things about REPRODUCTION.
First, there is no sex; reproduction is asexual.
I think of the biomorphs as female, therefore, because asexual animals like greenfly are nearly always basically female in form.
Second, my mutations are all constrained to occur one at a time.
A child differs from its parent at only one of the nine genes; moreover, all mutation occurs by +1 or -1 being added to the value of the corresponding parental gene.
These are just arbitrary conventions: they could have been different and still remained biologically realistic.
The same is not true of the following feature of the model, which embodies a fundamental principle of biology.
The shape of each child is not derived directly from the shape of the parent.
Each child gets its shape from the values of its own nine genes (influencing angles, distances, and so on).
And each child gets its nine genes from its parent's nine genes.
This is just what happens in real life.
Bodies don't get passed down the generations; genes do.
Genes influence embryonic  development of the body in which they are sitting.
Then those same genes either get passed on to the next generation or they don't.
The nature of the genes is unaffected by their participation in bodily development, but their likelihood of being passed on may be affected by the success of the body that they helped to create.
This is why, in the computer model, it is important that the two procedures called DEVELOPMENT and REPRODUCTION are written as two watertight compartments.
They are watertight except that REPRODUCTION passes gene values across to DEVELOPMENT, where they influence the growing rules.
DEVELOPMENT most emphatically does not pass gene values back to REPRODUCTION — that would be tantamount to "Lamarckism" (see Chapter II).
We have assembled our two program modules, then, labelled DEVELOPMENT and REPRODUCTION.
REPRODUCTION passes genes down the generations, with the possibility of mutation.
DE-XXXX VELOPMENT takes the genes provided by REPRODUCTION in any given generation, and translates those genes into drawing action, and hence into a picture of a body on the computer screen.
The time has come to bring the two modules together in the big program called EVOLUTION.
EVOLUTION basically consists of endless repetition of REPRODUCTION.
In every generation, REPRODUCTION takes the genes that are supplied to it by the previous generation, and hands them on to the next generation but with minor random errors — mutations.
A mutation simply consists in +1 or — I being added to the value of a randomly chosen gene.
This means that, as the generations go by, the total amount of genetic difference from the original ancestor can become very large, cumulatively, one small step at a time.
But although the mutations are random, the cumulative change over the generations is not random.
The progeny in any one generation are different from their parent in random directions.
But which of those progeny Is selected to go forward into the next generation is not random.
This is where Darwinian selection comes in.
The criterion for selection is not the genes themselves, but the bodies whose shape the genes influence through DEVELOPMENT.
In addition to being REPRODUCED, the genes in each generation are also handed to DEVELOPMENT, which grows the appropriate body on the screen, following its own strictly laid-down rules.
In every generation, a whole "litter" of "children" (i.e. individuals of the next generation) is displayed.
All these children are mutant children of the same parent, differing from their parent with respect to one gene each.
This very high mutation rate is a distinctly unbiological feature of the  computer model.
In real life, the probability that a gene will mutate is often less than one in a million.
The reason for building a high mutation rate into the model is that the whole performance on the computer screen is for the benefit of human eyes, and humans haven't the patience to wait a million generations for a mutation!
The human eye has an active role to play in the story.
It is the selecting agent.
It surveys the litter of progeny and chooses one for breeding.
The chosen one then becomes the parent of the next generation, and a litter of its mutant children are displayed simultaneously on the screen.
The human eye is here doing exactly what it does in the breeding of pedigree dogs or prize roses.
Our model, in other words, is strictly a model of artificial selection, not natural selection.
The criterion for "success" is not the direct criterion of survival, as it is in true natural selection.
In true natural selection, if a body has what it takes to survive, its genes automatically survive because they are inside it.
So the genes that survive tend to be, automatically, those genes that confer on bodies the qualities that assist them to survive.
In the computer models, on the other hand, the selection criterion is not survival, but the ability to appeal to human whim.
Not necessarily idle, casual whim, for we can resolve to select consistently for some quality such as "resemblance to a weeping willow" .
In my experience, however, the human selector is more often capricious and opportunistic.
This, too, is not unlike certain kinds of natural selection.
The human tells the computer which one of the current litter of progeny to breed from.
The genes of the chosen one are passed across to REPRODUCTION, and a new generation begins.
This process, like real-life evolution, goes on indefinitely.
Each generation of biomorphs is only a single mutational step away from its predecessor and its successor.
But after 100 generations of EVOLUTION, the biomorphs can be anything up to 100 mutational steps away from their original ancestor.
And in 100 mutational steps, much can happen.
I never dreamed how much, when I first started to play with my newly written EVOLUTION program.
The main thing that surprised me was that the biomorphs can pretty quickly cease to look like trees.
The basic two-way branching structure is always there, but it is easily smothered as lines cross and recross one another, making solid masses of colour (only black and white in the printed pictures).
Figure 4 shows one particular evolutionary history consisting of no more than 29 generations.
The ancestor is a tiny creature, a single dot.
Although the ancestor's body is a dot, like a bacterium in the primeval slime, hidden inside it is the potential for branching in exactly the pattern of the  central tree of Figure 3: it is just that its Gene 9 tells it to branch zero times!
All the creatures pictured on the page are descended from the dot but, in order to avoid cluttering the page, I haven't printed all the descendants that I actually saw.
I've printed only the successful child of each generation (i.e. the parent of the next generation) and one or two of its unsuccessful sisters.
So, the picture basically shows just the one main line of evolution, guided by my aesthetic selection.
All the stages in the main line are shown.
Let's briefly go through the first few generations of the main line of evolution in Figure 4.
The dot becomes a Y in generation 2.
In the next two generations, the Y becomes larger.
Then the branches become slightly curved, like a well-made catapult.
In generation 7, the curve is accentuated, so that the two branches almost meet.
The curved branches get bigger, and each acquires a couple of small appendages in generation 8.
In generation 9 these appendages are lost again, and the stem of the catapult becomes longer.
Generation 10 looks like a section through a flower; the curved side-branches resemble petals cupping a central appendage or "stigma" .
In generation 11, the same "flower" shape has become bigger and slightly more complicated.
I won't pursue the narrative.
The picture speaks for itself, on through the 29 generations.
Notice how each generation is just a little different from its parent and from its sisters.
Since each is a little different from its parent, it is only to be expected that each will be slightly more different from its grandparents (and its grandchildren), and even more different still from its great grandparents (and great grandchildren).
This is what cumulative evolution is all about, although, because of our high mutation rate, we have speeded it up here to unrealistic rates.
Because of this, Figure 4 looks more like a pedigree of species than a pedigree of individuals, but the principle is the same.
When I wrote the program, I never thought that it would evolve anything more than a variety of tree-like shapes.
I had hoped for weeping willows, cedars of Lebanon, Lombardy poplars, seaweeds, perhaps deer antlers.
Nothing in my biologist's intuition, nothing in my 20 years"experience of programming computers, and nothing in my wildest dreams, prepared me for what actually emerged on the screen.
I can't remember exactly when in the sequence it first began to dawn on me that an evolved resemblance to something like an insect was possible.
With a wild surmise, 1 began to breed, generation after generation, from whichever child looked most like an insect.
My incredulity grew in parallel with the evolving resemblance.
You see the eventual results at the bottom of Figure 4.
Admittedly they have  eight legs like a spider, instead of six like an insect, but even so!
I still cannot conceal from you my feeling of exultation as I first watched these exquisite creatures emerging before my eyes.
I distinctly heard the triumphal opening chords of Also sprach Zarathustra (the "2001 theme" ) in my mind.
I couldn't eat, and that night "my" insects swarmed behind my eyelids as I tried to sleep.
There are computer games on the market in which the player has the illusion that he is wandering about in an underground labyrinth, which has a definite if complex geography and in which he encounters dragons, minotaurs or other mythic adversaries.
In these games the monsters are rather few in number.
They are all designed by a human programmer, and so is the geography of the labyrinth.
In the evolution game, whether the computer version or the real thing, the player (or observer) obtains the same feeling of wandering metaphorically through a labyrinth of branching passages, but the number of possible pathways is all but infinite, and the monsters that one encounters are undesigned and unpredictable.
On my wanderings through the backwaters of Biomorph Land, I have encountered fairy shrimps, Aztec temples, Gothic church windows, aboriginal drawings of kangaroos, and, on one memorable but unrecapturable occasion, a passable caricature of the Wykeham Professor of Logic.
Figure 5 is another little collection from my trophy room, all of which developed in the same kind of way.
I want to emphasize that these shapes are not artists' impressions.
They have not been touched-up or doctored in any way whatever.
They are exactly as the computer drew them when they evolved inside it.
The role of the human eye was limited to selecting, among randomly mutated progeny over many generations of cumulative evolution.
We now have a much more realistic model of evolution than the monkeys typing Shakespeare gave us.
But the biomorph model is still deficient.
It shows us the power of cumulative selection to generate an almost endless variety of quasi-biological form, but it uses artificial selection, not natural selection.
The human eye does the selecting.
Could we dispense with the human eye, and make the computer itself do the selecting, on the basis of some biologically realistic criterion?
This is more difficult than it may seem.
It is worth spending a little time explaining why.
It is trivially easy to select for a particular genetic formula, so long as you can read the genes of all the animals.
But natural selection doesn't choose genes directly, it chooses the effects that genes have on bodies, technically called phenotypic effects.
The human eye is good at choosing phenotypic effects, as is shown by the numerous breeds of   dogs, cattle and pigeons, and also, if I may say so, as is shown by Figure 5.
To make the computer choose phenotypic effects directly, we should have to write a very sophisticated pattern-recognition program.
Pattern-recognizing programs exist.
They are used to read print and even handwriting.
But they are difficult, "state of the art" programs, needing very large and fast computers.
Even if such a pattern-recognition program were not beyond my programming capabilities, and beyond the capacity of my little 64-kilobyte computer, I wouldn't bother with it.
This is a task that is better done by the human eye, together with — and this is more to the point — the 10-giganeurone computer inside the skull.
It wouldn't be too difficult to make the computer select for vague general features like, say, tall-thinness, short-fatness, perhaps curvaceousness, spikiness, even rococo ornamentation.
One method would be to program the computer to remember the kinds of qualities that humans have favoured in the past, and to exert continued selection of the same general kind in the future.
But this isn't getting  us any closer to simulating natural selection.
The important point is that nature doesn't need computing power in order to select, except in special cases like peahens choosing peacocks.
In nature, the usual selecting agent is direct, stark and simple.
It is the grim reaper.
Of course, the reasons for survival are anything but simple — that is why natural selection can build up animals and plants of such formidable complexity.
But there is something very crude and simple about death itself.
And nonrandom death is all it takes to select phenotypes, and hence the genes that they contain, in nature.
To simulate natural selection in an interesting way in the computer, we should forget about rococo ornamentation and all other visually defined qualities.
We should concentrate, instead, upon simulating nonrandom death.
Biomorphs should interact, in the computer, with a simulation of a hostile environment.
Something about their shape should determine whether or not they survive in that environment.
Ideally, the hostile environment should include other evolving biomorphs: "predators'," prey "," parasites',"competitors'.
The particular shape of a prey biomorph should determine its vulnerability to being caught, for example, by particular shapes of predator biomorphs.
Such criteria of vulnerability should not be built-in by the programmer.
They should emerge, in the same kind of way as the shapes themselves emerge.
Evolution in the computer would then really take off, for the conditions would be met for a self-reinforcing "arms race" (see Chapter 7), and I dare not speculate where it would all end.
Unfortunately, I think it may be beyond my powers as a programmer to set up such a counterfeit world.
If anybody is clever enough to do it, it would be the programmers who develop those noisy and vulgar arcade games — Space Invaders' derivatives.
In these programs a counterfeit world is simulated.
It has a geography, often in three dimensions, and it has a fast-moving time dimension.
Entities zoom around in simulated three-dimensional space, colliding with each other, shooting each other down, swallowing each other amid revolting noises.
So good can the simulation be that the player handling the joystick receives a powerful illusion that he himself is part of the counterfeit world.
I imagine that the summit of this kind of programming is achieved in the chambers used to train aeroplane and spacecraft pilots.
But even these programs are small-fry compared to the program that would have to be written to simulate an emerging arms race between predators and prey, embedded in a complete, counterfeit ecosystem.
It certainly could be done, however.
If there is a professional programmer out there who feels like collaborating on the challenge, I should like to hear from him or her.
Meanwhile, there is something else that is much easier, and which I intend trying when summer comes.
I shall put the computer in a shady place in the garden.
The screen can display in colour.
I already have a version of the program which uses a few more "genes" to control colour, in the same kind of way as the other nine genes control shape.
I shall begin with any more-or-less compact, and brightly coloured biomorph.
The computer will simultaneously display a range of mutant progeny of the biomorph, differing from it in shape and/or colour pattern.
I believe that bees, butterflies and other insects will visit the screen, and "choose" by bumping into a particular spot on the screen.
When a certain number of choices have been logged, the computer will wipe the screen clean, "breed" from the preferred biomorph and display the next generation of mutant progeny.
I have high hopes that, over a large number of generations, the wild insects will actually cause the evolution, in the computer, of flowers.
If they do, the computer flowers will have evolved under exactly the same selection pressure as caused real flowers to evolve in the wild.
I am encouraged in my hope by the fact that insects frequently visit bright blobs of colour on women's dresses (and also by more systematic experiments that have been published).
An alternative possibility, which I would find even more exciting, is that the wild insects might cause the evolution of insect-like shapes.
The precedent for this — and hence the reason for hope — is that bees in the past caused the evolution of bee-orchids.
Male bees, over many generations of cumulative orchid evolution, have built up the bee-like shape through trying to copulate with flowers, and hence carrying pollen.
Imagine the "bee-flower" of Figure 5 in colour.
Wouldn't you fancy it if you were a bee?
My main reason for pessimism is that insect vision works in a very different way from ours.
Video-screens are designed for human eyes not bee eyes.
This could easily mean that, although both we and bees see bee-orchids, in our very different ways, as bee-like, bees might not see video-screen images at all.
Bees might see nothing but 625 scanning lines!
Still, it is worth a try.
By the time this book is published, I shall know the answer.
There is a popular cliche, usually uttered in the tones Stephen Potter would have called "plonking" , which says that you cannot get out of computers any more than you put in.
Other versions are that computers only do exactly what you tell them to, and that therefore computers are never creative.
The cliche is true only in a crashingIy trivial sense, the same sense in which Shakespeare never wrote anything except what his first schoolteacher taught him to write — words.
I  programmed EVOLUTION into the computer, but I did not plan "my" 
insects, nor the scorpion, nor the spitfire, nor the lunar lander.
I had not the slightest inkling that they would emerge, which is why "emerge" is the right word.
True, my eyes did the selecting that guided their evolution, but at every stage I was limited to a small clutch of progeny offered up by random mutation, and my selection "strategy" , such as it was, was opportunistic, capricious and short-term.
I was not aiming for any distant target, and nor does natural selection.
I can dramatize this by discussing the one time when I did try to aim for a distant target.
First I must make a confession.
You will have guessed it anyway.
The evolutionary history of Figure 4 is a reconstruction.
It was not the first time I had seen "my" insects.
When they originally emerged to the sound of trumpets, I had no means of recording their genes.
There they were, sitting on the computer screen, and I couldn't get at them, couldn't decipher their genes.
I delayed switching the computer off while I racked my brain trying to think of some way of saving them, but there was none.
The genes were too deeply buried, just as they are in real life.
I could print out pictures of the insects' bodies, but I had lost their genes.
I immediately modified the program so that in future it would keep accessible records of genetic formulae, but it was too late".
I had lost my insects.
I set about trying to "find" them again.
They had evolved once, so it seemed that it must be possible to evolve them again.
Like the lost chord, they haunted me.
I wandered through Biomorph Land, moving through an endless landscape of strange creatures and things, but I couldn't find my insects.
I knew that they must be lurking there somewhere.
I knew the genes from which the original evolution had started.
I had a picture of my insects' bodies.
I even had a picture of the evolutionary sequence of bodies leading up to my insects by slow degrees from a dot ancestor.
But I didn't know their genetic formula.
You might think that it would have been easy enough to reconstruct the evolutionary pathway, but it wasn't.
The reason, which I shall come back to, is the astronomical number of possible biomorphs that a sufficiently long evolutionary pathway can offer, even when there are only nine genes varying.
Several times on my pilgrimage through Biomorph Land I seemed to come close to a precursor of my insects, but, then, in spite of my best efforts as a selecting agent, evolution went off on what proved to be a false trail.
Eventually, during my evolutionary wanderings through Biomorph Land — the sense of triumph was scarcely less than on the first occasion — I finally cornered them again.
I didn't know (still don't) if these insects were exactly the same as my original, "lost chords of Zarathustra" insects, or whether  they were superficially "convergent" (see next chapter), but it was good enough.
This time there was no mistake: I wrote down the genetic formula, and now I can "evolve" insects whenever I want.
Yes I am piling on the drama a bit, but there is a serious point being made.
The point of the story is that even though it was I that programmed the computer, telling it in great detail what to do, nevertheless I didn't plan the animals that evolved, and I was totally surprised by them when I first saw their precursors.
So powerless was I to control the evolution that, even when I very much wanted to retrace a particular evolutionary pathway it proved all but impossible to do so.
I don't believe I would ever have found my insects again if I hadn't had a printed picture of the complete set of their evolutionary precursors, and even then it was difficult and tedious.
Does the powerlessness of the programmer to control or predict the course of evolution in the computer seem paradoxical?
Does it mean that something mysterious, even mystical was going on inside the computer?
Of course not.
Nor is there anything mystical going on in the evolution of real animals and plants.
We can use the computer model to resolve the paradox, and learn something about real evolution in the process.
To anticipate, the basis of the resolution of the paradox will turn out to be as follows.
There is a definite set of biomorphs, each permanently sitting in its own unique place in a mathematical space.
It is permanently sitting there in the sense that, if only you knew its genetic formula, you could instantly find it; moreover, its neighbours in this special kind of space are the biomorphs that differ from it by only one gene.
Now that I know the genetic formula of my insects, I can reproduce them at will, and I can tell the computer to "evolve" towards them from any arbitrary starting point.
When you first evolve a new creature by artificial selection in the computer model, it feels like a creative process.
So it is, indeed.
But what you are really doing is finding the creature, for it is, in a mathematical sense, already sitting in its own place in the genetic space of Biomorph Land.
The reason it is a truly creative process is that finding any particular creature is extremely difficult, simply and purely because Biomorph Land is very very large, and the total number of creatures sitting there is all but infinite.
It isn't feasible just to search aimlessly and at random.
You have to adopt some more efficient — creative — searching procedure.
Some people fondly believe that chess-playing computers work by internally trying out all possible combinations of chess moves.
They find this belief comforting when a computer beats them, but their belief is utterly false.
There are far too many possible chess moves: the search-space is billions of times too large to allow blind stumbling to  succeed.
The art of writing a good chess program is thinking of efficient short cuts through the search-space.
Cumulative selection, whether artificial selection as in the computer model or natural selection out there in the real world, is an efficient searching procedure, and its consequences look very like creative intelligence.
That, after all, is what William Paley's Argument from Design was all about.
Technically, all that we are doing, when we play the computer biomorph game, is finding animals that, in a mathematical sense, are waiting to be found.
What it feels like is a process of artistic creation.
Searching a small space, with only a few entities in it, doesn't ordinarily feel like a creative process.
A child's game of hunt the thimble doesn't feel creative.
Turning things over at random and hoping to stumble on the sought object usually works when the space to be searched is small.
As the search-space gets larger, more and more sophisticated searching procedures become necessary.
Effective searching procedures become, when the search-space is sufficiently large, indistinguishable from true creativity.
The computer biomorph models make these points well, and they constitute an instructive bridge between human creative processes, such as planning a winning strategy at chess, and the evolutionary creativity of natural selection, the blind watchmaker.
To see this, we must develop the idea of Biomorph Land as a mathematical "space" , an endless but orderly vista of morphological variety, but one in which every creature is sitting in its correct place, waiting to be discovered.
The 17 creatures of Figure 5 are arranged in no special order on the page.
But in Biomorph Land itself each occupied its own unique position, determined by its genetic formula, surrounded by its own particular neighbours.
All the creatures in Biomorph Land have a definite spatial relationship one to another.
What does that mean?
What meaning can we attach to spatial position?
The space we are talking about is genetic space.
Each animal has its own position in genetic space.
Near neighbours in genetic space are animals that differ from one another by only a single mutation.
In Figure 3, the basic tree in the centre is surrounded by 8 of its 18 immediate neighbours in genetic space.
The 18 neighbours of an animal are the 18 different kinds of children that it can give rise to, and the 18 different kinds of parent from which it could have come, given the rules of our computer model.
At one remove, each animal has 324 (18 x 18, ignoring back-mutations for simplicity) neighbours, the set of its possible grandchildren, grandparents, aunts or nieces.
At one remove again, each animal has 5,832 (18 x 18 x 18) neighbours, the set of possible great grandchildren, great grandparents, first cousins, etc.
What is the point of thinking in terms of genetic space?
Where does it get us?
The answer is that it provides us with a way to understand evolution as a gradual, cumulative process.
In any one generation, according to the rules of the computer model, it is possible to move only a single step through genetic space.
In 29 generations it isn't possible to move farther than 29 steps, in genetic space, away from the starting ancestor.
Every evolutionary history consists of a particular pathway, or trajectory, through genetic space.
For instance, the evolutionary history recorded in Figure 4 is a particular winding trajectory through genetic space, connecting a dot to an insect, and passing through 28 intermediate stages.
It is this that I mean when I talk metaphorically about "wandering" through Biomorph Land.
I wanted to try to represent this genetic space in the form of a picture.
The trouble is, pictures are two-dimensional.
The genetic space in which the biomorphs sit is not two-dimensional space.
It isn't even three-dimensional space.
It is nine-dimensional space!
(The important thing to remember about mathematics is not to be frightened.
It isn't as difficult as the mathematical priesthood sometimes pretends.
Whenever I feel intimidated, I always remember Silvanus Thompson's dictum in Calculus Made Easy: "What one fool can do, another can" .)
If only we could draw in nine dimensions we could make each dimension correspond to one of the nine genes.
The position of a particular animal, say the scorpion or the bat or the insect, is fixed in genetic space by the numerical value of its nine genes.
Evolutionary change consists of a step by step walk through nine-dimensional space.
The amount of genetic difference between one animal and another, and hence the time taken to evolve, and the difficulty of evolving from one to the other, is measured as the distance in nine-dimensional space from one to the other.
Alas, we can't draw in nine dimensions.
I sought a way of fudging it, of drawing a two-dimensional picture that conveyed something of what it feels like to move from point to point in the nine-dimensional genetic space of Biomorph Land.
There are various possible ways in which this could be done, and I chose one that I call the triangle trick.
Look at Figure 6.
At the three corners of the triangle are three arbitrarily chosen biomorphs.
The one at the top is the basic tree, the one on the left is one of "my" insects, and the one on the right has no name but I thought it looked pretty.
Like all biomorphs, each of these three has its own genetic formula, which determines its unique position in nine-dimensional genetic space.
The triangle lies on a flat two-dimensional "plane" that cuts through the nine-dimensional hypervolume (what one fool can do, another   can).
The plane is like a flat piece of glass stuck through a jelly.
On the glass is drawn the triangle, and also some of the biomorphs whose genetic formulae entitle them to sit on that particular flat plane.
What is it that entitles them?
This is where the three biomorphs at the corners of the triangle come in.
They are called the anchor biomorphs.
Remember that the whole idea of "distance" in genetic "space" is that genetically similar biomorphs are near neighbours, genetically different biomorphs are distant neighbours.
On this particular plane, the distances are all calculated with reference to the three anchor biomorphs.
For any given point on the sheet of glass, whether inside the triangle or outside it, the appropriate genetic formula for that point is calculated as a "weighted average" of the genetic formulae of the three anchor biomorphs.
You will already have guessed how the weighting is done.
It is done by the distances on the page, more precisely the nearnesses, from the point in question to the three anchor biomorphs.
So, the nearer you are to the insect on the plane, the more insect-like are the local biomorphs.
As you move along the glass towards the tree, the"insects' gradually become less insect-like and more tree-like.
If you walk into the centre of the triangle the animals that you find there, for instance the spider with a Jewish seven-branched candelabra on its head, will be various "genetic compromises" between the three anchor biomorphs.
But this account gives altogether too much prominence to the three anchor biomorphs.
Admittedly the computer did use them to calculate  the appropriate genetic formula for every point on the picture.
But actually any three anchor points on the plane would have done the trick just as well, and would have given identical results.
For this reason, in Figure 7 I haven't actually drawn the triangle.
Figure 7 is exactly the same kind of picture as Figure 6.
It just shows a different plane.
The same insect is one of the three anchor points, this time the right-hand one.
The other anchor points, in this case, are the spitfire and the bee-flower, both as seen in Figure 5.
On this plane, too, you will notice that neighbouring biomorphs resemble each other more than distant biomorphs.
The spitfire, for instance, is part of a squadron of similar aircraft, flying in formation.
Because the insect is on both sheets of glass, you can think of the two sheets as passing, at an angle, through each other.
Relative to Figure 6, the plane of Figure 7 is said to be "rotated about" the insect.
The elimination of the triangle is an improvement to our method, because it was a distraction.
It gave undue prominence to three particular points in the plane.
We still have one further improvement to make.
In Figures 6 and 7, spatial distance represents genetic distance, but the scaling is all distorted.
One inch upwards is not necessarily equivalent to one inch across.
To remedy this, we must choose our three anchor biomorphs carefully, so that their genetic distances, one from the other, are all the same.
Figure 8 does just this.
Again the triangle is not actually drawn.
The three anchors are the scorpion from Figure 5, the insect again (we have yet another "rotation about" the  insect), and the rather nondescript biomorph at the top.
These three biomorphs are all 30 mutations distant from each other.
This means that it is equally easy to evolve from any one to any other one.
In all three cases, a minimum of 30 genetic steps must be taken.
The little blips along the lower margin of Figure 8 represent units of distance measured in genes.
You can think of it as a genetic ruler.
The ruler doesn't only work in the horizontal direction.
You can tilt it in any direction, and measure the genetic distance, and hence the minimum evolution time, between any point on the plane and any other (annoyingly, that is not quite true on the page, because the computer's printer distorts proportions, but this effect is too trivial to make a fuss about, although it does mean that you will get slightly the wrong answer if you simply count blips on the scale).
These two-dimensional planes cutting through nine-dimensional genetic space give some feeling for what it means to walk through Biomorph Land.
To improve that feeling, you have to remember that evolution is not restricted to one flat plane.
On a true evolutionary walk you could "drop through" , at any time, to another plane, for instance from the plane of Figure 6 to the plane of Figure 7 (in the vicinity of the insect, where the two planes come close to each other).
I said that the "genetic ruler" of Figure 8 enables us to calculate the  minimum time it would take to evolve from one point to another.
So it does, given the restrictions of the original model, but the emphasis is on the word minimum.
Since the insect and the scorpion are 30 genetic units distant from one another, it takes only 30 generations to evolve from one to the other if you never take a wrong turning; if, that is , you know exactly what genetic formula you are heading towards, and how to steer towards it.
In real-life evolution there is nothing that corresponds to steering towards some distant genetic target.
Let's now use the biomorphs to return to the point made by the monkeys typing Hamlet, the importance of gradual, step-by-step change in evolution, as opposed to pure chance.
Begin by relabelling the graticules along the bottom of Figure 8, but in different units.
Instead of measuring distance as "number of genes that have to change in evolution" , we are going to measure distance as "odds of happening to jump the distance, by sheer luck, in a single hop" .
To think about this, we now have to relax one of the restrictions that I built into the computer game: we shall end by seeing why I built that restriction in in the first place.
The restriction was that children were only "allowed" to be one mutation distant from their parents.
In other words, only one gene was allowed to mutate at a time, and that gene was allowed to change its "value" only by +1 or -1.
By relaxing the restriction, we are now allowing any number of genes to mutate simultaneously, and they can add any number, positive or negative, to their current value.
Actually, that is too great a relaxation, sinced it allows genetic values to range from minus infinity to plus infinity.
The point is adequately made if we restrict gene values to single figures, that is if we allow them to range from -9 to +9.
So, within these wide limits, we are theoretically allowing mutation, at a stroke, in a single generation, to change any combination of the nine genes.
Moreover, the value of each gene can change any amount, so long as it doesn't stray into double figures.
What does this mean?
It means that, theoretically, evolution can jump, in a single generation, from any point in Biomorph Land to any other.
Not just any point on one plane, but any point in the entire nine-dimensional hypervolume.
If, for instance, you should want to jump in one fell swoop from the insect to the fox in Figure 5, here is the recipe.
Add the following numbers to the values of Genes I to 9, respectively: -2,2,2, -2,2,0, -4,-I, l.
But since we are talking about random jumps, all points in Biomorph Land are equally likely as destinations for one of these jumps.
So, the odds against jumping to any particular destination, say the fox, by sheer luck, are easy to calculate.
They are simply the total number of biomorphs in the space.
As you can see, we  are embarking on another of those astronomical calculations.
There are nine genes, and each of them can take any of 19 values.
So the total number of biomorphs that we could jump to in a single step is 19 times itself 9 times over: 19 to the power 9.
This works out as about half a trillion biomorphs.
Paltry compared with Asimov's "haemoglobin number" , but still what I would call a large number.
If you started from the insect, and jumped like a demented flea half a trillion times, you could expect to arrive at the fox once.
What is all this telling us about real evolution?
Once again, it is ramming home the importance of gradual, step-by-step change.
There have been evolutionists who have denied that gradualism of this kind is necessary in evolution.
Our biomorph calculation shows us exactly one reason why gradual, step-by-step change is important.
When I say that you can expect evolution to jump from the insect to one of its immediate neighbours, but not to jump from the insect directly to the fox or the scorpion, what I exactly mean is the following.
If genuinely random jumps really occurred, then a jump from insect to scorpion would be perfectly possible.
Indeed it would be just as probable as a jump from insect to one of its immediate neighbours.
But it would also be just as probable as a jump to any other biomorph in the land.
And there's the rub.
For the number of biomorphs in the land is half a trillion, and if no one of them is any more probable as a destination than any other, the odds of jumping to any particular one are small enough to ignore.
Notice that it doesn't help us to assume that there is a powerful nonrandom "selection pressure" .
It wouldn't matter if you'd been promised a king's ransom if you achieved a lucky jump to the scorpion.
The odds against your doing so are still half a trillion to one.
But if, instead of jumping you walked, one step at a time, and were given one small coin as a reward every time you happened to take a step in the right direction, you would reach the scorpion in a very short time.
Not necessarily in the fastest possible time of 30 generations, but very fast, nevertheless.
Jumping could theoretically get you the prize faster — in a single hop.
But because of the astronomical odds against success, a series of small steps, each one building on the accumulated success of previous steps, is the only feasible way.
The tone of my previous paragraphs is open to a misunderstanding which I must dispel.
It sounds, once again, as though evolution deals in distant targets, homing in on things like scorpions.
As we have seen, it never does.
But if we think of our target as anything that would improve survival chances, the argument still works.
If an animal is a parent, it must be good enough to survive at least to adulthood.
It is  possible that a mutant child of that parent might be even better at surviving.
But if a child mutates in a big way, so that it has moved a long distance away from its parent in genetic space, what are the odds of its being better than its parent?
The answer is that the odds against are very large indeed.
And the reason is the one we have just seen with our biomorph model.
If the mutational jump we are considering is a very large one, the number of possible destinations of that jump is astronomically large.
And because, as we saw in Chapter 1, the number of different ways of being dead is so much greater than the number of different ways of being alive, the chances are very high that a big random jump in genetic space will end in death.
Even a small random jump in genetic space is pretty likely to end in death.
But the smaller the jump the less likely death is, and the more likely is it that the jump will result in improvement.
We shall return to this theme in a later chapter.
That is as far as I want to go in drawing morals from Biomorph Land.
I hope that you didn't find it too abstract.
There is another mathematical space filled, not with nine-gened biomorphs but with flesh and blood animals made of billions of cells, each containing tens of thousands of genes.
This is not biomorph space but real genetic space.
The actual animals that have ever lived on Earth are a tiny subset of the theoretical animals that could exist.
These real animals are the products of a very small number of evolutionary trajectories through genetic space.
The vast majority of theoretical trajectories through animal space give rise to impossible monsters.
Real animals are dotted around here and there among the hypothetical monsters, each perched in its own unique place in genetic hyperspace.
Each real animal is surrounded by a little cluster of neighbours, most of whom have never existed, but a few of whom are its ancestors, its descendants and its cousins.
Sitting somewhere in this huge mathematical space are humans and hyenas, amoebas and aardvarks, flatworms and squids, dodos and dinosaurs.
In theory, if we were skilled enough at genetic engineering, we could move from any point in animal space to any other point.
From any starting point we could move through the maze in such a way as to recreate the dodo, the tyrannosaur and trilobites.
If only we knew which genes to tinker with, which bits of chromosome to duplicate, invert or delete.
I doubt if we shall ever know enough to do it, but these dear dead creatures are lurking there forever in their private corners of that huge genetic hypervolume, waiting to be found if we but had the knowledge to navigate the right course through the maze.
We might even be able to evolve an exact reconstruction of a  dodo by selectively breeding pigeons, though we'd have to live a million years in order to complete the experiment.
But when we are prevented from making a journey in reality, the imagination is not a bad substitute.
For those, like me, who are not mathematicians, the computer can be a powerful friend to the imagination.
Like mathematics, it doesn't only stretch the imagination.
It also disciplines and controls it.
Making tracks through animal space
As we saw in Chapter 2, many people find it hard to believe that something like the eye, Paley's favourite example, so complex and well designed, with so many interlocking working parts, could have arisen from small beginnings by a gradual series of step-by-step changes.
Let's return to the problem in the light of such new intuitions as the biomorphs may have given us.
Answer the following two questions: 1.
Could the human eye have arisen directly from no eye at all, in a single step? 2.
Could the human eye have arisen directly from something slightly different from itself, something that we may call X?
The answer to Question I is clearly a decisive no.
The odds against a "yes" answer for questions like Question 1 are many billions of times greater than the number of atoms in the universe.
It would need a gigantic and vanishingly improbable leap across genetic hyperspace.
The answer to Question 2 is equally clearly yes, provided only that the difference between the modern eye and its immediate predecessor X is sufficiently small.
Provided, in other words, that they are sufficiently close to one another in the space of all possible structures.
If the answer to Question 2 for any particular degree of difference is no, all we have to do is repeat the question for a smaller degree of difference.
Carry on doing this until we find a degree of difference sufficiently small to give us a "yes" answer to Question 2.
X is defined as something very like a human eye, sufficiently similar that the human eye could plausibly have arisen by a single alteration in X. If you have a mental picture of X and you find it   implausible that the human eye could have arisen directly from it, this simply means that you have chosen the wrong K. Make your mental picture of X progressively more like a human eye, until you find an K that you do find plausible as an immediate predecessor to the human eye.
There has to be one for you, even if your idea of what is plausible may be more, or less, cautious than mine!
Now, having found an K such that the answer to Question 2 is yes, we apply the same question to X itself.
By the same reasoning we must conclude that K could plausibly have arisen, directly by a single change, from something slightly different again, which we may call K".
Obviously we can then trace X "back to something else slightly different from it, X" , and so on.
By interposing a large enough series of Ks, we can derive the human eye from something not slightly different from itself but very different from itself.
We can "walk" a large distance across "animal space" , and our move will be plausible provided we take small-enough steps.
We are now in a position to answer a third question: 3.
Is there a continuous series of Xs connecting the modern human eye to a state with no eye at all?
It seems to me clear that the answer has to be yes, provided only that we allow ourselves a sufficiently large series of Ks.
You might feel that 1,000 Ks is ample, but if you need more steps to make the total transition plausible in you mind, simply allow yourself to assume 10,000 Ks.
And if 10,000 is not enough for you, allow yourself 100,000, and so on.
Obviously the available time imposes an upper ceiling on this game, for there can be only one K per generation.
In practice the question therefore resolves itself into: Has there been enough time for enough successive generations?
We can't give a precise answer to the number of generations that would be necessary.
What we do know is that geological time is awfully long.
Just to give you an idea of the order of magnitude we are talking about, the number of generations that separate us from our earliest ancestors is certainly measured in the thousands of millions.
Given, say, a hundred million Ks, we should be able to construct a plausible series of tiny gradations linking a human eye to just about anything!
So far, by a process of more-or-less abstract reasoning, we have concluded that there is a series of imaginable Ks, each sufficiently similar to its neighbours that it could plausibly turn into one of its neighbours, the whole series linking the human eye back to no eye at all.
But we still haven't demonstrated that it is plausible that this series of Ks actually existed.
We have two more questions to answer.
4.
Considering each member of the series of hypothetical Ks connecting the human eye to no eye at all, is it plausible that every one of them was made available by random mutation of its predecessor?
This is really a question about embryology, not genetics; and it is an entirely separate question from the one that worried the Bishop of Birmingham and others.
Mutation has to work by modifying the existing processes of embryonic development.
It is arguable that certain kinds of embryonic process are highly amenable to variation in certain directions, recalcitrant to variation in others.
I shall return to this matter in Chapter 11, so here I'll just stress again the difference between small change and large.
The smaller the change you postulate, the smaller the difference between X "and X" , the more embryo-logically plausible is the mutation concerned.
In the previous chapter we saw, on purely statistical grounds, that any particular large mutation is inherently less probable than any particular small mutation.
Whatever problems may be raised by Question 4, then, we can at least see that the smaller we make the difference between any given X "and X" , the smaller will be the problems.
My feeling is that, provided the difference between neighbouring intermediates in our series leading to the eye is sufficiently small, the necessary mutations are almost bound to be forthcoming.
We are, after all, always talking about minor quantitative changes in an existing embryonic process.
Remember that, however complicated the embryological status quo may be in any given generation, each mutational change in the status quo can be very small and simple.
We have one final question to answer: 5.
Considering each member of the series of Xs connecting the human eye to no eye at all, is it plausible that every one of them worked sufficiently well that it assisted the survival and reproduction of the animals concerned?
Rather oddly, some people have thought that the answer to this question is a self-evident "no" .
For instance, I quote from Francis Hitching's book of 1982 called The Neck of the Giraffe or Where Darwin Went Wrong.
I could have quoted basically the same words from almost any Jehovah's Witness tract, but I choose this book because a reputable publisher (Pan Books Ltd) saw fit to publish it, despite a very large number of errors which would quickly have been spotted if an unemployed biology graduate, or indeed undergraduate, had been asked to glance through the manuscript.
(My favourites, if you'll indulge me just two in-jokes, are the conferring of a knighthood  on Professor John Maynard Smith, and the description of Professor Ernst Mayr, that eloquent and most unmathematical arch-critic of mathematical genetics, as "the high priest" of mathematical genetics.)
For the eye to work the following minimum perfectly coordinated steps have to take place (there are many others happening simultaneously, but even a grossly simplified description is enough to point up the problems for Darwinian theory).
The eye must be clean and moist, maintained in this state by the interaction of the tear gland and movable eyelids, whose eyelashes also act as a crude filter against the sun.
The light then passes through a small transparent section of the protective outer coating (the cornea), and continues via a lens which focuses it on the back of the retina.
Here 130 million light-sensitive rods and cones cause photochemical reactions which transform the light into electrical impulses.
Some 1,000 million of these are transmitted every second, by means that are not properly understood, to a brain which then takes appropriate action.
Now it is quite evident that if the slightest thing goes wrong en route if the cornea is fuzzy, or the pupil fails to dilate, or the lens becomes opaque, or the focussing goes wrong — then a recognizable image is not formed.
The eye either functions as a whole, or not at all.
So how did it come to evolve by slow, steady, infinitesimally small Darwinian improvements?
Is it really plausible that thousands upon thousands of lucky chance mutations happened coincidentally so that the lens and the retina, which cannot work without each other, evolved in synchrony?
What survival value can there be in an eye that doesn't see?
This remarkable argument is very frequently made, presumably because people want to believe its conclusion.
Consider the statement that "if the slightest thing goes wrong…if the focusing goes wrong a recognizable image is not formed" .
The odds cannot be far from 50/50 that you are reading these words through glass lenses.
Take them off and look around.
Would you agree that "a recognizable image is not formed" ?
If you are male, the odds are about 1 in 12 that you are colourblind.
You may well be astigmatic.
It is not unlikely that, without glasses, your vision is a misty blur.
One of today's most distinguished (though not yet knighted) evolutionary theorists so seldom cleans his glasses that his vision is probably a misty blur anyway, but he seems to get along pretty well and, by his own account, he used to play a mean game of monocular squash.
If you have lost your glasses, it may be that you upset your friends by failing to recognize them in the street.
But you yourself would be even more upset if somebody said to you: "Since your vision is now not absolutely perfect, you might as well go around with your eyes tight shut until you find your glasses again." 
Yet that is essentially what the author of the passage I have quoted is suggesting.
He also states, as though it were obvious, that the lens and the retina cannot work without each other.
On what authority?
Someone close to me has had a cataract operation in both eyes.
She has no lenses in her eyes at all.
Without glasses she couldn't even begin to play lawn tennis or aim a rifle.
But she assures me that you are far better off with a lensless eye than with no eye at all.
You can tell if you are about to walk into a wall or another person.
If you were a wild creature, you could certainly use your lensless eye to detect the looming shape of a predator, and the direction from which it was approaching.
In a primitive world where some creatures had no eyes at all and others had lensless eyes, the ones with lensless eyes would have all sorts of advantages.
And there is a continuous series of Ks, such that each tiny improvement in sharpness of image, from swimming blur to perfect human vision, plausibly increases the organism's chances of surviving.
The book goes on to quote Stephen Jay Gould, the noted Harvard palaeontologist, as saying: We avoid the excellent question, What good is 5 percent of an eye? by arguing that the possessor of such an incipient structure did not use it for sight.
An ancient animal with 5 per cent of an eye might indeed have used it for something other than sight, but it seems to me at least as likely that it used it for 5 per cent vision.
And actually I don't think it is an excellent question.
Vision that is 5 per cent as good as yours or mine is very much worth having in comparison with no vision at all.
So is I per cent vision better than total blindness.
And 6 per cent is better than 5, 7 per cent better than 6, and so on up the gradual, continuous series.
This kind of problem has worried some people interested in animals that gain protection from predators by "mimicry" .
Stick insects look like sticks and so are saved from being eaten by birds.
Leaf insects look like leaves.
Many edible species of butterfly gain protection by resembling noxious or poisonous species.
These resemblances are far more impressive than the resemblance of clouds to weasels.
In many cases they are more impressive than the resemblance of "my" insects to real insects.
Real insects, after all, have six legs, not eight!
Real natural selection has had a least a million times as many generations as I had, in which to perfect the resemblance.
We use the word "mimicry" for these cases, not because we think that the animals consciously imitate other things, but because natural selection has favoured those individuals whose bodies were mistaken for other things.
To put it another way, ancestors of stick insects that did not resemble sticks did not leave descendants.
The German-American geneticist Richard Goldschmidt is the most distinguished of those who  have argued that the early evolution of such resemblances could not have been favoured by natural selection.
As Gould, an admirer of Goldschmidt, said of dung-mimicking insects: "can there be any edge in looking 5 per cent like a turd?" 
Largely through Gould's influence, it has recently become fashionable to say that Goldschmidt was underrated in his own lifetime, and that he really has much to teach us.
Here is a sample of his reasoning.
Ford speaks of any mutation which chances to give a "remote resemblance" to a more protected species, from which some advantage, however slight, might accrue.
We must ask how remote the resemblance can be to have selective value.
Can we really assume that the birds and monkeys and also mantids are such wonderful observers (or that some very clever ones among them are) to notice a "remote" resemblance and be repelled by it?
I think that this is asking too much.
Such sarcasm ill becomes anybody on the shaky ground that Goldschmidt here treads.
Wonderful observers?
Very clever ones among them?
Anybody would think the birds and monkeys benefited from being fooled by the remote resemblance!
Goldschmidt might rather have said: "Can we really assume that the birds, etc. are such poor observers (or that some very stupid ones among them are)?" 
Nevertheless, there is a real dilemma here.
The initial resemblance of the ancestral stick insect to a stick must have been very remote.
A bird would need extremely poor vision to be fooled by it.
Yet the resemblance of a modern stick insect to a stick is marvellously good, down to the last fine details of fake buds and leaf-scars.
The birds whose selective predation put the finishing touches to their evolution must, at least collectively, have had excellently good vision.
They must have been extremely hard to fool, otherwise the insects would not have evolved to become as perfect mimics as they are: they would have remained relatively imperfect mimics.
How can we resolve this apparent contradiction?
One kind of answer suggests that bird vision has been improving over the same evolutionary timespan as insect camouflage.
Perhaps, to be a little facetious, an ancestral insect that looked only 5 per cent like a turd would have fooled an ancestral bird with only 5 per cent vision.
But that is not the kind of answer I want to give.
I suspect, indeed, that the whole process of evolution, from remote resemblance to near perfect mimicry, has gone on, rather rapidly, many times over in different insect groups, during the whole long period that bird vision has been just about as good as it is today.
Another kind of answer that has been offered to the dilemma is the following.
Perhaps each species of bird or monkey has poor vision and  latches onto just one limited aspect of an insect.
Maybe one predator species notices only the colour, another only the shape, another only the texture, and so on.
Then an insect that resembles a stick in only one limited respect will fool one kind of predator, even though it is eaten by all other kinds of predators.
As evolution progresses, more and more features of resemblance are added to the repertoire of the insects.
The final multifaceted perfection of mimicry has been put together by the summed natural selection provided by many different species of predators.
No one predator sees the whole perfection of mimicry, only we do that.
This seems to imply that only we are "clever" enough to see the mimicry in all its glory.
Not only because of this human snobbishness, I prefer yet another explanation.
This is that, no matter how good any one predator's vision may be under some conditions, it can be exceedingly poor under other conditions.
We can easily, in fact, appreciate from our own familiar experience the whole spectrum from exceedingly poor vision to excellent vision.
If I am looking directly at a stick insect, 8 inches in front of my nose and in strong daylight, I shall not be fooled by it.
1 shall notice the long legs hugging the line of the trunk.
I may spot the unnatural symmetry which a real stick would not have.
But if I, with the very same eyes and brain, am walking through a forest at dusk, I may well fail to distinguish almost any dull-coloured insect from the twigs that abound everywhere.
The image of the insect may pass over the edge of my retina rather than the more acute central region.
The insect may be 50 yards away, and so make only a tiny image on my retina.
The light may be so poor that I can hardly see anything at all anyway.
In fact, it doesn't matter how remote, how poor is the resemblance of an insect to a stick, there must be some level of twilight, or some degree of distance away from the eye, or some degree of distraction of the predator's attention, such that even a very good eye will be fooled by the remote resemblance.
If you don't find that plausible for some particular example that you have imagined, just turn down the imaginary light a bit, or move a bit further away from the imaginary object!
The point is that many an insect was saved by an exceedingly slight resemblance to a twig or a leaf or a fall of dung, on occasions when it was far away from a predator, or on occasions when the predator was looking at it at dusk, or looking at it through a fog, or looking at it while distracted by a receptive female.
And many an insect was saved, perhaps from the very same predator, by an uncannily close resemblance to a twig, on occasions when the predator happened to be seeing it at relatively close range and in a good light.
The important thing about light intensity, distance of insect from predator, distance of image from centre of retina, and similar variables, is that they are all continuous variables.
They vary by insensible degrees all the way from the extreme of invisibility to the extreme of visibility.
Such continuous variables foster continuous and gradual evolution.
Richard Goldschmidt's problem — which was one of a set that made him resort, for most of his professional life, to the extreme belief that evolution takes great leaps rather than small steps — turns out to be no problem at all.
And incidentally, we have also demonstrated to ourselves, yet again, that 5 per cent vision is better than no vision at all.
The quality of my vision right at the edge of my retina is probably even poorer than 5 per cent of the quality at the centre of my retina, however you care to measure quality.
Yet I can still detect the presence of a large lorry or bus out of the extreme corner of my eye.
Since I ride a bicycle to work every day this fact has quite probably saved my life.
I notice the difference on those occasions when it is raining and I wear a hat.
The quality of our vision on a dark night must be far poorer than 5 per cent of what it is at midday.
Yet many an ancestor was probably saved through seeing something that really mattered, a sabre-tooth "tiger" perhaps, or a precipice, in the middle of the night.
Every one of us knows from personal experience, for example on dark nights, that there is an insensibly graded continuous series running all the way from total blindness up to perfect vision, and that every step along this series confers significant benefits.
By looking at the world through progressively defocused and focused binoculars, we can quickly convince ourselves that there is a graded series of focusing quality, each step in the series being an improvement over the previous one.
By progressively turning the colour-balance knob of a colour television set, we can convince ourselves that there is a graded series of progressive improvement from black and white to full colour vision.
The iris diaphragm that opens and shuts the pupil prevents us from being dazzled in bright light, while allowing us to see in dim light.
We all experience what it is like not to have an iris diaphragm, when we are momentarily dazzled by oncoming car headlights.
Unpleasant, and even dangerous, as this dazzling can be, it still doesn't mean that the whole eye ceases to work!
The claim that "The eye either functions as a whole, or not at all" turns out to be, not merely false but self-evidently false to anybody who thinks for 2 seconds about his own familiar experience.
Let us return to our Question.
Considering each member of the series of Ks connecting the human eye to no eye at all, is it plausible  that every one of them worked sufficiently well that it assisted the survival and reproduction of the animals concerned?
We have now seen the silliness of the anti-evolutionist's assumption that the answer is an obvious no.
But is the answer yes?
It is less obvious, but I think that it is.
Not only is it clear that part of an eye is better than no eye at all.
We also can find a plausible series of intermediates among modern animals.
This doesn't mean, of course, that these modern intermediates really represent ancestral types.
But it does show that intermediate designs are capable of working.
Some single-celled animals have a light-sensitive spot with a little pigment screen behind it.
The screen shields it from light coming from one direction, which gives it some "idea" of where the light is coming from.
Among many-celled animals, various types of worm and some shellfish have a similar arrangement, but the pigment-backed light-sensitive cells are set in a little cup.
This gives slightly better direction-finding capability, since each cell is selectively shielded from light rays coming into the cup from its own side.
In a continuous series from flat sheet of light-sensitive cells, through shallow cup to deep cup, each step in the series, however small (or large) the step, would be an optical improvement.
Now, if you make a cup very deep and turn the sides over, you eventually make a lensless pinhole camera.
There is a continuously graded series from shallow cup to pinhole camera (see, for illustration, the first seven generations of the evolutionary series in Figure 4).
A pinhole camera forms a definite image, the smaller the pinhole the sharper (but dimmer) the image, the larger the pinhole the brighter (but fuzzier) the image.
The swimming mollusc Nautilus, a rather strange squid-like creature that lives in a shell like the extinct ammonites and belemnites (see the "shelled cephalopod" of Figure 5), has a pair of pinhole cameras for eyes.
The eye is basically the same shape as ours, but there is no lens and the pupil is just a hole that lets the seawater into the hollow interior of the eye.
Actually, Nautilus is a bit of a puzzle in its own right.
Why, in all the hundreds of millions of years since its ancestors first evolved a pinhole eye, did it never discover the principle of the lens?
The advantage of a lens is that it allows the image to be both sharp and bright.
What is worrying about Nautilus is that the quality of its retina suggests that it would really benefit, greatly and immediately, from a lens.
It is like a hi-fi system with an excellent amplifier fed by a gramophone with a blunt needle.
The system is crying out for a particular simple change.
In genetic hyperspace, Nautilus appears to be sitting right next door to an obvious and immediate improvement, yet it doesn't take the small step  necessary.
Why not?
Michael Land of Sussex University, our foremost authority on invertebrate eyes, is worried, and so am I. Is it that the necessary mutations cannot arise, given the way Nautilus embryos develop?
I don't want to believe it, but I don't have a better explanation.
At least Nautilus dramatizes the point that a lensless eye is better than no eye at all.
When you have a cup for an eye, almost any vaguely convex, vaguely transparent or even translucent material over its opening will constitute an improvement, because of its slight lens-like properties.
It collects light over its area and concentrates it on a smaller area of retina.
Once such a crude proto-lens is there, there is a continuously graded series of improvements, thickening it and making it more transparent and less distorting, the trend culminating in what we would all recognize as a true lens.
Nautilus's relatives, the squids and octopuses, have a true lens, very like ours although their ancestors certainly evolved the whole camera-eye principle completely independently of ours.
Incidentally, Michael Land reckons that there are nine basic principles for image-forming that eyes use, and that most of them have evolved many times independently.
For instance, the curved dish-reflector principle is radically different from our own camera-eye (we use it in radiotelescopes, and also in our largest optical telescopes because it is easier to make a large mirror than a large lens), and it has been independently "invented" by various molluscs and crustaceans.
Other crustaceans have a compound eye like insects (really a bank of lots of tiny eyes), while other molluscs, as we have seen, have a lensed camera-eye like ours, or a pinhole camera-eye.
For each of these types of eye, stages corresponding to evolutionary intermediates exist as working eyes among other modern animals.
Anti-evolution propaganda is full of alleged examples of complex systems that "could not possibly" have passed through a gradual series of intermediates.
This is often just another case of the rather pathetic "Argument from Personal Incredulity" that we met in Chapter 2.
Immediately after the section on the eye, for example, The Neck of the Giraffe goes on to discuss the bombardier beetle, which squirts a lethal mixture of hydroquinone and hydrogen peroxide into the face of its enemy.
These two chemicals, when mixed together, literally explode.
So in order to store them inside its body, the Bombardier Beetle has evolved a chemical inhibitor to make them harmless.
At the moment the beetle squirts the liquid out of its tail, an anti-inhibitor is added to make the mixture explosive once again.
The chain of events that could have led to the evolution of such a complex, coordinated and subtle process is beyond biological explanation on a simple step-by-step basis.
The slightest  alteration in the chemical balance would result immediately in a race of exploded beetles.
A biochemist colleague has kindly provided me with a bottle of hydrogen peroxide, and enough hydroquinone for 50 bombardier beetles.
I am now about to mix the two together.
According to the above, they will explode in my face.
Here goes…
Well, I'm still here.
I poured the hydrogen peroxide into the hydroquinone, and absolutely nothing happened.
It didn't even get warm.
Of course I knew it wouldn't: I'm not that foolhardy!
The statement that "these two chemicals, when mixed together, literally explode" , is, quite simply, false, although it is regularly repeated throughout creationist literature.
If you are curious about the bombardier beetle, by the way, what actually happens is as follows.
It is true that it squirts a scaldingly hot mixture of hydrogen peroxide and hydroquinone at enemies.
But hydrogen peroxide and hydroquinone don't react violently together unless a catalyst is added.
This is what the bombardier beetle does.
As for the evolutionary precursors of the system, both hydrogen peroxide and various kinds of quinones are used for other purposes in body chemistry.
The bombardier beetle's ancestors simply pressed into different service chemicals that already happened to be around.
That's often how evolution works.
On the same page of the book as the bombardier beetle passage is the question: "What use would be…half a lung?
Natural selection would surely eliminate creatures with such oddities, not preserve them."
In a healthy adult human, each of the two lungs is divided into about 300 million tiny chambers, at the tips of a branching system of tubes.
The architecture of these tubes resembles the biomorph tree at the bottom of Figure 2 in the previous chapter.
In that tree, the number of successive branchings, determined by "Gene 9" , is eight, and the number of twig tips is 2 to the power 8, or 256.
As you go down the page in Figure 2, the number of twig tips successively doubles.
In order to provide 300 million twig tips, only 29 successive doublings would be required.
Note that there is a continuous gradation from a single chamber to 300 million tiny chambers, each step in the gradation being provided by another two-way branching.
This transition can be accomplished in 29 branchings, which we may naively think of as a stately walk of 29 steps across genetic space.
In the lungs, the result of all this branching is that the surface area inside each lung is rather more than 70 square yards.
Area is the important variable for a lung, for it is area that determines the rate at which oxygen can be taken in, and waste carbon dioxide pushed out.
Now, the thing about area is that it is a continuous variable.
Area is  not one of those things that you either have or you don't.
It is a thing that you can have a little bit more of, or a little bit less of.
More than most things, lung area lends itself to gradual, step-by-step change, all the way from 0 square yards up to 70 square yards.
There are plenty of surgical patients walking around with only one lung, and some of them are down to a third of normal lung area.
They may be walking, but they aren't walking very far, nor very fast.
That is the point.
The effect of gradually reducing lung area is not an absolute, all-or-none effect on survival.
It is a gradual, continuously varying effect on how far you can walk, and how fast.
A gradual, continuously varying effect, indeed, on how long you can expect to live.
Death doesn't suddenly arrive below a particular threshold lung area!
It becomes gradually more probable as lung area decreases below an optimum (and as it increases above the same optimum, for different reasons connected with economic waste).
The first of our ancestors to develop lungs almost certainly lived in water.
We can get an idea of how they might have breathed by looking at modern fish.
Most modern fish breathe in water with gills, but many species living in foul, swampy water supplement this by gulping air at the surface.
They use the internal chamber of the mouth as a kind of crude proto-lung, and this cavity is sometimes enlarged into a breathing pocket rich in blood vessels.
As we've seen, there is no problem in imagining a continuous series of Ks connecting a single pocket to a branching set of 300 million pockets as in a modern human lung.
Interestingly, many modern fish have kept their pocket single, and use it for a completely different purpose.
Although it probably began as a lung, over the course of evolution it has become the swimbladder, an ingenious device with which the fish maintains itself as a hydrostat in permanent equilibrium.
An animal without an air bladder inside it is normally slightly heavier than water, so sinks to the bottom.
This is why sharks have to swim continuously to stop themselves sinking.
An animal with large air pockets inside it, like us with our great lungs, tends to rise to the surface.
Somewhere in the middle of this continuum, an animal with an air bladder of exactly the right size neither sinks nor rises, but floats steadily in effortless equilibrium.
This is the trick that modern fish, other than sharks, have perfected.
Unlike sharks, they don't waste energy preventing themselves from sinking.
Their fins and tail are freed for guidance and rapid propulsion.
They no longer rely on outside air to fill the bladder, but have special glands for manufacturing gas.
Using these glands and other means, they accurately regulate the pressure of gas in the bladder, and hence keep themselves in precise hydrodynamic equilibrium.
Several species of modern fish can leave the water.
An extreme is the Indian climbing perch, which hardly ever goes into the water.
It has independently evolved a quite different kind of lung from that of our ancestors — an air chamber surrounding the gills.
Other fish live basically in water but make brief forays out of it.
This is probably what our ancestors did.
The thing about forays is that their duration can vary continuously, all the way down to zero.
If you are a fish who basically lives and breathes in water, but who occasionally ventures on land, perhaps to cross from one mud puddle to another thereby surviving a drought, you might benefit not just from half a lung but from one-hundredth of a lung.
It doesn't matter how small your primordial lung is, there must be some time out of water that you can just endure with the lung, which is a little bit longer than you could have endured without the lung.
Time is a continuous variable.
There is no hard-and-fast divide between water-breathing and air-breathing animals.
Different animals may spend 99 per cent of their time in water, 98 per cent, 97 per cent , and so on all the way to 0 per cent .
At every step of the way, some fractional increase in lung area will be an advantage.
There is continuity, gradualism, all the way.
What use is half a wing?
How did wings get their start?
Many animals leap from bough to bough, and sometimes fall to the ground.
Especially in a small animal, the whole body surface catches the air and assists the leap, or breaks the fall, by acting as a crude aerofoil.
Any tendency to increase the ratio of surface area to weight would help, for example flaps of skin growing out in the angles of joints.
From here, there is a continuous series of gradations to gliding wings, and hence to flapping wings.
Obviously there are distances that could not have been jumped by the earliest animals with proto-wings.
Equally obviously, for any degree of smallness or crudeness of ancestral air-catching surfaces, there must be some distance, however short, which can be jumped with the flap and which cannot be jumped without the flap.
Or, if prototype wingflaps worked to break the animal's fall, you cannot say "Below a certain size the flaps would have been of no use at all" .
Once again, it doesn't matter how small and un-winglike the first wingflaps were.
There must be some height, call it h, such that an animal would just break its neck if it fell from that height, but would just survive if it fell from a slightly lower height.
In this critical zone, any improvement in the body surface's ability to catch the air and break the fall, however slight that improvement, can make the difference between life and death.
Natural selection will then favour slight, prototype wingflaps.
When these small wingflaps have become the norm, the critical height h will become slightly greater.
Now a  slight further increase in the wingflaps will make the difference between life and death.
And so on, until we have proper wings.
There are animals alive today that beautifully illustrate every stage in the continuum.
There are frogs that glide with big webs between their toes, tree-snakes with flattened bodies that catch the air, lizards with flaps along their bodies; and several different kinds of mammals that glide with membranes stretched between their limbs, showing us the kind of way bats must have got their start.
Contrary to the creationist literature, not only are animals with "half a wing" common, so are animals with a quarter of a wing, three quarters of a wing, and so on.
The idea of a flying continuum becomes even more persuasive when we remember that very small animals tend to float gently in air, whatever their shape.
The reason this is persuasive is that there is an infinitesimally graded continuum from small to large.
The idea of tiny changes cumulated over many steps is an immensely powerful idea, capable of explaining an enormous range of things that would be otherwise inexplicable.
How did snake venom get its start?
Many animals bite, and any animal's spit contains proteins which, if they get into a wound, may cause an allergic reaction.
Even so-called non-venomous snakes can give bites that cause a painful reaction in some people.
There is a continuous, graded series from ordinary spit to deadly venom.
How did ears get their start?
Any piece of skin can detect vibrations if they come in contact with vibrating objects.
This is a natural outgrowth of the sense of touch.
Natural selection could easily have enhanced this faculty by gradual degrees until it was sensitive enough to pick up very slight contact vibrations.
At this point it would automatically have been sensitive enough to pick up airborne vibrations of sufficient loudness and/or sufficient nearness of origin.
Natural selection would then favour the evolution of special organs — ears — for picking up airborne vibrations originating from steadily increasing distances.
It is easy to see that there would have been a continuous trajectory of step-by-step improvement, all the way.
How did echolocation get its start?
Any animal that can hear at all may hear echoes.
Blind humans frequently learn to make use of these echoes.
A rudimentary version of such a skill in ancestral mammals would have provided ample raw material for natural selection to build upon, leading up by gradual degrees to the high perfection of bats.
Five per cent vision is better than no vision at all.
Five per cent hearing is better than no hearing at all.
Five per cent flight efficiency is better than no flight at all.
It is thoroughly believable that every organ or apparatus that we actually see is the product of a smooth trajectory  through animal space, a trajectory in which every intermediate stage assisted survival and reproduction.
Wherever we have an X in a real live animal, where X is some organ too complex to have arisen by chance in a single step, then according to the theory of evolution by natural selection it must be the case that a fraction of an X is better than no X at all A and two fractions of an X must be better than one; and a whole X must be better than nine-tenths of an X. I have no trouble at all in accepting that these statements are true of eyes, ears including bat ears, wings, camouflaged and mimicking insects, snake jaws, stings, cuckoo habits and all the other examples trotted out in antievolution propaganda.
No doubt there are plenty of conceivable Ks for which these statements would not be true, plenty of conceivable evolutionary pathways for which the intermediates would not be improvements on their predecessors.
But those Ks are not found in the real world.
Darwin wrote (in The Origin of Species): If it could be demonstrated that any complex organ existed which could not possibly have been formed by numerous successive slight modifications, my theory would absolutely break down.
One hundred and twenty five years on, we know a lot more about animals and plants than Darwin did, and still not a single case is known to me of a complex organ that could not have been formed by numerous successive slight modifications.
I do not believe that such a case will ever be found.
If it is — it'll have to be a really complex organ, and, as we'll see in later chapters, you have to be sophisticated about what you mean by "slight" — I shall cease to believe in Darwinism.
Sometimes the history of gradual, intermediate stages is clearly written into the shape of modern animals, even taking the form of outright imperfections in the final design.
Stephen Gould, in his excellent essay on The Pan da"s Thumb, has made the point that evolution can be more strongly supported by evidence of telling imperfections than by evidence of perfection.
I shall give just two examples.
Fish living on the sea bottom benefit by being flat and hugging the contours.
There are two very different kinds of flat fish living on the sea bottom, and they have evolved their flatness in quite different ways.
The skates and rays, relatives of sharks, have become flat in what might be called the obvious way.
Their bodies have grown out sideways to form great"wings'.
They are like sharks that have passed under a steam roller, but they remain symmetrical and "the right way up" .
Plaice, sole, halibut and their relatives have become flat in a different way.
They are bony fish (with swimbladders) related to  herrings, trout, etc., and are nothing to do with sharks.
Unlike sharks, bony fish as a rule have a marked tendency to be flattened in a vertical direction.
A herring, for instance, is much "taller" than it is wide.
It uses its whole, vertically flattened body as a swimming surface, which undulates through the water as it swims.
It was natural, therefore, that when the ancestors of plaice and sole took to the sea bottom, they should have lain on one side rather than on the belly like the ancestors of skates and rays.
But this raised the problem that one eye was always looking down into the sand and was effectively useless.
In evolution this problem was solved by the lower eye "moving" round to the upper side.
We see this process of moving round re-enacted in the development of every young bony flatfish.
A young flatfish starts life swimming near the surface, and it is symmetrical and vertically flattened just like a herring.
But then the skull starts to grow in a strange, asymmetrical, twisted fashion, so that one eye, for instance the left, moves over the top of the head to finish up on the other side.
The young fish settles on the bottom, with both its eyes looking upwards, a strange Picasso-like vision.
Incidentally, some species of flatfish settle on the right side, others on the left, and others on either side.
The whole skull of a bony flatfish retains the twisted and distorted evidence of its origins.
Its very imperfection is powerful testimony of its ancient history, a history of step-by-step change rather than of deliberate design.
No sensible designer would have conceived such a monstrosity if given a free hand to create a flatfish on a clean drawing board.
I suspect that most sensible designers would think in terms of something more like a skate.
But evolution never starts from a clean drawing board.
It has to start from what is already there.
In the case of the ancestors of skates this was free-swimming sharks.
Sharks in general aren't flattened from side to side as free-swimming bony fish like herrings are.
If anything, sharks are already slightly flattened from back to belly.
This meant that when some ancient sharks first took to the sea bottom, there was an easy smooth progression to the skate shape, with each intermediate being a slight improvement, given bottom conditions, over its slightly less flattened predecessor.
On the other hand, when the free-swimming ancestor of plaice and halibut, being, like a herring, vertically flattened from side to side, took to the bottom, it was better off lying on its side than balancing precariously on its knife edge of a belly!
Even though its evolutionary course was eventually destined to lead it into the complicated and probably costly distortions involved in having two eyes on one side, even though the skate way of being a flat fish might ultimately have  been the best design for bony fish too, the would-be intermediates that set out along this evolutionary pathway apparently did less well in the short term than their rivals lying on their side.
The rivals lying on their side were so much better, in the short term, at hugging the bottom.
In genetic hyperspace, there is a smooth trajectory connecting free-swimming ancestral bony fish to flatfish lying on their side with twisted skulls.
There is not a smooth trajectory connecting these bony fish ancestors to flatfish lying on their belly.
There is such a trajectory in theory, but it passes through intermediates that would have been — in the short term, which is all that matters — unsuccessful if they had ever been called into existence.
My second example of an evolutionary progression that didn't happen because of disadvantageous intermediates, even though it might ultimately have turned out better if it had, concerns the retina of our eyes (and all other vertebrates).
Like any nerve, the optic nerve is a trunk cable, a bundle of separate "insulated" wires, in this case about three million of them.
Each of the three million wires leads from one cell in the retina to the brain.
You can think of them as the wires leading from a bank of three million photocells (actually three million relay stations gathering information from an even larger number of photocells) to the computer that is to process the information in the brain.
They are gathered together from all over the retina into a single bundle, which is the optic nerve for that eye.
Any engineer would naturally assume that the photocells would point towards the light, with their wires leading backwards towards the brain.
He would laugh at any suggestion that the photocells might point away from the light, with their wires departing on the side nearest the light.
Yet this is exactly what happens in all vertebrate retinas.
Each photocell is, in effect, wired in backwards, with its wire sticking out on the side nearest the light.
The wire has to travel over the surface of the retina, to a point where it dives through a hole in the retina (the so-called "blind spot" ) to join the optic nerve.
This means that the light, instead of being granted an unrestricted passage to the photocells, has to pass through a forest of connecting wires, pre-sumably suffering at least some attenuation and distortion (actually probably not much but, still, it is the principle of the thing that would offend any tidy-minded engineer!).
I don't know the exact explanation for this strange state of affairs.
The relevant period of evolution is so long ago.
But I am ready to bet that it had something to do with the trajectory, the pathway through the real-life equivalent of Biomorph Land, that would have to be traversed in order to turn the retina the right way round, starting from  whatever ancestral organ preceded the eye.
There probably is such a trajectory, but that hypothetical trajectory, when realized in actual bodies of intermediate animals, proved disadvantageous temporarily disadvantageous only, but that is enough.
Intermediates could see even less well than their imperfect ancestors, and it is no consolation that they are building better eyesight for their remote descendants!
What matters is survival in the here and now.
 "Dollo's Law" states that evolution is irreversible.
This is often confused with a lot of idealistic nonsense about the inevitability of progress, often coupled with ignorant nonsense about evolution "violating the Second Law of Thermodynamics" (those that belong to the half of the educated population that, according to the novelist C. P. Snow, know what the Second Law is, will realize that it is no more violated by evolution than it is violated by the growth of a baby).
There is no reason why general trends in evolution shouldn't be reversed.
If there is a trend towards large antlers for a while in evolution, there can easily be a subsequent trend towards smaller antlers again.
Dollo's Law is really just a statement about the statistical improbability of following exactly the same evolutionary trajectory twice (or, indeed, any particular trajectory), in either direction.
A single mutational step can easily be reversed.
But for larger numbers of mutational steps, even in the case of the biomorphs with their nine little genes, the mathematical space of all possible trajectories is so vast that the chance of two trajectories ever arriving at the same point becomes vanishingly small.
This is even more true of real animals with their vastly larger numbers of genes.
There is nothing mysterious or mystical about Dollo's Law, nor is it something that we go out and "test" in nature.
It follows simply from the elementary laws of probability.
For just the same reason, it is vanishingly improbable that exactly the same evolutionary pathway should ever be travelled twice.
And it would seem similarly improbable, for the same statistical reasons, that two lines of evolution should converge on exactly the same endpoint from different starting points.
It is all the more striking a testimony to the power of natural selection, therefore, that numerous examples can be found in real nature, in which independent lines of evolution appear to have converged, from very different starting points, on what looks very like the same endpoint.
When we look in detail we find — it would be worrying if we didn't — that the convergence is not total.
The different lines of evolution betray their independent origins in numerous points of detail.
For instance, octopus eyes are very like ours, but the wires leading  from their photocells don't point forwards towards the light, as ours do.
Octopus eyes are, in this respect, more "sensibly" designed.
They have arrived at a similar endpoint, from a very different starting point.
And the fact is betrayed in details such as this.
Such superficially convergent resemblances are often extremely striking, and I shall devote the rest of the chapter to some of them.
They provide most impressive demonstrations of the power of natural selection to put together good designs.
Yet the fact that the superficially similar designs also differ, testifies to their independent evolutionary origins and histories.
The basic rationale is that, if a design is good enough to evolve once, the same design principle is good enough to evolve twice, from different starting points, in different parts of the animal kingdom.
This is nowhere better illustrated than in the case we used for our basic illustration of good design itself — echolocation.
Most of what we know about echolocation comes from bats (and human instruments), but it also occurs in a number of other unrelated groups of animals.
At least two separate groups of birds do it, and it has been carried to a very high level of sophistication by dolphins and whales.
Moreover, it was almost certainly "discovered" independently by at least two different groups of bats.
The birds that do it are the oilbirds of South America, and the cave swiftlets of the Far East, the ones whose nests are used for birds' nest soup.
Both types of bird nest deep in caves where little or no light penetrates, and both navigate through the blackness using echoes from their own vocal clicks.
In both cases the sounds are audible to humans, not ultrasonic like the more specialized bat clicks.
Indeed, neither bird species seems to have developed echolocation to such a pitch of sophistication as bats have.
Their clicks are not FM, nor do they appear suitable for Doppler-shift speed metering.
Probably, like the fruit bat Rousettus, they just time the silent interval between each click and its echo.
In this case we can be absolutely certain that the two bird species have invented echolocation independently of bats, and independently of each other.
The line of reasoning is of a kind that evolutionists frequently use.
We look at all the thousands of species of birds, and observe that the vast majority of them don't use echolocation.
Just two isolated little genera of birds do it, and those two have nothing else in common with each other except that both live in caves.
Although we believe that all birds and bats must have a common ancestor if we trace their lineages back far enough, that common ancestor was also the common ancestor of all mammals (including ourselves) and all birds.
The vast majority of mammals and the vast majority of birds don't use  echolocation, and it is highly probable that their common ancestor didn't either (nor did it fly — that is another technology that has been independently evolved several times).
It follows that the echolocation technology has been independently developed in bats and birds, just as it was independently developed by British, American and German scientists.
The same kind of reasoning, on a smaller scale, leads to the conclusion that the common ancestor of the oil-bird and the cave swiftlet also did not use echolocation, and that these two genera have developed the same technology independently of each other.
Within the mammals too, bats are not the only group to have independently developed the echolocation technology.
Several different kinds of mammals, for instance shrews, rats and seals, seem to use echoes to a small extent, as blind humans do, but the only animals to rival bats in sophistication are whales.
Whales are divided into two main groups, toothed whales and baleen whales.
Both, of course, are mammals descended from land-dwelling ancestors, and they may well have "invented" the whale way of life independently of one another , starting from different land-dwelling ancestors.
The toothed whales include sperm whales, killer whales and the various species of dolphins, all of which hunt relatively large prey such as fish and squids, which they catch in their jaws.
Several toothed whales, of which only dolphins have been thoroughly studied, have evolved sophisticated echo-sounding equipment in their heads.
Dolphins emit rapid trains of high-pitched clicks, some audible to us, some ultrasonic.
It is probable that the "melon" , the bulging dome on the front of a dolphin's head, looking — pleasing coincidence — like the weirdly bulging radar dome of a Nimrod "advance-warning" surveillance aircraft, has something to do with beaming the sonar signals forwards, but its exact workings are not understood.
As in the case of bats, there is a relatively slow "cruising rate" of clicking, rising to a high-speed (400 clicks per second) buzz when the animal is closing in on prey.
Even the "slow" cruising rate is pretty fast.
The river dolphins that live in muddy water are probably the most skilled echolocators, but some open-sea dolphins have been shown in tests to be pretty good too.
An Atlantic bottlenose dolphin can discriminate circles, squares and triangles (all of the same standardized area), using only its sonar.
It can tell which of two targets is the nearer, when the difference is only 1 1/4 inches at an overall distance of about 7 yards.
It can detect a steel sphere half the size of a golf ball, at a range of 70 yards.
This performance is not quite as good as human vision in a good light, but probably better than human vision in moonlight.
The intriguing suggestion has been made that dolphins, if they  chose to use it, have a potentially effortless means of communicating "mental pictures" to one another.
All that they would have to do is use their highly versatile voices to mimic the pattern of sound that would be produced by echoes from a particular object.
In this way they could convey to one another mental pictures of such objects.
There is no evidence for this delightful suggestion.
Theoretically, bats could do the same thing, but dolphins seem more likely candidates because they are in general more social.
They are also probably "cleverer" , but this isn't necessarily a relevant consideration.
The instruments that would be needed for communicating echo pictures are no more sophisticated than the instruments that both bats and dolphins already have for echolocating in the first place.
And there would seem to be an easy, gradual continuum between using the voice to make echoes and using it to mimic echoes.
At least two groups of bats then, two groups of birds, toothed whales, and probably several other kinds of mammals to a smaller extent, have all independently converged on the technology of sonar, at some time during the last hundred million years.
We have no way of knowing whether any other animals now extinct — pterodactyls perhaps?— also evolved the technology independently.
No insects and no fish have so far been found to use sonar, but two quite different groups of fish, one in South America and one in Africa, have developed a somewhat similar navigation system, which appears to be just about as sophisticated and which can be seen as a related, but different, solution to the same problem.
These are so-called weakly electric fish.
The word "weakly" is to differentiate them from strongly electric fish, which use electric fields, not to navigate, but to stun their prey.
The stunning technique, incidentally, has also been independently invented by several unrelated groups of fish, for example electric "eels" (which are not true eels but whose shape is convergent on true eels) and electric rays.
The South American and the African weakly electric fish are quite unrelated to each other, but both live in the same kinds of waters in their respective continents, waters that are too muddy for vision to be effective.
The physical principle that they exploit — electric fields in water — is even more alien to our consciousness than that of bats and dolphins.
We at least have a subjective idea of what an echo is, but we have almost no subjective idea of what it might be like to perceive an electric field.
We didn't even know of the existence of electricity until a couple of centuries ago.
We cannot as subjective human beings empathize with electric fish, but we can, as physicists, understand them.
It is easy to see on the dinner plate that the muscles down each side of any fish are arranged as a row of segments, a battery of muscle units.
In most fish they contract successively to throw the body into sinuous waves, which propel it forwards.
In electric fish, both strongly and weakly electric ones, they have become a battery in the electric sense.
Each segment ( "cell" ) of the battery generates a voltage.
These voltages are connected up in series along the length of the fish so that, in a strongly electric fish such as an electric eel, the whole battery generates as much as lamp at 650 volts.
An electric eel is powerful enough to knock a man out.
Weakly electric fish don't need high voltages or currents for their purposes, which are purely information-gathering ones.
The principle of electrolocation, as it has been called, is fairly well understood at the level of physics though not, of course, at the level of what it feels like to be an electric fish.
The following account applies equally to African and South American weakly electric fish: the convergence is that thorough.
Current flows from the front half of the fish, out into the water in lines that curve back and return to the tail end of the fish.
There are not really discrete "lines" but a continuous "field" , an invisible cocoon of electricity surrounding the fish's body.
However, for human visualization it is easiest to think in terms of a family of curved lines leaving the fish through a series of portholes spaced along the front half of the body, all curving round in the water and diving into the fish again at the tip of its tail.
The fish has what amounts to a tiny voltmeter monitoring the voltage at each "porthole" .
If the fish is suspended in open water with no obstacles around, the lines are smooth curves.
The tiny voltmeters at each porthole all register the voltage as "normal" for their porthole.
But if some obstacle appears in the vicinity, say a rock or an item of food, the lines of current that happen to hit the obstacle will be changed.
This will change the voltage at any porthole whose current line is affected, and the appropriate voltmeter will register the fact.
So in theory a computer, by comparing the pattern of voltages registered by the voltmeters at all the portholes, could calculate the pattern of obstacles around the fish.
This is apparently what the fish brain does.
Once again, this doesn't have to mean that the fish are clever mathematicians.
They have an apparatus that solves the necessary equations, just as our brains unconsciously solve equations every time we catch a ball.
It is very important that the fish's own body is kept absolutely rigid.
The computer in the head couldn't cope with the extra distortions that would be introduced if the fish's body were bending and twisting like an ordinary fish.
Electric fish have, at least twice independently, hit  upon this ingenious method of navigation, but they have had to pay a price: they have had to give up the normal, highly efficient, fish method of swimming, throwing the whole body into serpentine waves.
They have solved the problem by keeping the body stiff as a poker, but they have a single long fin all the way along the length of the body.
Then instead of the whole body being thrown into waves, just the long fin is.
The fish's progress through the water is rather slow, but it does move, and apparently the sacrifice of fast movement is worth it: the gains in navigation seem to outweigh the losses in speed of swimming.
Fascinatingly, the South American electric fish have hit upon almost exactly the same solution as the African ones, but not quite.
"The difference is revealing.
Both groups have developed a single long fin that runs the whole length of the body, but in the African fish it runs along the back whereas in the South American fish it runs along the belly.
This kind of difference in detail is very characteristic of convergent evolution, as we have seen.
It is characteristic of convergent designs by human engineers too, of course.
Although the majority of weakly electric fish, in both the African and the South American groups, give their electric discharges in discrete pulses and are called "pulse" species, a minority of species in both groups do it a different way and are called "wave" species.
I shall not discuss the difference further.
What is interesting for this chapter is that the pulse/wave split has evolved twice, independently, in the unrelated New World and Old World groups.
One of the most bizarre examples of convergent evolution that I know concerns the so-called periodical cicadas.
Before getting to the convergence, I must fill in some background information.
Many insects have a rather rigid separation between a juvenile feeding stage, in which they spend most of their lives, and a relatively brief adult reproducing stage.
Mayflies, for instance, spend most of their lives as underwater feeding larvae, then emerge into the air for a single day into which they cram the whole of their adult lives.
We can think of the adult as analogous to the ephemeral winged seed of a plant like a sycamore, and the larva as analogous to the main plant, the difference being that sycamores make many seeds and shed them over many successive years, while a mayfly larva gives rise to only one adult right at the end of its own life.
Anyway, periodical cicadas have carried the mayfly trend to an extreme.
The adults live for a few weeks, but the "juvenile" stage (technically "nymphs" rather than larvae) lasts for 13 years (in some varieties) or 17 years (in other varieties).
The adults emerge at almost exactly the same moment, having spent 13 (or 17) years cloistered underground.
Cicada plagues, which occur in any  given area exactly 13 (or 17) years apart, are spectacular eruptions that have led to their incorrectly being called "locusts" in vernacular American speech.
The varieties are known, respectively, as 13-year cicadas and 17 year cicadas.
Now here is the really remarkable fact.
It turns out that there is not just one 13-year cicada species and one 17-year species.
Rather, there are three species, and each one of the three has both a 17-year and a 13-year variety or race.
The division into a 13-year race and a I 7-year race has been arrived at independently, no fewer than three times.
It looks as though the intermediate periods of 14, 15 and 16 years have been shunned convergently, no fewer than three times.
Why?
We don't know.
The only suggestion anyone has come up with is that what is special about 13 and 17, as opposed to 14, 15 and 16, is that they are prime numbers.
A prime number is a number that is not exactly divisible by any other number.
The idea is that a race of animals that regularly erupts in plagues gains the benefit of alternately "swamping" and starving its enemies, predators or parasites.
And if these plagues are carefully timed to occur a prime number of years apart, it makes it that much more difficult for the enemies to synchronize their own life cycles.
If the cicadas erupted every 14 years, for instance, they could be exploited by a parasite species with a 7-year life cycle.
This is a bizarre idea, but no more bizarre than the phenomenon itself.
We really don't know what is special about 13 and 17 years.
What matters for our p rposes here is that there must be something special about those numbers, because three different species of cicada have independently converged upon them.
Examples of convergence on a large scale occur when two or more continents are isolated from one another for a long time, and a parallel range of "trades" is adopted by unrelated animals on each of the continents.
By "trades" I mean ways of making a living, such as burrowing for worms, digging for ants, chasing large herbivores, eating leaves up trees.
A good example is the convergent evolution of a whole range of mammal trades in the separate continents of South America, Australia, and the Old World.
These continents weren't always separate.
Because our lives are measured in decades, and even our civilizations and dynasties are measured only in centuries, we are accustomed to thinking of the map of the world, the outlines of the continents, as fixed.
The theory that continents drifted about was proposed long ago by the German geophysicist Alfred Wegener, but most people laughed at him until well after the Second World War.
The admitted fact that South America and Africa look a bit like separated pieces of a jigsaw puzzle  was assumed to be just an amusing coincidence.
In one of the most rapid and complete revolutions science has known, the formerly controversial theory of "continental drift" has now become universally accepted under the name of plate tectonics.
The evidence that the continents have drifted, that South America did indeed break away from Africa for instance, is now literally overwhelming, but this is not a book about geology and I shall not spell it out.
For us the important point is that the timescale on which continents have drifted about is the same slow timescale on which animal lineages have evolved, and we cannot ignore continental drift if we are to understand the patterns of animal evolution on those continents.
Up until about 100 million years ago, then, South America was joined to Africa in the east and to Antarctica in the south.
Antarctica was joined to Australia, and India was joined to Africa via Madagascar.
There was in fact one huge southern continent, which we now call Gondwanaland, consisting of what is now South America, Africa, Madagascar, India, Antarctica and Australia all rolled into one.
There was also a single large northern continent called Laurasia consisting of what is now North America, Greenland, Europe and Asia (apart from India).
North America was not connected to South America.
About 100 million years ago there was a big break-up of the land masses, and the continents have been slowly moving towards their present positions ever since (they will, of course, continue to move in the future).
Africa joined up with Asia via Arabia and became part of the huge continent that we now speak of as the Old World.
North America drifted away from Europe, Antartica drifted south to its present icy location.
India detached itself from Africa and set off across what is now called the Indian Ocean, eventually to crunch into south Asia and raise the Himalayas.
Australia drifted away from Antarctica into the open sea to become an island continent miles from anywhere else.
It happens that the break-up of the great southern continent of Gondwanaland began during the age of the dinosaurs.
When South America and Australia broke away to begin their long periods of isolation from the rest of the world, they each carried their own cargo of dinosaurs, and also of the less-prominent animals that were to become the ancestors of modern mammals.
When, rather later, for reasons that are not understood and are the subject of much profitable speculation, the dinosaurs (with the exception of the group of dinosaurs that we now call birds) went extinct, they went extinct all over the world.
This left a vacuum in the "trades" open to land-dwelling animals.
The vacuum was filled, over a period of millions of years of evolution, mostly by mammals.
The interesting point for us here is  that there were three independent vacuums, and they were independently filled by mammals in Australia, South America and the Old World.
The primitive mammals that happened to be around in the three areas when the dinosaurs more or less simultaneously vacated the great life trades, were all rather small and insignificant, probably nocturnal, previously overshadowed and overpowered by the dinosaurs.
They could have evolved in radically different directions in the three areas.
To some extent this is what happened.
There is nothing in the Old World that resembles the giant ground sloth of South America, alas now extinct.
The great range of South American mammals included an extinct giant guinea-pig, the size of a modern rhinoceros but a rodent (I have to say "modern" rhinoceros because the Old World fauna included a giant rhinoceros the size of a two-storey house).
But although the separate continents each produced their unique mammals, the general pattern of evolution in all three areas was the same.
In all three areas the mammals that happened to be around at the start fanned out in evolution, and produced a specialist for each trade which, in many cases, came to bear a remarkable resemblance to the corresponding specialist in the other two areas.
Each trade, the burrowing trade, the large hunter trade, the plains-grazing trade, and so on, was the subject of independent convergent evolution in two or three separate continents.
In addition to these three major sites of independent evolution, smaller islands such as Madagascar have interesting parallel stories of their own, which I shall not go into.
Setting aside the strange egg-laying mammals of Australia — the duck-billed platypus and the spiny anteaters — modern mammals all belong to one of two great groups.
These two are the marsupials (whose young are born very small and are then kept in a pouch) and the placentals (all the rest of us).
The marsupials came to dominate the Australian story and the placentals the Old World, while the two groups played important roles alongside each other in South America.
The South American story is complicated by the fact that it was subject to sporadic waves of invasion by mammals from North America.
Having set the scene, we can now look at some of the trades and convergences themselves.
An important trade is concerned with the exploitation of the great grasslands variously known as prairie, pampas, savannah, etc.
Practitioners of this trade include horses (of which the main African species are called zebras and the desert models are called donkeys), and cattle, such as the North American bison, now hunted to near-extinction.
Herbivores typically have very long guts  containing various kinds of fermenting bacteria, since grass is a poor-quality food and needs a lot of digesting.
Rather than break their eating up into discrete meals, they typically eat more or less continuously.
Huge volumes of plant material flow through them like a river, all the day long.
The animals are often very large, and they frequently go about in great herds.
Each one of these big herbivores is a mountain of valuable food to any predator that can exploit it.
As a consequence of this there is, as we shall see, a whole trade devoted to the difficult task of catching and killing them.
These are the predators.
Actually, when I say "a" trade, I really mean a whole lot of"sub-trades': lions, leopards, cheetahs, wild dogs and hyenas all hunt in their own specialized ways.
The same kind of subdivision is found in the herbivores, and in all the other"trades'.
The herbivores have keen senses with which they are continuously alert for predators, and they are usually capable of running very fast to escape them.
To this end they often have long, spindly legs, and they typically run on the tips of their toes, which have become specially elongated and strengthened in evolution.
The nails at the ends of these specialized toes have become large and hard, and we call them hooves.
Cattle have two enlarged toes at the extremities of each leg: the familiar "cloven" hooves.
Horses do much the same thing except that, probably for reasons of historical accident, they run on only one toe instead of two.
It is derived from what was originally the middle one of the five toes.
The other toes have almost completely disappeared over evolutionary time, although they occasionally reappear in freakish"throwbacks'.
Now South America, as we have seen, was isolated during the period in which horses and cattle were evolving in other parts of the world.
But South America has its own great grasslands, and it evolved its own separate groups of large herbivores to exploit the resource.
There were massive rhino-like Leviathans that had no connection with true rhinos.
The skulls of some of the early South American herbivores suggest that they "invented" the trunk independently of the true elephants.
Some resembled camels, some looked like nothing on earth (today), or like weird chimeras of modern animals.
The group called the litoptems are almost unbelievably similar to horses in their legs, yet they were utterly unrelated to horses.
The superficial resemblance fooled a nineteenth-century Argentinian expert who thought, with pardonable national pride, that they were the ancestors of all horses in the rest of the world.
In fact their resemblance to horses was superficial, and convergent.
Grassland life is much the same the world over, and horses and litopterns independently evolved the same qualities to  cope with the problems of grassland life.
In particular, the litopterns, like the horses, lost all their toes except the middle one on each leg, which became enlarged as the bottom joint of the leg and developed a hoof.
The leg of a litoptern is all but indistinguishable from the leg of a horse, yet the two animals are only distantly related.
In Australia the large grazers and browers are very different — kangaroos.
Kangaroos have the same need to move rapidly, but they have done it in a different way.
Instead of developing four-legged galloping to the high pitch of perfection that horses (and presumably litopterns) did, kangaroos have perfected a different gait: two-legged hopping with a large balancing tail.
There is little point in arguing over which of these two gaits is "better" .
They are each highly effective if the body evolves in such a way as to exploit them to the full.
Horses and litopterns happened to exploit four-legged galloping, and so ended up with almost identical legs.
Kangaroos happened to exploit two-legged hopping, and so ended up with their own uniquely (at least since the dinosaurs) massive hind legs and tail.
Kangaroos and horses arrived at different endpoints in "animal space" , probably because of some accidental difference in their starting points.
Turning now to the meat-eaters that the great grazers were running away from, we find some more fascinating convergences.
In the Old World we are familiar with such large hunters as wolves, dogs, hyenas, and the big cats — lions, tigers, leopards and cheetahs.
A big cat that has only recently gone extinct is the sabre-tooth ( "tiger" ), named after its colossal canine teeth which jutted down from the upper jaw in the front of what must have been a terrifying gape.
Until recent times there were no true cats or dogs in Australia or the New World (pumas and jaguars are recently evolved from Old World cats).
But in both those continents there were marsupial equivalents.
In Australia the thylacine, or marsupial "wolf" (often called the Tasmanian wolf because it survived in Tasmania for a little longer than in mainland Australia), was tragically driven extinct within living memory, slaughtered in enormous numbers as a "pest" and for "sport" by humans (there is a slight hope that it may still survive in remote parts of Tasmania, areas which themselves are now threatened with destruction in the interests of providing "employment" for humans).
It is not to be confused with the dingo, by the way, which is a true dog, introduced to Australia more recently by (aboriginal) man.
A cine film made in the 1930s of the last known thylacine, restlessly pacing its lonely zoo cage, shows an uncannily dog-like animal, its marsupial nature betrayed only by its slightly undog-like way of holding its pelvis and back legs, presumably something to do with accommodating its  pouch.
To any dog-lover, the contemplation of this alternative approach to the dog design, this evolutionary traveller along a parallel road separated by 100 million years, this part-familiar yet part utterly alien other-worldly dog, is a moving experience.
Maybe they were pests to humans, but humans were much bigger pests to them; now there are no thylacines left and a considerable surplus of humans.
In South America, too, there were no true dogs or cats during the long period of isolation that we are discussing but, as in Australia, there were marsupial equivalents.
Probably the most spectactular was Thylacosmilus, which looked exactly like the recently extinct sabre-tooth "tiger" of the Old World, only more so if you see what I mean.
Its daggered gape was even wider, and I imagine that it was even more terrifying.
Its name records its superficial affinity with the sabre-tooth (Smilodon) and the Tasmanian wolf (Thylacinus), but in terms of ancestry it is very remote from both.
It is slightly closer to the thylacine since both are marsupials, but the two have evolved their big carnivore design independently on different continents; independently of each other and of the placental carnivores, the true cats and dogs of the Old World.
Australia, South America and the Old World offer numerous further examples of multiple convergent evolution.
Australia has a marsupial "mole" , superficially almost indistinguishable from the familiar moles of other continents, but pouched, making its living in the same way as other moles and with the same enormously strengthened forepaws for digging.
There is a pouched mouse in Australia, though in this case the resemblance is not so close and it does not make its living in quite the same way.
Anteating (where "ants" are deemed for convenience to include termites — another convergence as we shall see) is a "trade" that is filled by a variety of convergent mammals.
They may be subdivided into anteaters that burrow, anteaters that climb trees and anteaters that wander over the ground.
In Australia, as we might expect, there is a marsupial anteater.
Called Myrmecobius, it has a long thin snout for poking into ants' nests, and a long sticky tongue with which it mops up its prey.
It is a ground-dwelling anteater.
Australia also has a burrowing anteater, the spiny anteater.
This is not a marsupial, but a member of the group of egg-laying mammals, the monotremes, so remote from us that marsupials are our close cousins by comparison.
The spiny anteater, too, has a long pointed snout, but its spines give it a superficial resemblance to a hedgehog rather than to another typical anteater.
South America could easily have had a marsupial anteater, alongside its marsupial sabre-tooth "tiger" , but as it happens the anteater trade was early filled by placental mammals instead.
The largest of today's anteaters is Myrmecophaga (which just means anteater in Greek), the large ground-wandering anteater of South America and probably the most extreme anteating specialist in the world.
Like the Australian marsupial Myrmecobius, it has a long and pointed snout, extremely long and pointed in this case, and an extremely long sticky tongue.
South America also has a small tree-climbing anteater, which is a close cousin of Myrmecophaga and looks like a miniature and less extreme version of it, and a third, intermediate form.
Although placental mammals, these anteaters are very far from any Old World placentals.
They belong to a uniquely South American family, which also includes armadillos and sloths.
This ancient placental family coexisted with the marsupials from the early days of the continent's isolation.
The Old World anteaters include various species of pangolin in Africa and Asia, ranging from tree-climbing forms to digging forms, all looking a bit like fircones with pointed snouts.
Also in Africa is the weird ant-bear or aardvark, which is partially specialized for digging.
A feature that characterizes all anteaters, whether marsupial, monotreme or placental, is an extremely low metabolic rate.
The metabolic rate is the rate at which their chemical "fires" burn, most easily measured as the blood temperature.
There is a tendency for metabolic rate to depend on body size in mammals generally.
Smaller animals tend to have higher metabolic rates, just as the engines of small cars tend to turn over at a higher rate than those of larger cars.
But some animals have high metabolic rates for their size, and anteaters, of whatever ancestry and affinities, tend to have very low metabolic rates for their size.
It is not obvious why this is, but it is so strikingly convergent among animals that have nothing else in common but their anteating habit, that it almost certainly is somehow related to this habit.
As we have seen, the "ants" that anteaters eat are often not true ants at all, but termites.
Termites are often known as"white ants', but they are related to cockroaches, rather than to true ants, which are related to bees and wasps.
Termites resemble ants superficially because they have convergently adopted the same habits.
The same range of habits, I should say, because there are many different branches of the anti termite trade, and both ants and termites have independently adopted most of them.
As so often with convergent evolution, the differences are revealing as well as the similarities.
Both ants and termites live in large colonies consisting mostly of sterile, wingless workers, dedicated to the efficient production of winged reproductive castes which fly off to found new colonies.
An interesting difference is that in ants the workers are all sterile females, whereas in termites they are sterile males and sterile females.
Both ant and termite colonies have one (or sometimes several) enlarged"queens', sometimes (in both ants and termites) grotesquely enlarged.
In both ants and termites the workers can include specialist castes such as soldiers.
Sometimes these are such dedicated fighting machines, especially in their huge jaws (in the case of ants, but "gunturrets" for chemical warfare in the case of termites), that they are incapable of feeding themselves and have to be fed by non-soldier workers.
Particular species of ants parallel particular species of termites.
For example, the habit of fungus-farming has arisen independently in ants (in the New World) and termites (in Africa).
The ants (or termites) forage for plant material that they do not digest themselves but make into compost on which they grow fungi.
It is the fungi that they themselves eat.
The fungi, in both cases, grow nowhere else than in the nests of ants or termites, respectively.
The fungus-farming habit has also been discovered independently and convergently (more than once) by several species of beetles.
There are also interesting convergences within the ants.
Although most ant colonies live a settled existence in a fixed nest, there seems to be a successful living to be made by wandering in enormous pillaging armies.
This is called the legionary habit.
Obviously all ants walk about and forage, but most kinds return to a fixed nest with their booty, and the queen and the brood are left behind in the nest.
The key to the wandering legionary habit, on the other hand, is that the armies take the brood and the queen with them.
The eggs and larvae are carried in the jaws of workers.
In Africa the legionary habit has been developed by the so-called driver ants.
In Central and South America the parallel "army ants" are very similar to driver ants in habit and appearance.
They are not particularly closely related.
They have certainly evolved the characteristics of the "army" trade independently and convergently.
Both driver ants and army ants have exceptionally large colonies, up to a million in army ants, up to about 20 million in driver ants.
Both have nomadic phases alternating with "statary" phases, relatively stable encampments or"bivouacs'.
Army ants and driver ants, or rather their colonies taken together as amoeba-like units, are both ruthless and terrible predators of their respective jungles.
Both cut to pieces anything animal in their path, and both have acquired a mystique of terror  in their own land.
Villagers in parts of South America are reputed traditionally to vacate their villages, lock, stock and barrel when a large ant army is approaching, and to return when the legions have marched through, having cleaned out every cockroach, spider and scorpion even from the thatched roofs.
I remember as a child in Africa being more frightened of driver ants than of lions or crocodiles.
It is worth getting this formidable reputation into perspective by quoting the words of Edward O. Wilson, the world's foremost authority on ants as well as the author of Sociobiology: In answer to the single question I am asked most frequently about ants, I can give the following answer: No, driver ants are not really the tenor of the jungle.
Although the driver ant colony is an "animal" weighing in excess of 20 kg and possessing on the order of 20 million mouths and stings and is surely the most formidable creation of the insect world, it still does not match up to the lurid stories told about it.
Alter all, the swarm can only cover about a metre of ground every three minutes.
Any competent bush mouse, not to mention man or elephant, can step aside and contemplate the whole grass-roots frenzy at leisure, an object less of menace than of strangeness and wonder, the culmination of an evolutionary story as different from that of mammals as it is possible to conceive in this world.
As an adult in Panama I have stepped aside and contemplated the New World equivalent of the driver ants that I had feared as a child in Africa, flowing by me like a crackling river, and I can testify to the strangeness and wonder.
Hour after hour the legions marched past, walking as much over each others' bodies as over the ground, while I waited for the queen.
Finally she came, and hers was an awesome presence.
It was impossible to see her body.
She appeared only as a moving wave of worker frenzy, a boiling peristaltic ball of ants with linked arms.
She was somewhere in the middle of the seething ball of workers, while all around it the massed ranks of soldiers faced threateningly outwards with jaws agape, every one prepared to kill and to die in defence of the queen.
Forgive my curiosity to see her: I prodded the ball of workers with a long stick, in a vain attempt to flush out the queen.
Instantly 20 soldiers buried their massively muscled pincers in my stick, possibly never to let go, while dozens more swarmed up the stick causing me to let go with alacrity.
I never did glimpse the queen, but somewhere inside that boiling ball she was, the central data bank, the repository of the master DNA of the whole colony.
Those gaping soldiers were prepared to die for the queen, not because they loved their mother, not because they had been drilled in the ideals of patriotism, but simply because their brains and their jaws were built by genes stamped from the master die carried in  the queen herself.
They behaved like brave soldiers because they had inherited the genes of a long line of ancestral queens whose lives, and whose genes, had been saved by soldiers as brave as themselves.
My soldiers had inherited the same genes from the present queen as those old soldiers had inherited from the ancestral queens.
My soldiers were guarding the master copies of the very instructions that made them do the guarding.
They were guarding the wisdom of their ancestors, the Ark of the Covenant.
These strange statements will be made plain in the next chapter.
I felt the strangeness then, and the wonder, not unmixed with revivals of half-forgotten fears, but transfigured and enhanced by a mature understanding, which I had lacked as a child in Africa, of what the whole performance was for.
Enhanced, too, by the knowledge that this story of the legions had reached the same evolutionary culmination not once but twice.
These were not the driver ants of my childhood nightmares, however similar they might be, but remote, New World cousins.
They were doing the same thing as the driver ants, and for the same reasons.
It was night now and I turned for home, an awestruck child again, but joyful in the new world of understanding that had supplanted the dark, African fears.