

LONDON was misted over.
That was Sara Monroe's first disappointment.
Jetting across the Atlantic, after two years in America, she had looked forward to seeing her home town from the air, to retracing toy-sized, familiar landmarks, to marvelling at new unfamiliar ones.
She wanted to savour, to prolong, her anticipation.
But London, provocatively, was wreathed in blue veiling.
The mist seemed like a bad omen and Sara's heart sank a little.
Perhaps everything was not going to be better.
There was a swift unromantic transition from the warm enclosed world of the aircraft to the hurly-burly of the airport.
On the ground, the mist was less noticeable but it was a dull day and cold for May.
Sara shivered a little in her thin American suit as she walked down the gangway and got into the bus which was  to take her and the other passengers to the arrival building.
But later, as she listened to the English accents of the Customs men, her feeling of anti-climax evaporated a little.
She was really and truly home.
She did not have much baggage with her, as most of her belongings, accumulated in her two years' stay in New York, had been sent ahead by sea.
She waited impatiently to be cleared, trying to peer meanwhile through the doorway beyond the Customs hall where friends and relatives of the travellers were crowded, but she could see no sign of Jenny.
She was sure she was there.
Jenny, her half-sister, eighteen years old and five years younger than herself, had written so positively that she would be at the airport to meet her.
 "I am longing to see you," Jenny had written.
"So much seems to have happened while you have been away.
I assure you that now I am completely grown-up—though Daddy doesn't seem to think so, I need hardly add.
He still treats me as though I were ten.
I shall definitely  be at the airport to meet you and I hope to have some startling and important news to give you in person.
All my love, Jenny.
PS.
He's marvellous."
Sara had smiled when she read the letter.
Grown-up Jenny might feel, but she still sounded the same.
Even at sixteen there had always been some marvellous "he" in her life.
At last her bags were given the magic chalk marks and she was free to go.
She passed through the doorway, her eyes raking through the little knot of people clustered round it.
Still there was no sign of Jenny.
Sara walked beyond the crowd and put her cases down and waited.
The life of the airport eddied round her.
People met and greeted each other with little cries of welcome.
Officials in their variety of blue uniforms hurried to and fro on urgent business.
Travellers, in the motley garb affected by travellers, in a state of suspended animation, sat on couches and looked tired, making footstools of their hold-alls.
But nowhere in the throng could  Sara see Jenny's fair hair and slender figure.
She decided that she would make a phone call just to check that Jenny had left home and knew the right time of her arrival.
But first she had to get herself some English money.
The coppers felt huge and unaccustomed in her hand when she received them.
She searched again before making her telephone call.
It would be so typical if Jenny missed her while she was in the booth.
But Jenny did not appear.
As Sara dialled the Kensington number of her stepfather's house, she had a vision of the hall where the telephone table was, and she was invaded with the old feeling of inadequacy.
The phone seemed to ring for a long time.
There must be someone there, the daily help, Mrs. Butler, at least.
At last with relief she heard Mrs. Butler's flat Cockney tones.
Mrs. Butler had worked for her stepfather for ten years, ever since her and Jenny's mother had died.
She was an old and familiar friend.
"It's Sara, Mrs. Butler.
Jenny was supposed to meet me at the airport."
"Oh, I'm so glad you've phoned.
I was hoping you would.
Jenny's in her room—not well—but that's not all.
I've had a message from Moorlake to say that Miss Lockwood's ill"
 "Is my great-aunt very bad?" asked Sara anxiously.
"I don't know.
We only got the message this morning"
 "And Jenny's too ill to pick me up?" 
 "She's not herself—" Mrs. Butler's voice sounded curiously evasive.
 "I don't think she's fit to come and get you." 
 "Never mind," Sara said.
"It would take too long now anyway.
I'll get the bus and take a taxi from the air terminal.
See you soon, Mrs. Butler."
Puzzled and anxious and feeling very flat, after the heady excitement of her flight, Sara picked up her bags and went to find herself a seat on the bus going into London.
Somehow she had not imagined her homecoming quite like this.
Everything  was going to be different.
She herself was different, for one thing.
America—travel—had changed her.
Given her more poise and self-confidence, as Great-Aunt Alicia had said it would.
In her imagination, when she came home the sun would be shining.
An hour later, when she was paying off her taxi outside the house, the sun, as though to make amends, was breaking through the cloud in a watery way, bathing the red Victorian brick in a soft bland light.
The house looked the same, Sara thought, standing for a moment outside the gate and looking up at it.
The virginia creeper was a little more luxuriant perhaps and the wood-work had been newly painted and was whiter than she remembered.
Her stepfather, Robert Simpson, had bought the battered and bomb-damaged house for a song just after the war.
Now it was worth five times what he paid for it, a fact on which he often dwelt with satisfaction.
The front door opened and Mrs. Butler, smiling a welcome, stood on the threshold.
 "Lizzie rang up after you did," Mrs. Butler said.
"She's got Miss Lockwood into hospital.
The old lady's very poorly, she said.
She's had a stroke."
 "Oh, dear," Sara said distressed.
"I was planning to go down this week-end.
Perhaps I had better go this evening."
The bond between her and her Great-Aunt Alicia Lockwood was very strong.
Alicia Lockwood was the only surviving relative of the father she had never known.
He had been killed in the war shortly after Sara was born.
 "I'd speak to the doctor first," advised Mrs. Butler.
 "I've got his number written down." 
"And now Jenny.
What's the matter with Jenny?"
 "She was taken ill yesterday," Mrs. Butler said,"and she's been in her room ever since.
She won't eat."
 "But what's the matter with her?" 
 "She's been jilted," Mrs. Butler said unexpectedly, the old-fashioned word tripping primly off her tongue.
 "Jilted?" 
 "Well, her young man's given her the go-by," Mrs. Butler said,"and she's very upset about it.
All I can say is her dad must be pleased.
He was never in favour —too old for her and too experienced and sophisticated; but you know what young girls are—always fall flat on their faces for a good-looking fellow."
 "I'll go up and see her," Sara said.
 "Your own room's all ready for you," Mrs. Butler said.
"I'll help you to take your bags up.
Would you like me to unpack for you?"
 "That would be marvellous," said Sara gratefully, "and if you look in my blue case, you'll find a package—a little something from New York for you." 
She climbed one flight higher to Jenny's room.
She knocked tentatively on Jenny's door and then tried to open it, but it was locked.
"Jenny!
It's me!
Sara."
There was a long silence and then she heard a shuffling sound.
The key clicked and the door opened.
Jenny was in her dressing-gown, her blonde hair tumbled about her face, which  was bereft of make-up, the eyes puffy from weeping.
The sisters stared at each other for a split second and then Jenny flung herself on Sara, crying incoherently.
 "Jenny, Jenny darling, what is all this?" 
Sara disengaged herself and led Jenny to a chair.
"I'm sorry, sorry—I never came to meet you—but I just couldn't…
I can't stop crying…
Oh Sara, I'm so unhappy.
I just wish I could die!"
The words came tumbling out.
 "Jenny darling, what is all this?" 
"I've been given the brush…
I've been made to look an awful fool…so humiliated…
"
With a wail Jenny threw herself on the bed and buried her face in her pillow.
 "Who's humiliated you?" 
Sara asked patiently.
 "Matthew Preston," Jenny whispered, and seeing Sara's look of non-comprehension added, "The man Aunt Alicia rents half Moorlake to." 
 "I remember now," Sara said.
 "A charming man," Aunt Alicia had  written to her in America,"has become my tenant.
He has his office in the old library and I have converted the rooms above into a flat for him.
The arrangement is working very well.
He is a forestry expert and has a small stud as a hobby, so now the stables are being used again and I wake up to the clop-clop of horses' hooves on the cobbles in the morning.
It makes me so happy."
Sara had been glad for her great-aunt, daughter of a famous Edwardian horse-breeder, and in her day a breeder herself, to have this nostalgic reminder of the past.
But what had happened between this man and Jenny?
Was this the marvellous man whom Jenny had mentioned in her letter?
Evidently he was not so marvellous now.
 "Tell me about it," Sara said.
Jenny put her head in her pillow again.
Her voice came muffled,"I don't want to talk about it.
I just want to die."
Sara sat down by the bedside and looked at the back of Jenny's head perplexedly.
Was any man worth this tremendous travail?
 "Jenny, Jenny darling" she began  hesitantly.
She was very fond of her little sister, so pretty, so volatile, so amusing.
Now it did not even strike her as odd or ungracious that Jenny, after their long separation, should have no time for questions or interest about her sojourn in America or her journey home, and that she could not control her own unhappiness for the sake of welcoming back her sister.
Whatever Jenny was involved in at any given moment took up the whole of her.
If she even fried an egg, she directed upon it the beam of her concentration, almost praying it would not break.
Now Jenny's heart was broken and Jenny had no will or energy to contemplate anything else.
But none of this was in Sara's mind as she patted Jenny's arm, seeking for some words of comfort.
 "I thought he loved me as much as I loved him." 
Jenny's voice was still muffled.
"I thought I was going to meet you and tell you the day.
Oh-h-h!"
She turned over and gave a loud wail.
 "I hate him!" 
 "Where did you meet him?" 
Sara asked.
 "How long has this affair been going on?" 
"I told you…
I met him at Aunt Alicia's because he rented half the house, and then I helped him with the horses.
I've been staying with Aunt Alicia for the past six months…
I only came home at week-ends…"
 "Don't grieve so," Sara said.
 "You're so young—" 
 "I'm not that young," Jenny said savagely and punched her pillow as though she wished it were Matthew Preston's head.
 "There are as good fish in the sea," suggested Sara.
Jenny sat up with a jerk.
 "There can't be any worse," she said bitterly, and then a look of contrition passed across her pretty face.
 "I'm selfish, aren't I," she asked,"to greet you like this, and never to meet you.
Did you have a good trip?"
 "Pretty good," Sara said,"and very fast.
We had a following wind.
How about dressing now, Jenny, and coming  down-stairs?
Can I bring you up a cup of tea or something?
Have an aspirin?
Jenny smiled weakly.
 "You're as bad as Daddy," she said.
"He flies to the aspirin bottle for everything, but I'm afraid aspirins won't cure what I've got, which is a great indigestible lump just She banged her chest to illustrate her words.
"The doctor gave me some tranquillisers but they haven't helped either.
I just haven't been able to stop crying.
It's awful not to be able to stop crying.
I've been leaking, leaking like a tap, and my muscles just wouldn't work to turn off the water."
 "You're not leaking now," said Sara briskly.
"Put on some clothes and come and have some tea.
I know Mrs. Butler is making some.
I'm anxious about Great Aunt Alicia.
How has she been lately?"
 "She was as right as rain two days ago," Jenny said,"and she was well all winter.
Even her rheumatism seems to have got better."
 "You saw her two days ago?" 
 "I told you," Jenny said a little irritably.
"I've been living at Moorlake.
She absolutely adores Matthew."
The tears welled up into her eyes again and she dashed them away with an impatient hand.
"He's charmed her as he has everyone else—and she loves the horses, of course.
I came away—I came away—after Matthew and I quarrelled.
She doesn't know about the quarrel—at least she didn't, unless Lizzie's told her."
Lizzie Stroud had been Great-Aunt Alicia's maid for as long as Sara could remember.
 "Or Matthew Preston?" suggested Sara.
"I don't suppose he'll tell anyone.
He should be too ashamed."
Jenny gave a convulsive sob and lay back in her pillows again.
 "Don't let's mention his name any more," said Sara.
 "Come on, Jenny, get up to please me." 
Jenny rose lethargically from her bed and went over to the wash basin and began bathing her eyes.
Sitting in front of her mirror a few minutes later, re-doing her face, she said,"You've got thinner—much too thin—and that's a beautiful suit.
Now  talk some more and let me hear whether you've come back with an American accent."
Sara smiled.
"I cultivated my English accent.
It was one of my assets, and what I was hired for."
 "What was America like?" 
Jenny asked without much interest.
"Your letters were always too short, Sara, and not detailed enough, but then you've never been good at spilling all your thoughts in speech or writing, have you?
Not like poor me."
 "I enjoyed America," Sara said and added quietly, "It was fun." 
America had been an escape, she thought, or perhaps a search, a search for identity, a reason for being Sara Monroe, not very clever, not as pretty or as talented as Jenny.
She had not wanted to go.
The job had been offered to her out of the blue.
It had been Great-Aunt Alicia who had considered it a marvellous and exciting opportunity and persuaded her to accept it.
 "Good for you to see the world," she had said.
"I know in your secret heart you want to come here and live with me but  we're not going to be two old maids mouldering away together.
You must see the world while you're young."
Well, she had learnt something, her capabilities as well as her limitations, and the value of independence.
 "It wasn't all work?" 
Jenny asked.
Sara shook her head.
 "And what about men?" 
 "I had plenty of dates, if that's what you mean," Sara said,"but nothing in the way of a long-term project.
I didn't fall in love.
It doesn't come to me as easily as it does to you."
Jenny grimaced at herself in the glass.
 "I guess I'm made that way," she admitted.
"You're too calm for your own good.
What are you going to do now?"
 "Get a job, I suppose," Sara said.
She had thought a lot about her future on the way home.
A job was essential since she had to earn her living.
She wanted to leave her stepfather's house.
She had been there on sufferance for so long and yet she had never been quite brave enough to break free, to launch out by herself.
He and  Jenny were sufficient for each other; they did not want a third person, especially a person whose tastes were so dissimilar and who did not fit in with their lives or their friends.
She would get a little flat of her own, perhaps go and stay with Great-Aunt Alicia at week-ends.
Best of all would be to get a job in Wellingham if it were possible and live all the time at Moorlake.
But that was the stuff dreams were made of.
 "I could never understand why Aunt Alicia had to rent part of Moorlake," Sara said.
 "My Moorlake," she added.
 "Her income has been dwindling," Jenny said,"and then she made some bad investments.
You know how stubborn she is.
Daddy said she was crazy but she wouldn't listen.
I am afraid it was a case of necessity.
She needed the money badly.
Moorlake is much too big for her and it's been going steadily to rack and ruin for years.
She's never been able to afford the upkeep of it.
She should have sold it long ago."
 "She loves it too much," Sara said  dreamily.
Only the thought of Moorlake had made her feel homesick in America.
 "If anything happens to the old girl, it will indeed be your Moorlake," Jenny said.
"What will you do then?
It will be too big for you too.
You'll have to sell it, Sara."
 "Don't talk of it," Sara said quickly.
 "I don't want to think of anything happening to Great-Aunt Alicia to begin with—and I can't bear the thought of selling Moor-lake." 
 "It's only an old house," Jenny said indifferently,"which has seen much better days.
You are funny, Sara.
You and Great-Aunt Alicia make a pair.
She's more eccentric than ever and Lizzie's gone gaga.
Sometimes I used to think I was in an old folk's home.
If it hadn't been for Matthew— "She bit her lip, and then continued a moment later," It was odd how I met him.
I called to see Great-Aunt Alicia quite by chance.
I hadn't seen her since you went to America, and then about six months ago I was staying the week-end with the Coleworthys and I thought I had  better drop in to see the old girl in case she heard I was in the neighbourhood and took offence"
 "Great-Aunt never takes offence," Sara protested.
 "So I called," Jenny went on, ignoring the interruption,"and there was this marvellous man, with Great-Aunt and Lizzie fussing round him as though he were the greatest gift to humanity.
He wanted someone to help him with his horses, so I took on the job.
It seemed like fate at the time—as though I were specially meant to meet him.
Oh, God!"
She suddenly put her face in her hands as the tears came to her eyes again.
 "Jenny, stop it!" 
Sara said.
Mrs. Butler brought in the tea, and raised her eyes to heaven when she saw Jenny weeping again.
Sara followed her downstairs.
She wanted to make her phone calls to Great Aunt Alicia's doctor, Lizzie and the hospital.
 "What's he like, this man Preston?" she asked.
 "I've never laid eyes on him," Mrs. Butler said.
 "He never comes to London —but we've heard plenty of talk of him—Matthew this and Matthew that, but you know what Miss Jenny is, what I call an enthusiast." 
Sara phoned the doctor first.
He did not think there would be any point in Sara travelling to Wellingham that evening, especially as she had only just got back from abroad.
He'd got Miss Lockwood into the cottage hospital.
She was as comfortable as could be expected, in a nice ward with only two other people in it.
Miss Monroe could come down in the morning and see her then.
There was some paralysis down one side.
He was non-committal about her chances of complete recovery, and Sara felt a little sick and uneasy when she put down the phone.
She rang up Lizzie.
A man's voice answered, husky, with a pleasant timbre.
Sara knew at once that this must be Matthew Preston, and was glad that at least Lizzie had company for the night.
When she spoke to the old  maid, she told her that she would be coming down in the morning.
But before she could set off the next day, the hospital telephoned with bad news.
Miss Alicia Lockwood had died in the night, quietly and painlessly in her sleep.
SARA'S father, Charles Monroe, had been the son of Aunt Alicia's only sister.
His parents had died as prisoners of the Japanese in Singapore, and it had been a further great grief to Alicia Lockwood when her beloved nephew had been killed in the desert in 1942 a few weeks after Sara was born.
To escape the raids in London, Charles's wife Peggy had gone to stay with Aunt Alicia in the country, and that was how Sara managed to be born at Moorlake House.
She had lived there until the war was over, and then her mother had married again and started a new family.
Peggy Monroe was young and her wounds had healed over.
Aunt Alicia found solace in the little Sara, as bubbly and zestful as her nephew had been.
She had no other great-nieces or nephews and it was accepted that Sara was her darling, that Sara was to get Moorlake  House and what little money and possessions Aunt Alicia had left.
Nobody in Sara's family thought it would be a great deal, nobody indeed thought much about it.
It was just accepted that one day Sara would have a little inheritance.
Sara herself never dwelt on it.
She loved her great-aunt for many reasons.
She was fun to be with, her eccentricities were amusing rather than irritating, she was kind and she was Sara's contact with the father she had never known.
In a way, Aunt Alicia knew her father better than her mother ever had.
A swift wartime courtship, a deep passionate love of a few weeks, then marriage, separation and death.
Her mother had been with her father so little time.
Aunt Alicia had known him all his life.
She had tales to tell of him as a small boy, as a young man.
She possessed snap-shots and formal photographs.
She had his fishing rod still, his old saddle.
For Sara, Aunt Alicia's tales of Charles Monroe with his dash and heroism had all the flavour of high romance.
It was impossible not to compare  him with her stepfather, so cold, reserved and cautious, and whose passions seemed solely aroused by his business and moneymaking skill.
From an early age, Sara had sensed that she irritated him, by her presence, by the fact that she was there to remind him of his wife's earlier marriage.
And because she was conscious all the time of his pride in his own daughter Jenny, so much brighter, her diffidence and lack of self-confidence increased.
Her mother had died when she most needed help in her development, with all the problems of adolescence.
Robert Simpson accepted willingly enough the responsibility for her material welfare.
She went to a good school, had enough clothes and pocket money.
That was his duty, after all.
But her heart and emotions and happiness held little interest for him.
After her mother's death, Sara clung to her Great-Aunt Alicia more than ever.
She spent all her holidays at Moorlake House.
She knew every inch of its twisting rambling passageways, every tree in its old lovely garden.
It was a magic place and  the fact that one day it would belong to her lay at the back of her mind like some deep buried treasure.
But when it did belong to her, she would be old too, like Aunt Alicia.
Moorlake was in the dim future, a beacon possibly, but far away on the horizon.
But now with Aunt Alicia's death, Moorlake was here in the present.
Sara felt bereft.
She was bitterly sad that she had not been able to see her aunt before she died.
She wished she had decided to come home a month earlier, even two days earlier.
She wished she had written more often to her aunt, and better letters; but then as Jenny had said, she was not very good at writing letters.
She felt cheated.
It did not seem possible that so lively a person was dead.
Age really had nothing to do with her.
True, she was old, but Sara had always imagined she would be one of those people who lived to be a hundred and had a telegram from the Queen.
Nobody talked about Moorlake House  in the Simpson household until after the funeral.
It was uppermost in Sara's mind.
She felt as though someone had dumped an enormous casket of jewels in her lap, and pleasurable though that was, she knew that in her heart she would much rather have her great-aunt alive, and the casket of treasure at some much later time in her own life.
Moorlake was not uppermost in either Robert or Jenny Simpson's mind.
Robert knew that his stepdaughter would have a little inheritance, not as much as it should have been because that stubborn old woman had dipped into her capital to buy worthless stock, but it would be a nice little nest-egg all the same.
The house, of course, would have to be sold, although heaven alone knew who would buy an old barn like that these days.
Jenny Simpson gave Moorlake hardly a thought.
It was nothing to do with her and she could not understand Sara's love of the old house.
It would have to be sold, of course, and her mind boggled a little at  the clearing up of the accumulations of a lifetime Sara would have to do.
Moorlake to Jenny meant Matthew Preston.
She wondered what he would do now, and where he would live.
In the meantime, for Sara, as Aunt Alicia's only relative, there were the funeral arrangements to make.
Her stepfather took over this task for her.
Alicia Lockwood was nothing to him, merely a connection with his wife's first husband.
He had seen very little of her and was not at all interested in her.
But clearly it would not be right for Sara to have to deal with all the arrangements by herself.
Robert Simpson always knew where his duty lay and what was correct and proper.
After the funeral, when they were eating the lunch he had arranged at the Black Lion in Wellingham High Street, Sara was approached by Mr. Crowther, Aunt Alicia's solicitor and senior partner in Crowther, Boon and Crowther, who had been solicitors in Wellingham for three generations.
He murmured discreetly that he would like a little word with her  privately.
They managed their conference over coffee, which they took in the lounge sitting in the chairs by the window.
 "It's about your aunt's will—" Mr. Crowther began.
Sara nodded dumbly at him.
She was still distressed and could have wished that Mr. Crowther had waited a little longer before telling her about her inheritance, when the sadness and regret she felt about Aunt Alicia's death was not so overpowering.
Aunt Alicia was old, she kept telling herself, and she'd had a full life, and she died in her sleep with no pain, but somehow it did not seem to make it much better.
Some ten minutes later, looking paler and feeling more shaken than ever, she rejoined her stepfather.
 "Do you want to go over to Moorlake now?" 
Robert Simpson asked her.
Sara shook her head violently.
 "I want to go back to London with you," she said.
"I've said good-bye to Lizzie.
Her niece is spending the night with her, so she should be all right, but she seems a little strange, as though, she hadn't quite caught on that Aunt Alicia has gone."
Only in the car when they were well on their way to London did she inform her stepfather of what Mr. Crowther had told her.
 "Aunt Alicia has changed her will," she said flatly, breaking the long silence between them.
Startled, her stepfather came out of his reverie.
 "She's what?" 
 "She's left me some money and all her furniture and things," Sara went on, "but she's only left me half the house." 
"Half the house?
How could she leave you half the house?"asked Robert Simpson incredulously.
"Who has she left the other half to?
Lizzie?"
"No.
Lizzie has her annuity."
Sara paused a moment and then said, "She's left the other half to Matthew Preston." 
IT had been a cold spring and the trees had been late coming into leaf, but now to-day in the sunshine they were all misted with green.
The birds gave voice so vigorously that relief that the sun had come at last might almost be detected in their song—the warm, exhilarating sun.
Underfoot, last year's leaves had rotted into a soft mould which gave off a pleasant nutty scent, and small clumps of primroses nestled amongst it.
Here and there the woods had been cleared and not replanted.
Or trees had been felled by age or storms and their rotting trunks left to become covered with creepers and fungi.
Brambles and bracken had taken over.
Paths led between the elders and thorn into shadowy jungle depths.
To Matthew Preston there was a sad feeling about the woods, despite the brilliance of the day.
They were derelict  and neglected, full of old trees long past their prime while younger trees had been choked with the undergrowth.
He glanced at the older man striding so purposefully beside him.
David Fairfax was proud of the estate and mansion he had so recently bought.
The house, Carpendens Court, dated from the time of Charles I; it had lately been used as a nursing home and was in sad disrepair.
Fairfax was looking forward to restoring it to its pristine splendour and stuffing it to the roof with Caroline antiques.
 "Everything in period style," he had said to Matthew.
He was aware that the house needed money spending on it; on its fabric apart from the more obvious need for modernisation and redecoration.
Matthew wondered if he was equally conscious that his land needed as much attention as the house.
One could never tell, with these town-dwelling millionaires who were smitten with the desire to be landed gentry.
The woods were extensive and the two  men had been walking about the property for over an hour.
 "I don't want any regimented conifers," Fairfax said.
 "I want hardwoods planted up that hill," he waved his arm in the direction from which they had come.
 "Good solid English timber." 
 "The land isn't fertile enough for hardwoods," Matthew said.
"Scots pine and Norway spruce would be the answer, with possibly some hybrid larch on the rocky and drier sites.
Nine-tenths of all the wood we use industrially is softwood,"he added mildly.
 "The Woodlands Incorporated people told me they could plant hardwoods," Fairfax protested.
Matthew shrugged.
 "There's nothing to stop you planting hardwoods," he said,"but they won't do well.
It's too poor a soil."
 "I can't stand the regimentation of conifers," said Fairfax.
 "You look at rows and rows of them and think ah, yes, forestry." 
 "They don't stay regimented," Matthew said gently.
 "As soon as you start thinning  them, you lose that uniformity and there is nothing more noble than a mature pine forest—it has the majesty of an ancient cathedral." 
He stopped walking and looked at the scrubland now directly in front of them.
"Here we could compromise.
The land would have to be cleared and drained, of course, but we could leave some of the better trees and let them grow to maturity.
We could replant with beech interspersed with conifers to act as nurses to the beech trees until they had got established.
That way you would have a little bit of each, and you would get the variety of shape and landscape you want."
 "More Scots pine and Norway spruce?" 
 "Scots pine, Norway and Sitka spruce, Japanese larch, Corsican pine, Douglas fir and lodgepole pine from Canada." 
Matthew smiled as he said the names.
"You have a choice.
We get our conifers from all over.
The seedlings are raised here, of course."
 "How soon can you give me an estimate for the work?" 
Fairfax asked.
"I don't say  I am going to give you the job.
I already have an estimate from Woodlands Incorporated and it seemed satisfactory to me."
 "They are a very big efficient concern," said Matthew quietly.
"I am a small one-man business, but I think I am equally efficient.
I can give you an estimate in a few days."
"I will be frank with you.
I prefer dealing with large concerns,"Fairfax said.
"They have more resources.
I wouldn't have considered giving you the job if my friend Lord Coleworthy hadn't recommended you so highly.
I believe you look after his woodlands.
 "I do," agreed Matthew, thinking that old Coleworthy was a very different kettle of fish from the man now staring at him with slightly belligerent blue eyes.
Coleworthy was a knowledgeable woodsman and knew exactly to a foot the value of all standing timber, every small spruce seedling on his land.
With his plans for afforesting the poorer parts of his ancestral acres, the replanting, the harvesting of his mature timber crops, his Christmas-tree  plantations of Norway spruce, he knew exactly what he was doing.
His woodlands were a valuable part of the economy of his estate.
This man, with his town-bred ignorance, combined with his native shrewdness and suspicion, would not be such an easy person to work for.
He would be breathing down your neck all the time.
Coleworthy knew his job and knew that you knew yours.
He left it to you.
But if Fairfax was going to restore his woods properly, the job would be extensive and interesting, something to get your teeth into—and also profitable.
Which counted, Matthew thought a little wryly.
They turned and continued their walk.
 "I understand there's a Forestry Commission grant towards planting," Fairfax said.
"I told Woodlands I wasn't interested, but maybe I am.
Although I'm not too keen on being told what to plant on my own land."
 "The dedication scheme," Matthew said.
"You can get a planting grant or an  annual management grant.
I don't think you'll find the Commission a dictator."
 "Dedication?" 
 "The owner who" dedicates' his woodlands binds himself, and his successors in title, not to use the lands so dedicated for any purpose other than forestry—they are managed solely for timber production.
You'd have to get your planting scheme approved by the Commission, of course."
"I wanted to preserve some grouse, Fairfax said doubtfully.
 "You can rear grouse if you want to," Matthew shrugged.
"Birds generally are to be encouraged in woodland.
Apart from adding to the pleasure of a wood, they keep down insects which might harm the trees.
The Forestry Commission men even put nesting boxes in their woods to encourage birds."
Something on the ground caught his eye and he bent down and looked at a small print in the soft earth.
It was broad and round and five-toed, a perfect impression.
 "What's that?" 
Fairfax asked, staring at him curiously.
 "Looks like a badger," Matthew said.
He glanced around and noticed a hole in the sandy bank a few yards away.
 "And there's an entrance to his set." 
 "Could be a fox," suggested Fairfax.
Outside the hole was a huge mound of earth in which grass and bracken and moss were mingled.
Matthew kicked at it with his foot.
 "It's a badger," he said.
"There's the stuff he's used to line his chambers with—or rather the stuff he's thrown out when he's put fresh bedding in—very clean creatures, badgers, and a very nice resident for your woods.
They eat young rabbits.
We will, of course, have to erect rabbit-proof fencing around all the new plantations.
One rabbit can finish off a few hundred young trees in no time."
 "How about deer?" 
Fairfax said.
 "I'm planning to have a herd of deer in the parkland around the house, and I'd like some deer in the forest." 
 "You can have deer," Matthew said,"provided you don't have too many.
They tub the velvet off their antlers on to the  trees and take off the bark but,, they don't do enough damage to matter.
He paused a moment.
He liked Fairfax better for asking about deer.
The man, after all, was a romantic with his Caroline house and his deer park.
"I agree they are beautiful, part of a forest, part of the fairy-tales of our childhood.
There are possibly fallow deer in the beech woods you own the other side of the valley?"
 "I have yet to see any," Fairfax replied.
Surreptitiously Matthew looked at his watch.
He had not allowed himself enough time for Fairfax.
He was going to be late for his appointment with Crowther and the Monroe girl.
 "And if I give you the job," Fairfax went on, "how soon will you begin?" 
 "I can start clearing and draining the land at once," Matthew said, "but I wouldn't begin planting until the autumn." 
He would have to take on extra labour, he was thinking.
He could probably switch Mason and the others about a bit; they'd nearly finished the job at Coleworthy  Farm; but he mustn't start counting his chickens.
He said,"I'll get out a plan of operations for you, Mr. Fairfax, and work out the value of any Forestry Commission grant it might attract.
It's a couple of hundred acres you want to replant?"
 "To begin with," Fairfax said,"but I want to do some extensive replanting all round the estate.
We want some specimen trees in the park, for instance, and I'd like you to recommend something quick-growing.
I'm sixty years of age and while I'm prepared to plant the woods for my grandson, I'd like to see some growth myself I can't afford to wait forty years."
 "You had better show me the sites," Matthew said, "and I'll see what I can suggest." 
As they climbed into his estate car, he resigned himself to being late for his appointment in the town.
 "THE simplest thing, I think," Matthew Preston said to Sara,"would be for me to buy you out—your share of the house, I mean.
I'm quite ready to do that.
I am sure we can agree on a fair price."
After arriving three-quarters of an hour late for their appointment, this is what he had the nerve to suggest.
Sara, sitting opposite him, on the other side of the solicitor's desk, some weeks after her aunt's death, was so affronted that for the moment she could not speak.
Then she said a little unsteadily,"I wouldn't ever consider selling my share of the house.
Indeed, I have been hoping to buy you out with the rest of my legacy."
Mr. Crowther picked up the papers in front of him and set them down again very neatly.
He opened his mouth but before he could get any words out, Matthew said,"I don't want to sell my share either.
The house suits me very well."
"The house can mean nothing to you.
You've only been there eighteen months while I've known it all my life.
I look on it as home.
I was born there."
Sara's voice trembled a little.
"You can have your office anywhere.
You don't need Moorlake."
Her eyes were bright with emotion.
He stared back at her, not deeply involved as she was, but calmly prepared to stand his ground.
She could not understand his nonchalance.
She had hoped—more, expected—that he would take the opportunity to move right away from Moorlake —and Jenny.
He was younger than she had supposed from Jenny's description—in his early thirties, and as good-looking as she had expected.
Dark-eyed, with a lean whippy look to him and a brown weathered face.
She noticed his comfortable, well-cut tweeds, his brogues shining as brightly as horse chestnuts, which was appropriate, since his business was with trees and forestry.
She could see how he had worked  his way into her aunt's affections.
Great-Aunt Alicia had always been susceptible to good-looking men, Sara reflected, and then had to admit to herself, but never feeble-minded about them.
Indeed she had been sharp and perceptive about people.
She could see more easily how he had dazzled Jenny, who, after all, did not have so much experience of the world and who was young and trusting.
 "It's not as easy as all that to find accommodation round about, or in, Wellingham," Matthew said.
 "Besides, there's the land and the stables." 
 "Oh, yes, of course," Sara said.
That was why Aunt Alicia took pity on him in the first place, Jenny had said, because he had nowhere to put his horses.
 "Aunt Alicia was sorry for you." 
 "I wouldn't put it quite like that." 
Matthew Preston's voice was still pleasant, but the expression in his eyes hardened a little.
"Your aunt advertised part of her house to rent—I became her tenant.
I helped her keep up the house.
It was far too large for her.
It is far too large for  one person these days.
You, for instance, could not possibly live there all by yourself."
 "And you could, I suppose, if I sold you my share?" 
Matthew shook his head.
 "I should probably convert the other half into flats." 
"Flats!
How horrible—and how lucky you were, Mr. Preston, to meet my aunt when she was old and didn't really know what she was doing."
Matthew's expression became a little colder.
 "I think she knew perfectly well what she was doing," he said.
He stared at her, the look in his eyes now definitely hostile.
This Sara Monroe was much prettier than he had expected, judging from the numerous snaps and photographs of her at all stages of her development from baby to schoolgirl to young woman, which were strewn about Moorlake House.
He had recognised her at once when he had seen her at the funeral, and even then her looks, though pale and wan, had surprised him with their purity.
She was  much prettier than Jenny, although he supposed not everyone would agree with him, Jenny's looks being of a more obvious kind.
Sara's beautiful colouring had not been apparent, of course, in the photographs —the incomparably fair skin contrasting with the dark hair.
He had heard a lot about Sara from Miss Lockwood—how sweet, wise and witty she was—how clever, how energetic—how talented, getting a job in America as a high-powered secretary.
He had visualised someone diamond-hard, very chic, very ambitious.
This girl was smart enough, he conceded, but her hair falling softly like brown peaty water round her shoulders and her dark blue eyes gave an impression of fragility which belied her reputation.
He was not very good about women's clothes, only noticing whether they were becoming or not, but he recognised the quality of hers, and of the big leather handbag she had placed on the desk.
He noticed too, that her hands were beautiful, not very  small, but slender with long, well-kept nails impeccably lacquered.
Behind the large expanse of his desk, Mr. Crowther fiddled with his pen.
With his thin wrinkled neck sticking up out of his starched white collar (so old-fashioned in shape, it was almost back in fashion) he reminded Sara of an ancient agitated tortoise.
He was almost as old as her great-aunt had been.
 "My dear Sara," he said,"your great-aunt was at perfect liberty to divide her estate how she chose.
She retained her faculties until the day she died.
Indeed she was more alert than many half her age.
She loved Moorlake House, you know, and I think she was trying to ensure the safety of its future.
She knew you could not possibly manage it all on your own.
She had a very high regard for Mr. Preston—"
 "Obviously," Sara interjected rudely, irritated with him.
As though she didn't know how Aunt Alicia had adored Moorlake!
Mr. Crowther made a little clucking sound.
He had known Sara all her life.
He  could understand her chagrin and annoyance, but the proprieties must be observed.
If Sara did but know it, he had been very much against the provisions of the will.
He had told Alicia Lockwood bluntly that she could not hope to dictate what happened to Moorlake beyond the grave.
But Alicia Lockwood at seventy-nine had been as strong-willed as she had been at any time of her life.
 "I don't see why I shouldn't try," she had said.
"And I like Matthew Preston.
He's much too good for Jenny even though she's so stuck on him.
He's the sort of young man Sara should marry—if only she weren't in America…
However, I have a little plan…
She will meet him when she comes back-if I live that long…
I have been feeling so groggy lately I just want to ensure the plan doesn't go awry if anything happens to me…"
 "I forbore to give you all the details of your great-aunt's will the other day, Sara," Mr. Crowther droned on.
 "You were upset and it seemed simpler to see you both together, but I will now give you  information about all the bequests and tell you what I have arranged about probate and death duties." 
He paused, gave each of them a solemn look across his spectacles and then went on even more deliberately, in his dry old voice.
"Miss Lockwood left the house to be divided between you, as you both see fit, but she suggested that Mr. Preston kept possession of his present furnished flat and ground-floor office.
All the furniture in Mr. Preston's accommodation —is to be his with the exception of the old mahogany bureau which I believe you, Sara, have always looked on as your special possession."
I looked on the whole house as my special possession, thought Sara dismally.
"The rest of the furniture, silver, paintings, curios, et cetra, all go to Sara.
Lizzie Stroud for whom Miss Lockwood made provision in the form of an annuity, is to continue to live on the top floor for as long as she chooses.
She is, of course, very old and it would be most unkind to move her."
 "How old is Lizzie now?" asked Sara.
 "Seventy-five," said Mr. Crowther.
 "She is active physically but I am afraid she has not retained all her mental faculties." 
He spoke with a certain smugness.
Over seventy he might be but he had retained all his faculties.
 "She's forgetful and sometimes a little difficult, but she still does the garden and she did all the cooking right up to your aunt's death." 
"Your aunt has also expressed a wish that various of her friends should have some personal memento of her which they can choose from her jewellery, her books or the Chinese room.
The fields which Miss Lockwood owned are also left to you, Sara, with the provision that Mr. Preston must have the use of them for as long as he requires for his horses."
Mr. Crowther put down the sheet of paper he was holding and picked up another.
He cleared his throat and looked again at Sara, addressing her directly.
 "I am now coming to apart of Miss Lockwood's last testament which she most particularly wanted me to read to you" 
Alicia Lockwood had said, "In front of them both, Mr. Crowther, so that they both catch on—I don't care if it is embarrassing so long as the idea gets into their heads." 
Mr. Crowther cleared his throat.
"My dear great-niece, Sara Monroe, will be surprised and perhaps a little chagrined to find that I have not left Moorlake outright to her as I always promised, but when she has met Matthew Preston she will, I know, understand why I have changed my mind.
My friendship with Matthew has been one of the pleasures of this last year.
I am deeply interested in his theories about horse-breeding.
By leaving him a half share in the house, I feel I am achieving two objects.
In the event of my death in the near future, he has security of tenure, and my niece, Sara, will have the advantage of his wise counsel.
I have given her a helper, and she will need help in keeping Moorlake.
I know that Moorlake will be safe in both their hands."
"I want Sara to have a fuller life than I have had.
I have never married.
But this  was not because I received no proposals.
I could have been married many times, as everyone knows, but I was always so involved with my father's business and then my own, life was always so full, that I let the opportunities slip by.
They did not come again.
I do not want Sara to end up like me, an old lady with a lot of memories.
I don't want her to stay a dedicated career woman.
In her old age, she must have lots of grandchildren around her, as I should have liked.
Matthew Preston is the sort of man Sara should marry.
They would have a great deal in common.
Sara listened to her aunt's words with a mixture of emotions.
Her aunt had never been given to sell—pity.
She had been a bustling energetic woman, always in a hurry, always busy, but here in her last will and testament she had uncovered some of the disappointment of her life, which no one had ever guessed.
Sara was sad for her, but then the sadness was succeeded by irritation at the old lady's mischief.
She had never liked Jenny.
That's why it was surprising that Jenny had gone to stay at Moorlake in these last months.
But that would be for the sake of Matthew's brown eyes.
Great-Aunt Alicia would be well aware of this.
So she had concocted this marvellous plan to spike Jenny's guns.
In her funny way, Great-Aunt Alicia had decided to tie Sara and Matthew Preston together in joint ownership of a house, hoping this would somehow lead to the bond of matrimony.
But Great-Aunt Alicia had always been famous for her absurdities.
Clearly she had not been in favour of Jenny's alliance with Matthew.
She looked up and met Matthew Preston's quizzical gaze.
She gave him a small, wintry self-possessed smile.
 "Poor Mr. Preston!" she said in a kindly manner.
"You've inherited half a house and almost a bride.
But don't worry, precious as Moorlake is to me, it would be taking things too far to marry you for the sake of making it whole again."
 "Good," said Matthew.
 "I'm greatly relieved." 
He stared at her with a dead-pan  face and she was not sure whether he was serious or not.
A very conceited young woman, Matthew was thinking.
If Jenny Simpson was all fire, this girl was all ice.
When he had learnt that Miss Alicia Lockwood, whom he considered one of the most charming and fascinating old dears he had ever met, had been mad enough to leave him half her beautiful and fantastic house, for one wild and quixotic moment Matthew had thought of refusing the legacy.
Jenny did not come into his calculations.
She would get over whatever it was she thought she felt for him.
She was a baby, and, in any case, he could not believe her feelings went very deep.
No, it was not Jenny who made him look askance at the legacy.
The idea of half a house shared with Miss Lockwood's niece seemed ridiculous somehow, a source of complications.
If he had not met Sara Monroe and seen the hostility in her eyes, it is possible that he might still have refused the legacy, inconvenient though it would have been.
But Sara had set some  spark of aggression alight in him.
He had been angered by her obvious, if unspoken, suspicion that he had persuaded the old lady to leave him the half share of the house.
He had made the offer to buy Sara out on impulse.
It suddenly seemed the best solution.
She wasn't going to get things her own way.
It would do her good to have him as her fly in the ointment.
The legacy had been a surprise to him.
His kindness to the old lady had been completely disinterested.
He had liked her and found her company entertaining.
It had been no hardship to sit and talk horses with her by the hour but he certainly had never expected his friendship to be so handsomely rewarded.
Or contemplated her death so soon.
He had known she was old but she had been so full of vitality, and interested in all the things going on in the world, that her death was a shock.
He was touched by the trust she had shown in him.
For the house was a trust.
She had wanted it preserved and she had chosen him as a means to this end.
The fact that he did not see how it was to be preserved  was another matter.
The sort of people who wanted a house that size these days did not want it in the high street of a market town, and this young woman surely would not have the income to keep it up.
He became aware that Mr. Crowther was speaking again.
"As you know, Sara, your aunt's income has been dwindling of late years—she was very careless of investments and spent too much of her capital.
When all the death duties have been paid, there will be about three thousand pounds left and that is left to you, Sara, unreservedly."
 "What, nothing for Mr. Preston?" asked Sara.
Mr. Crowther ignored her interruption.
 "The contents of the house have been valued for probate," he went on.
 "There is nothing there of any great value-some good furniture and old silver, of course—but nothing of fantastic worth." 
 "What about the Gainsboroughs?" asked Sara.
Aunt Alicia had been quite proud of her collection of murky old oil  paintings collected by her father and her uncle, the Admiral.
Mr. Crowther coughed apologetically.
 "Well—er—I'm afraid they weren't Gainsboroughs," he said.
"Your aunt became interested in selling them some time before she died.
We had an expert down from London who pronounced them rather inferior copies—but good enough, he thought, to be worth cleaning.
They could then be sold, but of course, they would not fetch anything much."
 "I don't want to sell anything," Sara said quickly.
Mr. Crowther looked at her dubiously.
 "The house seems overcrowded," he said,"but you must make your own mind up about that.
You have plans for the house, I take it?"
 "Yes, I have plans," Sara admitted after a little hesitation, but she did not elaborate on them.
 "You're going to live there?" 
Matthew asked.
 "Yes." 
Mr. Crowther broke the silence.
 "How much time have you got, Sara?" 
Sara glanced at her watch.
 "I'm meeting Jenny, my sister, at the Black Lion at six o'clock," she said.
She did not look at Matthew.
 "I suggest we walk down to Moorlake, then," Mr. Crowther said, "and have a look round." 
MOORLAKE HOUSE had been built in 1780.
At that time, it stood a little way out of the village of Wellingham, surrounded by fields, but the village had caught up with it and now it was the last house in the high street, painted white, double-fronted with an imposing pillared porch and pedimented doorway; Its big black front door was decorated with a lion's head knocker and a brass letter-box.
It faced directly on to the wide main street of Wellingham, with its market cross, ornamental flower beds and grass verges; in the daytime, a car park tangled up with bicycles and prams, on Saturdays and Fridays, with the stalls of a market.
At one time, the traffic had been heavy and lorries had thunderd past all night long, shaking the old house and its fellows to their Elizabethan and Georgian foundations, but with the coming of the by-pass, the traffic had eased considerably, and at night when the shops were shut and the shoppers gone home, the main street of Wellingham was as quiet and deserted as a stage before the curtain went up.
On one side of Moorlake was another house, a little smaller than itself with bay windows and the sign "Antiques" hung over its yellow-painted door.
Beyond was a bank, farther still some houses, ribbed with black beams, whitewashed, crooked and ancient, and then the Black Lion, and shops, the heterogeneous collection of buildings which composed a town which had been a hamlet in the time of the Tudors, a flourishing and prosperous market town in the eighteenth century, and was now, in the twentieth, settling comfortably into another phase of its existence, off the main traffic route, a backwater serving the big houses around, a dormitory for the more successful managers and executives in the prosperous light-manufacturing town of Bridgeborough some thirty miles away.
On the other side of Moorlake House was an old mellow wall inset with a shabby white-painted door.
The wall ended in a hedge and an orchard and then the road ran along into fields and the countryside proper.
Behind the wall was part of Moorlake's garden, but most of the latter lay behind the house itself, and ran down to a small stream, with a view beyond of fields and woods, some forty acres of which had been owned by Alicia Lockwood, the remains of her father's more extensive holding.
Mr. Crowther had his offices in an old house farther down the High Street on the other side, and in five minutes he and Sara and Matthew had walked down and were standing outside the big black door of Moorlake House.
Mr. Crowther reached in his pocket for the key but Matthew was there before him.
 "I live here," he said gently and put his key in the lock.
 "Yes, yes, of course, I was forgetting," the solicitor said fussily.
Sara stepped into the square  dark-panelled hall.
The last time she had been here had been to say good-bye to her great-aunt before she went off to America.
It appeared exactly the same—its walls hung with innumerable paintings, prints and photographs, their frames dull with years, their glass wavy and opaque so that the subjects had lost whatever initial impact they had and were now just pictures collecting dust.
The round table was still in the centre of the hall, littered surely with the same newspapers and magazines, old letters and circulars; and the old settle was still leaning against the far wall.
The afternoon sunlight poured through the tall window behind the curving staircase, and showed — up the shabbiness of the curtains, and the rugs on the uneven polished oak floor.
The air was permeated with Moorlake's own particular smell, a blend of wood-smoke, of beeswax, of damp, of her aunt's home-made potpourri in the big bowl on the table, of age, a characteristic scent of which Sara was always aware when she entered the house after a long absence but  pane and, idly, Sara tried to open the window.
It was stuck and Matthew pushed it open for her.
The bluebottle swung away as though surprised to find space again.
Matthew banged the window shut and the sunny silence was more pronounced.
Looking down the crooked corridor, with its uneven walls, Sara was conscious again of the age of the house and wondered at herself.
This old house, she thought, why do I love it so much?
Is it because all the people who have lived here have left little bits of themselves behind, so that it has become more than just a shelter against the wind and the rain?
The very air seemed full of spirits, of past human hopes and fears, desires and happinesses.
As though he had read her thoughts, Matthew said, "A house like this should have a ghost." 
Sara turned to him in surprise.
"But it has!
Didn't Aunt Alicia tell you?
An old sea captain, veteran of the battle of Trafalgar, and he has a wooden leg and he can be heard stumping about in October, round about the anniversary of the battle.
At least I've never heard him and I don't think Aunt Alicia ever did, but when she was a young girl, they had trouble with servants who were always getting worked up about him.
Moorlake has everything,"she added.
 "Except a master and mistress," Matthew said,"and a nursery full of children.
A big house like this should really hum with life.
But perhaps you are going to make it."
 "Hum, yes," Sara said, "but not with children." 
She added on impulse, "I'm going to start my own secretarial school here." 
 "You're what?" 
Matthew was very taken aback.
 "But I thought you were going to live here." 
 "I am," Sara said, "on top of my work —like you." 
Matthew was silent as they went downstairs again.
In the hall, he said, "And you think a secretarial school with clacking typewriters will be an improvement for Moorlake?" 
 "No." 
Sara resented the word  "clacking." 
"But it's going to help me keep my share of the house, and Aunt Alicia would approve of that.
She would never want me to sell my share."
She hesitated a moment.
 "We'll have to have a more detailed discussion, won't we?" she said.
 "Possibly with a builder?" 
 "And an architect," Matthew said uncompromisingly.
 "A good builder will be perfectly adequate," Sara said,"and I know a good one in the town.
I want to get started.
I am very anxious to move in."
 "When will you be down again?" asked Matthew.
 "In a few days," Sara said,"but I can come down any time.
I am staying with my stepfather in London.
I'll give you my phone number and perhaps you will ring me and we can make an appointment to see the builder."
 "I know your phone number," Matthew said.
Preoccupied with thoughts of her school and its organisation—she must get brochures printed and order equipment-there  would be much redecoration and rearrangement of the rooms at Moorlake she would have a million and one things to do before she got this project airborne—Sara looked at him blankly.
 "Didn't Jenny tell you she's been working for me?" 
Matthew asked.
 "She did," Sara said flatly, understanding his reference.
 "How is Jenny?" 
Matthew went on.
Was it her imagination or did he seem suddenly a little ill at ease?
 "I didn't see her at Miss Lockwood's funeral." 
 "She didn't go," Sara said, remembering how Jenny had said it would be too distressing.
Perhaps also she had been afraid of meeting Matthew.
 "She is perfectly well." 
This was not strictly true but she was not going to give Matthew Preston the satisfaction of knowing that Jenny still yearned after him.
 "She's a very good little horsewoman," Matthew said, opening the front door.
As he stood politely on the doorstep seeing her away, Bunny Chaloner cycled  out of the lane which ran alongside the orchard and led to the stables.
 "Good-bye," she called out as she passed them.
"I'm off home, She waved and cycled off down the High Street.
It was a boy's cycle and she was bent low over the handlebars, weaving in and out of the evening traffic.
Matt, thought Sara, as she walked towards the Black Lion.
So that's what his friends and/or employees called the unpleasant Mr. Preston.
Poor Jenny.
It was hard that she had to choose such an arrogant, disdainful man to fall in love with.
JENNY was waiting for her in the lounge of the Black Lion occupying herself with an evening newspaper.
She threw it aside when she saw Sara.
 "How did it go?" she asked.
 "Did you meet Matthew?" 
Sara nodded.
 "What did you think of him?" 
Sara brushed aside the question.
 "I tried to buy him out but he wouldn't play." 
"Why should he?
He likes Moorlake and he's very comfortable,"Jenny said.
She hesitated a moment and then said, "Did he mention me?" 
"Only at the end.
He asked how you were and said you were a very good horse-woman."
Jenny's face clouded with disappointment, but she did not say anything more about Matthew.
 "What possessed Great-Aunt Alicia to make such a crazy will?" 
Sara shrugged.
She did not feel like telling Jenny of Great-Aunt Alicia's plan for turning her boy friend into Sara's husband.
 "You're still set on starting the secretarial school?" 
Jenny asked.
"I can manage with half the house.
We discussed how we are going to divide it into two.
We can each be self-contained yet the house will retain its dignity."
 "I don't see how you're going to do it," Jenny said.
Sara began to explain, but after a few moments Jenny said impatiently, "Why don't we walk down to Moorlake and then you can show me properly?" 
 "Matthew will probably be there," Sara said.
 "I don't care." 
Jenny swung her blonde hair over her shoulder.
"I might as well resign myself to the fact that Matthew Preston is not out of my life.
If you're going to live at Moorlake and open this crazy school of yours, I shall be coming to see you and I shall probably bump into Matthew.
I suppose I can be civilised about the thing."
She did not seem to view  the prospect of bumping into Matthew with any great alarm.
Almost, Sara thought, one might detect a certain amount of satisfaction in her tones.
Oh well, she never would understand Jenny's vagaries.
When Sara took Jenny round to Moorlake some ten minutes later, Mrs. Mott opened the door.
She stared from one to the other of them in surprise.
Mr. Preston had gone out, she said, addressing Jenny.
Mrs. Mott was wearing her outdoor coat and was clearly leaving herself.
 "You're working late," Sara said pleasantly.
 "Overtime?" 
Mrs. Mott smiled.
She was fair and frecKled and had a nice white smile.
 "I just had to get something finished to-night for Mr. Preston," she said.
 "Rather urgent." 
She stood solidly in the doorway.
 "I want to show Miss Simpson how the house will be divided," Sara explained.
Mrs. Mott stayed with her hand on the latch.
 "I'm just leaving," she said and hesitated.
 "Perhaps it would be better if you came when Mr. Preston was here." 
Sara crushed down her irritation.
 "We don't really need Mr. Preston," she said and took a step forward.
Mrs. Mott opened the door a little wider and Sara and Jenny walked into the hall.
 "Don't let us keep you," Sara said to the secretary.
 "It's quite all right," Mrs. Mott said.
"I'll stay a little longer.
I have to lock up, you see."
 "I think I can do that," Sara said.
 "Hasn't Lizzie come back?" 
She turned to Jenny.
 "We'll start upstairs first and then you can see the lay-out." 
Jenny followed her up the stairs, and to her surprise, Mrs. Mott tagged along too.
Mrs. Mott seemed to be overconscientious, Sara thought, but still kept her temper.
"Please don't let me keep you any longer, Mrs. Mott.
Miss Simpson and I are going to stay in the house quite a while.
We have a lot to discuss about the redecorations."
Mrs. Mott seemed a little confused.
 "It's just that I have to lock up," she said again.
 "Do by all means lock up Mr. Preston's office," Sara said, "though I assure you we won't go riding his safe." 
When the secretary had at last left them, she lay back in her chair and gave a long sigh of exasperation.
 "What a watchdog!" she said.
 "What devotion to the Master!" 
 "Oh, she dotes on Matthew," Jenny said.
 "I am afraid she never liked me." 
 "Tell me who doesn't dote on Matthew Preston," Sara said impatiently.
Then, dismissing both Matthew and Mrs. Mott, she said, "Well, what do you think of my plans?" 
 "They're okay," Jenny said unenthusiastically, "but I still think you're absolutely mad to embark on something so ambitious." 
 "Oh Jenny darling, don't be a wet blanket." 
Sara got up impulsively and threw open the french windows and stepped out on to the stone-flagged terrace.
It was a mild evening, and below them, in three formal beds, rows of tulips were ranked like guardsmen, their colours intensified in the soft twilight.
Jenny said,"I've got a friend who knows about antiques—I mean he buys and sells them.
He would come here and give you a good, price for everything you wanted to sell."
"But I don't want to sell anything.
Do try and understand."
Sara shivered suddenly.
"Let's go back in.
I want everything in Moorlake to stay the same,"she said.
"I know that's not reasonable or possible.
But I really don't want any old antique-dealer poking about my aunt's things and putting a price on them."
"But there's so much, and what if the school is not a success?
What then?"
 "If it's not a success," Sara said slowly, "I'll turn my half of Moorlake into two flats and hope to keep one for a country retreat." 
Jenny said nothing to this and they sat silent in the darkening room.
 "We ought to go," Sara murmured at length, but neither of them stirred.
 "Matthew is dead set on keeping the house?" 
Jenny asked.
 "For the reasons why Great-Aunt Alicia  left it to him," Sara answered.
 "His business and his horses—and then it looks as though he has spent a lot of money on the stables." 
 "He has." 
They fell silent again, both thinking of Matthew.
Whatever was or had been between Matthew and Jenny was not yet resolved, Sara realised from Jenny's preoccupation with the man.
A small black shadow appeared at the window, outlined against the dark blue evening sky.
An old cracked voice asked, "Who's there?" 
 "Lizzie!" 
Sara jumped up.
"I looked for you earlier today.
Sara switched on a lamp and Lizzie became visible.
She was wearing her best coat, dark red, and a dark red hat to match.
Below the severe felt, her face was grey and lined but her eyes were black and bright as ever.
She gave Jenny a sharp look like the bright inquisitive look of a bird.
 "I thought you were never coming back," she said.
 "Oh, I heard you shouting at Mr. Matthew." 
She gave a little cackle and then bent down and began locking  the french windows.
 "I'll do that," Sara protested.
"I saw the windows were open.
I couldn't understand it,"Lizzie said, ignoring her.
 "I knew there was no one here in this room." 
She clicked the bolt home.
"But I thought I might catch them in the act.
They took all the new curtains out of the Chinese room and put up old ones instead."
 "Who did?" asked Sara puzzled.
 "What new curtains?" 
 "Peacock silk ones," Lizzie went on.
"The material cost your aunt a pound a yard and you should see what they've put in their place.
Old and faded stuff, they must have got it out of an attic."
 "But—" began Sara, and then remembered what Mr. Crowther had said about Lizzie.
Forgetful, he had called her euphemistically.
Lizzie was wandering backwards in time.
The past, reflected Sara, when the peacock silk curtains were newly hung in the Chinese room, was probably more real to her than the present.
 "We must go home, Lizzie dear," she  said,"back to London.
But I'll be coming to see you again soon.
I'm going to come and live at Moorlake."
 "It's very damp," Lizzie said unexpectedly,"and too big for you.
I always told your aunt it was too big for you and that you would never be able to manage it, but she never listened to me."
Sara had decided that she would move down to Moorlake at once.
It would be so much easier to get things done while she was on the spot.
She told Lizzie now that she would be coming down at the weekend and asked her if she would be kind enough to get her old room ready for her.
 "I'll drive you down," Jenny said, "and help you to move your things." 
Are you staying the night too?"asked Lizzie.
 "I think she'd better," Sara answered for her.
 "Otherwise it's too much driving." 
A sense of adventure remained with Sara for the next few days, a sense of adventure tempered with trepidation, so that she had a sensation of flying high.
Her excitement was not even dampened by Robert Simpson's disapproval of her plans.
 "Are you sure you know what you're doing?" he asked.
"You will rush into things, you know, Sara.
The most sensible thing would be to sell the house, to this Matthew Preston or anyone else who wants it."
 "She can't sell it," Jenny said quickly, giving Sara unexpected support.
"She loves the house too much.
Besides, she's had lots of good ideas.
she's going to write to all the personnel directors in the big firms in Bridgeborough…she's going to have outside teachers for the commercial subjects…a lecturer on current affairs…
I can imagine parents might like to send their daughters to her instead of having to go to London with all the problems of accommodation.
Robert Simpson looked sceptical but he raised no more objections.
Sara and Jenny arrived just before lunch at Moorlake, taking a picnic meal with them.
Sara had a key now and with a sense of the importance of the occasion she put  it in the door and they entered the house.
Lizzie came from the back of the house to greet them and insisted on helping them carry in Sara's boxes, packages and various belongings.
They had their lunch in the garden in the sunshine.
The rockery glowed with colour.
Birds sang.
It was a very pretty day.
 "I'm going out to tea," said Lizzie some time during the meal, "if you don't mind." 
 "Don't worry about us, Lizzie," Sara said.
 "We're going to unpack this afternoon." 
 "Your rooms are aired and I've had hot-water bottles in your beds these last three nights," Lizzie said.
 "I'm going to tea with Mrs. Mott," she added, and then glancing at Jenny, "Mr. Matthew's away for the week-end, so don't fret about seeing him." 
 "I'm not fretting to see him," Jenny said quickly.
 "Mrs. Mott's very nice," Lizzie went on.
"She's going to show me how to make brownies—little chocolate cakes but she  calls them brownies.
She brought me some the other day and they were ever so tasty."
When the meal was over, they helped Lizzie to clear away, taking the picnic things back into the house, and then began sorting out Sara's luggage.
 "I shan't unpack everything until the decorators have been in," Sara said.
"I shall leave the drawing-room and the Chinese room as they are.
The drawing-room can be used for interviews and for lectures.
Upstairs I shall have a small flat, a kitchen and bathroom and a big bed-sitting-room; the other big bedrooms I shall turn into classrooms."
The girls—her future pupils—could use the main door of the house and come up the stairs.
She herself would use the back staircase as the entrance to her flat, approaching it from the courtyard.
Perhaps she could have a little porch built over the side door and a bit could be cut off Lizzie's kitchen to make a small hall.
 "You've certainly got it all planned," 
Jenny said.
 "But in the meantime, before  all this comfort is achieved, where do you want these clothes?" 
Late in the afternoon, dusty and tired, they decided to stop for tea.
They came down into the hall and heard a key in the lock.
 "Lizzie must have come back," Sara said, but when the door opened, it was Matthew Preston who stood on the threshold.
For a moment, all three stared.
His surprise was as patent as theirs.
It was Jenny who found her voice first, and Sara's heart was caught by the tremor in it.
 "We thought you were away for the week-end," she said.
 "I had to come back early," Matthew said, and added, "Lizzie didn't tell me you'd be here." 
 "I'm moving in," Sara said.
 "Surely she told you that?" 
Matthew pushed his hand across his forehead as though he was tired.
 "I never quite understand when Lizzie's talking fact or fantasy," he said.
 "I'll make the tea," Sara said and hurried away to the kitchen leaving Jenny and Matthew alone.
She hoped it was  tactful but clearly they couldn't stand there like statues indefinitely.
Jenny stayed motionless by the round table in the centre of the hall, as though she could not move.
 "How's Juno?" she asked brightly.
 "Has she had her foal yet?" 
 "Not yet." 
 "Did you get a good price for the colt?" 
Jenny went on quickly and then Sara moved out of hearing.
She joined Sara some fifteen minutes later in the kitchen.
Her eyes were bright and her face pink, but she said nothing about their encounter with Matthew and Sara felt it would be prying to ask questions.
After their tea, Jenny said,"I'm going for a walk.
I must get some fresh air."
Sara went back upstairs to her room.
It was her old one which she had always had, and over-looked the courtyard.
Great-Aunt Alicia had redecorated it for her, many years ago.
Its chintz with its cherry-blossom pattern was faded but still pretty.
The room was full of mementoes of her childhood—Arthur Ransome books and  with the model rubber horses she had collected with their individually dressed riders, her collections of postcards and a whole rack of old Elvis Presley records.
Sara glanced out of the window into the courtyard.
She was not really surprised to see Jenny and Matthew crossing it side by side, Jenny talking animatedly, looking up into Matthew's face.
They disappeared into the stable block.
So much for Jenny's walk.
She was surprised, however, some time later when she heard the sound of horses' hooves on the cobbles and looked out and saw Matthew alone, riding out, astride a big chestnut mare.
Where was Jenny?
He sat well, she thought, as she watched him turn round the stable wall and disappear out of sight.
Jenny did not reappear and Sara began to think that she really had gone for a walk.
She went downstairs again.
The house seemed very quiet and she suddenly realised she was entirely alone.
This is how it would often be now that she had cast off in her own little ship of independence.
The evenings were drawing out and it  was not yet dark but the hall of Moorlake was shadowy and insubstantial in the twilight.
Through the long high window above the staircase, she could see a deep midnight-blue sky.
The old house creaked in its joints like an old dog settling down for the night.
A little tremulously, Sara switched on the wall sconces in the hall.
She was irritated with herself for feeling nervous.
She walked into the drawing-room.
The french windows were still open on to the garden and she started when the breeze stirred the curtains.
She switched on all the lights and the room sprang into familiar life.
She shut the windows and slipped home the bolts.
She was getting as bad as Lizzie.
Where was the old girl, incidentally?
She was late getting back.
Leaving all the lights burning, Sara wandered into the hall, and upstairs, back into her own room.
The stairs creaked as she went up them, and the landing creaked.
Indeed the whole house seemed full of small creaks and sighs, and mouse-like rustlings.
Probably were mice, anyway, thought Sara and switched on her radio very loud.
With an ashamed feeling of relief she heard the clop-clop of a horse.
Matthew had come back.
Not realising how clearly she could be seen against the light, she looked down into the courtyard.
There was the light crack of a pebble against the pane.
 "Miss Monroe!" 
Matthew called up to her.
Sara opened the window.
 "Yes?" 
The light shone on to his upturned face and gleamed on the burnished flanks of the mare who blew through her nose impatiently as though to ask what they were waiting for.
 "I want to talk to you." 
 "Now?" 
"Now is as good a time as any.
Give me five minutes to unsaddle Bess and come and have a drink with me."
When she walked into Matthew's sitting-room, Sara could not help comparing it with the drawing-room downstairs, it was so clean and fresh and comfortable.
Great-Aunt Alicia had certainly looked alter this man very well.
 "Please sit down," Matthew said.
He went over to a corner cupboard and began bringing out glasses.
 "I don't want a drink, thank you," Sara said abruptly.
 "Too much like fraternising with the enemy?" 
Matthew smiled.
 "Well, then, you may sit down and watch me." 
He poured himself some amber liquid from a thick cut-glass decanter.
He was still in his riding clothes, well-cut jodhpurs and an old tweed jacket.
He moved with a lithe easy grace across the room and stretched himself out in an easy chair.
 "About Mrs. Mott," he began.
 "Ah, yes, Mrs. Mott," Sara interrupted him.
"I would be grateful if you would tell her that this house also belongs to me.
That I lived here for many years as a child, that—"
Matthew raised his hand to stop her.
"I'm sorry about Mrs. Mott.
I realise she was over-zealous the other day from what she told me afterwards.
She hasn't been with me very long and she didn't understand the position.
One doesn't confide  every bit of one's business even to one's secretary.
She thought I had inherited all Miss Lockwood's property.
She didn't realise you were her great-niece until Lizzie told her.
I'm sorry about that.
It must have been irritating for you."
He smiled at her disarmingly.
He stood up and put his hands in his pockets and took a few turns about the room.
He stared at the carpet as though seeking inspiration.
Sara waited, on guard against the charm which she felt was being turned on for her.
He seemed quite a different man from the one she had met the other day across Mr. Crowther's desk, quite different from the man who talked to Jenny this afternoon.
She felt in some strange way that she was being "handled" like a restive horse.
 "I realise my presence here is an irritation for you," Matthew said at last,"but it's a fact.
I am here to stay.
So are you.
We both want our halves of Moorlake.
Life will be much pleasanter and smoother if we become resigned to that fact, if we become friends instead of enemies."
Sara stared at him.
It would be difficult  to be friends with someone who had made Jenny so unhappy and who was clearly going to make her unhappy again, stringing her along.
Jenny's heart was too loving and forgiving.
 "I don t waste time being an enemy, as you call it," she said.
 "I think our association will work very much more smoothly if we stay completely neutral business acquaintances." 
Matthew looked as if the snub had made him angry.
He did not say anything for a few moments and then he shrugged and gave a sharp laugh.
"Okay, if that's how you want it.
Possessions must mean a very great deal to you if you can bear a grudge so long."
 "I'm not bearing a grudge," Sara said quietly.
 "Just being greedy?" 
Sara flushed.
 "You're being very rude." 
 "I wonder why your great-aunt thought we would go for each other," Matthew asked thoughtfully.
 "I must admit I never liked the sound of you when she talked about you—which was often." 
"You have the advantage of me.
She never mentioned you in her letters."
 "You didn't even look very pretty in the photographs she showed me." 
Sara's flush became deeper.
 "Nobody looks pretty dressed up in a gym tunic." 
"You weren't always in a gym tunic.
You looked very cute at eighteen months lying on your tug alter your bath, but all the same I was agreeably surprised to find you beautiful in the flesh,"Matthew continued.
 "A beautiful greedy girl,;" 
"You exaggerate on both counts, Sara said.
She stood up.
 "There's no point in continuing this conversation." 
She paused at the door.
 "I shall be going to see the builders on Monday," she began.
 "Don't bother," Matthew said.
"I have arranged for both builder and architect to be here at two o'clock.
We can then get cracking about the conversion."
 "Why didn't you let me know before?" 
Sara asked.
 "You really are high-handed." 
 "Mrs. Mott was supposed to telephone you," Matthew said, "but maybe you had already left when she tried." 
Sara went back to her own part of the house.
She felt put out.
She was fast coming to the conclusion that it would be impossible to be neutral about Matthew Preston.
She found Jenny in the drawing-room.
"You're back at last!
I was getting quite worried about you.
Did you have a good walk?"
 "Where have you been?" 
Jenny demanded.
 "I've been back hours." 
 "Darling, hardly," Sara protested.
 "I've only been upstairs a short while." 
 "Have you been with Matthew?" 
 "Well, yes, I have." 
 "He asked you in for a drink without asking me?" 
"You weren't here.
In any case, "Sara said firmly," it was a business meeting.
He wanted to talk to me—about the builders, the architect and so on,"she added.
It really was too absurd for Jenny to be jealous.
 "MY, you are in a mess," Jenny said.
The square hall of Moorlake was bare, its furniture under dustsheets in the centre.
It was littered with ladders, pails and other decorators' paraphernalia and the air was permeated with the odour of the chemical the workmen were using to strip the woodwork.
Jenny, in a purple tweed skirt and a leather jerkin and black boots, stepped delicately inside.
With her short swinging hair, she looked like a medieval troubadour.
She had arrived again for the week-end; and much earlier, on Friday afternoon instead of evening, than Sara had expected.
Jenny was followed by the friend she had asked if she could bring, James Barlow.
Sara had been a little distraught when Jenny had asked if she might bring  James.
 "He's a marvellous painter," Jenny had said.
"He's a genuis.
He's unknown now but one day you"Il be proud to have known him.
He'll have masses of fab ideas for decorating Moorlake.
That's why I want to bring him along."
 "I don't really want any fab ideas," Sara had protested weakly.
She hadn't seen Jenny since she had moved to Moorlake that first week-end but she had known that it would not be long before Jenny returned.
Moorlake while Matthew Preston was there would always be a magnet.
James Barlow was a large man with a ginger beard, a white face and very blue eyes.
Sara, still in her jeans, pushed her hair out of her eyes.
 "Do come into the drawing-room," she said,"and I'll get Lizzie to make some tea.
Stick your cases anywhere for the moment."
They crossed the hall, carefully skirting the obstacles.
 "You're leaving the panelling unpolished?" 
James asked.
 "Yes," Sara said with satisfaction.
Matthew had been horrified when she had suggested stripping the dark panelling in the hall to its original natural pine colour and waxing it.
But the architect had agreed with her that it would make the room much lighter and in the end Matthew had assented.
As she looked at the soft golden panelling, more of which emerged every day, the pleasure of her victory washed over Sara anew.
The drawing-room had not yet been invaded by the decorators and was still in its original cluttered and faded ragbag splendour.
James stared about him with uninhibited curiosity, staring closely at the paintings and prints which covered the walls, poking his nose into tea caddies and picking up any object which took his fancy.
He was not exactly ill-mannered, Sara decided, but more like an inquisitive child.
Sara went to find Lizzie.
Mrs. Mott was in the kitchen making a pot of tea for Matthew.
 "Could I have a word with you, Miss  Monroe?" 
Mrs. Mott asked, holding the brown teapot to her bosom as if it were a precious chalice.
 "Surely," said Sara politely.
She had not taken to Mrs. Mott.
She knew this was unreasonable of her.
Mrs. Mott went out of her way to be courteous to Sara as though sorry for the initial error she had made.
She was always helpful and she was very kind to Lizzie.
She was a widow, Lizzie had told her, and had a schoolgirl daughter.
Mrs. Mott was devoted to Matthew.
She went about her secretarial duties like a high priestess at the temple of the sun gods and assumed, and this perhaps was the most irritating part, that everyone else was equally in awe.
 "Mr. Preston wanted me to ask you if it would be convenient to move the bureau into your part of the house this afternoon," Mrs. Mott began.
 "He's arranged for some of his men to come along—it's very heavy, you know—and he wondered whether you want it moved upstairs or downstairs." 
It was not convenient for the bureau to be moved.
Her own little flat was not yet  ready and Sara had not really determined where she wanted the bureau.
Indeed she had not given it another thought since last seeing it in Matthew's sitting-room.
But she and Matthew had had so many cold steely little tussles these last few weeks over so many small things—like the panelling in the hall and cutting some trees down at the side of the house which she said darkened the drawing-room and which he had gone berserk about—that Sara did not feel she could be obstructive again.
It was not that she was weakening, she told herself, it would just be simpler to let him move the bureau.
 "You had better tell the men to bring it downstairs and put it in the drawing-room," she said.
The bureau arrived while they were still having tea.
Two strong young foresters appeared at the drawing-room door with it and even they staggered a little under its weight.
They had taken out all the drawers to make it lighter and Matthew brought down two of the drawers a few minutes later.
 "Hallo," Jenny said brightly, too brightly.
 "Let me introduce my friend, James Barlow." 
The two men nodded at each other.
James's eyes quickened with interest; the expression in Matthew's was enigmatic.
 "James is the most marvellous painter," Jenny said.
 "One day he'll be famous and you'll tell your children you met him." 
James looked deprecating.
 "Jenny gets carried away," he said and smiled shyly.
 "She's just a little bit prejudiced." 
Sara suddenly understood why James might have been brought along for the week-end to Moorlake.
Poor James.
He was too innocent to be a stalking horse.
Or perhaps that was why he would make a good one.
There was a distinct love light in his eyes when he looked at Jenny.
James put down the piece of china he held in his hand.
 "Do you know much about china, James?" 
Sara asked when Matthew had gone.
"There's a pretty fruit set in the cabinet there.
It hasn't any mark but it looks good."
 "Yes, I saw it," James said.
"Victorian, I think.
I don't really know much about china but there are a few marks one always recognises."
 "I want to show James the rest of the house," Jenny said.
 "Why don't you?" 
Sara answered,"while I go upstairs and change.
I feel very scruffy.
I've been clearing things out all day."
 "And when does your school open?" asked James.
 "Sooner than I'd meant it to," Sara said a little ruefully.
 "I've already got three pupils—my solicitor's two granddaughters and another girl, daughter of a local landowner." 
Mr. Crowther had been very interested in the Moorlake Secretarial School.
His twin seventeen-year-old grand-daughters had just left school and when he had read the rough draft of Sara's prospectus he had immediately suggested that she enrolled Celia and Rosalind.
They lived deeper in the country, some twenty miles away.
Their parents had been debating what to do with them, whether to send them  abroad or to secretarial school in London.
Moorlake would be ideal.
They could lodge with Grandpa during the week and go home at week-ends.
 "But when do they want to start?" 
Sara had asked.
 "Now," Mr. Crowther had replied.
 "We must get them settled." 
Sara had made up her mind there and then.
She might as well accept the challenge.
One bedroom was ready as a classroom, desks and typewriters had been installed, and Miss Aitchison, who could teach both shorthand and typing and had diplomas to prove it, had been hired.
Celia and Rosalind would be arriving in a week's time.
The third pupil was Sandra Fairfax and she had surprisingly enough come through Matthew.
He apparently was doing some work for her father, David Fairfax, and had told him about the school.
Sara did not care to be beholden to Matthew Preston for even one pupil, but she knew at this moment she could not afford to be choosey.
 "You're in business," Jenny said admiringly.
Sara showed them their rooms and then went to her own to tidy herself up, leaving them to their own devices.
While she was making up her face at her dressing-table in the window, she saw Jenny and James wander across to the stables.
She supposed it would be all right, although she herself never went near the stables—which was sad, because she had her great-aunt's love of horses and she enjoyed the smell and the sound of them.
But she avoided Matthew as much as she could and had no wish to come in contact with Bunny Chaloner.
When she went downstairs again, neither of them was in the drawing-room.
Lizzie told her that Mr. Barlow was in the Chinese room.
James was kneeling on the floor in front of one of the lacquer cabinets, which he had opened.
He was making a careful examination of the bowls and plates it contained in dusty confusion.
 "Coolie chow" plates Great-Aunt Alicia had always  called them.
They had cost her uncle just a few cents each and were supposed to be the plates and bowls Chinese coolies ate their rice from while they sat with their rickshaws, waiting for trade, in old Pekin.
Or so Great-Aunt Alicia had believed.
James was so intent that he did not hear Sara enter the room.
 "I'm afraid your hands will get very dusty," Sara said politely.
 "The cabinets have not been cleaned for years." 
James Barlow gave a little jump.
His ginger beard came round and his teeth gleamed for a second.
 "What a lot of treasures you have," he said disarmingly.
 "Are you really a painter?" 
Sara asked curiously.
 "I am." 
 "But you buy and sell antiques." 
Sara made a statement rather than asked a question.
 "And you have a stall in the Portobello Road," she guessed.
James laughed.
"How did you know?
You've got some pretty things—nothing of any great value, of course, but lots of Victoriana—I'll give you a good price."
 "It was all valued for probate," Sara reminded him,"but in any case, I'm not interested.
I don't want to sell."
 "All this Chinese stuff, there's so much of it," James said.
He still held a small bowl in his hand and looked down at it, smoothing the porcelain with his forefinger and thumb in a kind of loving way.
He had thin delicate-fingered hands, Sara noticed.
 "I could take the whole lot." 
 "Thanks all the same," Sara said, "but I want to keep it." 
James put the bowl reluctantly back on its shelf and shut the cabinet doors.
He got to his feet and dusted his knees.
Sara was angry with Jenny.
Why couldn't she be honest and tell her why she had wanted James to see Moorlake?
 "Don't be cross with Jenny," James said almost reading her mind.
"Jenny wanted to help me and she knew you'd say no if she asked you outright.
I was supposed to come here and try and persuade you to sell.
I don't as yet sell many of my paintings, but I can make a sort of living by using my knowledge of  furniture and china.
My mother was quite an expert and I learnt from her."
Sara's anger with Jenny evaporated.
She was only trying to do James a good turn.
But her annoyance returned when Jenny came in a little while later and told her that she had asked Matthew to dinner.
 "You've what?" 
 "Don't worry," Jenny added hastily, seeing Sara's face, "I checked with Lizzie first and she said she had plenty of steak, and then I dressed it up and told Matthew you wanted to make the numbers even for your dinner party" 
 "You told him I had invited him?" 
 "Well, it's your house," Jenny said, "and it seemed better coming from you." 
For a moment Sara was too cross to speak.
What was Jenny playing at?
 "What time did you ask him for?" 
 "About seven." 
Sara went into the kitchen to see what preparations Lizzie was making.
The cooking was a little bit of a problem.
Lizzie wanted to go on doing it.
Sara thought she was too old.
She also didn't care too much  for Lizzie's cooking.
It was plain and English and a little too bland and unseasoned for Sara's travelled palate.
Furthermore, Sara did not want to be bound by a rigid time-table for meals, which Lizzie expected and insisted on.
Lizzie was an expert and Sara knew little about cookery.
It was checkmate.
Sara stared irritably at the enormous untidy lump of steak Lizzie brought out for her inspection.
 "Oughtn't you to cut it up?" she asked doubtfully.
 "Mr. Preston likes it cooked in one piece," Lizzie said.
"Then he cuts it across diagonally.
We always had it like this when Miss Alicia was alive."
Sara abandoned the steak.
 "And the salad?" she asked.
It seemed Lizzie had everything in hand.
Sara went back to the drawing-room and began laying a table for four at one end of the room.
Jenny came in with some flowers from the garden which she set in small posy bowls down the centre and James took the pink lustre candlesticks  from the mantelpiece and set them among the flowers.
The table looked much gayer than Sara felt.
Matthew arrived on the dot of seven.
He was wearing a dark suit instead of his usual comfortable country clothes.
He looked freshly bathed, shaved, pressed and brushed.
Sara as she greeted him was conscious again of his physical charm, but there was more to a man than a pretty envelope.
He had a bottle of wine under his arm.
 "A small offering for the dinner," he said.
 "If you can call a truce, I thought I would be magnanimous too." 
Sara turned away from his dark glance.
 "You are absurd," she said.
"I'm not calling a truce.
You can only call a truce if there's a war—"
"And this isn't war?
Argument and obstruction at every turn!
You should have been a guerrilla leader, Sara, you delight in winning small skirmishes."
 "The name is Monroe," Sara said.
 "The principal of the Moorlake Secretarial School is standing on her  dignity!" 
Matthew laughed at her.
"Dear Miss Monroe, but you have been Sara in my mind for so long—Miss Lockwood's great-niece Sara, Jenny's sister Sara, and now my fellow householder Sara and my landlady Sara—I can't change my thinking.
Sara shrugged.
 "Have it your own way, Mr. Preston," she said.
Matthew laughed again.
 "You are a mysterious girl," he said.
 "For what devious purpose have you asked me to dinner if it's not a truce?" 
 "I am not at all devious," Sara said offhandedly.
 "If you knew me better—" 
 "But I am not going to get into that happy position, am I?" 
Matthew interrupted.
 "I shall continue to think of you as devious, unreasonable and very dignified." 
Sara smiled despite herself.
 "And I shall continue to think of you as annoying," she said.
"But think how good I am for you.
A terrible piece of grit in the smooth mechanism  of your life.
Oysters make pearls for less."
 "I can't think what pearl you and I could make," Sara said, "unless it were Moorlake." 
Matthew turned his eyes away from her and walked to the window at the end of the drawing-room.
 "A little bit of frustration is good for everyone," he said"a great spur.
I've had some of these trees lopped,"he added peering into the twilight outside.
 "Did it make any difference to your light?" 
 "Not much," Sara said.
"I still think they should come down.
They're too near the house."
"And I still think they shouldn't.
They're part of the background of the house.
You would miss them more than you know.
They're beautiful trees."
He turned to look at her again, and for a long moment they stared at each other, irreconcilable strangers either side of a barrier; and yet Sara had the odd feeling that some part of her longed to understand Matthew  Preston, to agree with him, to acquiesce in his decisions.
With difficulty she glanced away from his dark compelling gaze.
She waved her hand at the drinks table.
 "Would you help yourself?" she invited him.
Jenny came sidling into the room in a slinky dress of pistachio green and sugar pink in a harlequin print.
 "Tell me what you want," she said to Matthew, "and I'll fix it for you." 
She stood by the glittering bottles and looked at him expectantly.
Sara left her to it and went out to the kitchen to begin the dinner.
Lizzie had made the pudding, a concoction of cream, egg-white and rum; she had made the salad and put the jacket potatoes in the oven.
Sara had told her to go to bed, or rather to go and look at the TV programme she wanted to watch.
 "I am sure I can cook the steak," she said.
Now, staring at the big thick lump of meat, her self-confidence vanished.
But anyone can cook a steak, she told herself.
It's like boiling an egg, easy.
She got the thin iron frying pan from the shelf and put it over the heat  with some fat in it.
The fat seemed to heat up more rapidly than she expected so she put in the steak and a great sizzling and searing went on and the air became full of blue smoke.
She turned down the heat quicKly but some of the fat had splashed on to the flames and the blue smoke increased in density.
At this point she was aware that she had an audience.
 "What the devil are you doing?" 
Matthew asked.
 "Spoiling our dinner?" 
He pushed her gently away from the stove and took the pan away, turned down the gas, opened the window.
 "Chop some parsley, do something useful," he told Sara, "I'll cook the steak." 
He put the pan back on the heat, turned the steak over, and it began bubbling in a controlled manner.
Sara did not chop parsley.
She watched Matthew.
He had been invited to dinner by Jenny.
Lizzie had bought the kind of steak he liked and now he was cooking it the way he wanted.
One way or another Matthew  Preston had taken charge.
It was funny really but somehow she didn't laugh.
Jenny and James had followed Matthew into the kitchen.
James brought them all more drinks.
 "I didn't know you could cook, Matt," Jenny said.
 "There's a lot you don't know about me, Jenny wren," Matthew said.
 "Don't call me that, you know I hate it." 
 "A wren is a dear little bird, but perhaps too mousey for you?" 
 "Shall I make some mustard?" 
James asked.
 "Oh yes, darling," Jenny exclaimed, her eyes still watching Matthew.
"James makes the most super mustard, with sugar and milk and vinegar.
Do make some, James."
James began poking about in the store cupboard.
Sara silently handed him the ingredients he wanted and found the mustard pot.
She felt very much a spectator.
The  three of them were involved in some game of the sexes in which she had no part.
Jenny went on being provocatively rude to Matthew and loving to James.
Matthew concentrating on the steak, seemed impervious and never once rose to her bait, but James, it was clear, was cheered and encouraged by Jenny's affectionate treatment.
Poor James, Sara thought again.
Jenny was really being very unfair to him.
The steak was ready and Matthew dished it up and took it to the dining table.
 "You had better serve it," Sara said.
Matthew sliced it diagonally as Lizzie had described and gave them their portions.
They helped themselves to salad and Sara poured the wine.
Matthew lifted his glass and looked across at her.
 "Here's to you, Sara," he said,"and the Moorlake Secretarial School.
May you have a hundred pupils before you turn round."
Sara was touched.
 "Not a hundred yet," she said.
 "I couldn't cope." 
 "Oh, yes, you could," Matthew said confidently.
 "You're very efficient." 
 "What did you expect?" 
Jenny interrupted.
Matthew took no notice of her.
His dark glance remained on Sara.
 "I know you like riding," he said.
"Why don't you come out with us some time?
We always want someone to help us exercise the horses.
Or are you afraid it would upset your neutrality?"
Sara began to understand then that this was his way of paying out Jenny for her flirtation with James.
As Jenny had used James, so was she going to be used as Matthew's instrument of retaliation.
But this was a game which two had to play.
Despite herself, she found his concentrated attention put her off balance, but she was not going to hurt Jenny by responding in any way to his compliments and flattery.
She tried to keep the conversation general and without barbs but it was like trying to float a small boat in a treacherous sea.
There were too many cross-currents.
Yet an outsider watching them might, as he heard the laughter, think the evening was being a very successful one.
Afterwards, looking back, Sara knew that if she were asked she would put a circle round this evening, this particular point in time, and say, "That's when the heartache began," a tiny little pain to begin with, no more than a tremor of consciousness, the veriest pinprick.
IT was very late.
Matthew had gone to his flat, James had gone to bed.
Only Jenny and Sara were still up, sitting in Sara's room.
Sara was undressed and ready for bed but Jenny was fully clothed, moving about the room in her harlequin dress like some angry restless dragonfly.
 "You encouraged him," she said for the tenth time.
"I would never have believed you could be so mean.
Sara, my own sister.
You encouraged him!"
"Jenny darling, Matthew Preston was having his own back.
You teased him with poor James.
What is sauce for the goose—"Sara sighed wearily.
 "James is an old friend of mine," Jenny said, "from way back." 
 "He knows what Matthew means to you?" 
"I haven't told him in so many words, but he'd understand.
James always does  understand me.
He's like a favourite old coat.
He always makes me feel cosy."
Sara paused.
 "Jenny, I don't want to sound like an old auntie, but you are not being very sensible about Matthew." 
 "I love him," Jenny said passionately,"and I know he loves me.
We've had so many wonderful times together—"
 "But wonderful times aren't always a good basis for marriage," Sara suggested gently.
 "What do you know about it?" 
Jenny asked.
"You've never been in love.
I know Matthew doesn't want to get married—he once said marriage was a trap—but I know he loves me"
"All men have said or thought that at one time or another.
Marriage is a trap, "Sara said patiently," but the fact is that when men and women fall in love they call the trap a haven—or a home.
Their point of view changes."
 "I'm going to get Matthew to change his point of view," Jenny said.
 "Why did the wonderful times stop?" asked Sara.
 "Why did you quarrel?" 
Jenny was silent for a moment, and then she said,"It was alter Bunny Chaloner came.
She spoilt things.
She was—she was —jealous of me."
 "Or were you jealous of her?" asked Sara shrewdly.
"Is Matthew worth all this love, Jenny?
Perhaps he likes all the girls—"
 "Just because he paid a little attention to you to-night," Jenny said,"you mustn't think that.
It meant nothing, nothing, nothing!"
 "I was as aware of Matthew's motives as you were," Sara said.
"I'm not going to talk any more about him.
You must go to bed, Jenny."
IN her hurry, Sara parked the car badly.
She opened the door and looked down at the gutter two feet away and then sighed.
It would have to do.
She was late already and wanted to tidy herself up before her appointment and it was nearly two o'clock.
She felt tired, irritable and depressed.
She had been up late the night before working on her account books.
The Moorlake Secretarial School was not yet airborne.
She had reached that stage in her enterprise when the first fine careless rapture had evaporated and as yet no real follow.through success had appeared to give her a further boost and a second wind.
She had twenty assorted pupils and needed many, many more.
She had no doubt they would come—she had had lots of inquiries from her last advertisement in the local paper—but in the meantime all the bills  were thumping through the letter-box and Great-Aunt Alicia's legacy was beginning to melt terrifyingly.
During office hours the main door of Moorlake House was always left on the latch.
Visitors for the school or Matthew could press either of the little buttons marked Inquiries above their names and step right in and wait for attention.
Sara herself did not use the front door.
Neither did her pupils.
Mrs. Mott had complained of the noise they made going to and fro.
Mrs. Mott had been very put out by the long time the builders had stayed in the hall; the chattering of the girls was the final straw.
So to keep the peace, Sara made everyone use her own entrance round the side of the house.
The builders, unfortunately, were still upstairs, and her classes were still conducted to the loud clank of hammering with attendant dust.
When Sara got out of her car, she noticed a man on the doorstep of the house.
He was pressing hard on the button and standing patiently for the door to  open.
Sara hesitated.
She herself was going to use her own entrance.
Before turning, however, she said, "Can I help you?" 
The man was short, red-faced, with a black moustache.
He looked as harassed as Sara felt.
 "I'm looking for Mr. Matthew Preston," he said.
 "Walk in," invited Sara.
 "You'll find his door to the right in the hall." 
The man lingered and looked helpless, and a little impatiently she opened the door for him.
 "I'll get Mrs. Mott for you," she said.
But when she put her head round Mrs. Mott's door, the secretary, was not there.
 "I expect Mr. Preston's secretary is still at lunch," Sara said.
 "She should be back shortly." 
 "I really want to see Mr. Preston himself," the man said drawing out a card.
"I'm Jack Barnes, the area representative for Woodlands Incorporated.
There's a special job Preston's engaged on and I want to come to some arrangement with him—there should be room for both of us — if  you would be good enough to tell me when your husband is likely to be back—"
Sara stared at him a little blankly.
 "Matthew Preston isn't my husband," she said.
 "I'm sorry—I thought this was his residence—I didn't realise—" 
"He does live here—upstairs—but I shouldn't think he's in at the moment.
I'm afraid I can't help you—couldn't you wait for Mrs. Mott to return from lunch?
She's Mr. Preston's secretary and she'll know all about it."
Sara stood poised for flight.
She was sorry for this little man and his problem but she was in a tearing hurry.
Any minute David Fairfax would be on the doorstep.
He was the sort of man who was always punctual and here she was with her hair all over the place and a shiny nose.
She particularly wanted to look cool, calm and collected for David Fairfax.
 "Just want to see the set-up my little girlie's embarked on," he had said down the telephone.
 "My wife's full of praise but I always like to see for myself." 
 "I can't wait," Jack Barnes said looking at his watch.
"I'm afraid I'm in something of a hurry but I was just passing and thought I would call in on the off-chance.
I'll have to phone Preston up."
He said good-bye, and leaving, collided with David Fairfax on the doorstep.
After he had gone and after they had introduced themselves to each other, David Fairfax said reflectively,"I know that man.
Now where have I seen him?
Never forget a face."
Nor does anyone else, thought Sara; why does everyone think they're so unusual because they never forget a face?
 "Now, if they said" I never forget a name "—Aloud she said," He's working with Matthew.
His name was Jack Barnes and he's with some firm called Woodlands Incorporated."
 "That's it," David Fairfax said.
"That's where I've met him, of course.
How odd that he didn't recognise me.
Very odd.
He's working with Preston, you say?
How very odd."
He seemed more caught up  with this coincidence than interested in the school he had come to see, Sara decided.
 "Now where would you like to begin?" she said brightly, still conscious of her slightly dishevelled appearance.
 "The classrooms are upstairs—" 
 "Beautiful old house Preston's got here," David Fairfax said standing stock still in the hall and looking appreciatively about him.
The hall had been transformed.
It was still as mellow and welcoming as it ever had been but now the pine panelling was softly golden, gleaming with wax polish.
The round table with its magazines was still in the centre, the floor had been repolished and lightened, and against this background the pretty curving staircase looked more elegant than it had ever done.
A new emerald-green carpet swept up to the landing and a new beautiful green — watered silk curtain with rich gold swags was hung at the long window above it.
 "I believe the house is — pretty historic — been a long time in Preston's family," David Fairfax went on.
"Nice to hear of  someone hanging on to their old family possessions.
Always makes me sad when I hear some old family has to sell up."
 "Yes," said Sara shortly,"only in this case, the old family isn't Matthew Preston's.
The house belonged to my Great-Aunt Alicia."
 "I thought it belonged to Preston!" 
 "Well, half of it does." 
"That's one way out of a dilemma.
You didn't want to sell it all so you sold half?"
 "Not exactly." 
Sara began to wish she hadn't embarked on this explanation of how and why Matthew Preston owned half the house.
David Fairfax would not let the subject go and went on questioning her as she showed him round.
Apart from being interested in the eccentricities of her great-aunt's will, he was also intrigued by the house and evidences of its age and its former proprietors which abounded.
Sara took him in her newly-decorated classrooms upstairs with their modern office equipment—she was particularly proud of her electric typewriter—but David Fairfax was more interested in the  photographs of her grandfather, driving his tandems and four-in-hands, on the landing walls.
 "This is the course of lectures your daughter is taking," she said trying to bring him back to the matter in hand.
She was pleased with the subjects of her lectures.
Current affairs were well covered, but in addition there were lectures on the stock market, the big banks, the ramifications of the big monopolistic groups of companies, the export and import trade.
Any girl, after attending these, should find her job, however humble a cog in the wheel of industry or commerce, more interesting and more understandable.
 "Sandra's no great brain," David Fairfax said.
"My son's got the brains, thank heaven.
But no doubt you'll be able to teach her something.
But I guess as soon as she gets a job, she'll be leaving to be married."
 "I suppose so," Sara said, a little deflated.
Sandra Fairfax was indeed a very pretty girl, and no doubt would marry  young.
 "She seems to be very keen on learning," she added.
 "Her typing is particularly good." 
 "She wants to get a job and be independent of Daddy," Fairfax said,"but we'll see, we'll see.
She'll have to run very hard in order to stand still, if you see what I mean.
She's had every luxury all her life.
I don't think she'll be too happy roughing it on nine pounds a week or whatever a shorthand typist earns."
 "Let's hope she'll be worth more when she has finished her course," Sara said lightly.
 "Some nice old family portraits you have," said David Fairfax eyeing the "Gainsboroughs" on the wall.
"I need a few to go with my newest acquisition.
I've bought Carpendens Court, you know."
 "But not from some impoverished family?" asked Sara slyly.
David Fairfax gave her a sharp look.
 "No, it was a nursing and convalescent home," he said.
 "The family who owned it died out way back." 
There was a sudden chatter and a clatter  up the stairs.
The pupils were coming back from lunch for their afternoon sessions.
Soon the place would sound like a factory with all the typewriters going at once.
David Fairfax waited to greet his daughter, and then said good-bye to Sara.
After all, he had not been the ogre she had expected him to be.
Mrs. Fairfax had come along with Sandra in the first place.
Gentle and unassuming, she had been very much in her daughter's hands.
The father, Sara had expected, had come to criticise and investigate.
Instead, he had seemed more interested in the house than in the school.
It had really been a fatherly routine check to see that all was well with the place his daughter was attending.
Both the Fairfaxes were snobs, Sara had concluded.
Mrs. Fairfax had seemed more interested in who was attending the school than in what was being taught.
And while Sara was pleased to accept girls from the big houses round about, she also wanted pupils from less luxurious backgrounds in the town and from Bridgeborough.
She did not want to cultivate the snob image.
It was  old hat, anyway.
Her school was going to be right with it, modem, classless, with no absurd delusions about exclusivity.
She forgot about David Fairfax and got on with her afternoon work.
She herself gave some of the lectures and was preparing one on business conditions in America.
It was hard for an English girl to get a secretarial job in New York these days—she had been lucky in getting her work permit before the restrictions were so stringent—but maybe one day the conditions would change and there would be more work permits available.
In any case, it was interesting to compare American and British offices.
She began typing, and David Fairfax went right out of her mind.
He came back into it with a bump some two days later.
It was early morning and Sara was taking the first typing session of the day.
Her first pupils all now knew the rudiments of typing.
All they needed was a lot of practice and some supervision and correcting, and occasionally putting back on the right track when they strayed.
Six  of them were clacking away at various speeds when the door of the classroom opened and Matthew Preston erupted into the room.
His face was dark with rage.
He shouted to make himself heard above the din: "I want to see you at once," 
Like one, all six typewriters stopped and six pairs of eyes gazed at him above the machines.
Sara too from her desk at the top of the room stared at him blankly.
After the noise of the typewriters, the silence seemed vast.
Matthew Preston, from the day the school opened, had been a source of interest to Sara's pupils.
He was young, personable and elusive.
He was the only eligible male in an exclusively female establishment.
Most of the girls were also interested in horses.
Matthew appeared occasionally in riding clothes, and what was more, kept horses somewhere at the back of the house.
But all the same, Sara had not been prepared for the girls' curiosity about Matthew.
She knew it annoyed Mrs. Mott, which was why she had agreed so peaceably to the girls not using the main  staircase and the hall of the house to get to their sessions.
In the stables, Bunny Chaloner was perfectly capable of warding off any too-friendly girl.
Lambert, the head groom, some of the pupils had found more approachable.
Now the advent of the man himself into a classroom caused something of a sensation, even if it was under cover.
 "I'd be obliged if you didn't shout," Sara said coldly.
"I'm busy.
I'll see you in half an hour at the end of the session."
 "I want to talk to you now." 
Matthew lowered his voice but his tone was still fierce.
As one, the six typewriters began clacking again, not perhaps quite so loudly as their operators strained to hear the rest of the conversation.
For a moment, Sara argued with him, and then seeing he was not going to leave the room unless she went with him, unwillingly she followed him out.
On the landing, she led the way to the small room she had been using as her office.
She shut the door and turned and faced him.
 "I think this is intolerable," she said.
 "I think your behaviour is intolerable," Matthew said.
 "What have you been saying about me to David Fairfax?" 
 "David Fairfax?" 
Sara stared at him.
She had seen very little of Matthew these last few weeks since the dinner party Jenny had invited him to.
She was busy and so was he.
There had been occasional brief meetings to discuss some detail of the conversion.
Sara had kept the tone formal and business-like.
She had smarted at Jenny's accusation the night of the dinner party that she had encouraged Matthew.
She had done her best to snub him on that occasion.
She found him physically attractive.
She could not help that.
He flustered her.
She had not known him long enough to become accustomed to the impact of his looks, but she felt confident she could hide any extra fluttering of the pulse which he gave her.
Now Jenny had been sent off to Rome by her father.
Sara knew that he hoped a change of scene would make her change her mind about Matthew.
Sara also knew that Jenny was writing to Matthew.
She  had seen the letters with the familiar handwriting and the Rome postmarks when she had sorted the post on one or two mornings before Mrs. Mott's arrival.
Her father would not be pleased.
But Jenny was not in Sara's mind as she looked at Matthew now.
Her heart faltered.
He looked frightening and she had a momentary sensation of having caged herself in with an angry lion.
 "David Fairfax came to see you the other day," Matthew went on.
"Whatever it was you said to him has caused him to cancel the work I was doing for him.
He seems to think I am some sort of double-dealing rascal who is going to cheat him—"
 "I said nothing about you that was not true," Sara cried, recovering her poise.
"I can't help it if you tell lies about your family and about Moorlake House.
I only corrected the false impression he had of—"
"Lies about my family?
What lies about my family?
I've never discussed my family with David Fairfax.
And how does Woodlands  Incorporated come into it?
What do you know of Woodlands Incorporated?"
For a second Sara looked blankly at him and then she suddenly remembered the little man who had called to see Matthew the day Fairfax had been there.
 "Some man called Barnes called to see you," she said.
 "I didn't know him—I only spoke to him for a few minutes, but David Fairfax recognised him." 
She racked her brains to remember what she had said about Barnes to David Fairfax, but she had said nothing, only that he came from Woodlands Incorporated—and that, because she was still holding his card in her hand.
 "You certainly gave him your version of how your aunt came to leave me this property," Matthew said bitterly.
 "It's none of his damn" business, of course, but he certainly made it so."
 "He was interested in the house," protested Sara.
"I didn't give him my version, as you call it.
He questioned me."
She felt a little sick.
David Fairfax had  certainly blown up everything she had told him.
 "He's under some delusion that I'm going to cheat him," Matthew said.
 "Anyway, the job's off—" 
 "I'm sorry—" Sara began.
 "You're sorry," Matthew mimicked.
"Go and tell that to the extra men I've hired.
I've spent a lot of time on this job —or rather wasted a lot of time—it meant a great deal to me."
He pushed his hand wearily through his hair.
The fire had gone out of him suddenly.
 "I'm sorry," Sara said again.
She was distressed that her words to David Fairfax could be so misconstrued.
 "Can I see Mr. Fairfax and explain—" 
 "I'd prefer you to keep your nose right out of my business and not ravel things further by" explaining "anything," Matthew said.
Anger battled with remorse in Sara's heart.
He was a most difficult man, and yet she hated him to think so ill of her.
What did it matter what he thought of  her?
Surprisingly she knew it mattered to her a great deal.
 "You sound as if you think I did it all on purpose," she said.
 "Didn't you?" 
Matthew's dark eyes were bitter.
"Your fragile looks belie you.
You are as tough as Miss Lockwood made you sound.
You'd like to see the back of me, and all your actions are directed towards that end.
But I shall be harder to budge than you have bargained for."
He turned on his heels and left her.
When he had gone, Sara sat down at her desk.
She felt quite weak and breathless, as though she had been running.
She hated Matthew Preston as much as he obviously hated her.
And yet—and yet his bitterness against her was fully comprehensible.
She looked at the telephone on her desk and for a minute was tempted to pick it up and ask for David Fairfax's number.
But no, it would probably cause more trouble if she meddled further and tried to explain.
It was ironical that it was Matthew's kindness in mentioning the school to Fairfax for his daughter Sandra which had brought  about their meeting.
Sara wished she had not been so petty when Fairfax had called, and had let him go on thinking it was Matthew's old family house.
Then none of this might have happened.
While she did not like Matthew and never would, she could not wish him ill.
WHEN Matthew left Sara, he went down to his office.
On his desk was a map of the Fairfax property which he had been working on when he had the telephone call from the owner telling him that he was cancelling all the arrangements.
Matthew had been making a detailed fire-protection plan for the acres which Fairfax had wanted to replant or afforest.
Fire is the greatest danger to new forests and woodlands.
Every year in Great Britain hundreds of acres of trees are destroyed, a loss which is carried into the future, for fires mean a loss of that timber needed in the years to come.
Matthew had made his fire plan and cleared it with chief officer of the Wellingham fire brigade.
Fire rides, equipment, improvement of the natural water supplies, rendezvous points, sign  posting, adequate access into the woods, had all been discussed solemnly as befitted their importance.
Matthew thrust the map aside impatiently.
He had put out orders for hundreds of seedling trees, miles of fencing.
Mrs. Mott had better get on with the job of cancelling them.
"Yes, of course, Mr. Preston, I'll start straight away .
Shall I phone through or had I better write?"
Mrs. Mott spoke softly as though in the presence of the bereaved.
"You'd better write—it's more official.
It's not as bad as all that, Mrs. Mott,"Matthew added.
 "We'll survive; you know." 
 "Oh, I know, Mr. Preston," breathed Mrs. Mott.
"Indeed, I've been thinking perhaps it's a mercy, you know.
Mr. Fairfax would have been a most difficult customer in all senses of the word.
Very erratic and demanding."
 "I guess so," said Matthew.
But it would have been a lovely job, he thought, interesting, with plenty of scope, and  profitable.
He could have managed Fairfax.
The office seemed suddenly stuffy and confining.
 "Ring through to Lambert and tell him to saddle up Bess," he asked Mrs. Mott.
 "I'm going out." 
He would get right away out of the town, blow the cobwebs out of his brain.
It was an uncertain day, more like April than June.
There was a high wind and clouds scudded across the blue sky and when the sun was obscured the wind seemed cold.
The trees shook, all their young leaves shivering as if with ague or fear of the approaching storm.
The wildness of the day suited Matthew's own mood as he galloped across Sara's fields into the woods and hills above the town.
When Alicia Lockwood was alive, he had persuaded her to plant one of her more derelict fields with Norway spruce.
He would ride out and see how the little plantation was doing.
As the trees grew, he had told Miss Lockwood, she could thin them and sell the thinnings as Christmas trees in the right season.
She had been keen on the idea and had talked of planting  more spruce for the specific object of selling them as trees at Christmas but she had died before they could do anything more about it.
He did not know if Sara knew about her little plantation.
He had not spoken to her about it.
She had indeed shown little interest in the fields her great-aunt had left, probably because he had the use of them.
At the thought of Sara, his rage returned.
He urged Bess forward to clear a hedge and galloped on.
It was demoralising to think such a beautiful girl could have so mean and greedy a spirit.
For some time he had thought her one of the most beautiful girls he had ever seen.
There was nothing static about her looks.
They grew on you.
Her face was like a beautiful landscape except that instead of changing with the weather, it changed with her moods.
It had been pleasant to see her flitting about Moorlake, absorbed in her enterprise.
She fitted the old house somehow.
But she had no heart.
A nasty little calculating machine instead.
He pitied the poor mutt who ever fell for  the face and the figure and who thought there was something behind them to match their perfection.
Matthew had reached the woods and he slowed Bess down to a walk and bent down and caressed her neck.
He looked about him and was pleased with what he saw.
Last year he had thinned the woods for Alicia Lockwood, cutting down saplings and stragglers.
The remaining trees were doing well.
It was a lovely piece of woodland and full of birds and their song.
Matthew rode on feeling a little more at peace with himself.
He skirted the spruce plantation and supposed that at some point he should tell Sara about it.
He could imagine that she might be interested in its money-making propensity at the end of the year.
When he returned to his office some two hours later, it was to hear from Mrs. Mott that Lord Coleworthy had been on the telephone and wanted him to ring back when he came in.
It appeared that Lord Coleworthy had heard all about the trouble from Fairfax  and was trying to be a peacemaker.
But first he wanted to hear Matthew's side of the story.
Later, Sara was told this by Mrs. Mott.
Diffidently, she stopped Matthew one morning when he was on his way out.
 "Have you heard anything more about the Fairfax business?" she asked.
 "Mrs. Mott thought things might be patched up." 
Matthew looked down at her, his expression unfriendly.
 "No," he said.
 "How kind of you to be interested," he added sarcastically.
From the doorstep, she watched him get into his car and drive off.
She felt as if someone had squeezed her heart hard and painfully.
Horrid man.
 "Lovely day," said Mrs. Hargreaves from the antique shop next door.
She was busy opening up her shutters.
 "Lovely," said Sara mechanically.
 "I've been meaning to pop in and see you for some time," Mrs. Hargreaves went on.
"I wondered whether, now you've done a lot of redecorating, you had any little pieces of furniture you wanted to sell.
Your aunt had some nice things and I believe you've got a lot of blue and white china."
Sara stopped thinking about Matthew Preston and focused on Mrs. Hargreaves.
 "I'm sorry," she said.
"What did you say?
Blue and white china?"
 "That nice friend of yours who spent the week-end told me you had a lot of Oriental stuff," Mrs. Hargreaves went on.
 "He bought quite a lot of things from me —he was trade—" 
 "Yes," said Sara, "I remember." 
Thwarted by her refusal to part with any of her treasures, James Barlow had consoled himself in Mrs. Hargreaves's shop next door.
 "I'm not really selling anything," she said hastily, "but if I am I'll let you know." 
 "I'm always interested in Oriental china," Mrs. Hargreaves said.
The Chinese room had so far not been touched by Sara or her decorators.
She wanted to turn it into a little sitting-room for herself and she wanted to keep its  Chinese theme.
She also wanted to make it more comfortable.
It would never be comfortable while it had the square Canton-wood furniture.
So far she had not been able to reconcile her desire to keep everything the same and her desire for comfort.
So the Chinese room remained dusty and deserted.
One day she would do something about it, but at the moment she had so many other things to occupy her attention.
SARA had been dreaming and for a moment her dream had more reality than her waking state.
She was in a lift and the lift wouldn't stop at the right floor but kept going first up and then down, past the numbers she wanted.
There was a typewriter involved too and as the lift went up and down the typewriter's bell tinkled metallically.
Why was the typewriter on the floor?
Sara stared at her bedroom ceiling.
She had left her curtains undrawn so as not to sleep too long in the morning.
The moon had risen and splinters of its light lay across her bed.
Of course she wasn't in a lift.
She was in her bed and it felt about two o'clock in the morning.
She turned over and looked at the illuminated dial of her alarm clock.
It was ten past two.
Then she heard the typewriter bell again.
At least it didn't sound now quite like a  typewriter, but there was something metallic about it.
It seemed directly underneath her.
There!
She heard it again.
It was like a kind of scratching.
As she had learned on her first night there, Moorlake was noisy at night.
It sighed and groaned and creaked so that sometimes it was easy to believe ghostly footsteps were padding about; but this noise was something different from the usual spasmodic little creaks—it seemed regular and deliberate.
Sara sat up and felt for her dressing-gown.
She pulled it round her and picked up a heavy torch.
It was probably the wind rattling some lattice, but she was going to find out.
Lizzie was no doubt sleeping soundly on the floor above.
Matthew, of course, was now sealed off in his part of the house.
Sara crept carefully down the stairs.
The moon peering in helped her to see and there was no need to switch on the light.
When she got downstairs, there was no sound at all.
Now fully awake, fright overcame her.
What on earth was she doing coming downstairs in the middle of the  night to investigate a mysterious noise?
In the little passage, there were two doors.
One led to the drawing-room, one to the Chinese room, which was directly under her bedroom.
Resolutely, Sara switched on the passage light.
She opened the door which led into the Chinese room.
As she did so, a door slammed and there was a gust of air.
She felt for the light switch and clicked but nothing happened.
After that, she was not quite sure of the sequence of events.
She heard a muttered curse, she saw a shadow across the french window at the end of the room, she felt someone catch her round the waist and drag her to the ground.
She fought tenaciously and managed to get herself free.
She rolled along the carpet, hampered by her long dressing-gown, and then arms like steel tentacles caught her again.
She still had the torch in her hand and brought it down on her assailant with all her strength.
She made contact and heard an exclamation of pain and then her arms were pinioned behind her and she was powerless.
She screamed.
She was released suddenly.
 "Oh, my God," said Matthew.
She heard him fumbling about looking for the lamp switch and then he found it.
It was a reading lamp, a tranquil Chinese lady in blanc de ChIne with a light above her head and a pink pagoda-shaped shade.
In its rosy glow, Sara, still lying on the floor, saw Matthew.
He was fully dressed and a dark contusion on his cheek was beginning to swell.
 "They've got away," he said and moved swiftly to the french windows.
The peacock silk curtains swayed gently in the breeze.
Sara got up slowly.
She felt bruised and her arms hurt.
She looked about her.
Two of the black lacquer cabinets had been opened and china lay in little piles outside them on the carpet.
As far as she could see nothing had been taken but then she was not exactly sure of all their contents.
Matthew came back into the room.
 "They were in a car," he said,"but I was too late.
It was parked down the road.
I  heard the motor but I wasn't even able to get the number."
 "Did I do that?" asked Sara looking at his face.
 "It was you who pulled me to the ground?" 
Matthew had been in the stables late, looking at one of his mares who was about to foal.
Coming back across the yard he had heard the sound of a door swinging.
He had walked round the side of the house and seen the french windows of the Chinese room wide open and the curtains billowing in the breeze.
At that time, he was not suspicious of any burglars but thought that Sara had been careless and had left the window unlocked.
He went to close the windows and stepped inside the room, planning to lock them and then let himself out by Sara's front door.
His footsteps must have disturbed the intruders.
They had switched off their torch when he stepped inside the room, and made no noise, but some sixth sense told him that he was not alone.
He deliberately locked the french windows and stayed inside the  room, knowing that eventually the night visitors, whoever they were, would have to make a move.
But instead, it had been Sara who made the move.
He had seen her perfectly in the light from the passage.
In the same instant someone had leapt for the window.
It was he whom Matthew had brought down in a flying tackle.
The other man had bumped into Sara, but in the confusion when Sara had torn herself away, Matthew had caught hold of Sara herself.
 "I'm sorry," Matthew said.
 "Are you all right?" 
 "Yes, I'm all right," Sara said, her teeth beginning to chatter.
She looked up at him with a slightly worried expression, put out her hand as though to catch hold of him, and slipped to the floor in a faint.
Sara heard Matthew's voice from a long way off.
 "Come on, sweetheart," he was saying, "you can't do this to me." 
She could feel him patting her face.
She was lying on one of the sofas in the drawing-room.
Matthew was kneeling on  the floor looking into her eyes beside the couch and his arm was around her.
 "That's a darling girl, wake up, wake up." 
She stared up at him in puzzlement and when she blinked, he suddenly drew her to him as though she were a beloved doll.
 "You sweet creature," she thought she heard him say and she felt a warm butterfly kiss on her mouth.
Afterwards, she knew she must have imagined the words and the kiss.
They were so unlikely.
She shook her head as if she had been swimming, and complete consciousness came back to her.
She drew herself away from Matthew in sudden shyness.
 "Have I been out long?" she asked.
 "Ooh, I'm so cold." 
"Only a few minutes.
I'm going to make you a cup of tea and we'll put some whisky in it to make you feel better.
But first I'll get you a blanket."
 "Oughtn't we to ring up the police—about the burglary?" 
Sara asked.
"Yes, I'll see to them later.
Where can I find you a blanket?"
 "There's a car rug in the cupboard in the hall." 
Wrapped in the car rug, lying on the sofa, Sara began to feel more normal.
Her teeth stopped chattering, and when Matthew came back with the tea and the whisky, he remarked that the colour had come back into her face.
 "You certainly went whiter than white," he said.
"I m sorry I gave you such a fright.
A very inefficient bit of work all round."
 "Your bruise doesn't look so good," Sara said looking at the dark swelling on his cheek bone.
 "You were lucky I didn't cut your face open with that torch." 
 "Or blind me," Matthew said.
Sara sipped her hot tea with its dash of whisky gratefully.
She still felt a little odd and light-headed.
It struck her as bizarre to be lying here at three o'clock in the morning with Matthew Preston.
 "What do you suppose they were alter?" she asked, thinking of the burglars.
"There's nothing of value in the Chinese room—it's only junk my great-uncle brought back on his travels—tourist stuff.
He thought of himself as a great collector —I believe there were great collections of Chinese porcelain made by Victorian and Edwardian connoisseurs, but he was pretty small fry, just being fashionable."
 "Maybe you ought to get an expert to look at the china," suggested Matthew.
"Or it is possible that exaggerated stories have got about of the valuables in Moorlake.
There have been a lot of strangers in the place—workmen—"
And knowledgeable people like James Barlow, who had talked to Mrs. Hargreaves next door, thought Sara.
She remembered the antique-dealer's remark of the other morning.
 "I believe you've got a lot of blue and white china." 
Matthew looked at his watch.
 "The police are a long time getting here," he said.
He had rung them up while he was making the tea and someone was supposed to be on his way.
 "I don't suppose we have squad cars in Wellingham," said Sara.
"They'll be coming by bike.
What about your mare?"she asked suddenly.
 "Lambert's with her." 
The silence of the house wrapped them around.
Surreptitiously Sara studied Matthew.
It was easy to understand why Jenny found him so fascinating.
He was a curious mixture, an unpredictable man.
 "Why did you take up forestry?" she asked him.
Matthew did not seem surprised at her question.
The early hours of the morning are a time for confidences.
 "I wanted a country life," he said.
"My father has a property in Somerset but my elder brother will farm it.
I had to forge out on my own."
"And you went to university and got a degree?
In forestry?"
Sara persisted.
Matthew nodded.
 "Why this sudden interest in my life story?" 
 "I was thinking how little I know of you, and wondering how and why you turned up here in the first place." 
 "And thinking what a pity I did?" 
"Here we go again!
I never said that!"
 "You had it coming out of your head in a balloon." 
 "And the country life satisfies you?" 
 "It's the only life," Matthew said.
"I like to feel close to the rhythm of nature.
In a big town there is a barrier between you and the seasons.
Even the sky loses its importance."
He spoke simply, without pretension, and Sara had an unexpectedly warm feeling towards him.
She wished suddenly that she had met him under different circumstances: not as Jenny's boy friend; not as her fellow beneficiary in Aunt Alicia's will.
She admitted then she might have liked him quite a lot.
She gave a small sigh.
Jenny would be coming home next week.
What then?
The child needed to be protected from Matthew.
There was a sharp peal on the doorbell.
 "The Law," said Matthew and went to answer it.
The Law came in the person of a portly middle-aged man m the traditional raincoat.
He had a cup of tea, he listened to their story and took down what description he could of the intruders.
 "One of them was an old man," Matthew said, "or else he was wearing a wig of white hair." 
They were back in the Chinese room  Sara once more tried to guess whether anything was missing.
"It almost looks as though they were just going through the cupboards, examining the stuff, as it were, the plainclothes man said.
"The way the pots are laid out on the floor upside down, all showing the marks.
We'll have to see if we can get some fingerprints."
It was dawn when he left, a cold grey summer dawn with the birds making a deafening row.
After the enclosed black circle of the night, Sara felt as though she and Matthew were in a large grey room with the blinds suddenly sprung.
She was exhausted, and her bruises, where she had tumbled on the floor, ached uncomfortably.
She opened the door for Matthew and looked across the grey yard.
Lambert came out of the stables.
He stumped across to them on his thin gaitered legs.
 "A filly," he said briefly.
Without a word, Matthew moved across the yard and disappeared through the stable door.
Sara stared after him.
The cold morning air made her conscious she  was still in her dressing-gown.
She pulled it tightly about her and followed Matthew.
The mare lay in the straw with the newborn foal nestling into her side.
It was glistening and damp, a pale golden colour, and its ribs heaved a little still with the exertion of its arrival into this strange new world.
The mother nudged it and licked it with concentration and deliberation.
This magic had been happening while they had been closeted with the policeman discussing the prosaic and sordid details of the burglary.
 "Good girl, lovely girl," Matthew said softly.
All three of them stared in silence for a few moments.
Matthew turned to Lambert.
"Everything was okay?
You must be tired.
Why don't you turn in now?
I'll take over from here.
She'll be all right for a few hours.
I'll get the vet later this morning.
There seems no point in my going to bed now."
Sara slipped away quietly.
There seemed no point in her going to bed either, even though she felt so ragged.
Maybe a hot bath would refresh her.
It was lighter now.
She looked down across the terrace into the garden.
The mist was rising from the trees and the sun was gleaming through.
The beginning of a new day.
The early morning was marvellous if you could only get up for it.
She heard a footstep behind her and turned to see Matthew.
For a moment they looked at each other in the penetrating light of early morning.
Matthew's chin was dark with stubble, his hair rough and uncombed and the bruise below his eye looked angry and sore.
Sara hated to think of how she herself must appear with her face devoid of make-up and her hair tumbled.
But even his dishevelment could not destroy the strength of Matthew's looks, she thought.
She had the most extraordinary longing to lay her head on his chest and lean on him as though he were a tree or something solid of that sort, to feel his arms close round her.
She pulled her dressing-gown round her 
SANDRA FAIRFAX was eighteen.
Her birthday fell on a Sunday and Sandra was having a big barbecue lunch party.
A little to her own surprise, Sara was invited.
 "Bring tennis and/or bathing gear," the invitation ran.
For a day or two, Sara hesitated to accept it.
Sandra's friends would all be so much younger than herself, and then she heard that the guest list comprised all age groups and included many of her old local friends whom she hadn't seen for the past two years, and so she decided to go.
It would be fun to have a little social life again and it occurred to her, too, that now she had come to live in Wellingham permanently, she must let as many people know as possible what she was trying to do at Moorlake.
The day of the barbecue came at the end of a week of still, warm weather.
When Sara awoke and looked outside at the deep cloudless blue sky, she guessed that her hostess was also scanning it with equal pleasure.
The heat wave was continuing.
Below her window the courtyard was in deep shadow, but to her left the garden was bathed in new-minted sunshine.
It was early, and dew still lingered in the grass.
Every leaf and flower in the garden was as still as a painting and the air was expectant as though awaiting some marvellous event.
It might be the setting for A Midsummer Night's Dream, thought Sara; sleepily stretching herself, and any minute now Titania and her train of fairies might glide across the grass and into the trees.
She heard the rattle of a bucket and saw Bunny Chaloner walk across the yard swinging the pail cheerfully.
Some Titania.
More like Puck.
That girl certainly loved her job.
She was there at all hours.
A few minutes later while she was pinning up her hair before having her bath, she heard the sound of horses'  hooves and saw Matthew with Bunny Chaloner by his side ride out.
Matthew was astride the big chestnut mare Bess, who seemed to be his special favourite.
Bunny was riding a smaller Younger animal, as black as her own hair, and one who evidently found the scent of the morning too exhilarating.
He danced sideways, flicking his tail, and then caracoled round the comer of the stables in a showy and exuberant manner.
Bunny sat on him like an angel, as though glued to the saddle, handling him beautifully and gently.
A feeling of something very like envy passed through Sara as she watched her.
It was a heavenly morning for a ride.
She waited by the window to see if they would reappear in the lane which led into the woods.
For a second she thought they must have turned the other way, and then she saw them again, riding through the trees, the sunlight striking them before they moved off into the shadows.
Sara gave a big involuntary sigh and returned to her hairpins and rollers.
She spent a leisurely morning doing  some school work, reading the newspapers and then finally taking time dressing for her lunch party.
Prepared either to swim or play tennis, she packed her shoes and racket, towel and suit and a pair of shorts and a shirt.
She had been asked for twelve and it was now half past eleven, which would give her time for a pleasant comfortable drive to Carpendens Court.
She went downstairs, said good-bye to Lizzie, and went to get her car out of the garage.
The garage was part of the stable block and had been made out of the old coach house.
It was roomy enough to hold several cars, and Matthew also left his estate car there.
She crossed the courtyard and passed the stables.
No sound came from within, for the mares now would be in the fields, including the little foal which had been born the night of the burglary.
She had seen it staggering around on uncertain legs a few mornings before.
She came into the cobbled yard in front of the coach house walking carefully in her high-heeled sandals on the uneven ground.
Matthew was standing by his car, his hand on the door handle.
They stared at each other in mutual surprise, and then Sara's feeling was succeeded by another which she recognised as pleasure—unexpectedly, pleasure.
Matthew had changed from his breeches into slacks and a blue check sports shirt.
He held an untidy bundle of towel and swimming trunks in his hand and a tennis racket lay on the back seat where he had obviously just flung it.
Matthew looked Sara up and down, taking in her pretty printed linen sheath, the big striped beach bag and the tennis racket she was carrying.
 "Anyone for tennis?" he said.
 "Swimming?" 
 "I'm going out to lunch," Sara said,, "to the Fairfax barbecue for Sandra's birthday." 
"How strange.
So am I."
"It is strange.
I thought you and David Fairfax weren't on speaking terms,"Sara said.
Matthew ignored this.
"Are you driving  yourself there?
Why don't you come with me?
It seems silly to take two cars."
For always, Sara remembered that summer morning drive to Carpendens Court.
The windows of the car were open and they hummed along at a steady cruising speed meeting very little traffic.
The fields and woods were bathed in golden light overlaid with a blue haze of heat.
The hedgerows seemed full of flowers, wild roses and deep blue trails of wild pea and in the ditches the lacy umbelliferous wands of cow parsley and meadow.sweet and lady's mantle.
The air smelt of new.mown hay and roses.
Sara felt she was holding the distillation of summer in her hand.
She returned to the subject of David Fairfax.
 "If there has been a rapprochement between you," she said,"I think you are very mean not to have told me.
I didn't plan for you to lose that job, whatever you may think."
Matthew gave her a sidelong glance.
"Didn't you?
I am not sure you weren't doing a little stirring of the pudding, "he  said and then went on," There hasn't been a rapprochement exactly.
Things have been patched up between us by Lord Coleworthy, who likes me and thinks I do a good job.
I don't think in his heart of hearts David Fairfax really wants to employ me, but neither does he want to offend Coleworthy.
I, of course, would like to tell him to go to hell and keep his job, but I can't afford such proud gestures.
So on balance, it looks as though I will be doing the replanting and afforestation for Fairfax.
It will be a long job, for his estate has been sadly neglected."
 "I'm glad," Sara said softly, looking out across the fields.
She felt extraordinarily and ridiculously happy and could no]understand the reason for it.
Life was the same as it ever had been.
She had had Moorlake House and was in the red an"the Moorlake Secretarial School didn't have enough pupils, but driving along this morning, she felt curiously content.
So must a butterfly feel as it rose towards the sun, so must a bumble bee feel as it slipped from nectar.filled flower to flower, so must  Matthew's foal as it gambolled beside its mother.
She was twenty-three and could push down a house or build one, it was a glorious day and she was going to a party and sitting beside Matthew Preston.
How absurd she was, and what absurd reasons for this euphoria.
She glanced surreptitiously at Matthew, and the line of his jaw and his profile and the glimpse of his eyelashes all pleased her.
 "Did you have a good ride this morning?" she asked.
 "I saw you go out with Bunny Chaloner." 
"You must have been up early.
Yes, it was very pleasant.
We went up into the Forestry Commission woods the other side of the hills."
He paused a moment and then added,"You know, Sara, I meant it the other evening when I said you could ride whenever you want.
Judging from what your great-aunt used to say about you, I am sure you are as good as Jenny, and I would be glad for you to take out any of the animals.
Just tell Bunny or Lambert when you want to go out.
We always need a little bit of extra help."
 "You're very kind," Sara was Pleased.
"I would like to ride some time —perhaps one evening when I've finished work.
I'm sure pupils will help you whenever you want.
They're always ask me about the horses."
Matthew gave a small groan.
 "Those girls!" he said.
"I'm sure they only do it to tease Lambert.
He's too susceptible"
Like his master, perhaps?
Sara thought, but did not say aloud.
 "There'll be several of them there to-day," she said.
 "Sandra's friends." 
 "I'm not running a riding school," Matthew protested.
 "I only want expert help, remember, and if you want to ride, just say the word, but don't include it in the curriculum of the Moorlake Secretarial School." 
 "I suppose you know all the bridle Paths through the woods?" he added.
 "Since I was a child." 
 "I'd like you to ride round your own property, too," Matthew said.
"There's a little plantation of Norway spruce planted for your great-aunt and there are  two fields, I think they're called Long-fallow and the Barn field, which I wanted your aunt to plant.
She was quite keen as they are very good fields.
You can make a little money selling off the thinnings from the Norway spruce as Christmas trees.
I'll take you take you round myself some time and show you what I mean."
For a little while they were silent and Sara's feeling of contentment had imperceptibly increased.
Somewhere on the edge of this feeling she knew there was danger, but for the moment she allowed herself to drift alone on a cloud of enchantment.
 "Have you heard anything more frow the police about your burglary?" 
Matthew broke the silence between them.
 "They came round again to see if they could find any more clues," Sara said,"but so far a blank; and also, I don think anything was stolen, thanks to you.
You must have disturbed them right in the act."
 "And what have you done about getting the stuff properly valued?" 
"Nothing much.
Except that I rang up James Barlow, Jenny's friend, and asked if he could help me."
 "I thought he was a painter." 
 "He also buys and sells antiques for a living and he has promised to come down next week and have a proper look and then perhaps take a few things back to London to some man he knows who is an expert on Oriental China and objets d'art." 
 "How keen is Jenny on that man?" asked Matthew.
 "Jenny hasn't told me," Sara said after a moment, "but I know she's very fond of him." 
"He's more than fond of her, I should say, Matthew said casually—almost too casually, Sara thought.
"But she's probably fallen for some dashing Italian by now, Matthew added.
 "When does she come home?" 
 "I thought she would have written and told you," Sara said carefully.
 "She has been a fairly regular correspondent," Matthew laughed.
 "Jenny likes expressing herself on paper but she  hasn't so far, mentioned the date of her return." 
 "It's Tuesday or Wednesday," Sara said.
They were at carpendens Court now.
They passed through the iron gates and the lodge, up the drive bordered with rhododendons, into the home park dotted with massive trees, to the grand sweep of gravel in front of the house.
The barbecue had been set up by the lake, whither Matthew and Sara were conducted by the white-jacketed foreign butler.
The lake, visidle from the house, and backed with trees and a small Greek temple, had been cleaned and drained by David Fairfax to make it fit for swimming, and a diving-board had been installed.
Some of his guests were already in the water when Matthew and Sara arrived.
The lake was fringed with a shore of sandy pebbles and then a great curve of grass swept up to the terrace of thr house.
On the shore and on the grass, charcoal braziers had been set up, and a trestle  table, covered with a bright-hued cloth and crockery, looking like an advertisement for gracious living out of doors.
Behind in the background was a blue-and-white-striped marquee, an insurance against the weather.
On the table, on great platters, were mounds of steaks and chops, all marinading in special sauces; long loaves of crusty bread; wooden bowls of salad.
David Fairfax, their host, with a fancy apron and a chef's hat, was presiding at one of the charcoal fires.
Others were manned by his friends and the domestic help.
Mrs. Fairfax, looking elegant and unruffled, and obviously not going to cook a thing, was greeting her daughter's guests.
Strains of jazz throbbed and boomed overhead, muted by the open air and varying in volume with the capricious comings and going of the breeze from the lake.
A speaker had been set in one of the trees, like some modernistic bird's-nest, and Sara noticed the long snaky trail of the cable connecting it with the hi-fi in the house.
Sandra and her mother came forward to greet them, there were introductions to other fresh arrivals, old friends appeared, and when Sara had time to look around, Matthew had disappeared from her side.
She was taken off to play tennis on the courts which were nearer the house.
Afterwards, with her foursome, she changed into her swim suit and went for a bathe before lunch.
She looked around at the other people in the water, and when she saw Matthew, brown and sinewy, poised on the board for a swift controlled racing dive, she admitted to herself that it was him she was searching for.
She watched him dive, slicing into the water like a knife, and then continue in a powerful crawl which took him towards the centre of the lake.
He was followed by Sandra Fairfax, whose own crawl was pretty expert.
She saw him again briefly as she helped herself to food.
The steaks and chops were cooked now, black on the outside and tender and succulent inside.
He stood by her at the buffet.
 "Having fun?" he asked looking down on her.
She smiled and nodded but, in truth, she was not caving all that much fun.
The day had a shadow in it and waS not living up to its promise.
The surroundings were beautiful and the food delicious.
The company with whom she had been playing tennis and swimming and was now sitting, were an old friend she had known since Pony Club days, and her newly acquired husband, and David Fairfax, Junior, son of the house, spectacled and earnest and studying to be a chartered accountant.
H was nice enough, she conceded.
Indeed they were all nice.
Nice and comfortable and dull.
Exhausted by their exercise, they were content to drowse in the sun.
It was she who was at fault.
She longed for some excitement, some stimulation.
She wan something wonderful to happen.
this morning this beautiful day had been rich with the promise of some wonderful event before nightfall.
The party had coagulated into groups.
People had found various places  to sit while they had their food, and there they stayed once they had eaten, like Sara's companions, drowsy with sun and exercise and air and food.
The servants from the house moved unobtrusively among them, removing dirty plates, offering more glasses of the delicious cup, tinkling with ice and decorated with cherries and cucumber and sprigs of borage.
Above their heads the music still throbbed, more sweetly now since either David or Sandra had switched the records to more old-fashioned melodies.
Where Matthew was, Sara had no idea.
Perhaps he was with the group by the lake, or the others under the trees, or others still farther away on the terrace of the house.
Whenever she looked, she could not see him.
A big birthday cake came out for Sandra with eighteen candles which she ceremoniously blew out.
She was looking very pretty in her bathing suit, her hair still damp from swimming.
A little while after the cake-cutting, the party began to regroup.
Older guests, friends of David  darling, would you go and switch that thing off?
It seems to have got stuck and it has been playing the same bit over and over.
We're all going mad here."
David put on his spectacles and towelled his head.
He threw the towel aside and caught hold of Sara's hand.
 "Come into the house," he said,"and help me choose some decent records.
We've had enough of this oldy-worldy stuff."
Sara went with him across the grass.
Even on this hot day it felt cool and clammy to her bare feet, and then, as contrast, came the baking hot flags of the terrace.
There was no one about.
Only between twenty and thirty guests were left and they were scattered about the gardens like so much confetti.
David pushed open one of the french windows and they found themselves in the library.
The house was shuttered and seemed dim and cool after the glare outside.
It also, after the talk and laughter and the samba drum beats, seemed strangely silent and hushed.
 "The hi-fi's in Dad's study," David said  and padded across the turkey carpet across a hall and through a polished dark oak door.
The blinds were down in the study to protect new furnishings from the sun, and the light was subfusc and aqueous.
At first Sara did not see the two figures standing close together at the end of the room.
They appeared to have their arms around each other, either having just embraced or being just about to embrace.
At Sara's and David's entrance, the girl stepped back convulsively from the man, and Sara saw with a dull feeling of inevitability that it was Matthew and Sandra.
 "We came to do something about the record-player," Sandra said brightly.
 "Something's gone wrong with it." 
 "How odd," David said calmly,"so did we, and let's get some new groovy records on.
The oldsters have had their quota.
What's the matter with it?"
They all stared at the needle stuck in one place while the record continued to revolve.
Very very faintly they could hear the sound.
David picked up the arm and  through the rack looking for new ones to put on while Sandra busied herself putting on the sleeves of the ones they had played.
Matthew said, "I think it's time we went home, Sara." 
 "I'm ready whenever you are," Sara said without looking at him.
Sandra gave a small shriek.
"You can't go home yet.
The party's only just beginning.
It's my birthday.
No one can go home until I say so.
Come and have another swim."
She stood up and the records in her lap, slid to the floor.
"Come on, Matt, I insist.
She caught hold of him by the hand and half ran, half pulled him across the room to the door.
Matthew gave a rueful despairing look at Sara.
 "See you later," he said.
Sara knelt on the floor and began putting away the records Sandra had abandoned, carefully matching the right sleeve to each disc.
David Fairfax knelt beside her and helped her after he had got the record-player going again.
His face was very close  to hers and he suddenly took off his spectacles and looked deeply into her eyes.
Sara drew away from him, but she was not quick enough for him.
He plopped a tentative kiss on her cheek.
 "Oh, David," she said pushing him away as if he were a small boy, which indeed he seemed.
 "Sandra and Matthew have been giving me ideas," he said.
 "Well, pop the ideas right out of your head," Sara said briskly, and then to soften her rejection of his advances, she added,"I've got the most awful headache.
Do you think you could run me home, David?
Would it be a bore?
I came with Matthew Preston but I don't want to spoil his fun if he wants to stay on.
I'll say a quiet good-bye to your mother and father and perhaps you would explain to Sandra and tell Matthew when you come back."
David protested a little at her going, but assured her it would be no trouble to take her home, and some fifteen minutes later, after she had said her thank-yous and good-byes and collected her belongings, they were in his super-charged sports car roaring along the lanes.
Sara closed her eyes.
It seemed a million years since the morning.
 "Are you sure you're all right?" 
David asked.
 "You look rather pale." 
 "Too much sun and fresh air," Sara said weakly.
At last, after another million years persuading David she would be all right when she had taken some aspirin, she was alone, in her own flat.
She felt hot and sticky and changed her clothes and put on a housecoat.
She made herself some tea and took some aspirin and paced about the flat.
Matthew Preston was an attractive man physically.
She had always thought that, and she had been involved with him, willy-nilly, over the house.
It was nothing more nor less than propinquity.
This attraction she felt would wear off.
It was meaningless.
He was attractive and he liked girls.
Jenny, who was in love with him and whom he had asked to marry him.
Her own sister.
Now Sandra, and  probably many more.
The line forms on the right, dear.
She was not going to be one of a group.
The Matthew Preston Fan Club.
It was absurd, like a disease she had caught.
This morning she had sensed he wanted to be friendly.
It had been easy to respond, but she must keep her distance.
She was not going to fall in love with him, but even as she said this vehemently to herself, Sara was afraid that she had already gone over the precipice she had been conscious of this morning.
She had already fallen in love with Matthew Preston.
She was as bewitched as her sister Jenny.
She was startled out of her reverie by a ring on the door-bell.
She went downstairs half knowing, half afraid, it would be Matthew.
He stood on the doorstep, still with his tennis racquet and bathing things under his arm.
 "Are you all right?" he asked.
"You shouldn't have rushed off like that.
I would have brought you home—I didn't want to stay any longer.
The expression in his eyes was tender and kind.
 "I'm all right," Sara said hurriedly, looking away from him.
"I had some tea and an aspirin.
I didn't want to spoil your fun-break the party up."
There was a small uncertain silence.
Matthew made no move to go.
 "Aren't you going to ask me in?" 
"Why, yes, do come in, if you Sara stepped back into her tiny hall and then walked into the drawing-room.
 "What are you going to do about supper?" 
Matthew asked.
"I'll be all right, Lizzie'll cook me something.
Anyway, I don't feel like eating after that enormous lunch."
Matthew put his things down on a chair but did not sit down himself.
Instead he paced about the room.
Sara stood by the open window and the scent of tobacco plant was wafted strongly to her on the warm evening air.
 "Can I give you a drink?" she asked nervously.
 "Whisky —sherry —tea?" 
 "No thanks, no thanks," Matthew said and continued pacing about.
 "Do sit down," Sara protested.
 "You'll wear out the carpet." 
Matthew flashed a dark look at her.
 "I had better go," he said abruptly.
 "I promised Lambert I'd help with the horses." 
He paused at the front door as she showed him out.
 "It could have been a lovely day," he said slowly.
"Did you feel this morning?
It started out so beautifully…
"
His words tailed away.
Sara looked up to meet his glance.
His eyes were dark with feeling, with message he could not put into words, but Sara would not allow herself to read an understand the message.
 "It was a lovely day," she said flatly half turning away.
 "Mrs. Fairfax had arranged everything beautifully." 
 "What about the ride?" 
Matthew asked.
He had way-laid Sara in the cobbled yard of the coach house when she was on her way to collect her car to do some shopping.
Tonight?"
Bunny Chaloner, sitting on the step of the coach house door in the sunshine, looked up with interest from the tack she was busily cleaning.
It was the day after the barbecue and Sara was reminded that it was here yesterday she had met Matthew.
Her feelings then were as absurd as her feelings now; both the happiness and the misery were equally ridiculous and stupid.
 "I can't to-night," she said quickley.
 "I've got some work to do." 
 "To-morrow then?" 
"I can't to-morrow either.
In fact, I don't think I can this week,"Sara added  in a rush.
 "I've got a lot of extra work to do." 
 "It doesn't have to be the evening," Matthew said looking at her, his eyes narrowed against the sun.
 "You can ride during the day if you have more time then." 
 "I don't really have much time at all, thanks all the same ." 
Sara got into her car and shut the door.
She wound down the window.
"Can I do anything for you in Bridgeborough?
I've got to drive in."
 "No thanks," Matthew said.
He stepped back and watched her as she whirled the small car round and out of the yard into the lane, crashing her gears with nervousness.
Sara felt slightly sick, but there was no point in wading deeper into the morass.
She must steer clear of Matthew and then perhaps this ridiculous infatuation would wear off.
It was easier said than done.
He was around all the time.
She saw him constantly, and every time she saw him, she was washed anew with yearning.
She  plunged deeply into work to try and distract herself.
Her part of Moorlake was not yet straight and there was still much clearing out to be done.
She was busy, too, with the organisation of the school.
At the moment, she took her pupils as they came, fitting them into courses already running.
It meant numerous small classes of girls at different states of progress.
Eventually, Sara hoped to run her courses in terms of three months each, corresponding to the scholastic year.
Now as she was getting inquiries for further ahead, it was possible to plan doing this.
So what with paper work and work around Moorlake, Sara kept herself active.
Lizzie grumbled and said she was getting thin and doing too much, but then Lizzie would have grumbled if she had done too little.
Jenny came back from Rome and rang Sara up within a few days of arriving home.
Her trip had been marvellous, she bubbled over the phone, but Rome had  been terribly hot and she was glad to be back.
 "I've got a favour to ask you," she said later in the conversation.
"Do you think I could come and stay with you?
The thing is"She paused, and Sara waited silently for her to continue.
 "Matthew has asked me to work for him again." 
 "I see." 
"Is it all right?
You don't sound very enthusiastic.
I mean I can't very well stay with him."
Jenny's laugh came lightly over the line.
 "Of course you can stay," Sara said, "though we are still not very comfortable." 
Perhaps Matthew was in love with Jenny, as much as he could be in love with anyone.
 "But what does your pa say?" 
 "He's not pleased," Jenny said after a small pause.
"So I haven't been absolutely truthful with him.
I've told the teeniest weeniest white lie and said that I will only be staying with you for a week or so."
 "But how long are you staying, Jenny?" 
 "You know my feelings about Matthew," Jenny said.
"They haven't  changed.
I shall stay as long as the job lasts—or until my situation changes."
 "Matthew—" began Sara and then stopped and bit her lip.
 "Matthew what?" 
 "Nothing, I said nothing." 
Jenny went on,"It's no good disapproving, Sara.
I understand Matthew."
No, thought Sara, it was no good disapproving.
Jenny would brook no criticism of Matthew.
Her rage would only be turned against the detractor.
She must learn her own lessons.
 "When do you want to come?" 
Sara asked.
 "At the beginning of next week," Jenny said.
 "And Sara, there's no need to mention it to Matthew if you see him." 
"Mention what to him, Jenny?
That you're coming?
Has he really offered you the job back?"
 "Of course he has." 
Jenny's impatience came across the wire.
"I just don't want it to get back to Pa.
I told you he doesn't know I'm going to work for Matthew.
He thinks I'm staying with you."
"You're being very silly, Jenny.
He's bound to find out and then he'll be angrier than ever."
 "I'll calm him down when and if he finds out," said Jenny confidently.
She hesitated and then said, "Do you see much of Matthew?" 
 "I see him constantly," said Sara and left Jenny to make what she could of that.
 "You can ask Miss Monroe if you don't believe me," Sandra Fairfax cried and flashed Sara a mischievous look as she came into the garden.
Some half-dozen of the girls were having their elevenses in the sunshine in between lessons, and drinking their coffee with a great deal of laughter and chattering.
Sara envied their insouciance.
They were completely carefree, seventeen and eighteen years old, released from irksome school, not yet burdened with adult responsibility.
Life was there for them to enjoy.
 "Ask me what?" 
Sara said.
 "Oh, it's a bet we had with Sandra," one of the girls giggled, "but she's such an old fibber we don't believe she's won it." 
 "I have so," Sandra cried.
 "Part of it anyway, and the rest will come later." 
 "What was the bet?" 
Sara asked.
There was more laughter, but at length someone said, "Sandra made us a bet she would get Matthew Preston to lend her a horse to ride and to make a pass at her." 
 "You can be a witness for me, Miss Monroe," Sandra cried.
"Didn't you and David interrupt us in the study on my birthday?
It was a most crucial moment.
I was just about to ask him about the horse —and I never got another chance afterwards.
But I will, you'll see.
Tell them I won half my bet, Miss Munroe."
Sara smiled a little stiffly.
"We certainly interrupted something.
Don't you girls ever think of anything except boys?"
 "Men," corrected Celia, one of Mr. Crowther's nieces.
"And clothes.
And parties.
You sound like my mother, Miss Monroe."
"I'm going to sound like your teacher now and shoo you all back into the classroom.
It's nearly time for your next session.
Miss Aitchison will be waiting for you."
Sara walked down the terrace steps into  the garden proper.
She was going to pick some flowers for Jenny's room.
Jenny was arriving this evening.
How easily Matthew was captured, she thought.
A young pretty face and an invitation, and he succumbed.
Until the next pretty face came along.
How sensible she had been not to give way to any of his blandishments.
Wiser than Jenny, who was chasing a romantic will-o'-the-wisp and who would end up with more heartache.
She picked a mixed posy of flowers and put them in the small basket she was carrying, and then wandered down through the orchard.
Beyond the apple and plum trees was one of Great-Aunt Alicia's best fields, a beautiful broad paddock, and here the mare and the new foal were grazing.
More animals were grazing farther down the field.
As Sara leaned over the gate, a slight figure who had been obscured behind them began walking towards her along the hedge.
It was Bunny Chaloner.
 "Hallo," said Bunny when she was  within speaking distance.
 "Admiring our baby?" 
The foal's legs still seemed too long for its body and it still was not sure where the four of them were going, but this did not deter it from frisking about.
 "He's grown so quickly," Sara said.
She had had very little to do with Bunny, but on their occasional meetings the girl had grown more civil of late.
Sara could only suppose that her initial suspicion had been stilled, and that she accepted her, Sara, as part of the permanent scenery around the place.
 "I've been having a look at the entire," Bunny said.
 "He came back from Newmarket last week and I was worried about the fencing in his field." 
Sara had seen the stallion arrive, a great big bay, with a fierce, nostril.
He had not liked his ride from Newmarket in the horse-box but she had watched Bunny whisper and wheedle him into tranquillity.
Confident as Sara was of her own skill as a horsewoman, she would have had to know him very well before she dared to ride him, but Bunny, she knew, rode him constantly without fear.
Bunny put a foot on the gate and lithely jumped up and perched on the topmost bar.
For a few minutes they contemplated the grazing animals in silence.
It was a tranquil picture the green field; the far woods; above, a blue sky dappled with little fleecy clouds.
The silken coats of the well-cared-for horses gleamed in the sunshine.
Sara felt at peace gazing at them.
 "You've been working hard," she said to Bunny.
 "You come so early in the morning and you leave late." 
Bunny shrugged.
 "I have plenty of time off really," she said.
"Matt lets me go whenever I want.
He's a marvellous man to work for, and anyway, I love the job."
Her voice was dreamy.
 "Sometimes I think I must have been a horse in a previous incarnation." 
She laughed.
 "You certainly seem to know their language," Sara said.
She looked at her watch and turned regretfully away.
She had to take a class in ten minutes.
"Ah well, I suppose I must get back to my  work.
I don't think it's as much fun as yours."
She picked up the basket of flowers from the ground.
"I must put these in Jenny's room.
She'll be back with you to-morrow.
Bunny stared at her.
"Jenny?
Your sister?
I thought she was in Rome."
 "She was," Sara said, "but she's coming back to Moorlake to work for Matthew again—surely you know?" 
 "Matthew hasn't told me," Bunny said.
She sounded angry.
"He hasn't dared.
I shall leave,"she said.
 "There isn't room for both of us!" 
She flashed a look at Sara.
"I can't help it if she is your sister—she's spoilt and she causes trouble.
It's not fair not to tell me!"
 "You can't leave—not when you love the job so much," Sara said.
 "Matthew must think you need an extra pair of hands." 
They walked back through the orchard in silence and when they reached the garden, Bunny turned off abruptly towards the stables.
Sara went about her business, more  troubled than ever about Jenny's imminent arrival.
She began to wonder if Matthew knew himself that she was coming, that she was going to work for him again.
Had he really offered her the job?
That doubt, however, was set at rest at lunch time when she got a message from Mrs. Mott.
 "Mr. Preston would like to see Miss Simpson as soon as she arrives," Mrs. Mott said with her usual air of an ambassador at the Court of St. James delivering a grave communique"from his Head of State.
Sara was visited again by the police.
They had caught two men breaking into an antique shop a few miles away from Wellingham, a former private house at the side of the road.
One of them was an elderly man with white hair which had turned out to be a wig, and the CID man had remembered Matthew's remark about the men who had burgled Moorlake.
One of them had had white hair or, Matthew had remarked, it might have been a wig.
Would Sara and Mr. Preston come down to the police station and see if they could identify the men?
They were going to have an identification parade.
It was not a very pleasant task and Sara went to the station with some trepidation.
As it was the other end of the town, Matthew drove her there in the late afternoon.
Neither of them was able to identify any  they came away they did not feel they had been of much help.
It was about six o'clock and the shops in Wellingham were all closed and the streets emptying.
Matthew drove the car round the back of the house and switched off the engine.
He did not immediately get out of the car but turned and looked at Sara.
 "Let me take you out to dinner," he said,"and we'll forget about that unpleasant experience.
I know it's silly, but I always feel so sorry for people who are compelled to steal."
 "They're not compelled, surely?" asked Sara faintly.
 "What about it?" 
Matthew said, his eyes still on her face.
 "Will you have dinner with me?" 
 "I'm sorry, I can't," Sara said.
 "I'm working," she added lamely.
 "What's the matter?" 
Matthew asked softly.
 "Are you playing hard to get?" 
 "I'm not playing anything!" 
 "Or still keeping our relationship to a" strictly neutral business acquaintance"?
I  don't think you are as indifferent to me as you pretend,"Matthew said.
He picked up her hand.
"See?
You tremble when I touch you."
Angered, Sara tried to snatch her hand away but he held on to her wrist and put his other arm around her shoulders.
Sara lay back against the car seat unresisting, and looked up Into his face.
There was a teasing light in his eyes mingled with tenderness.
One half of her wanted to give in and accept his kisses, which she knew would be delicious; the other half wanted to tell him insultingly what she thought of him.
 "You're very conceited, Matthew Preston," she said.
 "A great whizz with the girls." 
 "But not with you?" 
 "If you don't let me go this instant I shall scream and Lizzie will come out and Bunny Chaloner" 
 "She's gone home, and Lizzie would approve—she likes me." 
He let her go reluctantly.
"You're a funny old-fashioned  girl.
But I warn you I don't give up easily.
I shall try again."
Sara got out of the car.
 "You can cross me off your list," she said.
Oh Jenny, she thought, poor Jenny.
 "What list is that?" asked Matthew idly as he shut the car door.
If only we could get to know each other better, we'd have a beautiful friendship.
What are you afraid of?"
Sara turned on her heel and walked away from him.
He caught her up as she was turning into the courtyard to cross to her own front door.
 "You'll find it hard to get away from me here in this house," he murmured.
"Time is on my side, Sara darling, but, beware, I don't have too much patience.
He put his hand under her chin and turned her face upwards towards him and bent down and very deliberately Kissed her full on the lips, and then he turned away and left her.
Shaken, Sara opened the door and entered the house.
She felt on fire, and thoughts tumbled pell-mell in her head—Jenny, and his effrontery.
Did he think he was the Shah of Persia?
The man was a demon and he had disturbed her to the depths of her being.
Lizzie came from the kitchen to tell her Jenny had phoned and was arriving a day earlier.
I only need that, thought Sara.
What was she going to do about Matthew and Jenny?
Warn him off and have him think she wanted to encourage him herself?
Tell Jenny of his fickleness and have Jenny accuse her of jealousy?
Poor Jenny, she thought again, and a still small voice added, poor me.
It's not good enough,"Lizzie, said, plonking a cup of tea in front of Sara.
"We're not straight yet.
Miss Jenny ought to be more thoughtful instead of causing extra work."
 "She won't be much extra work," Sara protested mildly,"and we have plenty of room.
Don't fuss, Lizzie."
 "I'm not fussing!" 
Lizzie was indignant and padded back to the kitchen mumbling to herself.
It was late afternoon.
School was over for the day and Sara had expected Jenny to arrive before this.
She awaited her coming with mixed feelings.
Once she would"only have been pleased to see Jenny and welcomed her company.
Now her presence at Moorlake was going to be complicating for both of them.
Her own attraction to Matthew she had pushed to the outermost edges of her  consciousness.
She did not want him in her life.
She did not want to be hurt by him.
She did not want Jenny to be hurt.
Yet she could see nothing in the future but hurt for both of them.
She felt disloyal in not telling Jenny of Matthew's inconsequential fickleness, and yet Jenny would probably not believe her if she did tell.
And she knew, too, that having this queer ambivalent feeling about Matthew herself, her motives in bearing tales would not stand examination.
So Sara, troubled, sipped her tea and waited for Jenny.
She arrived at last an hour or so later, swerving up in her blue sports car, its boot piled with a large amount of luggage.
Pulling off her bright headscarf, tossing off her jacket, she threw off apologies at the same time.
"It was Daddy.
I had the most awful time with him.
He doesn't approve of me staying here at all."
 "He's lonely without you," Sara said.
"Oh, it's not that.
It's Matthew he  disapproves of, even though he doesn't know him properly."
Sara suddenly felt pity for her stepfather, bereft of his only, well-beloved daughter.
She was too young to be away from home; he should have been sure of her company for a few more years yet.
 "I've got my own life to lead," Jenny said.
"He must understand that.
Anyway, I've promised to go back to London at the week-end.
It was the only way he would let me come.
We had the most terrible argument."
 "I'm sorry," Sara said.
 "It must be hard for him." 
She hesitated a moment and then said,"Matthew asked to see you as soon as you arrived.
I got the message at lunch time, so maybe to-morrow would do now."
 "Matthew?" said Jenny sharply.
 "How—" she began and then bit her lip and said, "I'll have some supper and then go up and see him." 
Over the meal, she became a little more cheerful and relaxed and made Sara laugh with her tales of her sojourn in Rome.
But as soon as the meal was finished, her animation left her.
She became silent and fidgeted about the room, halfheartedly helping Sara to clear away.
 "Don't worry," Sara said,"I'll do the washing up.
You can go and see Matthew now if you want
 "Can't Lizzie—" began Jenny.
 "I've sent her to bed," Sara said, "She works too hard as it is, for an old woman her age," 
 "Well, if you're sure" 
"Of course, there's practically nothing to do, anyway.
Off you go!"
Jenny sped away with relief.
Upstairs to tidy herself up, and then out to re-enter the house by Matthew's door.
Alone, Sara switched on her radio and did the washing up.
It did not take long, and afterwards she went round the house and saw that all the doors and windows were barred.
Since the burglary, she had been extra-careful.
Then she went to her office and prepared some work for the morning.
Still Jenny had not returned.
She had been gone nearly two hours and Sara  decided that she was not going to walt up for her.
She felt tired, and Jenny had a key and could let herself in.
She and Matthew must have plenty to talk about.
Or perhaps they were not talking.
Sara's heart twisted a little with unhappiness.
Not for the first time, she wished Great-Aunt Alicia had never set eyes on Matthew Preston.
The next morning Jenny was up early.
She yawned over her breakfast.
 "I didn't sleep very well," she said in explanation.
 "What time did you get to bed?" 
Sara asked.
 "Not very late," Jenny said a little defensively, and added,"Matt's got a big job on and is going to be very busy, he says.
He won't have so much time for the horses, so I'm going to be useful at least."
 "And what about Bunny Chaloner?" 
 "What about her?" asked Jenny sharply.
 "She was upset that Matthew hadn't told her you were coming back." 
 "Matt will calm her down," Jenny said carelessly, and helped herself to more coffee.
Matthew evidently did calm her down, for Sara continued to see Bunny worKing around the yard or riding out.
Her threat to leave the job had been an idle one, and whatever ill feeling there had been between her and Jenny must have been papered over.
The two girls sometimes exercised the horses together and seemed on amiable terms.
They both came under the orders of the elderly Lambert, who seemed to have taken over the running of the stable almost entirely from his master.
Little was seen of Matthew by anyone.
Sara, busy about her own affairs, and always up early, occasionally caught a glimpse of him driving off in his estate car in the morning.
He had begun the clearing and draining of the Fairfax land and was helping with the actual physical labour himself.
He came home late and, according to Lizzie, had a bath and went straight to bed.
Certainly Jenny did not see him for  the first few evenings she was at Moorlake.
She was disconsolate in consequence, and seemed to find time hanging heavily on her hands.
At the week-end she drove back to London to stay with her father, and Sara was left alone again.
She was in her bedroom on Saturday morning making a list of the errands and shopping she had to do when she became aware of an excited chattering in the courtyard below her window.
It sounded like a flock of children.
She looked out and saw that it was a flock of children, of assorted sizes, and both sexes, ranging from ten to fourteen years of age.
There must have been about forty or fifty of them.
Each child had a hold-all and there were two adults with them, a man and a woman.
The children in small groups went inside the stables while the others waited.
They were orderly but noisy and were occasionally called to order by the adults.
Bemused, Sara stared down at them What on earth was Matthew up to now!
Her question was answered a few minutes later when Matthew himself came outside  and saw her at the window.
He grinned at her and called up, "Like to come for a picnic?" 
Sara could not help smiling back at him, he looked so incongruous surrounded by the children, who did not seem to stay still for a moment; the whole group bubbled and rippled with continuous movement.
 "What are you doing?" 
Sara asked.
 "Going for a picnic," Matthew said.
"Come on, join us.
It's a beautiful day,"
It was indeed a beautiful day, one more of this beautiful summer.
The sky was cloudless and the air still, and as yet it was not too hot.
 "I've got too much to do," Sara said.
 "I can't just drop everything and go off on a picnic." 
 "Why not?" asked Matthew.
 "What's so urgent it can't be left till Monday?" 
 "My week-end shopping." 
"For one?
Rubbish.
Lizzie will do it.
Come on now.
You'll be perfectly safe.
Well chaperoned."
Matthew waved his arm at his audience, who were listening to this exchange with come interest.
Sara realised then that he was perfectly serious in his invitation.
At first she had thought he was joking.
 "You are really going on a picnic?" 
 "What does this look like?" 
 "A conducted tour of the Moorlake stables." 
 "Come on down and I'll explain." 
Sara moved away from the window and curiosity took her downstairs to the courtyard.
Looking down at her, his dark eyes twinkling, Matthew said,"It's really an outing to the school forest.
I don't suppose you've met Don Halpin, the local forestry officer.
He's an old friend of mine.
We were at university together.
This is his baby.
This is a special outing and he was supposed to be here to take charge of this lot, but the poor fellow's down with jaundice and I'm standing in for him.
He didn't want to let the kids down.
It's a kind of review of the year's work and a lot of trouble had been taken by everyone.
It would have been a great disappointment if someone hadn't taken Don's place.
The  visit to the stables is just a bonus.
One of the kids asked about the foal and it suddenly occurred to me they'd like to see all the mares, so I had them brought inside specially for visitors' day."
He laughed.
 "Where is the school forest?" asked Sara.
He really was a dear man with his enthusiasms, she thought.
"About thirty miles away, up in the Forestry Commission woods round Whitecross.
Come with us, Sara.
It will do you good, and Lizzie's packed enough food for a whole squad, let alone two of us.
Be a devil and stop being so staid and doing only the things you've planned to do."
 "I'm not staid," Sara protested looking at him, tempted by the thought of a day in the open air and in his company.
Weakly, she gave in to temptation.
 "When are you leaving?" she asked.
 "In about half an hour," Matthew said, looking pleased.
Sara discovered that they were to travel in two large buses which were parked outside the house.
The two teachers went in one bus, she and Matthew went in the  other.
As she filed into the bus with the girls and boys, Sara almost felt back at school again herself.
The high spirits surrounding her were infectious and she had an insane desire to giggle.
It was absurd for her to be going on such an expedition She and Matthew sat at the back of the bus, and while they were bowling along into the country, with a beautiful view of the landscape, Matthew explained the history of the school forest.
 "It's the old story of catching them young," he said.
"Most people have an affection for trees and think they're beautiful and necessary to the landscape and so on, but it's important that we also realise their value as a national asset.
We need trees—as shelter for crops and stock; they prevent erosion of the soil; they play an important part around reservoirs by purifying the water we drink.
And in spite of all the synthetic man-made materials, we need wood as much as ever we did.
At the moment, about four-fifths of all the timber and timber products we use have to be imported.
The aim of the Forestry  Commission is to make the country less dependent on timber supplies from overseas.
"It's a long-term project, and to help it there's got to be a forest sense among the general public.
How better to inculcate it than in the young?"
And so the idea of the school forest was born.
This particular comprehensive school had taken over its forest—a plot of land in one of the Commission's forests—five years ago.
The plot had a stream and a little natural woodland in the form of mixed oak, birch, alder, ash and sycamore.
The boys and girls had cleared the land and planted larch, spruce, pine, silver fir, cypress and redwood.
All the planting was recorded on charts and records were kept of growth and development.
The forest had become like an open-air classroom for the study of subjects other than the trees themselves—nature and bird life, animal and insect life; aquatic studies based on the stream; map-reading, the study of rocks and soils; drawing from nature and even gardening came into it.
Naturally, the school worked in the forest the year round.
This trip, with its mixed classes, was in the nature of a special outing for the summer term, to show the forester the work done during the year, to formulate new projects, to hear his comments.
Matthew, standing in for his friend, had promised to give him a full and complete report.
The buses turned off the main road on to a forestry road running through the woods, and in a little while they arrived at their destination.
The buses were parked and the children filed through the gate which led to their own fenced-off domain.
They followed a sandy path through the young trees all of which had been planted by earlier pupils, their predecessors.
In the old natural woodland which had been there originally, in a small clearing, a log cabin had been built and thatched with heather.
This was the head-quarters of the picnic and here everyone dumped their  hold-alls and the teachers the equipment which had been brought.
Truly, the cabin was in the heart of the forest.
Trees surrounded it on all sides.
It could have been a wood-cutter's cottage in an old fairy tale, Sara thought, or the first house built by a settler in the Wild West.
The children surely enjoyed their forest.
The children were dividing themselves off into small groups.
Each had its own project to attend to…checking on nesting boxes they had some months earlier put among the trees…on the stream…recording the height of various trees planted the autumn before…and there was also some weeding to be done, as always, among the ranks of young trees.
The children were all intent and serious.
So was Matthew.
Sara, watching, and listening to him, felt her heart expand with sweetness.
How nice he could be, she thought, as she saw his manner with the children warm, yet not in the least condescending with too much bonhomie.
She felt very much an ignorant outsider, but unobtrusively attached herself to  charge.
He took no special notice of her, but she felt welcome, and when he was explaining some method of or reason for the cultivation of certain trees, she sensed he was talking to her as much as to the boys and girls around them.
The groups of children were soon swallowed up among the trees, and the sounds of the forest overlaid their fading voices and laughter, the soughing of the wind in the canopy of branches above their heads, the calls of the birds and the rustling and murmuring in the undergrowth.
Matthew and Sara and the children with them came out of the old woods into the new plantation, where rows of conifers, dark green, were interplanted with small spindly brighter green beeches.
It was hard to imagine the leggy beeches would some sixty years hence be tall majestic trees.
Then the conifers would have long since given up their job as nurses to the beeches and ended in a timber yard.
They were on the brow of a little hill  and Sara walked farther on to look down on the county spread in front of her, idly trying to recognise familiar landmarks—It was a travel-ad view —neat lush fields, trim hedgerows, a farmhouse nestling in amongst its windbreak of trees, a sheet of yellow on the far hills where a field of mustard was in bloom, and for the rest, a thousand different shades of the greens of high summer, a piece of England basking in the sun and as beautiful as any foreign strand.
Matthew came up beside her while the boys and girls were busy with their charts among the trees.
They stood there for a moment without speaking.
Sara felt a strange contentment creep over her.
She didn't want to talk or exclaim on the beauty of the view, and as though Matthew was also aware of their silent communication, he laid his hand gently on her shoulder.
He broke the silence first.
 "I want to say something to you," he began, but Sara never heard what it was.
An interruption came from one of the  schoolboys who had walked up behind them and had some question he wanted to ask Matthew.
At midday, everyone returned to the cabin for their lunch.
Sara and Matthew ate theirs companionably with the two teachers and the bus drivers sitting outside in the sunshine, sharing Lizzie's meat pies and coffee and chocolate cakes.
 "Mrs Mott's brownies" , said Sara when she saw them emerge from the picnic basket.
 "Mrs Mott's what?" asked Matthew laughing at her.
 "Your Mrs Mott's brownies," Sara said.
 "She gave Lizzie a lesson on how to make them." 
 "And Lizzie learnt her lesson well," Matthew said.
 "She and Mrs Mott seem to like each other." 
"Yes said Sara.
She had not thought of Moorlake or Jenny for the whole morning.
Now they came again to the forefront of her mind.
She looked across at Matthew.
She should not have come on this picnic.
She loved Jenny, and Jenny loved Matthew.
But, a small voice whispered, that does not make Matthew Jenny's property.
He belonged to no one.
Matthew looked up from the picnic basket as though aware of her intent, serious gaze.
Their glances met, and for a moment Sara felt as though she had been swung out into space.
She dared not believe in the warmth and tenderness she saw in Matthew's eyes.
With an effort she looked away and made some remark to one of the schoolteachers and became consciously absorbed in the conversation which followed.
Going home later in the afternoon, Matthew said, "Unfortunately I'm going out this evening, otherwise we might have had dinner together." 
 "I couldn't," Sara said hurriedly, and added, lying, "I'm going out too." 
 "And to-morrow?" 
 "To-morrow I've promised to take Lizzie to see her niece the other side of Bridgeborough," Sara said quickly, glad of the genuine excuse.
Matthew looked at her quizzically but said nothing more.
Their bus dropped Matthew and Sara at Moorlake before taking the children on to their school, which was the collecting and departure point.
Sara and Matthew stood outside the house waving while a loud chorus of goodbyes fell around them.
The day was over and Sara could not stifle her regret.
She had learnt to know Matthew a little better.
She had seen another side of him and one she had not even dreamt existed, a kind, sweet, patient side.
She had been impressed by his knowledge and his observation and she loved and admired him a little more.
She felt very unhappy as she entered her own part of Moorlake.