

2 In The Beginning…
I was born, Thomas Gilbert Mahaddie, on 19 March 1911 in Leith, Scotland.
My earliest memory was being handed around a railway carriage in the Waverley station, Edinburgh, and being kissed by a crowd of drunken Gordon Highlander Reservists on their way to their depot in Aberdeen, to join the colours.
The date — 4 August 1914.
As soon as my mother saw the train on its way, we took the renowned Edinburgh cable car to a photographer at Piershill to have my very first picture taken, which was a shouted instruction as my father disappeared into the darkness of a Princes Street tunnel and the acrid smoke of what I was told to be a "Puffing Billy" .
I have never been able to identify the photographer Alec Roberts' establishment, but I think that it had a balcony.
I was told that each train which passed us happened to be the one that was taking Tam Mahaddie away to kill the Kaiser and win the war.
My mother was a delicate creature and a cripple who had to wear a large, specially made boot as she had a shortened leg.
She was, nevertheless, an expert dressmaker and as I was to learn later, was the only reason that we lived with some decree of plenty during the Kaiser's War.
During the war my mother worked in a factory making endless ground sheets which I was told could be turned into trench capes.
This I wondered at.
The factory which was in Leith had what would now he called a creche where the children could it and play and he looked after whilst the mothers got on with the ground sheets…and the war.
By contrast, my father was very much the soldier and something of a mystery.
Whereas many of my Army friends can trace their ancestry back and produce forebears who were generals and colonels, some of them were surprised to learn of my Army background but shocked to learn that Tam somehow managed to join the Gordons as a drummer-boy and, 22 years later, reached the rank of Private soldier.
This has always been a great mystery to me because I remember seeing photographs of my father in hospital uniform wearing sergeant's stripes (which I understand was the practice then) and later, after the war, he was a corporal.
The reason for demotion was never made clear to me.
Despite these fluctuations in his status I remember him fondly on his infrequent leaves as someone with a great sense of fun.
He could tell endless tales, normally with himself as the butt.
In his youth he seemed to he involved with many sports and I have seen evidence of his playing goalkeeper for a select Scottish hockey  team — on roller-skates.
In fact in our tenement "penthouse" I once unearthed several roller-skates which I cannibalised until finally there was only one, at which point I gave up the unequal struggle on a solo skate.
One of these many memories I find myself repeating, even today is to retrace our Sunday morning walks from my home in Pilrig, Leith, to a hotel near the Tron Kirk (where my aunt worked as a housekeeper) stopping first at a statue, halfway up the Mound, of a kilted figure representing the Black Watch who died in the Boer War.
The same litany took place every Sunday.
Dad Tam: "You promise me you will never tell anybody" til "am deed that I stood for the man who made that statue." 
I duly promised crossed my heart and — spat which was the custom of small boys at the time — and I never did break that promise to Dad Tam whilst he lived, and to this day I believe in my heart that the figure overlooking Princes Street Gardens is in the image of my father, complete with a handsome Kitchener moustache.
My mother told her version.
Soon after they married my father was out of work (he was a house painter).
He answered an advertisement in The Scotsman asking for ex-Black Watch volunteers to pose for a sculptor.
In his desperation Tam gave the name of a Black Watch friend, got the job and donned the Black Watch kilt for a few coppers an hour the shame of it.
Years later, long after Tam was "deed" , I did some research at the Black Watch archives in Perth and was assured that no such thing could ever have happened.
After all "no Gordon would know how to wear the Black Watch tartan" .
I fared no better with the Gordons in Aberdeen: "but no Gordon would he found deed/dead in the Tartan of the Black Watch." 
I was told they know how to honour their dead in the Highland regiments but the next time I go to Edinburgh I will gaze up at Dad Tam, and see both of my sons in that solid likeness (despite the Kitchener moustache).
I will spring a tear, come to attention and salute that old Scottish soldier who took an alien handed to feed his family and still bring honour to the 91st of Foot.
My most vivid memory of that period was the bombing of the Leith Docks.
We lived on the boundary of Edinburgh and Leith in a District called Pilrig and our home was on the top floor of a tenement.
A neighbour sent for us to take shelter in a basement further along the street, and I was dragged along Arthur Street.
I could see this vast sausage-like shape in the sky, dull silver in colour, and actually heard the explosion of the bombs which hit a bonded whisky warehouse on the edge of the Docks.
Exciting stories emerged the next day of many killed and, particularly, the whisky running in the gutters from the warehouse many claimed to have collected the whisky in jam jars and all kinds of handy vessels.
Oddly there seems to he very little official recognition of this incident, save a soldier and a girl who were casualties in different areas of Leith.
A baby died later from unknown causes.
I was only three-and-a-half when I saw the Zeppelin, although I cannot claim that it kindled any positive interest in flying.
But I do remember being impressed by the various fathers who came home on leave and the colourful uniforms they wore, more especially those who wore the "maternity jacket" of the Royal Flying corps.
The very first RAF uniform I saw was worn by FIt Lt Wedgwood Benn  DSO, DFC — father of Anthony Wedgwood Benn — MP who was the Member of Parliament for Leith when he visited my school.
When the war ended my father remained in the Army, and my mother became a dressmaker to her friends and the neighbours.
I also shared the fall-out of her skills: she designed and made all my clothes.
I was very proud of those she made for outdoor wear, perhaps because they were different; they were generally made from offcuts of the various dress lengths being made up into ladies' costumes.
Apparently the demand of the fashion of the time was for Navy blue, and I never even noticed that the slightest change in shade was incorporated into the front and hack panels of a jacket or trousers.
I was not even aware that, until I had my first bought suit, that flies had been invented!
The exclusive "Annie Thompson" design had only a small flap — that was adequate in normal circumstances — but near disaster in an emergency, when I could not even resort to the era of the "Flapper" in her cami-knickers, and go down one leg.
The "Annie Thompson" design had pre-empted the Bermuda shorts and they were so tight that there was no escape save struggle with the tiny flap.
Quite apart from the unique trousers, the jacket was similar to those worn by cavalry officers as dress kit, buttoned at the throat and falling away at each side.
I was never conscious that my attire was odd until I had my first normal boy's gear.
The sheer joy of having pockets and flies was something that lasted for weeks.
My shirts and nightwear were still "Annie Thompson" exclusives (which was her maiden name) and she would frequently scold herself when she made a mistake in her work and oddly I find that I do the same thing, even today, a sort of "pull your finger out Mahaddie" .
Although I can recall so clearly seeing my father off to the war, and even more clearly the Zeppelin, the mid-twenties are not so clear.
But in what seemed like a very short period my mother died after a long illness.
She was confined to bed and had infrequent visits from a nurse; since my father was still in the Army I looked after myself and skipped school to visit my mother who, by this time, was in a hospital for the terminally ill.
It never occurred to me that my mother would die, and it was a profound shock when she did, After a year or so my father left the Army and remarried a Highland lass who seemed to adore me, but did not seem to take to my sister who lived with an aunt.
I left school before my 14th birthday (which could happen in Scotland) and started work the same day in the employ of a grocer and wine merchant.
The shop was called Russell's and was opposite the Theatre Royal in Edinburgh.
My main task was to bottle wine — Red Biddy it was called, at 1/10d a quart bottle — and Guinness it 7d a bottle.
I very much enjoyed this change of life, especially the 15 a week, of which I was allowed to keep half-a-crown.
In those days the licensing laws were very strict, especially for off-licence sales, except that all kinds of liquer could he ordered and delivered.
This produced a rich seam of tips, much of it from the artists at the Theatre Royal during rehearsals.
This I overplayed by spending too much time in the rear of the stalls watching rehearsals, and an assistant would take over the Royal deliveries.
But when he took just as long the "boy" was back on call.
By this time I had joined the Scouts and had reached the dizzy heights of Patrol Leader.
For a brief spell I became a Troop Leader, which I enjoyed because the  Troop Leader carried the flag, but unlike "Sister Anna" (who also carried a banner in the song which I was to learn much later) I had a handsome leather pouch which went over one shoulder.
My Troop — 10th Leith (Balfour Melville)— frequently marched with the rest of the Edinburgh District Scouts and I found the flag holster a great comfort — as it would have been to "Sister Anna" — since, in the song, she only had a "banner-carrying navel" as I recall.
3 When Beech Leaves are Falling
In the late twenties I was attracted to an article which appeared in the Scout Magazine written by the Chief Scout, Lord Baden-Powell, about Halton and the Trenchard Experiment.
This I discussed at once with my Scoutmaster, who had served as an officer in the Gordons during the war and was now a schoolmaster.
He was most enthusiastic and sent away at once for specimen examination papers.
When these arrived I realised that my dream of Halton was not to be.
But not so my Scoutmaster.
I had each Wednesday afternoon off from Russell's and he enroled me, secretly, into his school for lessons with his normal classes, He and his wife held a weekly open house and these cramming sessions prepared me for the coming Halton entrance examination.
I looked forward to the exam with dread.
When it came I tried frantically to remember all that had been forced into me by my mentor, and to the utter amazement of all — around but mainly myself — I passed into the 17th Entry at Halton in January 1928 with, I believe, 305 out of a total of just under 400 starters.
But somehow I just managed to miss Leading Aircraftsman by two per cent when I passed out.
My joy of getting into Halton was short-lived, In the first term I was up before the Head, a delightful fellow called B, A, Smith who kindly explained in a most embarrassed way that in spite of appearing to have satisfactory results in other departments, my school results were as poor as he could recall in all his experience.
Despite all this he gave me one term to show some improvement, I never really shed the "below average" tag at the Halton style of academy.
After all, most of my contemporaries were ex-grammar school, and at the other end of the scale dealt with the mysteries of each stage of calculus.
The workshop classes were a mixture of all grades of academy, and it was here that I found common ground absorbing my trade instruction; and happily in this field I was able not to be as conspicuous as I was at school.
Perhaps it was a great help to me at this time that the RAF introduced a new trade into the Service — Metal Rigger — and to the horror of the old "Chippie Rigger" who fashioned the ancient wooden aircraft, and claimed "we used to have men of steel and kites of wood…sadly now the process has been reversed" .
Another help at this critical time was that Halton won a county title at cross country when I was a junior, and I also won a boxing medal.
But it is only fair to record that the lad who won the "best loser's" medal broke his wrist on hitting me  on the head (watch this space) as a flyweight (special gilt one 1/9d), which led to a most embarrassing situation.
I foolishly sent this medal home.
Immediately my father started matching me with all kinds of licensed murderous thugs, and one in particular who had become the amateur flyweight champion of Scotland.
Happily I had been at school with this fellow and was able to contact him on my next leave, and to persuade him that it would be a pity to spoil his good name by killing me.
He saw the wisdom of this ploy and invited me to his next fight, when he lost his title.
As the saying goes "you can't win them all" .
In all other respects it seemed that I was winning.
I heard no more from the Head (could someone have come worse than me?) and also I found myself in a new dorm filled with chaps who were in the top classes at school.
This faster stream chatted about the mysteries of calculus, and were happy to help me as I was anxious to he helped — but not with calculus.
At about this time I was able to discard the dread of the "chop" from Halton and a balm to my ego was a gain in my outdoor activities, particularly in cross-country and track, I felt very comfortable at the workshops, I also adored the evening sessions at school when we were lectured by such great names of the day as Churchill, Trenchard, Beaverbrook, General Smuts, a host of politicians, and near our own held, such fine names in aviation as Handley Page and others; splendid names in their day.
I began to feel more a part of this vast foundation of the great Halton Experiment.
However small it was (and whether it is just or not), I have felt over the years that the Halton experience has enabled me (despite my background) to bridge the gap between those far off days, and reaching the rank of sergeant pilot, and the mid-war years when, in a few months, there was swift passage through the roles of flight commander, squadron commander, staff officer and station commander.
I am certain that the transition could only have been made possible through the dedication (If those Mr Chips at Halton, who gave their entire working life to the charges of all their students, Men like A.C.K. Kermode, Whittaker, Latimer Needham, Pillars, B.A. Smith and last but not least my dear friend the maths master.
He in particular helped me considerably.
Quadratic equations were a great mystery to me, and seeing me struggle with a problem he would call me out and painstakingly take me step by step to a solution.
Then he would ask the class if anyone had an answer, and before they had a chance to reply he would add "Mahaddie and I have arrived at this conclusion" .
I adored that man.
Another splendid fellow was A.C.K. Kermode who taught "Theory of Flight" which seemed to embrace in a single formula, at least to me, the entire majesty of flight.
Also Whittaker, the English master, must have suffered with my transposition of a simple sentence in basic english, but nevertheless seemed to enthuse over anything I did in the manner of an essay.
Whilst I was not physically built as an athlete, I found by hard training I could make the track and cross-country teams.
This was a boost to my ego and helped to offset the ever-present dread of getting the chop from Halton.
Perhaps some indication of how this reacted on me may be gleaned from memory, One of the  medical wing commanders at the hospital — H.E.
Whittingham, later Sir Harold E. Whittingham KCB, KBE, LLD, MB, ChB, FRCP (Lon), DPH, FRCS (Ed), FRFPS (G) etc, etc, had a wager with the Commandant, Sir Norman McEwan, that by medical examination he could forecast the first, second and third places in any track event over 220 yards.
Now I was keenly aware of where I ranked in the mile, half-mile and three miles.
I enjoyed a secret determination to upset the medical theory.
Came the intense medical examination, much of which is commonplace today, but by no means in vogue in 1928/29.
For example, all the competitors had to blow into what resembled a gas meter and the capacity of the lung was recorded, I failed to see the point of this exercise, and that, with other medical experiements, only fired my resolve to upset the doctors' wager, which I believe was for a box of cigars.
On the day of the Station sports I tried harder than I had ever tried in any of my events, and the results were exactly as predicted by old Doc Whittingham "not in the first three, could make fourth if he really tries hard enough" (which could be the story of my life).
Thus the years at Halton fell away like the beech leaves from the trees around the camp some golden, some dark brown, but only one black that covered the parade grounds and even got into our billets on a windy day in the autumn.
At long last came the passing out.
I was confident by this time that I was safe, despite retaining my poor showing at school, but I was in a new trade — Metal Rigger — and was, by result, as good as most.
My interest in sport helped and apart from three days jankers (for being late back from weekend pass — could not afford a taxi from Wendover station), this vexed me as many of my Entry had zero days but many, like my dear friend the late Roddy Morgan, did more than 300 days.
He was possibly one of the most brilliant boys ever at Halton, whom I have always claimed, if Whittle had not invented his jet engine, he certainly would have come very close in his time.
He was killed at Shoreham in an experimental microlite machine.
One of my colleagues in the billet during the very early days at Halton was known as Buster.
Buster bought a very old and very large American motor car — I believe the price was £10 and, being probably one of the poorest of apprentices at the time, I had a 10 share in this syndicate.
To glamorise the whole thing (the car obviously could not be kept at the camp), it was kept in some out-of-the-way garage, possibly in Aston Clinton, which was the nearest village to the camp at Halton.
Buster felt that he could make the vehicle — which was a very dismal thing to look at — a real sort of Bonny and Clyde affair.
He could glamour it all up by putting in a phoney dashboard and to that end he thought that perhaps he could borrow (borrow is a word we use a lot in the Air Force) some instruments from an old aeroplane down on the aerodrome — I believe it was a Boulton Paul Sidestrand.
There it was in all its glory abandoned outside in all weathers.
It seemed a good idea at the time, and it was agreed that all the shareholders would get an instrument of any description.
It did not matter whether it was the oil pressure gauge or anything else.
I was detailed to get the altimeter.
I should add here that even as a junior at Halton I was in the senior cross-country team — which only people in their very last year were normally eligible to join and at this stage I was in my first year of three, I was allowed to go out on any occasion, in running gear, to train as I was a bona fide member of the team and so on one of these occasions when I was out training — I always wore a sort of towel around my neck which looked very professional at the time and quite unnecessary — I managed to conceal the altimeter, which had become very very hot property by this time because it was known that several instruments were missing and we could have a visit from the gendarme.
So out I went, Halton is ringed with beautiful beech forests and one of my training runs just happened to take me through one of these forests where I felt I was utterly safe except for the birds and the bees.
I dug a hole under the root of one of the trees and deposited the altimeter.
The only reason I went this rather dicey route was that we heard a buzz that all the billets were going to be searched.
We were not sure what they were looking for but it was almost certainly for these 10 or 12 instruments that were now gaping holes in the dashboard of the abandoned aeroplane down on the airfield.
So up until then, being very cautious and a canny Scot, I hung the instrument wrapped in a piece of rag outside the window of my bed space on a nail, just in case somebody came round whilst we were either at school or the workshops.
However, the altimeter was buried and no doubt if it still has not been found, someone roving round the forests with their metal detectors today will come across it and will not be able to understand what an ancient altimeter is doing there after 60 years.
Buster somehow or other was found to have one of the instruments, and so he was put on a charge and ultimately he was sentenced to be flogged as this was still the practice in the Services.
This is not something from Mutiny on the Bounty or Cowardice in the Face of the Enemy.
Incidentally, in World War 1 you were shot — and many people were shot — by a firing squad of their own regiment, thus Buster was sentenced to be flogged.
He was adamant — although all the shareholders in the motor car felt it was time, as one did at school, to say look "I am involved" , but Buster was quite insistent that it was pointless 10 or 12 of us being flogged.
So the whole Wing and a mustering from the otlier wing on our camp, about 600 boys in all, assembled in the square with Buster in the middle, still determined that it was pointless us all being whacked.
I think (I cannot remember the number) that it must have been at least 20 lashes he received and I felt every one of them.
If I dip deep into my memory these 60 years hence I can feel them still.
Buster bent over a table, on trestles (airman's six-foot, for the use of), and received his punishment from a great monster as we thought at the time, a flight sergeant RAF policeman with a cane.
In the meantime, someone had found that there was some sort of balm that we could rub on his bum before the event, but an echo that I will tell you and I will never ever forget, I can honestly say that having witnessed that ordeal and experienced the aftermath, and having seen the vicious weals on Buster's backside, I have never ever stolen a thing of any value since.
When people ask me about the deeds of some of our very great airmen, and I go right throughout the war on both sides, there are shining examples brighter than anything in the constellation that come to mind; I think of Cheshire's 100  sorties and, no less important, Fraser Barron — a little Kiwi not yet 21 with two DSOs, two DFCs and a DFM — Pathfinder squadron commander, killed with his deputy Master Bomber on one of the interdiction targets before the Invasion, and a host of others, I can think of half-a-hundred, but I have never met anyone — In fact I have never walked in the shadow of anyone — braver than Buster.
Buster — one time aircraft apprentice, 17th Entry, Halton, 1928 — but all time and forever will he a rare English gentleman, in the tradition of Titus Oates.
4 Cranwell
Thus, Aircraftsman First Class Mahaddie left the chalk hills of the Chilterns with some regrets, and a deal of thanksgiving for the blessings bestowed, to enter the RAF proper, and proper it was at Cranwell — the RAF College.
A fortunate posting indeed, straight into the College workshops with an endless work rate, repairing the ancient Avro 504, Siskin and the Audax — work I really enjoyed.
I was also lucky in working for a sergeant who happened to have only three figures in his official service number, a relic of the old Royal Flying Corps.
Whilst the College was in recess we had a great deal of spare time.
Once the backlog of prangs had been cleared one was able to enjoy the taste of Service life of the early thirties, in which sport figured in balance with the work in hand.
I was never to get beyond the most minor rugger stage at Hilton, because the Wing standard was very high.
So I set out to have a go at the Station side, but it just happened that there was also a scratch side called the C.N. Lowe 15.
Lowe had been a well-known wing threequarter for England — Wg Cdr C.N. Lowe, Chief Flying Instructor, RAF College, Cranwell — and his side drew players from several RAF stations in the district; he was also a very good coach.
The real object of his 15 was to provide a chopping block for the College 15, who trained incessantly for their annual fixtures with Woolwich and Sandhurst, whom up to then they had never beaten, Lowe's side never beat the cadets, but at least provided reasonable opposition and enjoyed a form of coaching from Wg Cdr Lowe.
This led to another form of coaching, I just cannot remember how my interest in tennis arose, save that I used to practice for hours against an airman's table top fixed to the netting of an old tennis court.
Because I must have been noticed, I was invited by the families to play in mixed doubles.
Cranwell enjoyed excellent tennis courts, beautifully secluded with 12-foot high hedges, in excellent condition.
Arising from this, I was offered coaching by the College coach; I think his name was Pearse, and he was one of Dan Maskel's assistants at Queen's Club.
I understood that the fees were a charge on some obscure NAAFI rebate fund.
Pearse coached me for two years.
When I went overseas I had graduated from the "Pat and Giggle" stage and could join those who had served several years in Mespot.
Uncoached I was at least able to survive a couple of rounds in the local tournaments; a stroke of luck at this stage was that I was paired with a newcomer to the Command — a FIt Lt Reep who was in a different league to mine — and we  entered for competitions and this raised my game quite a bit.
In fact we did very well in doubles.
This, in turn, improved my singles game considerably and I won the Baghdad Open one year playing against Indians in the main, who were horrified that I insisted we played in the heat of a Baghdad afternoon when it was normally well over 110° in the shade, and there was no shade — mad dogs and Scotsmen!
This was a minor tournament and played at the YMCA in Baghdad.
After the trials of Halton, Cranwell was a haven, With my pay now being nearly 30 a week, I invested in a motorcycle — a square tank Rudge of questionable vintage — for £4 (at a pound a week), but soon cured myself of the motorcycle bug that seemed to affect us all at the time.
After some 20 months I was able to take a trade test and become a Leading Aircraftsman getting nearly £2 a week, One of the notorious figures at Cranwell at this time was Aircraftsman Shaw (the legendary Col T.E.
Lawrence — Lawrence of Arabia) whose mind-bending task daily was to sit outside "C" hangar and record the cadets' flying times.
He was, of course, revered by all and sundry in the hutted West Camp, Cranwell.
He was a form of Guru to the airmen who frequently took their problems to him, rather like the simple Arab in the desert who treated him as some form of God.
Many tales are told of his judgements that hovered between those of Solomon and Sanders of the River.
On one occasion the old crone who managed the NAAFI decided that she would have to charge an extra penny for a cup of tea.
Now in the early thirties this was too much for the troops to take, so they took their problem to Shaw who then went to the NAAFI and bought all the cups for a penny.
When the NAAFI ran out of cups, the old dear was at her wits end and sent for the orderly corporal, who in turn sent for the orderly sergeant.
He also realised that this was a situation far beyond his metier and summoned the duty staff officer, who arrived resplendent in full ceremonials, pantaloons, highly polished knee-length riding boots, and regulation yellow walking stick, and visited Shaw in his billet and confronted him in a corner, where he held court.
After a short and unequal debate, Shaw conceded the surrender of the cups, provided the NAAFI no longer charged a penny deposit on a penny cup of tea, and West Canip, Cranwell, returned to its normal tranquillity.
The other story I recall to mind about this time is that Cranwell in those days must have been the coldest spot south of the Arctic Circle and the ration of coal to fire the single stove in a billet of 22 erks took little account of the temporary hutment, Some genius had laid down that the ration of coal would he 1lb of coal every other day was sufficient to ward off armies of brass monkeys that descended on Cranwell in winter.
In even the mildest winter, the situation was desperate enough for those in the workshops to make a form of briquette from any form of rubbish bound by rags — and sometimes wired flex — that would give the slightest measure of heat.
Now the ration per airman, meagre as it may have been, was four times for an officer — ie 4lb every other day, The coal compounds were side by side, and whilst the officers' compound was generally well filled.
I can recall sweeping dust from the airmens' compound floor to get a wee bit extra for the billet.
The Shaw solution to the inequality of the coal ration was simple: just change the signs on the compounds, A perfect balance system was introduced and there was no complaint from the officers' batmen — well they would not would they"?
And so some two-and-a-half years slipped away at Cranwell.
I practiced my trade, I simplified my life, I was on my way to becoming the "Compleat Airman" , I also felt that I should get an overseas tour out of the way, and was quite pleased when I found my name on the PWR+; I then awaited eagerly to learn where.
In those days I was going, and was only intrigued to learn that it was Mespot or Iraq as it became.
Goodbye Cranwell, thank you for all your favours and "Sydiha" Baghdad.
5 Mespot
Having been duly warned about an overseas tour, in time a boat list appeared and all the old sweats started horrific stories about the various places we were destined to go.
If it was in the Near and Middle East the stories generally centred round what would happen to you if you were ever caught by the Bedouin — or the Bedou, as the old sweats termed the colourful Arab in the desert.
There was a sense of adventure about it all, despite the warnings "don't forget to carry your goolie chit" .
This was a warning to the adventurous Arab in the desert, if you did force-land and you suddenly found you were his prisoner, and in several dialects of Arabic.
It claimed that a large amount of money would be the immediate reward if you were delivered unharmed to the nearest British post.
This was a very comforting thing, although I must admit that I heard of no cases occurring in the period that I was in Mespot.
But the tales that were told were not only gruesome but frightening — in fact sickening is probably a better word — of what happened to you if the desert Arab got hold of you and handed you over to his womenfolk.
However, that did not stop the sense of adventure to a 20-year-old going off in 1933 in a very strange vessel called the Somersetshire, of which a very famous Air Force song will be sung for evermore.
It was a British India troopship and somehow managed to cram 600-700 troops into the sharp end, and the rest of the ship quite — two-thirds — was reserved for one hundred officers and a few, very few, Princess Mary's Royal Air Force Nursing Service.
But once more, in the words of the song, "it was a nice tiddley ship and the skipper looks on her with pride" .
It took 21 days to get to Basra, through the Suez Canal, down the Red Sea (that was not) sharp left at Aden and up the Persian Gulf.
There in front of us was Basra.
It was a great joy to get ashore after being cramped with our fellows, not all of them Air Force.
I recall that there was a battalion of the Highland Light Infantry (HLI).
They had very strange habits and hygiene was not something that they practised very seriously.
One of our fellows claimed that, within half a day out from Basra, one of the RAF chaps was stopped and a HLI lad said, "Hey Jock, can you tell me where is the wash-hoos?" 
That might be pure fiction but nevertheless it was a very amusing story at the time.
On sentry duty one night, in the magazine of all places, I propped myself with my rifle on guard in a corner and somehow or other managed to let my feet out at  about 30° to 35° to the vertical, and I fell asleep.
The orderly sergeant missed his footing coming down the rather steep gangway into the magazine, and cursed "Oh bother" or some similar word you hear often in the Sergeants Mess.
He was followed by a very young and very clueless officer.
The sergeant came straight up to me and said: "Sentry you were asleep.
By that time my eyes were wide open and I replied: "Oh no, sir, I was just leaning in the corner." 
 "No you weren't, you were fast asleep, and he turned to the young officer and enquired: " Did you see him asleep, Sir?"
 "As a matter of fact sergeant I didn't" he said.
After giving me a bit of a rollocking they went away telling me what happened to sentries who fell asleep guarding the magazine.
There were many amusing things that happened on the way out, to distract us from the utter boredom of slogging through the Med and down the Red Sea.
I doubt if we sailed at anything more than eight or nine knots, maybe 10, if we had the wind behind us.
One of the things that some chaps found amusing when they went to the "heads" (the head is what the Navy calls the loo), you sat in a long row and a great flush of water ran right through a row of 20 or 30.
It was very common that the duty wag at the time would make a little paper boat, and probably get some fat or grease from some convenient part of the ship, He would then set light to this and let it sail down the waterway whilst there was a great row of people sitting attending to their needs of nature.
Baghdad at last, and a short trip to Hinaidi — the large RAF base and home to No 70 Squadron, It was a great event on the squadron when the boat arrived; in fact it was the greatest event of the year, save Christmas.
Next day I was a second rigger on a Vickers Victoria — a large troop carrier known as the "flying pig" because of its girth, The squadron had a general purpose role and just how general call be gauged by my first flight, which was only a couple of days later — to deliver a coffin-like box to RAF Shaibah near Basra, The journey only took a few hours, On arrival the coffin was decanted and refilled with ice and shark meat in exchange for the pork we had brought from the squadron pig firm.
The squadron also flew the Iraq Levies, A sort of RAF Regiment of the day, they were mainly Kurds who came from the far north of Iraq excellent soldiers but poor airmen who generally laid their breakfast on the cabin floor whilst we were taxying, to take-off.
That, mixed with the mule's contribution, produced an atmosphere in the cabin that stood me in good stead for the rest of my flying career.
We also had a strong liaison with the RAF Armoured Cars, These were manned by RAF personnel, but were Rolls-Royce-engined devices that resembled a large, extended bully-beef tin.
Their main task seemed to be to inspect the landing grounds that extended across the route from Baghdad to Damascus.
The landing grounds were linked with a furrowed track which a motor company called Nairn Transport used as a guide to Rutbah Wells — a kind of Beau Geste-type of fort, or staging post — between Baghdad and Damascus.
As this was my first experience of squadron life, I quickly fell into its easy way, I was rather surprised to find I was already selected to play rugger for the squadron the following Sunday, and also went straight into the squadron tennis team.
Someone was taking a frightful chance I felt; these games were always held on a  Sunday and the English community in Baghdad came out to the camp as several matches were played in the afternoon.
I enjoyed the complete change of life at Hinaidi.
There was plenty of flying, sport, and my work on the aircraft was nearer to the pulse of the Air Force than I had been before.
The following is a typical example of the character of the RAF as I saw it for the first time about a couple of months after I got to Baghdad.
We were called out in the middle of the night to man the Bund (a sort of wide wall that encircled the entire camp).
There was a danger of the rising River Tigris flooding the camp, and the hospital was the first building to be endangered.
When I arrived on tie scene there appeared to be hundreds of people there, but a civilian — the works and bricks engineer seemed — to be the boss, and even the station commander was happily taking orders from him about filling sandbags and placing them on the Bund to strengthen it against the rising tide.
A very new officer (judged by the colour of his drill shorts, which had a yellow rookie look about them as if they had come straight out of Millett's window) appeared in his drill which was never meant for him; it was meant for a much larger person.
He rather looked like one of the comics on television who will always wear his khaki shorts halfway to his ankles.
This fellow went up to a chap (you could not tell who were NCOs or who were officers) who was just resting because it was very hard work and we were working under pressure, and said sharply: "What is the trouble with you, have you run out of sandbags?" 
The chap was a flight sergeant, a very aged flight sergeant, and he always had words for very young stupid officers.
He said, "No Sir, we have run out of sand." 
Now considering there was at least 1,000 miles of sand between Baghdad and Damascus, everybody who heard this remark had hysterics, everybody except for the stupid young officer who went off to think about this.
The station commander at Hinaidi was a very famous RAF character called Jackie Hunter, who was an amazing example to all.
He was a giant of a man and did the work of three, and when someone flagged with exhaustion he would appear like a genie by his side and with a quiet word help him over the temporary crisis.
Towards the end of my Baghdad tour I had regular tussles with the group captain in friendly games of tennis, but I was never able to take a set off him, which never surprised me since he was more or less the permanent Inter-Services Tennis Champion in the UK,(Oddly enough, Jackie Hunter was my station commander early in the war and saved me from the wrath of my Air Officer Commanding — "Maori" Coningham — when I brought my bombs back when everyone else had "found the target" , but this was before the days of the night camera.)
At this stage in my Mespot tour I had a bit of luck.
The Cranwell tennis coaching I had received was paying off and my rugger was improving.
Whilst I had nothing in the way of academy to display, I had won an open competition at the YMCA Baghdad Tennis Tournament, and was scrum-half for a 15 that was scratched up to play odd sides like the Palestine Police, or a crew from a Red Sea sloop on a visit.
I thought that I would have a go at getting a pilot's course, which I did — and was soon sharply put in my place.
Paraded in my immaculate "dhobied" drill I presented myself to my commanding officer who glared at me, and dismissed me with these words: "I am astonished that you have the gall, Mahaddie, to apply for a pilot's course…if anyone is foolish enough to ever recommend you, you would only kill yourself, and probably others, Good day!" 
Happily, my AOC had other ideas.
Frequently he would stop on his walk around the teams on a Sunday, and at least on one occasion he advised me to break from the scrum more often (in those days airmen scrum-halfs played to orders).
It so happened that on one of these Sundays my CO strolled by at the same time, and the AOC asked him why he had not seen Mahaddie for a pilot's course.
The CO lied, of course, and said he had no idea, whereupon the AOC demanded "put him up at once " , and up I went.
And it could have been a disaster.
The AOC's personal assistant was an airman like myself and he warned me not to stand on the mat in front of his desk.
When I was ushered into the presence, I did stand on the mat.
Due to my forward speed the mat and my feet ended up under the AOC's desk at the same time saluted, and my Wolseley sun helmet sped to the opposite corner of the room.
The great man put me at my ease at once: "What does your father do?" 
"A school janitor…
"
 "Did he serve in the war?" 
 "Yes, he was a Gordon." 
 "A Gordon?" exploded the AOC.
 "Which battalion?" 
"The 1st…
"
I was a subaltern in the 1st Gordons!"
I was home and dried.
It would be quite unjust to end the story there, for years later, a very pretty WAAF officer I knew came and asked if my wife and I would come to her wedding reception to be held at Claridges.
We were delighted, and at a convenient interlude she took me to a favourite uncle, an Air Vice-Marshal.
On being introduced, and when I repeated my name, he mused,"Mahaddie…
MAHADDIE.
I seem to know that name "" You recommended me in Mespot for a pilot's course"I enlightened him.
 "Of course" said the AVM."
I well remember I said to myself at the time, "there is a lad who will go a long way." 
So it came about that there was a vacancy for a rigger in No 70 Squadron, Hinaidi, and off to the Canal Zone, Egypt, I sped to learn to fly.
A pleasant change from the heat of Mespot, but with a deal of other diversions that I found easy enough to take.
Practically on arrival I was caught up with what was a slightly better standard of rugger and tennis, No 4 Flying Training School (FTS).
Abu Sueir, was a pleasant station, well-established and well-run by one of the oldest group captains in the RAF, and the adjutant was none other than "Happy" Day or "Wings" Day perhaps one of the best known officers of the pre and postwar RAF, "Happy" was indeed a character much larger than life, and even today when I meet a fellow student from my course in the RAF Club, he related with tears streaming down his cheeks an incident when "Happy" was taking the course on rifle drill.
Now "Happy" was a fugitive from the Royal Marines, and he knew his rifle drill.
Each pupil had to detail a movement in front of the squad pretending to be a drill sergeant and my detail was to get my squad from the stand easy position, slope arms and march them some 50 yards, then bring them back to the original  position order arms and stand at ease.
Quite simple you might think.
So thought I. The first part was okay when we got the squad marching the 50 yards, but I was the only one that did not see that someone had dug a trench in the line of march, and in one step leapt over the trench in perfect style.
I dared not even glance at "Happy" , but to add insult to injury I gave the order "About turn!" and they repeated the gazelle-like jump even better than the first time.
When I think of that occasion and what "Happy" had to say to me (but not in private) I blush.
But the Gods were once more on my side, I took very kindly to flying instruction, but again I was lucky.
My instructor was a Sgt Williams and he was remarkable for his quiet voice and stable temper.
For years afterwards my fellow pupils would remind me that he got a gong — an Air Force Medal — for teaching me to fly.
Years later during the war when I went to Central Flying School to get an instructors rating, he once more instructed me and this time got another gong — Air Force Cross — for conduct far and beyond the call of duty, trying a second time to teach me to fly (or so my mentors claim).
Whilst at Abu Sueir I managed to get a great deal of tennis but my rugger was curtailed slightly, I played for a scratch side called the Canal Zone but was not allowed to take part in away matches because of the time I would have to spend away from the course due to travelling.
In any event, I was loathe to miss any flying.
Once more I found that the Gods were smiling on me.
The Chief Flying Instructor (CFI) was a well known — in fact, famous — character in the days of the skirmishes with the tribes in Mespot after the League of Nations had proclaimed Mespot (Iraq) and the country a Mandate under British protection.
He was also a very keen observer of rugger, to my everlasting relief.
To this day I have no idea how I nearly managed to kill my flight commander during a taxying accident, but I did.
Suddenly I found that he and I were on a collision course, both in Atlas aircraft.
It all happened so quickly.
In a flash I realised that my propeller was tearing great chunks out of his cockpit and he was quite literally trapped.
I switched off immediately but the propeller was determined to make yet another turn, and another, and eventually stopped — embedded in the side of his aircraft.
Naturally, he was speechless with rage and he seemed to go a funny colour, rather like the top range of a steel tempering chart — cherry red.
He was bigger than I and he grabbed me by my Sidcot collar and hauled me in the direction of the CFI's office, I did not even have time to shake off my parachute before we burst into the "Holiest of Holies" .
The moment the CFI caught sight of the flight commander, he said crisply"What do you want?
Come back later".
The flight commander, without having the chance to say one word, retreated in haste.
Seeing me the CFI said "Ah Mahaddie, I wanted to have a word with you, sit down" .
He then embarked on a long tirade about the tactics we should adopt for a forthcoming game with an Army side.
He took his duties as the non-playing captain of the Canal Zone scratch side very seriously, I am happy to recall, I still adore that man, one-time CFI Abu Sueir George Gardiner.
I was also favoured by this delightful fellow when the instructors had a sort of "Wing Ding" towards the end of the course.
They did a mass formation practise for some show in Cairo, and he would get in the back of an Audax, throw off his parachute and Sutton harness, then kneel looking backwards and control the formation like the leader of the Halle.
Happily, it was generally very stable air  when we did this.
There would have been no reprieve had I deposited my CFI over the side and I suppose that could have happened, I was to learn many years later, however, most of the formation complained that I steered a very erratic course, and I thought it was the CFI touching the control column in his cockpit, and with his feet (suggesting that I move to the right or the left).
However, I was always quite relieved when he resumed a proper attitude in the back of the cockpit and was safely attached to his parachute and using the Sutton harness.
And so my tour in Mespot came to an end, I gained my "wings" on 13 June 1935 and was promoted to sergeant.
It had been most enjoyable with a tremendous amount of flying: I had been in every part of the Command — Persia as it was in those days, down the Gulf and all the way round the Gulf to Bahrain, Salalah, I took part in the search for the Imperial Airways Argosy airliner City of Glasgow that landed on the beach and was literally lost for a couple of days before one of the Shaihah crews found it away down beyond Sulwah Wells.
I did two tours all the way round to the Gulf and right round to Aden which was very pleasant.
We staged with the Sultan of Oman and Muscat, and Salalah, and I can recall one evening a hit of a commotion, when one of the Wapiti crews of No 55 Squadron caused an uproar by trying to get on to the roof.
He did not feel very well and he felt that some air was called for.
A large Nubian slave — the Sultan had removed his tongue so he could not speak — was manhandling this fellow because he wanted to get on the roof.
It was not until an Indian secretary arrived and said "Well I'm sorry, you can't really go up, the Harem is up there." 
So these things came to an end, I recall that on one occasion I was offered the eye of a sheep that had been cooked on a vast platter.
We all sat around cross-legged picking at bits of the sheep and I was offered the eye by the Sheik, which I understand was a kind of honour.
Whilst I took it, I was about to flip it away somewhere when my CO said, "You must eat it, YOU'VE GOT TO EAT IT!" under his breath.
How I put that eye into my mouth and how I swallowed it I will never know, but swallow it I did.
The things we do for England!
When my tour ended we were taken across the route to Damascus in the Nairn transport.
This was a vehicle with all mod cons at the rear of the bus, which I had followed many times and checked on its progress flying over the route; oddly enough, on my last night in Mespot I was to sleep in the Imperial Airways rest fort at Rutbah Wells, I had refuelled there many times and had wondered with awe at the vast ugly route-flying Imperial aircraft — Handley Page HP42s — and even more so at the passengers who took an even greater interest in our tiny single-engined Wapiti aircraft, and furthermore asked endless questions about our aircraft and of our life in Baghdad.
So at last I was to savour the delights of staging at Rutbah Wells fort and, after travelling most of the daylight hours from Baghdad, it was bliss to get into the fort with all its comforts.
Far and away superior to those we had at our base RAF Hinaidi, and certainly better than those enjoyed by officers in the Mess.
Whilst the nine-month period I spent at Abu Sueir in the Canal Zone.
Egypt, was intense and highly concentrated, it did have some dramatic moments, such as my taxying accident.
After all we were all leading aircraftsmen on the course and the officer element were acting pilot officers on probation who generally referred to themselves as the lowest form of animal life within the RAF.
But they were all  quite delightful fellows about the same age as most of the airmen pupils, and we seemed to fit in very well with each other; although most of us had spent several years in the RAF the acting pilot officers had only spent, say, a couple of months.
But also on the course, and I believe one of the earliest, was a pilot scheme for Medical Officers to take flying training.
On our course we had the most enchanting fellow — a flight heutenant doctor and his name was Tom MacDonald — who eventually became one of the most senior Medical Officers in the RAF.
He was treated a little harshly because he was aged and equivalent in rank to the vast majority of the officer instructors.
In other words he was a flight heutenant of medium seniority in the rank.
Now it was an established custom that we very often used to go out to a strip in the desert away from the camp where we could indulge in circuits and landings to our hearts content without being related to the hour by hour flying that went on at the Base camp.
Naturally, amongst other things that we took out into the desert with us was the long-established tea swindle, which we all subscribed to, It was considered a most heinous offence if pupil or anyone else taxied within the proximity of the tea swindle and the great volume of sand engulfed those who were engaged in making the tea — indeed, getting any sand anywhere near the brew as it was being prepared was considered a serious offence.
On one occasion Doc MacDonald did.
He must have forgotten there was a wind change, in any case a great mass of sand was blown in the direction of the little Base Camp and smothered the tea swindle but, worse still, it also smothered the various Instructors who were resting whilst the pupils were carrying out a detail in the air.
One of the Instructors was an Irish gentleman by the name of Fagan who had all the Gaelic charm of the Irish and, more especially, a great mass of raven-black hair exquisitely waved from his brow to the nape of the neck.
He was very proud of this crowning glory of his and he was incensed with Mac's indiscretion in his taxying too near to the tea swindle and, more especially, too near his hair-do.
When Mac got out of the aircraft Fagan stormed up to him and said: "You are a bloody fool, Mac, look what you've done with your inconsiderate taxying, blowing this shit all over the camp." 
Now it was a rule and the custom at the time that any of the staff could impose a fine on the spot and in this circumstance Fagan imposed a fine of 10 "ackers" — that is 10 piastres, which I cannot remember what the value was at the time, but let us say it was something in the order of 5.
So the doctor was most apologetic and went.
Whatever the state of the tea that was being brewed, he still had his cup.
But before he got into his aircraft to complete his detail he presented 20 piastres to Fagan, Fagan looked at the 20 piastres — and the 20 piastre piece was a great thing like a cartwheel, very large and bigger by far than an old-fashioned crown, some 2-2 ½ ″ wide, Fagan looked at this and the doctor said: I am sorry about the shit I blew over everybody — there is my fine, "Fagan looked at it and said" Doe, the fine was only 10 piastres."
 "Yes." 
replied the doctor in his delightful Scottish accent (and rather I think with a lovely Highland lilt to it).
 "10 is for the shit I blew over you and 10 is for the shit I am just about to blow over you, Good-day sir." 
In Alexander Frater's book Beyond the Blue Horizon I found another echo of my Mespot days when he follows the footsteps of the early Imperial route as he  called it and, strangely enough, he has a chapter called "Following the Furrow" .
These were the deep furrows etched in the sand to help the Nairn transport, but I rather think more so to help the pilots of the period to find their way across the route from Rutbah Wells to Damascus, or indeed from Baghdad to Rutbah Wells.
But the other echo which really gripped me was his reference to some of the Imperial flights down the Gulf that were not as straightforward and as simple as they are today, I speak now of when I was awakened from my afternoon siesta by someone from the guardroom telling me to get down to flights as quickly as possible and have my overnight gear with me.
When several of us got down there the CO informed us that we had to fly down the Gulf to look for an Imperial Airways airliner, one of those Armstrong Whitworth Argosys which was named City of Glasgow, and had been overdue for sometime.
So in a very short time we were in the air.
We bypassed Shaibah of the famous and immortal song Shaibah Blues — which will be belted out by our sons and their sons I hope for evermore — and on to Bahrain where we landed and had a bit of a briefing by the CO of No 84 Squadron based at Shaihali, and so on down the Gulf to look for the City of Glasgow.
At the briefing it was not actually uttered, but there was a rumour that there was a woman and child on the Argosy, so this had made it even more important that we keep a good look out and try to find City of Glasgow.
We had a very impromptu meal which was brought out from somewhere near Bahrain because our landing area was in a small offshore sand strip where the Nos 55 and 84 Squadron aircraft (also a Valentia from No 70 Squadron, which was our support aircraft) were all based overnight and I went to sleep in this hot and humid place, The humidity factor at Bahrain was very high indeed, in the 90s, but I went to sleep quite comfortably on a groundsheet having dug a little hole for my not very considerable hips, weighing very little above 9 stone, and I settled down for the night.
But I had a nightmare.
It was a nightmare about this child.
Oddly enough, I was not with the rest of the aircraft that were in the search; in fact my station was offshore — not on the coast, or inshore — but quite some distance out in the Gulf.
So it was indeed a classic nightmare where I dreamt that I was the only person searching for the child, and the only person who saw that this vast Argosy was down near the coastline, and I landed in a most difficult position near the aircraft and found nobody else about.
Possibly they had all gone off looking for help but I found the child and I cradled the child round my neck with some sort of rag and headed off back to Basra.
Why I headed for Basra I do not know.
On the way the child seemed to do nothing else but take a great deal of delight in wetting me thoroughly.
I woke up in the middle of the night to find that I was completely and utterly saturated.
But it was the precipitation running off the wings through a gap in the frieze ailerons that we had on the Wapiti aircraft at that time, that had soaked me.
This channelled a complete stream of water — and quite cold it was — on to my stomach and woke me up.
But no child, So I got up and changed into my khaki drill and was just about to throw the water off the groundsheet that by this time had collected in the hole that I had prepared for my sleeping, to find that there was a black scorpion wallowing in the slight indentation I had made in the sand.
It seemed to he enjoying the water that somehow or other had seeped through, and  I often wonder what would have happened to me if that black scorpion had indeed swung its deadly tail backwards and on to me.
We pressed on down the Gulf and after an hour or so my radio lad in the back gave me a chit — "The Argosy has been found, return to Bahrain" — and so, led by the squadron commander, John A. MacDonald commanding No 55 at that time, we were led back to Bahrain.
We refuelled and went on to Shaibah and spent the night.
By this time several of the aircraft crews that had found the Argosy made arrangements to ferry its crew and passengers to safety.
Having arranged a guard on the aircraft we all went back to Shaibah, where we were entertained by the one lady passenger in the Officers' Mess.
For the first time in my life I tasted champagne and I did not care for it very much because I was a complete and absolute non-drinker at the time, I would like to warn anybody that this was something which did not last for very long: I have since acquired an insatiable thirst and desire for champagne.
When the celebrations were at a height the lady who had been rescued said she would present a piece of silver when she got back to England to the squadron and what would they like.
One wag, and I believe it was a junior officer of No 84 Squadron, said I wonder, please, we would prefer something from you."
 "What have you in mind?" she entreated.
He became very confused and it was suggested that the squadron would like something which she was wearing at the time.
So she dashed off to her room and came back with a piece of underwear that I had certainly never seen before.
This was long before all things that girls wear could be studied and were exhibited on the way up the escalator at Piccadilly Underground.
So she produced a very exquisite and delicate garment called French cami-knickers.
So the plot was that the squadron would make a mould in mahogany to fit the cami-knickers and this became a very prized trophy of No 84 Squadron.
I only heard of what we will call "the-carving-of-mahogany-to-fit-the-cami-knickers" years and years later from my dear friend Bruin Boyce.
Bruin many years later became the CO of No 84 Squadron in Greece — that is before we were all thrown out by the Germans and, let me say at this stage, aided and abetted by a rather unmentionable faction of Greek insurgence.
So having got back to Egypt (and he was being harried from one end of the Western Desert to the other by Rommel) Boyce found himself in a caravan which was his headquarters and also where he lived when he received an order to hare back as fast as possible to El Alamein.
So he jumped astride a tractor and was being driven at maximum speed when he was told by somebody landing one of his aircraft alongside "You are not so far in advance of Rommel's recce tanks" .
At that stage the airman suddenly realised that he had left the carving and "Jane's" pants in the caravan.
All the paperwork had been removed and burnt, but the caravan had been the working place of the squadron — the squadron headquarters in other words — and so against the CO's most urgent requests and orders the airman turned the tractor round and raced back, grabbing "Jane" and her pants off the caravan wall, thrusting them into the arms of the CO and then retraced his steps in the direction of El Alamein.
6 The Dark Clouds Gather
When I returned to the UK in 1937, just as the Expansion was getting underway and when the RAF was some 33,000 strong, one could see more people at a mid-week match at Arsenal.
Such was the style of the Service at the time that it was known as "The Best Flying Club in the World" , but measured against today's standards, utterly amateurish and grossly incompetent.
If I should wander into the uncharted minefield of personal opinion it is only with the benefit of hindsight.
It was a profound shock to return to a very different Air Force than the one I had left before my overseas tour, I feel that a typical true story of this period may well illustrate the sense of the time.
In Mespot you were allowed to purchase a bolt of blue serge and have the squadron tailor make up your uniform.
Likewise, your shoes were made by the squadron "Moochie" , costing less than a pound.
Shirts and ties were also non-regulation.
So when I was confronted by the station warrant officer (SWO) in my very best turnout I was somewhat aggrieved at his tirade about my flouting regulations when a strange apparition approached, an airman acting as the station Postman.
It was still in the days when airmen's tunics were buttoned UP to the neck.
His was undone to the waist, he had no cap, his slacks were dirty and crumpled, he was unshaven and badly needed a haircut, he wore plimsolls, loosely tied with bits of string.
He was a complete mess; and please, let me claim, in complete contrast to my own turnout.
The SWO stopped his flood of words about my rig (the airman also had one eye bandaged with a filthy pad).
The warrant officer was speechless, but not for long and he thundered at him as he had on me a few minutes before.
Starting at the airman's feet he moved up and raved at each disaster until he came to his head.
He paused as if to draw breathe, and bawled: "What's the matter with your eye?" 
The airman just replied, at's full of bullshit,"and he did not alter his sloppy slouch on the way either.
I had returned to a very different Air Force indeed.
Oddly enough I met the same warrant officer some years later when he was SWO on a station near Warboys and we had many a chuckle about that.
In fact we became quite good oppoes in a way.
It should be remembered that a serving sergeant pilot (as we called ourselves in those days) had little clue about the policy that emerged from Arthur Marshall (Air Ministry) when the plans for one White Paper were never implemented before another White Paper overtook it.
And so it went on in what was styled — even  in the ranks — as the Baldwin Air Force, and it was in this environment that I found myself a mere fragment within a daily expanding Air Force.
Thus the RAF commenced its preparation to meet Hitler's Luftwaffe and within a handful of years added roughly one million, including WAAF, to Baldwin's original figure.
With hindsight it was a remarkable logistic achievement.
My own case at this point was by no means typical of the average or a product of the time — some 12 years service, and my five years as an NCO pilot coming to an end.
I had, however, a great deal of flying experience, but unfortunately measured only in hours in the air.
This in the main was from following the pipeline in Mespot to Damascus, or better still a rough track from Baghdad to Damascus, linked by a series of emergency landing grounds, staged on their way to Egypt.
Thus, in spite of the large amount of flying experience I had accumulated overseas, I found that it was of little use to me back in the UK, I did find, however, that my seniority as an NCO seemed to attract functions that I found difficult to avoid.
I had been trained in Mespot in the art of aerial survey by the Royal Engineers, which I felt was of no practical use to my squadron, thus I became the squadron photographic officer (small p and small o).
I was also the squadron instructor and the Link training instructor.
Sadly, I failed daily to get any of the pilots to use the Link, so I used the periods myself and, in time, overcame my shortcomings in bad-weather flying, I am convinced to this day that those stolen trips in the Link could well have prolonged my flying life in later years.
There were, of course, some hidden benefits to being the head boy amongst the junior pilots, I seemed to be something of a senior subaltern, and as such donned the mantle which brings to mind the old chestnut about this essential character in regimental life who enters the Mess, sees a great array of flowers and demands "who put those bloody flowers there?" 
A very junior subaltern leaps to attention and says "the colonel's wife SIR!" 
A slight pause and the crafty reply was "how charming, how utterly delightful" .
After Munich in a very short year we were at war, and by all accounts it was a very different manner of acceptance of war than we are told of the 1914 war.
After Munich there was a positive lurch to prepare as best we could with the near-hopeless equipment available.
On that lovely September morn the Prime Minister entoned, calling us to battle "and consequently we are now at war with Germany" .
The thin, dreary voice trailed away.
There were no cheers, just a stunned silence.
And yet, speaking for myself, something stirred within, and I would expect each and every one of us felt this something.
As a boy at Halton I had devoured every book available on the exploits of the RFC in World War I and my mind went at once to the great deeds of Ball, Bishop, McCudden, Mannock — why not Mahaddie, I thought?
And that euphoria lasted quite 4 minutes until the first siren wailed and a bile settled in my gut that lasted until my Commander-in-Chief sent me a signal: "Personal for Station Commander from C-in-C — Hostilities cease at midnight tonight.
Signed Harris."
I would like to add here that after the PM's announcement and the start of the siren wailing there was a dignified stroll to the shelters, but as the tempo of the  siren note seemed to get more urgent the pace quickened and no one wanted to start a sprint but I, being a scrum-half, anticipated this and was in the shelter first.
After all, the head boy must show the way.
And so to war, and at first a very strange war, On either side it appeared that no one wanted to start the bombing war which in our way had been our long time plan — in fact the Trenchard theory that fighters are for defence, bombers for offence.
It is only fair to put on record, so that the student of war today can trace Trenchard's early thinking, by recalling that the Harris war aircraft were laid down in the mid-thirties.
In spite of the struggle Bomber Command endured and the casualties suffered, particularly in the first two years when the bombers did so badly, and the only positive result we could measure was the shocking number of losses in aircrew, we were squandering our seed-corn.
7 The First Tour
I quote from Laddie Lucas who, in his recent book entitled Out of the Blue, talks about fate, chance, luck, destiny and a lot of other factors which, affect ones lives so curiously.
I take two examples which I find seem to embrace the fateful aspects of my life in the Service.
They are, you might say, the minimum and maximum in this area of fate and chance.
The first is a quote from Al Deere, one of the most famous Battle of Britain pilots: Fate is a strange master and I have always been a fatalist,— he should be a fatalist he has baled out nine times in his air-lighting life.
I also find an enduring quote from a friend of mine, a Pathfinder, who makes this comment: "The way all my crew were picked was a sheer gamble, I think, therefore, I was exceedingly lucky." 
This was from Maj Johann Christie DSO.
DFC.
of No 35 Squadron (PFF), later General in the Royal Norwegian Air Force.
Now within these two Parameters I seem to find all the chance, the luck, the destiny that have been my fellow passengers or fellow crew particularly throughout this the first tour.
Oddly enough I may never have had an operational tour had it not been for one of these fellow travellers.
And I will leave it to you, dear reader, to make a choice.
The very first sortie that I did when the war started was with No 77 Squadron in a Whitley to take pamphlets to Germany, flying in at the top end near Kiel and going throughout the Ruhr spreading these horrors of war on the germans telling them "you are wicked naughty Germans and if you don't mend your ways Hamish will come back tomorrow night and drop some more paper on you" .
Not that it would have done the slightest bit of good.
Oddly enough — those of you who may recall what it was like in the Ruhr (or as crews called it "The Happy Valley" )— on this occasion there was one searchlight waving about near the top of the Ruhr, and for one agonising moment it waved over the Whitley, and there was another one at the bottom by the Cologne end.
My second pilot was Spike Edmonds, a well-known character in the RAF, but also an excellent navigator who seemed to have God on his side.
By the time we eventually turned to starboard and headed off towards the UK I was most anxious to get home: I was to be the best man at a wedding that day, and I had to get back before high noon, When the dawn really appeared we were lying very sedately over (and we were not aware of it at the time) Belgium.
Suddenly the Whitley was entirely surrounded by strange aircraft I learned later after much research that  they were Fairey Foxes).
In the rear of one of these biplanes there was a gunner with a Scarfe ring who selected a pan of rounds which he put on the gun.
The next thing I knew I was looking straight up the barrel of this gun because the Fairey Fox was no more than 12ft away from the cabin and the pilot was very annoyed.
He kept shaking his fist at me, and with the other hand he pointed downwards; and I kept putting my thumb up.
Spike, of course, kept saying "He wants us to go down for a drink." 
Now I did not have the slightest intention of going down for a drink: all the drinking I was going to do was at the reception — if I ever got to the wedding.
So I kept putting my thumb up implying "Yes, it's alright I'll land" .
Spike also said "We are of course quite near the coast" .
The gunner of the Fox gave me the final two fingers and I knew the third finger was coming up which meant the "K" gun would be right in my starboard earhole, I put my finger lip and gave the impression I was going to land, whereupon all the Foxes — by this time four or live of them — were given a signal by the leader, and they all turned on their backs and headed where they wanted me to follow.
But I then put the Whitley into the most desperate dive, everything in the cabin was floating, and before the Foxes could turn round and do anything about, it I was over the Channel, I landed at Manston where I was put under arrest immediately.
My guns were inspected and a statement was taken from all the crew and I was released, as I said many times later, "without prejudice" , but darkly adding "subject to re-arrest" .
However, I did not make the wedding but I did get some of the grog and a piece of the cake, and kissed the bride by proxy (her maid of honour was stand-in).
As an interesting echo, the flight commander of the Fairey Foxes was a Lt Donnet, whom I met later at RAF Sylt, and I was very amused to hear his version, the Belgian's claim was that a Whitley had fired on one of his Foxes and wounded the observer, although they were able to land safely.
They were obviously very annoyed and when another Whitley flew straight over Brussels (Averre, I believe it was) they all went up and forced this aircraft down.
One of my friends — Flg Off Murphy — was interned, and in point of tact spent live years in "the bag" .
So when the third Whitley appeared overhead (incidentally, Murphy said that could only have been Mahaddie) Donnet recalled thinking that was no gentleman, and that was no Englishman.
He gave his word that he was going to land but he didn't".
And, after all, would you have done so in the same situation?
Providence, destiny — although I would like to treat destiny with a very small "d" in my case — inevitably played their parts but nevertheless I got away with it, and my crew got away with it.
Considering that we were completely and utterly untrained at this stage of the war, this was no mean achievement.
On my birthday, 19 March, we went to the German island of Sylt.
It was in direct reprisal for their raid on British ships in Scapa Flow a few nights before when bombs had been dropped on land and killed one civilian.
We were to bomb the seaplane base at Hornum on the southernmost tip of the island.
Now, I served on the island many years later and became friendly with a host of people, and I personally researched a great deal on our raid when not a single bomb fell on the seaplane base.
And I would dare those of you who would look up the newspaper clippings of that occasion and challenge that view, because you would find a much different reading in those newspaper clips than what I learnt many years later, trudging round the island, Personally I thought that I was being particularly clever  bombing a seaplane that was taking off, It was only when I was serving on Sylt in the fifties that I learned that this was in fact a tug (or you might call it a barge, a sea-going barge) on the end of 100 metres of line, that was being towed.
The lights of an aircraft were stretched on timbers, but no seaplane — and I did not hit one.
I do know that some of my colleagues tried but you will not read about that in the newspaper clippings of the period.
And we trudge through the winter and into the spring of the first bombing year.
We visited Oslo Fjord with only six 250lb bombs and that would not do much damage even if we had found a target (which we did not).
We also went a few nights later to Stavanger, and I do believe that my bomb-aimer at least claimed he saw, through broken cloud, what he took to be hangars on the airfield at Stavanger and these were bombed.
Whether it was ever verified that we did I doubt.
Then we started, in May, to go to Germany — Munchen Gladbach in the Ruhr area on 11/12 May, Happily it was not the Ruhr that I knew on my second tour, a desperate place to be at then.
On this occasion we did get shot at.
A vast area of towns all spilling into each other, we must have hit something, Geilenkirchen, we were looking for oil.
This, interestingly enough, was the one thing the boffins told us: get on and we will stop the war.
That was a very shrewd thing to say in 1940 but it did not happen for nearly five years.
Later on when we had returned to the daylight offensive with the 8th Air Force, escorted by hundreds of fighters, could we go searching for oil.
When I went to Germany within a few days of the end of the war, it was rather remarkable to go to a Luftwaffe air field with many aircraft, all intact and fully serviceable, but with their tanks — dry not a drop of oil was to be found on those bases.
In 1940 we had the will but neither the know-how nor the equipment.
So we waited five long years before we could go in daylight, find the oil, and deny the Luftwaffe and the tank crews of the substance that they so desperately needed.
I see from my Logbook that Geilenkirchen, Abbeville, Hirson, Hannover and Hamm amongst others appear as targets but I was never convinced that we either found, damaged, or even delayed the German masses' progress through the Low Countries.
Hamm seemed to be a favourite target; although our numbers were small in these raids we never seemed to achieve any worthwhile concentration.
Despite this period there was always a mass of cloud and it was quite normal for us to go down to see if one could identify some feature.
Fortunately for us at the time there was not the amount of light flak associated with later years, or that which was spawned by some of the Cheshire low level attacks.
Neither was there the more deadly flak which confronted the interdiction or pre-Invasion attacks on railway centres, which accounted for some of our best PFF crews.
I recall at this period that I had a new second pilot by the name of Saltzgaber, who was first generation Canadian but German born, The target was Mannheim, When we got into the area we found that thick cloud covered what we thought was tie target, so we went down, But there was no way we were going to get under.
Fortunately we had an alternative target so I asked for a course.
When we reached the new target and found gaps in the cloud and bombed, my second pilot just remarked that he was glad we did not bomb Mannheim, and I asked why.
He replied that he had a grannie down there.
In one of my lectures to the Staff Colleges, The Bombing Years — A View from the Cockpit, I can say as pertinently as I can that my first bombing tour was a complete and utter waste of time.
I was lucky enough not to be court martialled, quite apart from getting away with it the first night.
We were briefed that if we could not sight and identify the target we had to bring our bombs back.
I brought my bombs back on many occasions, because I am quite certain we never got anywhere near anything that looked like a target.
Please remember in these early days — and I am talking before we really started the bomber offensive — we were just trying to halt the mass of Germans who were rolling through Holland and Belgium.
There were no real strategic targets; they were in fact tactical targets, and they were virtually impossible to find.
I will take just one example.
In mid-June 1940, when the Nazis were sweeping through Belgium, we were sent out on one occasion to find a very large wooded area near Rotterdam.
The first I ever heard of "pathfinding" was after briefing in June 1940, when most Whitley crews in No 4 Group, Bomber Command averaged 25 sorties that month after the breakthrough in the Low Countries, Flg Off "Jimmy" Marks of No 77 Squadron (later Wg Cdr J.H. Marks DSO.
DFC.
killed whilst CO of No Squadron) got a few of us together and suggested that we made a time-and-distance run from the seemingly everlasting fires of Rotterdam to the target — a large troop concentration some 35 miles away.
It was a relatively easy business to navigate from Spurn Head to the Dutch coast since the glow of Rotterdam could be seen 100 miles away.
Marks suggested that after a careful time-and-distance run from the centre of Rotterdam, we would all drop a flare and at the same time fire a red Very light.
The interesting thing about this — in my experience the first ever co-ordinated attempt to find a target — was that despite the assurance of all the enthusiasts to the scheme (one Plt Off Leonard Cheshire included) that the run was made with great care, not one of a dozen or more taking part in this quite unofficial experiment claimed to have ever seen one of the other's flares or Very lights.
This occasion was really under ideal conditions, from an easily-defined startpoint and with no opposition.
An afterthought, but one which may be taken as a portent of the future, was that Marks was not deterred by this initial failure.
He then selected crews for another attempt the following night and reduced the numbers to the four best navigators.
Please remember that the navigator at that period was also the second pilot, I considered mine was as good as any on the station — he was included.
On this occasion the timed run was made with a stopwatch, all compasses had been re-swung and the ASI recalibrated.
At the end of the run from Rotterdam, and within three or five seconds, four flares and four Very lights were visible in a radius of approximately three miles and one flare had pinpointed the target — a large, distinctly-shaped wood concealing troops and armour.
At once more flares were identifying the target area and a fair concentration of bombs directed on the aiming point.
This was confirmed by the immediate reaction from the ground.
The time, it should be recalled, was June 1940, and take note of the name — Jimmy Marks.
Just glancing through my logbook of 1939-40, I find it astonishing how little we seemed to do before the advent of the German breakthrough in the Low Countries, I see what are described as security patrols, where we flew, and in  daylight.
We had to fly all the way to the Danish coast or within sight of the Danish coast; happily this was very low and the Germans did not appear to have our style of radar at the time.
The value of these occasions was very doubtful.
We flew also to France (Epernay) which was one of our bomber airfields and we operated to places like Prague.
Now Prague is a very long way from Epernay.
The airfield's codename was "Vino" and was near Epernay, the only thing I can remember of that occasion was that we got lost and had to ask for a radio steer from the ground station, We were anxious to get back there because the next evening Gracie Fields was performing for the troops in a local theatre, Of the visit to Prague (which we never found).
I recall that we showered thousands of leaflets all over Czechoslovakia but I doubt if one fell on Prague.
This was telling them — trying to bolster their morale — that we were coming to their aid when it was virtually impossible for us to aid them at that time.
Certainly, it was impossible with the gear we had, and certainly with our lack of skill for getting to a positive point on the Earth that could do some good.
I well recall walking the 11 miles from the airfield to Epernay.
We could not get in to see Gracie Fields and, together with hundreds of troops, we stood outside and they relayed her performance, I listened to this glorious voice singing "Sally" and all the rest of her favourite songs, and then walking the other 11 miles back — in flying boots.
It took my poor wee feet weeks to recover.
That was my first and only visit to Prague.
Duisberg and Frankfurt were visited towards the end of June and then, after 33 sorties, I was posted "tour expired" to Kinloss in the bonnie land of Moray to instruct at No 19 OTU.
So here ended my first tour and I could not claim that I ever actually had a clear view of any German target, save that which we did locate with the aid of Jimmy Marks' experiment northeast of Rotterdam in mid-June 1940.
I might have broken my luck had I been able to get over the Alps on a raid to Turin on 11 June.
This sortie was planned to attack Turin on the evening that Mussolini was going to declare war on England, No 4 Group's Whitleys flew to Jersey in the morning, refuelled and awaited instructions to fly to Italy; I believe that there were about 20 of us.
In the early evening we took off and, speaking for myself, I was very glad that there was a drop of about 100ft to the sea when the heavily laden Whitley cleared the airfield boundary.
We took off into the last of the evening sun in poor visibility and I do not recall seeing any of the aircraft that took-off in front of me rise in the evening murk, I was too busy putting the nose down and squeezing a bit more speed out of the lumbering Whitley as we cleared the boundary.
The events that followed have been chronicled by several of those that took part, My fate was similar: we were to listen out for a coded signal from Group at Lyon if we were to proceed to the target.
I certainly received that signal and pressed onwards to the Alps.
On approaching the high ground before the Alps themselves we all encountered thick cloud, despite the season, and icing.
Now Spike, apart from being an excellent navigator, was also something of an amateur Met man and would quote yards of Pick (an authority on Met forecasting) at anyone who would listen, and at first he could not believe that we were in an icing situation.
The first indication of this predicament was the ice slipping off the  airscrews and splattering against the side of the cockpit.
The control surfaces became sluggish and in spite of full power we were not making any height.
So I went on to reciprocal for 10 minutes to seek a more friendly environment, which I did, and then set course again.
We got a little higher on this occasion but again ran into severe icing and again we turned back in order to find less cloud and less icing, on tie third attempt we were getting quite near the Alps and we were collecting a great deal of ice.
My wireless operator reported that several of our Italy-bound contemporaries had abandoned the sortie and were returning to Jersey.
Of that No 4 Group party which set out to bomb Italy the night they declared war on England, I know that four — and only four Whitleys — did get over the Alps.
Somehow they bombed the target in perfect weather and unopposed, and returned to Jersey.
I find it almost amusing to listen to several of my contemporaries tell me about that ill-fated occasion and how they found a means of getting over the Alps.
But they are never the four that I know did actually make it on 11 June 1940.
I know I did not…but I do know who did it.
Overnight I was posted to the other end of the country and the war seemed to recede, but the need for bomber replacement became more urgent.
8 Kinloss
From being with a squadron on a war footing at Driffield — which was a pleasant oasis in the East Riding of Yorkshire — to arriving in the Highland town of Forres, which seemed to welcome the inmates of Kinloss. was like fumbling through a series of dark curtains into some broad sunlight.
There seemed to be no sense or reason for war at Forres; in the bonny land of Moray there did not appear to be anything such as rationing.
You could buy salmon, which I suspect could have come from the King's Reach skirting Balmoral) for 2/6d a pound; and there was no dearth of whisky for which I had yet to acquire a taste.
There followed a period for the next 18 months where my family, having joined me from Yorkshire, came up to Scotland.
We lived in a series of pleasant digs until eventually we settled on the outskirts of Forres, very near the local satellite airfield of the same name.
Now the selection of pupils was another gamble and they were allocated to us straight from the various flying training schools.
They had been trained in their own callings — pilots, navigators, gunners and wireless operator's — and came together at No 19 OTU Kinloss where they were to be trained on Whitleys.
We all got a rough average of the scale and the standard of these people, but somehow or other and — I never understood why this happened — I seemed to get the occasional chaps that were given a last chance.
These "no-hopers" were probably given to me because I may well have been overheard to say I did not believe that there was such a person who had gone through a-initio training as a pilot who could not get on step by step until he became an operational pilot.
I might vary this if one was arguing that it was easier for a chap in some circumstances to become a bomber pilot than it would be to become a fighter pilot, and I would concede that argument.
However, among the several people I had there was one rather unique fellow.
He was a highly educated gentleman, a very well known Varsity athlete, but he came to me with a bad report that he was completely and utterly clueless about some of the finer points of simple take-off and landing procedures.
We had a simple code about the immediate drill before take-off — TMPF we called it, T was throttle, M was mixture, P was pitch and F was flaps and undercarriage.
On several occasions I would find myself at 1,000 ft or above, and the undercarriage was still down: the flaps, if we had put any out, were still down: the engines were belting away in line pitch; and the mixture control remained where it was — in rich.
This was something we had to put a stop to straight away, and after relaying  time and again the simple formula TMPF: TRIM — MIXTURE — PITCH — FLAPS, which he repeated, he always forgot to take action.
Eventually when we found ourselves nearly at 1,500ft, I said to myself, and into the microphone, quite plainly so he could overhear: "This puts the undercarriage up." 
I then put my hand on the throttles and said: "This reduces the power." 
I then went on in the proper sequence to the pitch control: "And this reduces the pitch." 
and so on.
Now I though he would have hysterics; he could not get down on the ground quick enough to carry this action out.
We had barely got off the ground again when he grabbed the undercarriage lever and shouted into his microphone "this puts the undercarriage up," followed by the most hysterical laughter.
He went through all the drills saying exactly what I had said previously, and did everything right.
We had not the slightest trouble with the landing codes: "This puts the undercarriage down; this puts the flaps out; this goes into fine pitch…
"
I never had the slightest worry about him from then on.
He could land averagely well and take-off.
Nevertheless, I had an odd feeling about this fellow and it came to me many times during my short period as an Instructor.
I suppose it is what the Scots, particularly in the Highlands, call being "fey" .
Now that is a word you seldom come across in England, but away up in the Highlands and Islands being "fey" means that you have a certain sixth sense — you are the seventh son of a seventh son, or whatever the drama is on that score.
I did not think this fellow would survive very long, he was what I call one of my "oncers" .
I always felt frightfully embarrassed and equally sad about this.
Why was it right to train a fellow and you knew, or you felt that, you could not go to the flight commander or the wing commander and say a think this fellow should go down the pits, "or a think we should remuster him to the Army or the Navy" .
He had been trained and he had passed all the standard regular practices, I could not.
Fey was something they would tell me I had just invented, but it is something that never left me during the entire period I was an Instructor and sadly I was to learn very shortly after he left Kinloss that he did not survive very long on the squadron that he joined.
Also it was particularly strong in the latter years of the war, particularly in the last 18 months, when many, many first and second tour people were coming back to do a further tour, I have wept many a tear for some first class fellows that pestered me, pestered me beyond belief, writing to me every week.
I knew in one case that every Saturday morning I would get a letter from a lad who was having a very trying time at an operational training unit, and he begged me week after week, I eventually relented and brought him back; he nearly went through and completed a second Pathfinder tour.
He even got himself a VC in the most alarming circumstances, but that did not stem my tears that I shed for this man.
But I did not stop him coming back, and do not, I beg of you, ask me to try and explain that.
Kinloss was a pleasant environment and the locals were extremely kind to the alien invasion, but one felt so very much out of the hurly burly of wartime England, this was made particularly clear when pupils I had trained returned for their rest period, and one did get the message that my operational background was no longer valid or right to pass on to the crews coming forward for conversion to twin-engined aircraft.
I suppose that a better expression would be to frankly admit I was getting stale.
I had a spell off instruction and became the assistant to the chief ground instructor and, in that capacity, I also was instructed to carry out preliminary inspections of crashes that happened at Kinloss during that period, and a most unpleasant task this was.
I was normally the first RAF person to view the scene, and I find it quite unbearable to attempt to describe the desolation and carnage that confronted one on a hilltop in the isolation and splendour of the Scottish Highlands.
If there had been a fire the tragedy was doubly sickening; frequently there was not a fire and it all seemed so unreal rather like some still life tableau.
The entire scene was compounded by the thunderous silence that covered the scene, save the wind which seemed to whisper in condolence.
Once a huge golden eagle circled above a wreck and I intercepted a couple hiking to call at a Crofter's cottage for assistance because I was loathe to leave the area to the eagle.
Towards the end of my sojourn at Kinloss, and after I became the assistant to the chief ground instructor under a squadron leader, I was also seconded to the engineering wing.
The purpose of this wing was to test aircraft that came out after a form of garage servicing; this was before the garage system introduced by Bennett in the earlier days of Pathfinding at RAF Wyton.
So as an aircraft came out of the engineering wing I gave it a test.
Here I am not trying to give the impression that I am a Test Pilot as such, not in the way of Roly Beamont, or a host of other of my friends in this particular field; this was just a question of an air test rather than a flight test.
So I took this Whitley up for 10, 15 maybe 20 minutes and just made quite sure that all the engines were running perfectly, made a spot check on each engine and tested its flying capabilities — hands off and a few simple things in everyday testing.
I took with me a very young airman from the engineering wing and I understood that it was his first flight.
He was sitting beside me in the jump seat or that generally occupied by a second pilot because in those days there were no flight engineers on twin-engined aircraft.
So we carried out a test very satisfactorily and then made overtures to land.
Now we were using a rather old radio set at the time called a TR9 that was not one of the better things that our radio and radar boffins produced for us in the early days of RT air-to-ground and vice-versa.
This was a very old set and did not always work; as I did not make contact with the control tower I came round and I saw that it was all clear for me to land, so I put my wheels down and made my approach.
No sooner had I selected wheels down than I noticed that the port wheel had not come right down because I did not get a green light on that side of the undercarriage indicator.
Starboard was alright but there was no green on the port.
So I selected "up" once more and went round again, I went away from the aircraft circuit and tried this once more and still no green.
I decided to get a bit of height and do a gentle dive with power off and I made a rather ham-fisted upward climb in the hope that I could jolt the wheel down.
Still no green.
Again I was making no contact with the flying control and as I did not have a WT operator I could not use my wireless set to inform the station that I was in this predicament.
However, we had in the aircraft a rather antiquated device (certainly World War I) of a message bag with a coloured streamer and I put a message in the bag and I dropped it near the control tower.
I saw the airmen of the watch come out and gather it up, and all the time I was trying to make contact with the control  tower.
In my message I told them that I was going to fly close to the control tower to see if they could tell me what was wrong with my port wheel, but again no reply from control.
However, they gave me a green Very light which I assumed was "clear to land" .
So I made an approach, a long low approach and happily there was a bit of a crosswind from the portside, I decided to use this crosswind to help me place the aircraft at the end of my run off the normal line of landing and nearer to the engineering hangar.
The whole thing went very well.
Oddly enough, I found that I could keep the port wing up for a considerable time and, as I lost flying speed and I came nearer and nearer to the Engineering Wing area, the port wing happily stayed in the air until my speed was very low indeed and then gradually — and I did not think of this — one (and only one) of the prop blades gently ploughed into the rather soft earth, My port wing was still in the air, and ever so gently we made a beautiful semi-turn to port.
Gradually the port wing tip fell on the ground and we came to the gentlest of stops some 70/80 yards from the engineering wing perimeter.
All the while I had been telling my young passenger what I was going to do.
He was well strapped in: "The moment the aircraft stops." 
and I showed him the escape hatch in the cockpit, "open this hatch and get out and get as far away from the aircraft as you can" .
 "Yes, sir." 
he said.
We could talk to each other with our internal RT.
So we came to the halt, everything worked perfectly and I was astonished how easy this all was, I rather fancy it was the one blade digging gently in and scribing a beautiful arc to port, all the time into wind; it was the gentlest of one-wheel landings that could ever have been attained.
So as we came to a stop the hatch was opened and this young fellow put one foot on the throttle quadrant, another on my shoulder and the next one on the top of my helmet and he was out.
But not before he kissed the top of my helmet and shouted at me: "Oh, my mum's going to hear about this." 
And he was off.
There was no fire and I had switched off long before the port wing touched the ground, I saw him hare across the airfield diagonally opposed to the direction of the hangar, and indeed the aircraft, and at the same time he was haring away towards Findhorn.
I saw that the wing commander engineering, who also was a pilot (but in those days they did an engineering course as we had no Engineering Officers, at least I do not remember any) opened his window in the office and climbed out.
He came racing towards me just as I got out, I had already shed my parachute in the aircraft to get out a little more schnell before he accosted me, I got the most bitter rollicking for leaving the aircraft outside his engineering hangar area.
I recall one of his demands was: "What on earth possessed you to leave the aircraft here?" 
I replied: "Well it never occurred to me to put it anywhere else; this is the engineering hangar area and you could find out very quickly, once you jack up this port wing, what happened to the undercarriage." 
There did not seem to be a satisfactory answer to that and indeed to prolonging this very bitter rollicking that he was bent on awarding me.
Oddly enough, later on in the Mess I heard him repeat part of the rollicking, but not my reply, to the station commander.
The station commander, who just happened to be a bit of an oppo of mine called "Bull" Jarmen — a great monster of a fellow and a Kiwi to boot— who was heard to say: "Well, it was very convenient  him leaving it there; you did not have to travel very far to collect it or find out what happened to the undercarriage." 
So no more was said about that.
Also, the other reason that I did not leave it in the centre of the airfield was that the flares, the gooseneck flares (a device with paraffin and a sort of rough wick), were laid out for night flying.
If I had left it on the night flying path I would have had a serious rocket which I would not have forgotten as easily as I had forgotten the first one — from the wing commander flying.
So I found myself in one of those "Catch 22" situations and I chose the lesser one, and the one I thought I could defend.
I was commended by my station commander, but relations with the wing commander engineering were never quite the same I am sorry to say.
The poor fellow could not accept and believe that a person with active flying experience, slight as it may have been, could land an aircraft in a relatively confined space.
This possibly had something to do with my early days in Mespot, where the Wapiti had huge doughnut wheels and literally you could choose a very restricted area and get the aircraft down.
But the wing commander sadly decided he should return to GD duties.
In those days a wing commander engineering officer was still a GD pilot but after the long course (I think it was at Henlow, on engineering) they devoted all their energies to full time engineering.
It happened that he decided to go back and found himself commanding a squadron on operations at about the same time that Salmon and Gluxstein as we called the two German battle wagons, decided to leave Brest, head up through the Channel and escape the wrath of the Navy and whatever airborne effort we could produce in the teeth of extraordinarily adverse weather conditions at the time.
I believe he was one of the many aircraft that General Galland's flying wing and the German Navy shot down on route through the narrows of the Channel.
Thus the idyllic lifestyle came to an end; back to Ops and the upheaval of the family and the relative pleasures of a training establishment.
But the stark reality of the Highland scene described reminds me of another idyllic circumstance that went the rounds about this time.
Imagine a similar hilltop in the lovely countryside of Aviemore and a small stone-built lodge providing shelter for a corporal and two airmen at one of the quadrants of a bombing range that Kinloss used for practice.
How one afternoon in the blaze of the Highland summer one of the airmen roused the corporal and entreated: "What do you make of yon?" 
 "Yon" just happened to be three WAAFs toiling up the brae each with a kit bag.
The corporal and the airmen first put on some trousers and literally threw themselves down the brae to meet the girls.
In the breathless explanations that followed, apparently the WAAFs had been sent to relieve the airmen of manning the bombing quadrants but no action had been taken about withdrawing the RAF.
Oddly enough, there had been no similar arrangements about the second or right angle quadrant.
Now this yarn had long since passed into history of ancient Highland folklore, and the WAAFs and airmen could have lived happily ever after.
They had settled down to happy domestic bliss and a couple took strict turns to collect pay and rations from Aviemore railway station at regular intervals.
It was, of course, by far a situation too good to last and in time, gazing down the glen, a solitary figure was spied struggling up the brae — without a kit-bag — the WAAFs identified their squadron officer (known as Belladonna) apparently about to make her first call on her troops in the wild, I was never able at first hand to witness this airmen's paradise but it is a story that passed the rounds at Kinloss.
I was questioned about this in recent years when I visited the Camp during one of my lecture rounds to the ATC in the Highlands, but I only add this yarn to illustrate that it takes all kinds to make any air force station, and I am sure our childrens' children will be told and the tale will no doubt be embroidered to suit the occasion.
9 Pathfinder Force — The Background
Seen purely through the eyes of a bomber captain, the year 1942 saw the awakening of the "sleeping giant" , but although no dramatic results ensued in the first half of the year save the "1,000-Plan" (surely the most well-conceived confidence trick of the entire war) hope for the future was clearly manifest.
The most pertinent thing was the advent of Arthur Harris as the new C-in-C, His arrival at "The Petrified Forest" (Bomber Command HO) coincided with the publication of the Butt Report — one of the most deadly denunciations of the only serious offensive we were able to mount against the enemy.
Whilst the Butt Report "scourge" had a devastating effect on the staff at Bomber Command, the Directorate of Bomber Operations at the Air Ministry were under no false illusion as to how able the Command was in striking its targets.
Moreover, since the admirable "con trick" of the 1,000-Plan, they had been extremely active in a certain field.
This had been talked about by a few experienced bomber squadron commanders, notably Wg Cdrs "Willie" Tait, Charles Whitworth, Syd Bufton and, of course, "Jimmy" Marks who, as bomber pilots.
Flight and Squadron Commanders, knew where the great weight of effort ended up but, more importantly, knew why.
This select cell and others knew the most experienced "bomber barons" who had endured nearly three years of bombing, but were now with a "three ringed" voice.
The most active of these well-disciplined "rebels" occupied an office in the Air Ministry and were all agreed that the basic cause of our dismal failure to date was navigation, Disregarding the gallantry and the will to "press-on" , if — in the face of all the efforts of the enemy, his flak defences, searchlights, decoy targets and, most lethal, ever-increasing "fighter boxes" of the Kammhuber Line — we simply could not find and destroy targets, the task was virtually impossible in the face of such odds.
Thus, this "think-tank" at the Air Ministry started talking about a target finding element which evolved into a target marking force and, ultimately, the Pathfinder Force (PFF).
Long before the actual birth of PEE in August 1942, the concept of the target finding/marking force was being well received by the hard-pressed bomber crews but, oddly enough not by the staff at Bomber Command.
It took many months to get the Staff to evaluate the possibilities of such a scheme.
We are told the new C-in-C vetoed the suggestion from the outset and, in the absence of evidence from the archives, this is surely inconsistent with his demand for the agreed build-up of the Command, his determination to shed the twin-engined bombers in favour of four-engined Stirlings, Halifaxes and Lancasters, and his bitter and seemingly endless feud with the Navy (and, to a lesser degree, the Army) about the "milking" of his Command.
It should be remembered that Harris inherited a virtually bankrupt concern, achieving little and suffering appalling casualties.
The incredible thing at this "halfway" stage was that crew morale was as high as it was.
This was due to many reasons but, in my view, mainly to the excellent field rank officers — the flight and squadron commanders — and in no small degree to the basic training of aircrews, and the support of the Empire Air Training Schools in Canada and Rhodesia.
The sadly-lacking mainspring of the entire offensive was the slow build-up of planned routeing and the lack of any scientific devices to assist the navigators and bomb-aimers.
It is extremely odd to reflect today that whilst the "boffins" managed to save the country in 1940 with radar in the Battle of Britain, no parallel device was being developed to help Bomber Command.
But please to remember that the Battle of Britain boffinery first saw the light of day in the mid-1930s.
There was a scientific hiatus and it took the Butt Report and the prodding of the C-in-C to trigger off an effort in this direction, GEE was an excellent start, but soon negated by jamming.
It did, however, assist in the concentration of bombers on route to the target and was invaluable in getting aircraft back in conditions of bad weather, GEE's most important occasion was perhaps the 1,000-Plan, when nearly 1,000 aircraft passed through the target area in about 90 minutes, making Koln a watershed in the history of the British Bomber Offensive.
Some 600 acres of central Koln had been devastated, and although the other two targets within the 1,000-Plan were not a success due to poor weather, Harris had made his point.
At the same time the Air Ministry element renewed their efforts to get the Command to consider some co-ordinated system of condensing our bomber streams through the target and, more importantly, the concentration of damage to the aiming point.
The Air Ministry firmly believed that fundamentally it was a question of pure navigation, and furthermore they were convinced that they knew one man who could lead such a formation to meet the planned Bomber Force envisaged by the Chiefs of Staff — but he was not even in the RAF, He was a professional Imperial Airways pilot with an international reputation — a host of "firsts" in world aviation events and, even more importantly, he was an outstanding navigator.
By name — Captain Don Bennett, the Operational Director and founder of the Atlantic Ferry who persuaded first Lord Beaverbrook (and he in turn Churchill) and finally a reluctant Air Council that delivery of aircraft by air from the USA was feasible; and on 10 November 1940 Don Bennett delivered seven Lockheed Hudsons; six landed at Aldergrove in Northern Ireland, and another nearby.
Harris is believed to have said on receiving the Directive to form a Target Marking Force, that this was one more occasion where a commander in the field had been dictated to by junior officers at the Ministry.
It is difficult to understand why the Bomber Staff was so reluctant to even consider the Ministerial direction.
We are told that the main reason given was the weakening of squadrons by withdrawing the best crews, Nevertheless after much procrastination, all of which is still clouded in the veil of "security" , the Pathfinder Force was formed on 15 August 1942 and its first Commandant was Gp Capt D.C.T. Bennett DSO (later AVM, CB, CBE, DSO) who was officially  appointed on 5 July — the master airman extraordinary and navigator par excellence.
Once the formation of PFF was fait accompli, and apparently against the personal wishes of the Bomber C-in-C (and the majority of his Group commanders) the Bomber Groups were instructed to send selected volunteer crews to a squadron raised by each Group and, thereafter, each squadron would be supported by its parent Group.
Thus, at the outset, No 1 Group raised No 156 Squadron (Wellingtons), No 3 Group — No 7 Squadron (Stirlings), No 4 Group — No 35 Squadron (Halifaxes), and No 5 Group — No 83 Squadron (Lancasters).
By the end of the war, PFF comprised eight Lancaster squadrons and 12 Mosquito units, plus the Met Flight Mosquitos and the PFF Navigation Training Unit.
The early problems of the PFF gave its critics much to enjoy since the Force was Pathfinder in name only, The four initial squadrons, each with a different type of aircraft, had essentially different operational capabilities.
The one redeeming feature was that Groups initially did select good crews, many of them second-tour types.
All the original crews were expected to volunteer for 45 sorties: by and large this meant in effect that each PFF crew would start a full Bomber Command tour of about 31) sorties.
Very few, in fact, claimed the "let-out" , and 60 sorties was nearer the average.
This incredible sense of duty should be considered against the average sortie life of aircrew in the Command which was never higher than 9.2 and, at one time, as low as eight sorties per crew.
Whilst 100 bomber sorties was quite normal in PFF Mosquitos, particularly in the OBOE squadrons, many "heavy bomber barons" did achieve over 100 sorties, and all in Western Europe.
Some very bad-luck cases come to mind of apparently indestructible characters who were chopped on the last few sorties — 97th or 98th.
Two that seemed particularly sad cases were Sqn Ldr "Danny" Everett DSO.
DFC.
of No 35 Squadron who was killed on his 99th sortie.
Everett, who had been ordered to take a rest at 98 trips, was testing aircraft at the Group Maintenance Unit when he heard that there was a spare aircraft going a-begging at his old squadron.
Without mentioning it to anyone, he took a scratch crew and was posted missing, believed killed in action on 7 March 1945.
But if Everett's chop was a severe blow, the advent of Alec Cranswick's death on 5 July 1944 ended a living legend.
Alec Cranswick was the perfect Englishman — quiet and retiring, but as a bomber captain in an exclusive class of his own.
At that time he had flown nearly 60 sorties in the Middle East before joining PFF and his total trips are somewhat obscure, but it was certainly not less than 147 (AVM Bennett, in his book Pathfinder, credits him with 143).
Few bomber crews — if in fact any — exceeded this total, and certainly not in heavy bombers.
One of the most fascinating aspects of the Pathfinders was its attraction for characters, and the very nature of the Force seemed to beckon to the most unusual types.
PFF crews had to volunteer which meant, in effect, that they were volunteering twice — first as aircrew and then, if selected again, to do an extended total as Pathfinders.
Although originally we demanded experienced crews, many actually started their operations with PFF.
These I personally selected at training schools, generally those with "Distinguished" passes.
After the initial flush of good intentions by Groups, within six months there began a steady deterioration in the standard of crew replacements.
In many cases they were not  even volunteers.
After a further period of three months or so, Don Bennett appointed me Group training inspector — and I became virtually a horse thief!
My function was to tour the squadrons daily, using the previous evening's raid as my theme, to explain the difficulties and, in general, to make contact with the Main Force.
And, I suppose, to make a plea on the spot for greater support in the shape of better crews, because I believed the best was only just good enough.
Another source of crews was the instructional staff at flying and navigation training schools, In my endless lectures to the training Groups.
I charged a fee — two tour-expired instructors.
A great number of the OBOE pilots were in fact Blind Approach Training (BAT) instructors and the hurdle was 1,000 hours on a BAT Flight, the relationship to PFF OBOE work here being too obvious to detail.
Possibly the main strength of the PFF lay in the hotch-potch of nationalities.
Approximately half the force were from the Commonwealth — Aussies, Canadians, New Zealanders, South Africans, Rhodesians and even from as far afield as Hong Kong, Fiji and the West Indies, this all made for healthy competition.
I have in recent years got into a deal of trouble in certain Commonwealth countries by claiming that any all-Canadian or Australian squadron was not as good as a mixed squadron.
In fact I have gone further and said a "mixed" crew was, in my view, infinitely better than, any "national" crew, one of the reasons, possibly, for the high proportion of Commonwealth crews was my established policy of spreading my selection net as widely as I could in view of the poor cooperation of the Groups; to this end I literally plagued the various HQs in London — the Aussies at Kodak House etc.
I was able to have the pick of excellent crews practically at the dock side as they arrived in the UK.
An excellent seam of Dutchmen was worked,"these were all Dutch naval pilots and navigators, not particularly experienced but the lack of hours was more than compensated for by their almost embarrassing zest for flying.
Amongst the first of these was one Erik Hazelhoff, at one time the aide to Queen Wilhelmina and who held a Dutch Knighthood on arrival in PFF.
He was the bait that brought many Dutch aircrew to our Mosquito squadrons.
Amongst other nationals was an outstanding Norwegian, Ma Christie — later to become a General in Norway's air force.
Several Americans served, but were thinly disguised in RCAF uniforms.
These were first-rate press-on types.
One, a Texan, would never wear the issue flying boots but preferred the cowboy-type with high heels!
It took the whole of his crew to hold him (in a table whilst I got a hacksaw and cut at least two inches off his fancy boots; somehow he managed to get them restored.
My objection to his high heels was that he would do himself a mischief if he had to bale out!
An interesting aspect concerning my widely-flung net for Pathfinders was that Groups after a short while sent crews who had not volunteered to join the PFF and, in many cases, had made a nuisance of themselves.
By mid — 1943 it was made very clear to the Main Force Groups that their "selection" was unacceptable as I sent more crews back than we kept.
About this time I noticed that those crews who consistently got aiming point pictures on the bomb plots issued by HQ Bomber Command after each raid were never selected for PFF.
In my lecture tours round the squadrons I sought these crews out and, almost without  exception, found they had in fact volunteered for PFF but had their applications rejected by their CO.
It was a very simple matter to reverse this procedure, generally after some unpleasantness with the appropriate squadron and station commander.
When we hid a regular flow of sound, keen material and the PFF Navigation Training Unit was in full swing, we saw the steady development of tactics geared to the constant production of new and better "stores" — target indicators, hooded flares and many other innovations, all of which was more than matched by the improvement in navigational techniques.
Whilst all this was going on, the enemy night defences were of course more than keeping pace with our ever-changing methods.
It is true to say that the German nightfighter dictated the tactics we were forced to adopt.
It was a critical struggle — a battle of wits between ourselves and the Lufwaffe with the edge always in favour of the Germans.
Occasionally we had a relatively trouble-free raid: Dresden, for example.
We were never given any long period free from a fight from the coast to a target and hack…
Happily, there were few disasters like the Nuremburg raid of 30/31 March 1944.
Of 795 aircraft which set out we lost 94 which failed to return, some 71 badly damaged which reached England — 22 of which being write-offs after crash-landing.
The total loss of these aircraft and crews was the bitterest blow Bomber Command had to suffer in the entire war, and it is difficult to understand why it happened.
Normally, the PFF planned the route, which took account of many factors such as the avoidance of heavily-defended areas and the upper winds.
The usual dog-legs associated with a bomber raid were inserted into the route to give a false impression of the ultimate destination, and the Mosquito Light Night Striking Force carried out spoof attacks on either side of the main track with "Window" attacks and actually dropping TIS on probable targets along the route.
In the case of Nuremburg however, the PFF planned route was rejected by the Group commanders (save one, the AOC No 1 Group), and one single-leg inserted of some 260 miles.
Willi Herget, a Luftwaffe nightfighter ace with 74 confirmed kills, told me that halfway along this track it was easy to guess at the target, because a line of burning British bombers pointed the way to Nuremburg.
This disaster was written-off as an accident "," one of those things'.
But Nuremburg was no accident.
It was caused, Oddly enough, to the best of my belief, the PFF routeing was never challenged thereafter.
Possibly the greatest compliment that could be paid to the PFF — and that accidentally — was near the end of the war when the Command was strong enough for each Group to mount an attack on a single target, but generally supported by the full paraphernalia of hard-won pathfinding techniques.
True, there were a few exceptions to this rule-of-thumb, plus OBOE and GEE-H, the main agents for precision marking.
It has been claimed that these free-for-all/do-it-yourself Group attacks justified the early Command view that it was wrong to form a corps d'elite.
But such a misguided view fails to take into account first the "fusing" of the many experienced crews that served in the Force, and the pooling of operational expertise that followed the hard-won tactical procedures, and last but no means least the steady improvement of the boffinery devices that were tried and tested on the job by no  less than Bennett in person.
And finally the determination of his crews to influence an ever greater weight of bombs to be left in the right place in Germany.
A secret report issued by the Luftwaffe in March 1944 on British Pathfinder Operations* (see Appendix I) declared that"the success of a large-scale night raid by the RAF is in increasing measure dependent on the conscientious flying of the Pathfinder crews'.
And at the same time to quote Bomber "Harris," the customer is seldom wrong.
I also must add that as far as the war moved to its close, crews became increasingly better; the output of the Empire Air Training Scheme gave us crews with more experience; second and even third tours crews were returning to Operations; and in the final phase, in daylight, the casualty rate dropped dramatically.
All of this was happening alongside the steady decline of the Luftwaffe which did not enjoy our operational tour scheme and rest periods.
The chief architect of this incredible advance in bombing efficiency was unquestionably Don Bennett.
His single, minded pursuit of operational perfection had to be witnessed to be appreciated, He was the only Commander in the field that was able to change the entire concept of strategic bombing; moreover he was the only Group commander with any worthwhile operational background, my personal researches accredit him with more than a full bomber tour of operations, and that includes his escape from Sweden.
Yet Bennett was the only wartime Group commander not to be knighted.
We in the Pathfinders who survived, wear this slight like a mark of Cain.
It is ironic to reflect that had he served the Luftwaffe in a similar role to that which he graced in the Royal Air Force, there can be little doubt that he would have been invested with the highest order of the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross — with Diamonds, Swords and Oakleaves.
And those doubters should read Great Britain — British Pathfinder Operations as at March 1944.
Whilst I would commend you to study the German Staff Paper in its entirety, I would also draw your attention to its personal citation of AVM Bennett, and note the dateline March — 1944: "This 35-year-old Australian — known as one of the most resourceful officers in the RAF — had distinguished himself as long ago as 1938 by a record long-range flight to South Africa…an example of his personal operational capabilities…may be cited in the attack which he made of the German Fleet base at Trondheim." 
10 Able-Oboe-Charlie
 "Able-Oboe-Charlie" was the aircrew phonetics used by the early Pathfinders to identify their Commandant, although at the time he was officially a Commander of the Pathfinder Force, with the acting rank of group captain under the control of No 3 Group for day-to-day administration.
Thus the tempo of development within the Pathfinder Force kept pace with the events of the times.
Early 1942 saw the doubts that lurked within the minds of many inside and outside Bomber Command that all was not well with our bombing of Germany.
Fortunately, there was a small cell of opinion within the Air Ministry that passionately believed they knew the reason for the failure and, more importantly, felt that they also knew the answer.
At the highest level, Churchill's Scientific Adviser.
Prof Lindemann (later Lord Cherwell) was also looking at this state of affairs and originated a study of some 600 aiming-point night photographs to be analysed of our best results to date.
This emerged as the Butt Report and was immediately rejected out of hand by the incumbent Commander-in-Chief, Bomber Command, but not so by the Army and Navy to whom the report had been leaked and who were bent on carving Bomber Command up between them for their desperate needs in the Western Approaches and in the war in the desert.
Fortunately, as so frequently happens in our military history the right man — and many would claim the only man — that was available at the time, assumed Command of Bomber Command in February 101,, and I have no doubt that future historians will claim that Sir Arthur Harris inherited a bankrupt concern, a sum total of 374 aircraft with only about 40 four-engined bombers in that total.
And it should be recalled that in a very short time (less than three months) Harris mounted his 1,000-Plan to demonstrate what strategic bombing was all about, but more especially the main reason was to get the Navy and the Army off his back with their insistent and regular demands for bombers to bolster the parlous situation in their theatres of war.
There is little doubt that Harris's 1,000-Plan saved the Command for the planned strategic bombing of Germany that had been his Directive from the Chiefs-of-Staff Committee who set aside some 3,500 heavy aircraft for this task.
(It is worthy of note at this stage that Harris never received his full complement of aircraft and in the final days of the Bomber Offensive his maximum strength of first line aircraft was only 1,625 of which 200 were Mosquitos,) in one of my Staff College lectures.
The Bombing Years, I stress and support the Harris claim that  the Allied strategic bombing was the main contribution to the downfall of Hitler's Reich and our victory in Europe.
I also say, with tongue in cheek, that the Harris 1,000-Plan should be dubbed the most outrageous confidence trick of the entire war.
Let the Staff College student consider how Harris was able to conjure from his original strength of 374 front line aircraft, and in a few months have some 1,047 aircraft set course for Koln in order to devastate 600 acres of the city (plus the admirals and generals in Whitehall).
I invite the student of the air war to compute Harris's achievements with 1,625 aircraft and consider how much sooner we could have achieved victory in Europe had he the support of the promised 3,500 aircraft, and the entire Chiefs-of-Staff Committee.
Sir Arthur Harris does not, and never has, claimed that the Allied victory in Europe was the sole achievement of his Command.
He had unstinted praise for the part played by the US Eighth Air Force as an equal partner in the Allied Bomber Offensive.
He did, however, reserve some individual praise for the vast professional contribution that Don Bennett brought to the Command.
And it should be remembered that despite a tremendous volume of criticism that heralded the Bennett appointment as the Commandant of Pathfinder Force, it was but a murmur compared with that when he was appointed AOC of No 8 (PFF) Group at the tender age of 31.
I have in my possession a letter from one of the RAF's most revered names, a great wartime C-in-C and possibly one of the RAF's foremost Chiefs-of-Air-Staff and, in peacetime, a dear friend of mine these many years, who said of the Bennett appointment: "I cannot understand what Harris was thinking of making that airline fellow a Group Commander…" 
Donald C.T.
Bennett, the youngest of four boys, was born at Toowoomba, Australia, on 11 September 1910.
Destined to take over his father's cattle station, he quickly defected and headed for Point Cook — the RAAF "Cranwell" — but not before several obstacles, which might have deterred many a lesser lad, had been overcome.
He was deeply influenced by the great aeronautical pioneers of the day, notably Kingsford-Smith and Ulm, whose epic flights in the southern hemisphere shone like the target indicators he was to introduce years later over Germany.
His period at Point Cook seems to have been distinguished only by his getting a first in flying, and a second in the academic studies — by his standards, a poor start.
For reasons best known to the RAAF at the time, they started cutting back on pilots and offered his course a transfer to the RAF.
He accepted and joined No 26 Squadron at North Weald to start a Short Service Commission.
At this time he developed a feeling for courses and put in for every course in sight.
Oddly enough, this must have sickened him because he banned anyone going on a course whilst he was AOC Pathfinder Force.
In fact, he claims that his flyingboat course was his last in the RAF and certainly the most fortuitous for himself and subsequently the RAF.
His posting to Pembroke Dock, then commanded by Wg Cdr A. T. Harris, was a meeting of great minds and it is interesting to recall what Harris said about him in the early thirties, and later in the war years: "he was, and still is, the most efficient airman I have ever met" .
But also added that he easily became impatient with any intellect inferior to his own.
During his flyingboat period he added to his natural aptitude as a pilot several academic qualifications — a First Class Navigation licence, "B" Pilot's licence.
Ground Engineer's licences, "A" - "C" and "X" categories, a Wireless Air Operator's licence and an Instructor's rating — in preparation for the period when he entered civil aviation.
On leaving the Service in August 1935 he spent several months looking around and also being looked at by the family of the lovely Ly, his Swiss wife, a scrutiny which was reciprocated when Ly had in turn, to be looked at by the swarm of Bennetts in Brisbane, Australia.
In January 1936 he joined Imperial Airways and quickly became known as the "Boy Wonder" and it was during this period, he later admitted, that he committed the only error of judgement in his entire flying career.
Coming into Brindisi Harbour, he noticed that on the roof of a high rise block of flats under the wing float, lay a lovely Latin sunbathing.
She gave him a rather languid finger wave and just as she disappeared under the wing float, he then realised she was only wearing a black sporran.
The result unnerved the "Boy Wander" and he "dropped in" from several feet.
In 1938 he was given command of Mercury, the top (seaplane) half of the Mayo composite, the lower carrier element being the Maia flying boat.
In July that year, he flew Mercury on the first ever commercial Atlantic flight with a half-ton payload, starting at Foynes and landing at Montreal some 20 hours later, navigating by astro.
The return flight was made via Horta in the Azores due to not having a Maia-assisted take-off, which would have allowed a heavier fuel load.
There followed DCT's attempt to fly the Mercury nonstop from Dundee to Cape Town, which failed by a relatively short distance, but nevertheless added considerably to the world's seaplane records and is still the record today.
This particular flight can take its place with those of his boyhood heroes, Kingsford-Smith and Ulm.
It would appear that the real importance of the Mercury records was lost in the "peace-in-our-time" sentiment which swept the country at the time, and despite the world record and some 42 hours 26 minutes air time.
Bennett returned to duty in a week and to nonstop flights to Egypt carrying mail, logging about 14 hours each way.
Again, these nonstop flights between England and Egypt were commercial firsts.
In August 1939, Don Bennett inaugurated two-way regular Atlantic services, aided by Alan Cobham's Flight Refuelling Company — yet another first, with Capt Jack Kelly Rogers starting at the New York end of the route.
The outbreak of war saw Bennett still in the navy blue of Imperial Airways and he heard the Prime Minister's broadcast, declaring war on Germany, with much the same feeling as most of us who remember it.
Later that evening, over the Atlantic, he heard the SOS of the SS Athenia with its 1,000 complement of women and children en route for the New World.
Wedged neatly between his route flying at this period was a rescue operation to collect Gen Sikorski's staff who were making their way to the South of France, hotly pursued by the Germans.
The only hitch in the operation was when the Royal Navy fired on the flyingboat as it took off from Bordeaux with the Polish General and his staff aboard.
The Atlantic Ferry now figures largely in the Bennett saga in which he was joined by several of his old Imperial Airways colleagues.
The Ministry of Aircraft Production under Lord Beaverbrook was keen to fly the badly-needed aircraft across the Atlantic, instead of crating, shipping and uncrating — and a good proportion being sunk by U-boats.
The Air Ministry was emphatic that it "was suicide to attempt air delivery — more especially in winter time" .
Despite this, Bennett led seven Hudson aircraft, with captain, co-pilot and wireless operator and made the first formation delivery flight across the Atlantic in November 1940; similar formation flights followed at regular intervals.
DCT personally leading about one in every four flights.
It was around this time there were grave doubts about what might be called the cost-effectiveness of the results achieved by Bomber Command.
The C-in-C of the day utterly refused to believe the Air Ministry's suggestions that we were wasting our effort and losing many crews to little purpose.
During one of his staging trips, Bennett was invited to the Air Ministry ("by some friends') when the sad tale of Bomber Command's failure was laid bare.
The quite unprecedented step reflected the deep concern felt by a cell of opinion within the bomber department at the measure of the Command's worth at that time.
The fact that an unknown "civilian" should have been consulted about what was indeed a purely Service matter, should be weighed against Bennett's unequalled background and experience.
No serving officer — at that time, or since — could match his enviable array of qualifications and experience.
Despite the "Boy Wonder" tag, he countered the quite genuine complaints that with the elementary aids available — basically just a compass and air speed indicator — it was virtually impossible to find a German target in the face of spoofs/dummies and the mounting numbers of fighters, as well as flak and searchlights.
From that quite informal meeting at the Air Ministry, and others subsequently, the idea of setting up a Target Finding/Marking Force was imperative to the saving of Bomber Command as a vital contribution to winning the war.
From these secret meetings evolved the idea of a Force that would actually lead the assault and would be responsible for finding and marking the target for the Main Force.
When the new C-in-C, Sir Arthur "Bert" Harris, assumed command in February 1942 he was compelled to accept the concept, against his adamant belief that a corps d'elite was damaging to the Command.
But he claimed that "…this is just one more example of a Commander in the field being overruled by a junior staff officer at the Air Ministry" .
I had a feeling when I read those words over 40 years ago, and written in the heat of the aftermath of a long and tiresome period of war, that Sir Arthur might have wished he had put it differently.
The whole vexed question associated with the gestation period of the "Target Marking" element has not been, to date, documented.
Ultimately, Harris conceded that if this was the Air Ministry's will, the addition to the Command would be called the Pathfinder Force and demanded Bennett would be the first Commandant.
Prior to the Ministry's ultimatum, Bennett had been removed from the Atlantic Ferry and was replaced, oddly enough, by the Air Chief-Marshal who had resisted the actual formation of the Atlantic Ferry as "suicidal" .
An interesting comparison between the two periods of operations was that in the Bennett era, only one  aircraft failed to make the crossing.
Students of wartime history will find a study of the post-Bennett era revealing.
On re-entering the RAF, DCT was made an acting wing commander and, after a short period, was given command of No 77 Squadron flying Whitleys which, with his background, must have been a daunting experience.
Happily, after a short period, this was rectified and he commanded No 10 Squadron with Halifaxes.
Shortly after joining No 10 Squadron he was shot down during an attack on the Tirpitz at Aasfjord near Trondheim in Norway.
Despite having one wing afire and disintegrating, he managed to get his crew away but only after his flight engineer, FS Colgan, found a parachute and attached it, and had gone to the aid of the wounded tail gunner.
Bennett was the last to bale out, He evaded capture on his adventurous journey from Norway to Sweden and this is best savoured by his own description in Pathfinder which, unhappily, does not report details of his encounter with Count Bernadotte of the Swedish Foreign Office: this must have been a very unequal contest.
He was back in the UK exactly one month after being shot down.
On his return to duty, and the award of a DSO, he was ordered to Bomber Command where Harris confirmed that he was to command the Pathfinder Force.
Although the C-in-C had initially resisted the formation of the PFF, he gave the Commandant virtual carte blanche in the selection of airfields and staff; the Command however, insisted that the Force operated the night it was formed, despite an adverse weather forecast.
This did nothing to alleviate the poor opinion of the whole PFF concept held by senior officers inside and outside the Command.
Bennett was considered an upstart, and a civilian upstart to boot, in spite of Point Cook and his Short Service Commission, not to mention his formidable flying experience and technical background.
And, I hazard a guess, more logged flying time than the sum total of all the senior officers in the Command at the time.
Nevertheless, he set about the seemingly hopeless task of making a bankrupt Command a going concern.
At the time of his appointment to PFF, the Command was just getting used to GEE, thought originally to be a bombing aid but really at best an aid to navigation.
Nevertheless, it was very welcome until its worth was diminished by enemy jamming.
It must have been a testing time for the boffins at the Telecommunications Research Establishment (TRE) at Malvern to find an operational RAF pilot in their midst, competing with them and reducing by months the time-scale normally associated with getting things done.
Here was the case of the user in desperate need and the boffins equally keen to deliver the goods.
Quite apart from the endless experiments to be carried out in developing H2S and OBOE, there were countless visits to the Air Ministry, HO Bomber Command, the aircraft makers and TRE where he had to fight and fight hard — for the priority he felt his PFF must have to survive.
It was during this latter period that the anti-Bennett lobby really closed ranks on the "civilian upstart" .
It is only fair, however, to place on record that he never felt that a tiny measure of diplomacy was worth trying.
A typical example — and there are many of these — was when he patiently sat through a high level Air Ministry conference listening to the Mosquito being castigated for its poor night flying qualities (because of the glare from the exhausts), and Boscombe Down recommended that it should never be flown at night, the chairman, as an afterthought, suggested Bennett contribute his views: "I wish someone hid told me about all these faults', he replied," because I have been flying the Masse on OBOE night trials with excellent results".
End of conference — but not the end of "civilian upstart" !
What Bennet did not tell the conference was that he had designed special shrouds for the exhaust ports, and his Group engineer had them made up in the local village smithy.
They only lasted a short period, but the Command engineer followed up at once with proper drawings aid specified the correct heat resisting metal.
Not only was the question of PFF navigation imperative to the success of the Pathfinders but there was the vital question of armament "stores" — hooded flares and target indicators in all sorts of colours.
A special form of coloured route marker had to be developed and approved and it was in this field, as with TRE, that Bennett had the least of his problems.
It was a love affair between thinking minds as opposed to that "bloody jumped-up airline chap" which seemed to be the anthem of his air-rink contemporaries.
Whilst the need for"stores' and all forms of ancillary equipment was being chased, the matter of operating a hotch-potch of five squadrons, each with a different type of aircraft, brought its own problems to the PFF.
But the Command insisted that the Pathfinders must pathfind with what they had and make the best of it.
Small wonder that there was high glee within the Command when the first sortie to Flensberg was such a debacle, due in the main to weather.
I remember — I was there.
Nevertheless, methods were being developed to allow the mounting weight of Bomber Command to inflict an ever-deeper mark accurately on the allotted targets.
Whilst DCT would not accept an Australian squadron, he did accept a Canadian squadron — No 405 — because he said the Canadians were actually getting their replacement crews direct from No 6 Group, which was the Canadian group wholly supported financially by the Canadian government.
Perhaps the close proximity to No 4 Group — and Roddy Carr, the Group Commander — might have influenced "Black Jack" McEwan, the Canadian Air Vice-Marshal, since they were the only two Groups which supported Bennett entirely during those troublesome times, from the PFF's formation to the end of the war.
I felt that it should now be placed on record that the monumental and disgraceful row which was a feature during the Battle of Britain between the two Air Vice-Marshals — Keith Park and Leigh Mallory — was in no way comparable to the discord that appeared to exist between Bennett and AVM Sir Ralph Cochrane, AOC No 5 Group.
Here were two superior intellects — "Cocky" with a vast Air Force-trained mind (and as Bennett quoted in Pathfinder "…an energetic and conscientious man…no Air Force officer with more zeal…a magnificent-brain…" ) and I, as one who basked in the favour of them both, fully endorsed these views.
Bennett had added to his original Australian Air Force training, albeit with a Short Service RAF Commission, but had accumulated almost every qualification known to aviation and beyond this, had a wealth of  practical experience.
In flying experience alone he came to the Command with nearly 10,000 hours.
I claim to have seen this conflict at closer range than anyone.
As the PFF "horse thief" , I would be told to visit the Group commander when I next called an No 5 Group to explain some aspects of our techniques, or indeed a lapse in recent sorties, I was always made most welcome and enjoyed"Cocky's' confidence.
He would gently put his point of view and add "go tell your master" .
It was on one of these occasions that Guy Gibson was ushered into"Cocky's' presence and, just prior to his appearance, the AOC had given me a slip of paper with the names of about 20 pilots whom he asked me not to recruit — as a favour to him — which was his style.
When Gibson and I left the office, Guy turned on me and bluntly told me the fate that would overtake me were I to steal one of his crews.
Now "Cocky" did not tell me what his list was intended for, I had assumed that Gibson was referring to his own unit, No 106 Squadron.
He did, however, and… "and keep your sticky fingers off Searby" .
Now up to that moment I had never heard of John Searby, one of Gibson's flight commanders, and he did not appear on"Cocky's' list.
That same day he (Searby) was posted to command No 83 Squadron, and won renown at Peenemunde as the Master Bomber.
Guy quickly evened the score by removing, through stealth, one Dave Shannon from the PFF Training Unit at Warboys, to become one of the outstanding Dam Busters.
There is a sad ending to this tale, "Cocky" had grounded Guy Gibson after his epic Dams sortie, but he pestered his Group Commander to return to active flying.
Eventually "Cocky" agreed with the proviso that he undertook a short course at Warboys on the Mossie before he attempted what was known as the Cheshire low-level marking technique.
This technique was highly dangerous and required the skills that Cheshire had certainly acquired over a long period, but was equally within Gibson's exceptional abilities.
However, Gibson had no experience on the Mossie and would have benefited a great deal from a few hours with the PFF Mossie Unit at Warboys — perhaps a couple of low-level bombing attacks on our bombing range.
Sadly he rejected this dual instruction and was lost on a low-level marking attack that, had Cochrane been aware that Gibson was not checked out at Warboys, his AOC would have forbidden him to fly that night.
Thus the RAF and the nation were deprived of one of its most gallant battle leaders, amongst the bravest of the brave — I knew them all, I walked in their shadows.
As I make my way through my lecture tours overseas I am frequently asked who was the best, and I have to evade a proper answer because each group had its Gibsons, but at different times.
However, I can debate with anyone and at any stage that Gibson was right at the time for the Dams.
He was right at that time because he was, shall we say, "in season" , an exceptional pilot.
He had the arrogance and the charisma of a Bob Stanford-Tuck or Doug Bader, but I will also add that he had that indefinable something that was an essential ingredient in an outstanding bomber pilot.
He also had the same stock-in-trade qualities that were clearly visible in Len Cheshire, Willie Tait, Jimmy Marks, Pat Daniels and the youthful Fraser Barron to name but a handful.
Oddly enough many years later — and shortly before his death — "Cocky" and I often had breakfast together in the RAF Club and he never berated Bennett or in any way referred to the difference of opinion that certainly existed in the  Pathfinder era.
Sadly much of the animosity generated about Cochrane and Bennett originated from within No 5 Group and a great deal I was able to counter before it reached tap-room levels, I never felt I was running with the fox because I had great feeling and admiration for both these Olympian"gores, in fact, Cochrane invited me to move to No 5 Group with him when he left No 3 Group, but I declined as I was in mid-tour.
When the war ended he sought me out to offer me choice of jabs; I chose his Transport Wing in Germany, on loan to Sholto Douglas then the C-in-C Germany, to operate the air transport requirements for Germany in the early days after the end of the war, with aircraft baked in the UK.
Bennett was less discreet and, by virtue of his unsurpassed practical experience was less patient with"Cocky's' theory and lack of operational experience.
I have been the catalyst in the fusing of these two remarkable characters at postwar reunions and have been warmed by their adult behaviour, long after the flak had faded.
I have always understood, and believed, that you just cannot"dance at two weddings', but I admired and respected Cochrane as the most efficient serving officer I had encountered in my short 33 years in uniform.
Bennett, on the other hand, had my absolute loyalty and to witness him in action led one to understand in later years what Lord Reith — founder Director of the BBC — meant when he said "I was never fully stretched" .
DCT's tongue-lash never really hurt because a moment's reflection made one realise that he was right.
He generally was.
Whilst the pathfinders had the original control of H2S, developments were going on with a fair measure of practical input from Bennett and his friends at TRE, and eventually a superior set was devised and known as the 3cm HS.
Immediately — and this can be well understood — Coastal Command had more than a passing interest because it was having a desperate struggle with the U-boats in the Atlantic and, naturally, it was very keenly supported by the Admiralty and the Navy to boot, to get hold of this latest model.
The Battle for Control of 3cm H2S
Oddly enough, Bomber Command seemed to feel that if Bennett was so impressed and believed that the Pathfinders should have this latest version, then it was up to Bennett and the Pathfinders to fight and debate with Coastal Command.
So Bennett was instructed to go to AM Sir John Slessor, Commander-in-Chief, Coastal Command, and literally fight it out for their share of the new 3cm H2S.
Viewed entirely from a technical standpoint, this was rather an unfair struggle.
Whilst AM Sir John was generally acknowledged as a very rare intellect and, particularly, an excellent scribe in the best Staff College style, he was no match whatsoever for Don Bennett with his mass of technical knowledge and practical hard-won experience.
It may be of interest to many, particularly Bennett's detractors, to know that he disapproved originally of the Main Force having H2S, even the earlier versions.
He made a very sound case that only the Pathfinders should receive the benefit of H.S developments and that it was wrong for the Main Force to have the device.
He did have (and I know this as I was on his staff at the time) some sympathy with Coastal Command in view of its flight in the Atlantic, particularly in the Western Approaches and more especially in what was called the "black pit" , this was an area in the Atlantic where the RAF could not give air cover to the convoys either from Ireland.
Iceland or the Eastern seaboard of Canada and America.
What struck me at the time about the "battle" between Bennett and Slessor was that Bennett acted as an agent for his C-in-C as well as in his, own personal interest.
Nevertheless, he did feel that Coastal had a strong claim to the latest 3cm version which could well have been made available to assist with the war at sea if large resources had not been diverted to equip the Main Farce of Bomber Command.
This diversion was unnecessary, thought Bennett, and I fear this and many similar instances were to befall him whilst commanding No 8 Group — for example, the introduction of the Master Bomber role, and the Group commander's broadcast prior to the disastrous Nuremburg raid in March 1944.
It would he a very revealing item of Bomber Command's history were a tape to be made available today of that unfortunate telephone link-up, and for a cold assessment to be made of all the circumstances as known at the time.
But perhaps the most surprising "own goal" scored by the Command was the length of time that it took to appreciate the value of Radio Countermeasures (RCM).
11 Some "Odd Bods" 
Sqn Ldr Tommy Blair DSO, DFC
Perhaps I should start with one of the most colourful characters that we ever had in the Pathfinder Force — unhappily now dead — Tommy Blair of No 83 Squadron.
He was a very much larger than life character who it is understood, although it may not be strictly true, was sacked three times by his company for which he worked as a salesman.
Although he was sacked he was taken back a fourth time and he did indeed die in harness.
I can recall one memorable evening when we met in the Pathfinder Club just as soon as it had opened in the evening; I was attached to the Air Ministry at the time and it was very soon after the war as we still wore uniform.
 "Hamish, oh I am so pleased to see you" , he said,"I have got a very important job tonight, one of my clients is over from France with his wife and daughter and I am entertaining them.
Now I find that in entertaining three people I cannot quite devote as much time to the two ladies as I would like to, perhaps you could assist me."
He continued, "they are coming in here shortly and there will be papa, mama and a daughter; we will go to the Savoy Grill where we will have a little meal" .
Now Tommy's idea of a little meal was quite different to that of my own, a serving Wing Commander having in London whilst my family were up in East Yorkshire.
My idea was more Lyon's Corner House than the Savoy Grill but, nevertheless, we went to the Savoy.
After a delightful supper we just tottered across the forecourt of the Savoy Grill into the Savoy Theatre — very intimate — and we saw a nice show.
We then all got into taxis and we went off to the Coconut Grove at the top half of Regent Street where we spent until the small hours of the morning.
Tommy dancing with everyone in sight and paying court to the French ladies.
We were wined and dined at great expense and the next time I met Tommy he thanked me profusely for assisting him on that evening.
He told me that he got an awful rocket from the Director of Accounts when he handed in the bill which worked out at several hundred pounds — and here we are talking of the year 1946!
He completed a Pathfinder tour and came to Warboys when I was the High Master there.
Whenever I wanted a guest to be really entertained at one of our functions I would send for Tommy and ask him to look after them.
We had no Balls as such in those days, we would have a dance, and when I was entertaining  any of my theatrical friends from the West End it was always Tommy that I selected to do some special entertaining — well within the reach of the station commander's entertaining fund.
However, this was very limited indeed in comparison with the vast sums that we can associate with Tommy's expense account!
Incidentally, Tommy had a dog of 57 varieties called Sammy who was predominantly Spaniel by looks and devoted to him.
Sammy had his own log book and the number of sorties he did over Germany varied according to the time of night and the amount of beer consumed in that period.
Sammy slept under the navigator's table and never seemed to have any reaction to the gyration of the aircraft or the attention of the natives with their flak and fighters outside.
I have difficulty from time to time in persuading some of my colleagues to believe that a boy not yet 21 could amass so much experience in such a short time; he had completed two tours and looked like completing a third.
Nevertheless, this happened to many, but I would question if anyone in the Command had amassed the experience of Fraser Barron in such a relatively short time.
I was particularly distressed when I personally sanctioned his return to operational flying after a short period as an instructor at an OTU.
Wg Cdr Fraser Barron DSO.
DFC.
DFM.
RNZAF
When highly decorated and very experienced operational pilots were posted to training units within Bomber Command, they invariably suffered some difficulty within these establishments.
The main reason for this was that the units themselves resented a very young officer, heavily laden with acting rank, which meant that an existing officer of the same rank had to he disposed of to make way for an operational type doing a rest period.
After considerable pleas in writing and phone calls, I brought Fraser Barron back to command No 7 Squadron; during the interdiction period prior to the Invasion he was outstanding not only as a squadron commander, hut also as an inspiration to all.
Sadly, as the Master Bomber on a raid against Le Mans railway yards on 19/20 May 1944, he collided with his Deputy and it was indeed ironic that they both actually marked the aiming point with their burning aircraft.
 "Mad Doe" Winfield was one of the doctors at the Institute of Aviation Medicine at Farnhorough and he was also one of the earliest of qualified doctors to take a full pilot's course.
Now Dr Winfield — and I have ratified this — made 127 sorties; he could not have enjoyed his period at the Institute very much because he never seemed to he there, But he would come on a station with some project he wanted to fully research and he believed the only way to fully research these things was to "try them out on the dog" .
Although he was a fully qualified pilot, he never to my knowledge (certainly not whilst he was with No 7 Squadron) was ever captain of an aircraft; he had been second pilot, or flown as mid- upper, or rear gunner or had taken some other crew function, but at the same time he would be researching and demonstrating some aspect of a project that he was currently engaged with at the Institute.
For instance, I recall one evening he came to me and took out a matchbox and he gave it a couple of shakes; I thought there were matches inside, hut he opened the box and inside were some very evil-looking pills, about the size of, or a little larger, than a Beecham's pill.
They were generally of a mottled colour and looked most unappetising, "Try one Hamish" he invited, I would take one and taste it and then he would say: "What do you make of it?" 
Wg Cdr Roland Winfield MD.
ChB.
DFC.
AFC
"If it wasn't a pill I could almost be certain of a taste and an odour of liver and bacon, and probably some onions.
Are there onions mixed?"
I asked, "Why yes," he exclaimed,"it's liver, bacon and onions'.
Somewhat perplexed I asked him what was the purpose of these things, "Well," he said"we're very concerned about gunners — particularly rear gunners.
On the way hack they get past the enemy coast and usually they light up a cigarette".
 "None of my crew would, I'd know instantly," I told him,"I'm a non-smoker and if anybody smoked in my aircraft I would know at once.
I know of anything that is happening down at the rear, I can tell you I have a very keen sense of smell."
 "Well," he said,"we think we lose a lot of aircraft, because we have been monitoring quite a — few they just disappear from the radar screen 50 miles off the coast, sometimes more, sometimes halfway across the sea if they are making a dash far Flamborough Head.
This is a great worry to us and we believe we can help to prevent these losses by giving them something to distract them from smoking like liver, bacon, eggs, or steak and onions.
We've got all sorts of mixes'.
Then he would take another matchbox out and say "try these" .
There was a very positive taste and odour about what he was trying to illustrate.
He was also the fellow who sat on the ground in what was called a "Robinson Jacket" and was snatched from an absolutely stationary position on the ground by an Anson with a hook; this was a device to snatch injured personnel off the battlefield and into the air.
What happened to them when they got to the other end I have never dared to ask, but perhaps these few illustrations (pages 82–83) will convince you that Doc Winfield actually sat in this contraption and was hooked from a completely static position by an aircraft into the air and probably (and I never found out) delivered to some hospital none the worse for the experiment.
Wg Cdr ( "Mad Doc" ) Winfield DFC, AFC — and no braver man ever took to the air, after completing 127 sorties — was found dead by his wife halfway up the stairs with a tray of morning tea, which might be a sort of warning to those of you and there may be a few who do get up to make your wives cups of tea.
I told you in another part of this saga of mine that I took over a Night in No 7 Squadron from a Flight Commander.
Sqn Ldr Leigh-Smith, that I believe had ditched, I found all his clobber in the flight locker swimming in salt water, and his aircrew sweater and all his other gear dyed yellow by the colouring that aircrew used to put in the water to help identify their position to searching aircraft.
Erik Hazelhoff-Roelfzema
Now this fellow had a very attractive girlfriend called Midge"md I got to know Midge through my predescessor, about the time I was due to leave No 7 Squadron and go to Bennett's headquarters.
I met her in Cambridge and she introduced me to her new boyfriend who was a Dutchman called Erik Hazelhoff-Roelfzema, I  was most impressed with this keen and very handsome young man, but I knew nothing whatsoever about him save that he was anxious to get into the Pathhnders.
As my new Job in Bennett's Headquarters was ultimately to recruit Pathfinders.
I felt that this was possibly a chap I should look at — quite apart from the fact that I knew little of him except that he had somehow or other got out of Holland and become the ADC to Queen Wilhelmina at the Dutch headquarters in London.
However, I was not prepared just to accept him with no experience at all and I asked him to give me some sort of evidence about the amount of flying he had done.
So after one or two other visits to The Bun Shop or Joe Mullins' Volunteer in Cambridge on nights off, he eventually presented me with a log book detailing some 280/290 hours of flying, which was about the average of the normal straight-through pilot that came from the training machine aid could then enter all Operational Training Unit.
So there was nothing different"about that save that years later I found out that it was not his log hook at all.
It was ill fact a log hook that he had bought from somebody and changed the name.
Now had I known about this it the time, of course he would not have stood a chance of getting into the RAF.
After the war he also confessed to me that his eyesight was very bad and he would not have passed any normal eye test that we used in the RAF, hut he did have contact lenses.
Quite apart from the bizarre situation of a bought log book and contact lenses, you have got to also measure the style of a fellow that goes to those lengths to do something he wants to do, and wants to do badly.
But this, of course, was the stock-in-trade of any of these people — Dutch or anybody else — who managed to get out of German-occupied Europe and fight with the Allies.
Erik Hazelhoft-Roelfzema was accepted eventually, hut I still felt he wanted more experience.
It was not until about a year later, when I became the High Master of Warboys, that I took him into Warboys and made him a sort of Staff pilot flying Oxford aircraft on special navigational training exercises; this was something that I could physically check and I do not know why it is, and I am not being clever now, I just accepted the evidence he gave me of this phoney flying.
Later, when I felt that he could do with even more experience than he hid got at Warboys, I sent him up to RAF Grantham which at that time was training navigators.
He could fly all day long and all night long if he wanted, but I wanted him to get 100 hours at night and I felt that despite his enthusiasm I would like to he shot of him for a period.
So it would take him, in my view, at least three or four months to get 100 hours night flying.
Although he was on Oxfords, or even Ansons, he was nevertheless getting experience at night and this was important if he wanted to become a Mosquito Pathfinder.
So off he went to Grantham.
I think it was within a month or so of his departure that I received a phone call from a friend of mine at Grantham: "Look, for God's sake let's get rid of this Dutch friend of yours, he's a menace." 
 "What has he done" ?"
I asked.
 "He hasn't done anything except fly at night," was the answer.
"He has asked to do at least two details at night and if anyone falls sick he will ask to do a third and even a fourth.
If he had the chance he would fly all night long and also do any day flying.
He's got his 100 hours, can I send him back to you?"
I agreed and I put him under training for Mosquito, and to the best of my knowledge (and this is only a guess) he did over 70 sorties, got himself at least one DFC, if not two, and became a very worthwhile member of the Pathfinder Force.
I always had a strong feeling that, once "Bomber" Harris was forced to accept a Target Finding/Marking faction within his Command, one of the very first people to he considered"is founder member would he Jimmy Marks.
Wg Cdr Jimmy Marks DSO.
DFC
By the time the Farce (now called the Pathfinder Force by Harris himself) was being manned.
Jimmy Marks had become the Commander of No 35 Squadron and so arrived on the day that the Pathfinders were formed with his hind-picked aircrews from No 1 Group.
Sadly, Marks did not last very long and he was the first of the Commanding Officers of the four founder squadrons to he lost in battle; this was flat only great loss to the squadron, hut certainly to the Pathfinders.
I possess a letter from one of his crew who was the last to leave the stricken Halifax whilst his Commanding Officer struggled to keep the aircraft"airborne, losing height rapidly and beseeching all the crew to get out before it struck the ground.
It is difficult to understand why Mark's action was not brought to the attention of the authorities then, because his action as the captain of the aircraft dwells within many heroic and desperate actions that under normal circumstances would have been considered for high award.
His flight engineer WO W. G. Higgs wrote: On the night of 10/20 September 1942 we were attacked by a Bf110 from below; he hit us in the port mainplane and set fire to numbers five and six fuel tanks,"the ailerons were jammed and the fuselage was also on fire.
It was impossible for the skipper to get out", although I put his parachute on for him he remained at the controls and ordered the crew to bale out.
I wrote to my parents ill POW camp telling them that the crew were alive because Jimmy Marks had stayed with the aircraft in order that we could escape.
I served with Marks before the war and he showed great promise even as a junior officer.
Earlier in this tome I recalled his experiment with target finding, and remember the dateline — June 1940, attacking a target near Rotterdam.
Johnny was a Canadian hush pilot before the war and was fortunate to survive the trough of despair in the spring and early summer of 1942 when survival chances were at their lowest (see graph on page 85).
Gp Capt Johnny Fauquier DSO.
DFC
I recruited Johnny at the Golden Fleece in Thirsk, one of the No 1 Group watering places, and he came down and commanded No 405 (PFF) Squadron at Gransden Lodge.
Fauquier was a hard CO, very much after the manner of the Royal Navy chaplain whose Gospel appeared to he don't do as I do, do as I tell you".
He survived an outstanding Pathfinder tour as a group captain, was snatched by the AOC No 6 Group to become his SASO and got a "thick" un"hut chucked it all ill to drop two ranks to command No 617 Squadron, wherein he finished the war.
He gave me the most trouble by returning more potential Pathfinders than any other CO: hut not only — aircrew he walked about Gransden with a wad of  railway warrants in his pocket, and anyone who offended got one on the spot.
The AOC No 6 Group complained to me about this, so I suggested that he keep the culprit for a week and then send him back.
It never failed.
He found himself stymied by an old oppo of mine when setting out on one of the Bielefeld Viaduct sorties with Tallboys.
His R/T went u/s as they were taxying out and he called for control to stop "Jock" Calder (his Deputy) and tell him to get out of his aircraft and hand it over to Johnny's crew, "Jock" overheard this plea, switched off his R/T, took-off and led the sortie, but was never forgiven.
Johnny was surely the "Billy Bishop Canadian" of World War 2: only the war ending when it did denied him the highest award.
Wg Cdr Rodley, a distinguished Pathfinder, commanded No 97 Squadron which, together with No 83 Squadron, was hijacked by No 5 Group towards the latter part of the war to provide pathfinding expertise for No 5 Group's bombing sorties.
Wg Cdr E. E. Rodley DSO.
DFC.
AFC.
AE
Possibly the most terrifying of Rodley's activities whilst attached to No 5 Group was a remarkable escape from destruction when he took off from Coningsby on a special mining raid, with a full load of Admiralty aerial mines, and suffered engine failure almost immediately after take-off.
There was no possibility of jettisoning the mines and fortunately, right ahead on the preliminary climb.
Rodley sighted a sandbank awash ahead.
He landed wheels-up on the sandbank and he and all the crew escaped certain death.
Apparently, some years later the whole story broke and Rod and the crew — those that survived the war — were awarded the Freedom of the Town of Boston.
Rodley, having survived a complete Pathfinder tour and beyond, became a senior captain in BOAC and is today happily retired and an active member of the Pathfinder Association.
Leonard Cheshire and I were pilot officers together in No 4 Group at the beginning of the war; he came from the dreaming spires of Oxford and I had just been commissioned as a pilot officer after serving a stint of five years as a sergeant pilot.
Thus together we became one of the lowest forms of animal life in the Royal Air Force, the most junior — a very thin single ring — but, nevertheless, Leonard Cheshire had a stamp of his very own.
Gp Capt Leonard Cheshire VC, OM, DS0, DFC
First of all I recall that there were not too many varsity entrants in the Air Force, probably only one on each station at the time, and Leonard Cheshire was our first university entrant and viewed with considerable suspicion and a certain amount of distaste.
He was not one of us; he did not quite fit into the measured compartmentalised minds of the Service at that time.
However, from the moment he entered the Mess he was quite an outstanding character — and I hope he will not mind me mentioning it — against a rich harvest of exceptional characters at that time.
Something that struck me personally at this period was that he had a most strange and cultivated sense of humour.
Being such an "odd bod" he was the butt of many who took the opportunity to make it known that he was different from  us, and whether we thought we would in time change him was something that was a hope — happily a fond hope.
One of the things that always intrigued me, and still does, concerned his Oxford tailor who seemed to think that the practice of having the brevet just above the left breast pocket on the tunic should he reviewed.
His brevet (his flying wings in other words) was situated some two or three inches above the pocket and when this error was pointed out to him by the more die-hard RAF characters he pointed out that the space was to make room for the VC, the DSO and the DFC.
He obviously had never heard of the Order of Merit or I am quite sure he would have mentioned it at that time.
Truly one of our outstanding men of the war (and any war).
Another side of the coin: when Don Bennett lavished high praise on my finding and training of pathfinders in the final phase of the war.
I have never quite understood why "Chesh" as we called him at the time, was the only person I selected for training with the Force that my Master vetoed; my Master also vetoed the selection of Leonard to command No 35 Squadron in the early days of the Pathfinder Force and I was never able to establish why.
12 Second Tour
In the preface to this saga you will have tasted the full flavour of the Ju88 attack from the account by Bob Pointer — my mid-upper gunner — and who better to describe that horrendous shock of the cannon squirt.
I, of course, at the sharp end felt but a slight tremor and my concern was with the loss of lateral control and my instrument panel disintegrating in front of me.
Permit me to take up our plight — try to imagine for a moment the straight and level run in to the target, "bombs gone" followed by the desperate seconds (best described by one of my Canadian pilots as "when I bite buttons off my parachute cushion" ) before the automatic photoflash and the aiming point picture taken by the night camera.
The instant I realised that we had a picture I made a steep turn to starboard and a downward movement, simultaneously I was aware of a slight tremor in the aircraft in the region of the bomb bay.
As I made the turn and dive I realised that I had lost lateral control and the wing "roll and dive" was increasing alarmingly.
My immediate reaction was to reduce power and I grabbed for the throttles.
Due to my haste and attitude I missed the four levers and only managed to close the two nearest throttles — in other words, the port engines.
This arrested the rite of roll and steepness of the dive and the wing started to return to the horizontal (also aided by the power from the starboard engines and pressure of the elevators), I was then able to assume some lateral stability by careful manipulation of the outer engines.
All this, of course, happened in much less time than it takes to explain.
Happily all four engines had been spared the attention of the Ju88 but I was soon to learn from the flight engineer that the aileron control cable had been severed and he went into the wing root to find the two ends and make some sort of connection.
I then started to climb through the broken cloud to recover some 10,000ft lost in the dive.
When I came out on top I immediately looked to starboard for the Pole Star and was rather shocked to find that it was oil the portside and we were obviously heading east, but by careful use of the engines was able to turn through 180° and the navigator gave me a heading after taking a sight from the astro compass.
Roughly halfway between the target and the coast the rear gunner signalled that we were about to be attacked and my ham-fisted evasive action severed the repair that the Night engineer had made to the aileron controls.
I was therefore left to dodge the fighter by very rough usage of the throttles, and shameful  longitudinal control of the elevators.
Happily we got rid of the fighter and the navigator set course once more by his skilful application of the astro compass readings and crossed the Channel.
We were then able to find our way home by the friendly beacons until we reached the searchlight cone at Oakington.
Whilst in the circuit we called for an ambulance on the Aldis lamp for the WT/Operator who had lost three fingers on one hand whilst "tinselling" .
I was not aware how badly Eddie had been injured, but understood that he was comfortable; this information came much later.
What the crew were not aware of was when I went into the starboard turn and dive without knowing that my aileron controls had been severed, and the fortunate miss of the four throttles made all the difference to the immediate arrest of the desperate attitude of "Charlie" .
And further, I had no idea I had lost some 10,000ft by this stage.
By now I was well under the cloud base and had some idea of horizontal reference and applied maximum boost and revs to regain height.
Having restored stability I quickly got above the cloud, found I had lost the Pole Star and somehow, like a tank commander, turned through 150° by not very gentle use of the outer engines.
The odd thing was that once on reciprocal we should have passed near the Koln area, with its attendant flak and searchlights, but not a sign.
Thus all things were bearing an equal strain and we were westward-bound when a frantic signal from the rear gunner warned me that we were about to be attacked again, and my heavy-handed evasive action severed the aileron control repair.
Happily there was some friendly cloud; this time I went right through it to regain some horizontal reference, then bob in and out of the cloud until Jock had repaired the damage, I stayed near the cloud base just in case we were jumped again.
Soon the Manston cone appeared on the port beam, and my London bobbie (Special Branch) steered me home via friendly beacons.
But my bit had yet to come; I had no idea if we had sustained damage to the undercarriage, although we had three greens burning bright, I motored in as if to land on new-laid eggs; all the crew, including Jock the engineer, were at crash stations and we landed "soft as a mouse's instep" , as Spike used to say.
In retrospect, what I found fascinating at the time (and this feeling has only increased with time and further thought) was that all the crew just did what I would have told them had I been able to make contact with them.
In point of fact the reverse ruled: I was constantly having chits thrust at me giving me a blow-by-blow account of "Charlie's" state of health, but I was never made aware of the seriousness of Eddie's wound, and somehow I did not know until I visited him in hospital later that morning.
In August 1942 I was delivered to No 7 Squadron at RAF Oakington by an oppo, Geoff Wornersley, who shortly followed me to PFF.
He did not leave the Force until he had completed the "ton" with DSO.
DFC and Bars, and his third tour with No 139 Squadron which later had a modified 120–scanning H2S that acted as hand-maiden to the Light Night Striking Force.
I replaced a Night commander who I understood had ditched, or so it seemed — his name was Sqn Ldr Leigh-Smith whom I have already spoken of.
Oddly, I felt this was a good omen.
Early in my first tour I argued with my colleagues that I doubted it would be possible to ditch a Wimpy or a Whitley on water, particularly if there was a heavy swell.
By a strange coincidence the first ditching I heard about was in No 77 Squadron in the early months of the war.
A sergeant "Nobby" Hall ditched and the crew got into the dinghy, and somehow Nobby got separated, drifted away from the dinghy and was drowned.
A sketch wad found on my locker door and I believe the author was Nobby Hall; he had opposed my views on ditching, as well he might, since he was an ex-officer, Merchant Navy, who had joined the RAF as a direct entry sergeant pilot in the Baldwin expansion period, and it was indeed ironic that he should perish and his crew saved.
Quite apart from the sheer mystery of all that I had to behold on arrival at an up-to-date operational station.
I was plunged at once into an immediate round of familiarisation of completely new and strange devices that were the work-a-day tools of Bomber Command.
What I found startling was the maturity of the crews.
At first I was not aware that all the crews in the PFF had been selected by their Groups and, in the main, were either second tour volunteers or were well advanced on their first tour.
This was eventually made doubly plain when each member of my crew took it in turn to brief me on his particular duties, and I in turn had to perform in his position.
My first sortie was on 18/19 August with a Peter Heywood, a son of the manse, who gave me a faultless demonstration of captaincy.
Sadly it was on Flensberg, the first PFF outing that was ruined by the weather, and did nothing to further this founding of target finding/marking.
I think what impressed me most about Heywood was his absolute control of his crew and, in particular, his assurance that he was the boss, despite his tender years and meagre experience.
My next trip was not so pleasant but nonetheless enlightening, It was with a scratch crew and an experienced navigator who, like myself, had returned to ops after a period in the training world, but also (like myself) utterly clueless about present day operations.
On this occasion I felt that all was not well and, although we got round alright, I had a deal of unease about the method employed by the navigator.
He had a weird habit of talking to himself or, as I later realised, to God.
At times when the flak splattered against the fuselage, he assumed an affected ecclesiastical voice, apparently coming from God: Are you in there Algernon "?" 
And the navigator replied in his normal Brummie voice: "Oh no, he is in the aircraft over there," and the odd thing was that the flak left us and clobbered an aircraft near us, It was the dead-ringer of God's voice that unnerved me, I put a stop to this impersonation of the Lord and, sadly.
Algy used up his measure of luck, I was then given a super navigator with only the sharpest of pencils and the instinct of a homing pigeon who took me through my tour; he perished the first time he New without me after I was hijacked to Bennett's staff.
I now had a settled crew and witnessed the steady improvement in the PFF methods, but very much trial and error as it was at the time, although in keeping with the Harris momentum.
I was enjoying the Stirling, but I was not impressed with its operational altitude.
Here we saw the professionalism of Bennett when he made a study of the factors that impinged upon the operational height aspect.
When he looked at the tremendous penalty borne by the aircraft in regard to the armour plating carried, the first thing to go was a huge ½″ thick slab that could have graced Fort Knox, but which protected the W/Op and the cabin crew, and that must have weighed several hundred pounds.
Next he interrogated the gunners and found that the average rounds used by them (that came back) was something in the order of 350 rounds per gun, and they carried and brought back several thousand rounds per gun.
He then made careful research into the reserve fuel lifted and found we all returned with about 23% of our fuel.
This reserve was cut to around 12% and the result was that the Stirling was able to operate at 18,500′ plus, which was a much better height than the bare 12,500′ we struggled to in the early days of PFF.
I remember at the time that all the crews felt a great deal happier being so much nearer the rest of the Lancs and Halifaxes, and no longer were in great danger of our oppoes dropping bombs and incendiaries on us.
Strangely, and almost coinciding with this modification to weight reduction, I found myself in a lack-of-petrol situation.
It was on a trip to Frankfurt with a mixed load of several 2,000lb bombs and the varied load of experimental PFF flares and early target indicator devices; Bennett always insisted that we had to carry a full load of the hurtful.
Running into the target we were heavily engaged by accurate flak that caught us whilst in a large cone of searchlights.
Although we did not appear to have a direct hit in any vital part (and the engines were spared) as soon as we dropped our bombs, and the photo-flash meant we had a picture of where we had left our load, we turned for home.
Now please permit me a slight diversion here.
The flight engineer and I were one-time apprentices at Trenchard's, Halton, and he had left the Service at the end of his 12 years and returned when the war started.
In the meantime, I had attended a special engine-handling course at Rolls-Royce, Derby, and we had different ideas about the engine settings.
This led to an occasional resetting of my settings when I may have been distracted.
Halfway between the target and the coast the Night engineer announced that we were having a heavy petrol consumption and the dialogue was something like this:
 "Skipper to navigator, how long to the coast?" 
Navigator: "Thirty-nine minutes." 
Skipper to flight engineer, "how much petrol?" 
Flight engineer to skipper, "thirty-seven minutes." 
At each stage there was always less fuel than there was time to get to the French coast.
Then this pantomime carried on from the coast.
The next stage was to get to Manston.
When we got to Manston with four engines still running there was a heavy undercurrent in the cabin, although no words were uttered, the inference was that possibly we had the wrong engine setting.
We entered the Manston circuit and found two Stirlings demanding emergency landings and I recognised the voice of one of my lads, Desmond Ince, and I told him to go ahead and take my turn to land.
The other chap I was to learn later was a Sgt Middleton from Mildenhall (later Flt Off.
VC).
Whilst I was behind Desmond he was on two engines and landed heavily; one of his engines came adrift and preceded him along the flarepath.
The Mildenhall aircraft veered away to the left and into a flying club canvas hangar full of light aircraft and churned the lot into kindling.
By  this time Desmond had nearly stopped on the flarepath and I decided to give him a wide berth.
At that instant control called to announce that there was an Air Raid warning and put out all the lights, followed immediately by bombs exploding on the airfield, I knew the airfield well and I stuck to my heading and switched on my landing light just to "feel" the ground, landed and rolled along until I felt a sharp jerk and a bash or two then a complete halt.
In the gloom I felt I was in some kind of an enclosure and told the rear gunner to get out and find out where we were.
By this time the "All Clear" sounded and there was a certain amount of light by which I could plainly see I was in what appeared to be an MT parking lot, When the rear gunner returned he reported that we were in the Manston MT yard.
He later told me of the adventure he had walking round the high netting accompanied by an airman on the other side of the wire.
When my chap turned to confront the Manston sentry — who was on guard with a rifle and one round, and obviously felt that the chap on the wrong side of the wire could be one of those attacking his airfield — my chap said sharply something to the effect: "Can you get us out of here?" and explained that he only meant his oppoes, not the Stirling.
The sentry is claimed to have replied: "Now don't abaht, I've got one up the spaht…" but rushed away to get the orderly corporal who, in turn, found the situation beyond his authority, and we were only released by no less than the duty officer.
Later when we were enjoying a beer with the station commander were we nearly disposed of when it was announced that the Stirling had clobbered a Coles crane, an ambulance, several minor vehicles and the CO's Humber.
The station commander, a well-known Battle of Britain type, suggested that he had wasted more animo on the Luftwaffe that he could have kept for such an occasion as ours.
On the way back to Cambridge we staged at "Moonies" in the Strand.
The nav — Tommy of the Metropolitan Police — rang his wife who appeared, as if by magic, with a large £5 note to feed and water the crew.
Not that this, as it happened, was necessary because the landlord's wife saw we had all we wanted.
The regulars and the heavy mob from Fleet Street arrived and we just managed to catch the last train to Cambridge.
Something similar must have happened to Middleton's crew because we met together at the station and took the train on the last lap to Cambridge.
There I was to have a long conversation with young Middleton, to whom I took a great shine, and was very impressed with him as a person and indeed his crew.
I enquired if he had volunteered for Pathfinders, to which he replied that he had thought about it, I told him if he wanted to come he could join my squadron.
He agreed, and in a few days — not very long — he was in my flight.
By this time it needed reinforcing, we had recently lost several crews.
So Middleton did two sorties I believe, and on each occasion he brought back an aircraft that was no longer capable of flying and was a write-off, it had so much flak and fighter damage, When the same thing happened a second time I had Middleton in and told him that one of his problems was his navigator who was just not able to navigate him round the very heavy flak areas.
It was pointless him going right through the centre because he was incurring far too much damage and eventually he would be shot down.
Of course, he was highly hacked about this — as only young Aussies of his type can be — and he insisted that he was not having his crew tampered with in any way, I agreed, but reminded him that he had  volunteered to come here, so he could volunteer to go back to his squadron.
I suggested that he might like to go and have a talk with his crew, I did not want to send him back to his squadron, but with a new navigator I believed he could eventually forge a good Pathfinding crew.
Middleton did not want any of that but he said he would go and talk to his crew.
Whether he did or did not, he was back in very short order saying that the crew had decided to go back to their old squadron, and I cleared him to return to his squadron that same afternoon.
So back he went to his squadron — No 149 — but he fared no better.
The sad thing was, as I said before, his navigator was incapable — and I must say not good enough — to get him round the heavily defended areas, and so in two sorties he still sustained abnormal flak damage.
On his last sortie to an Italian target, of all places, he sustained tremendous flak damage which rather belied the sort of opinion that we had of Italian flak.
We often said they loaded the gun in the afternoon and took a long lanyard into a dugout some distance away and fired their gun once and never emerged to reload.
But Middleton received enormous damage on that last sortie which ultimately proved fatal.
As I have heard from his crew, he baled out when he eventually got back to the south coast of England.
One of his gunners, FS Cameron, who oddly enough baled out from two aircraft whose captains, ultimately, were posthumously awarded the VC, has his portrait in that magnificent War Museum at Canberra.
It shows this air crew just as he baled out of the aircraft less his parachute harness which he had abandoned on landing.
He is looking up and out to sea in a southerly direction, and looking and listening desperately for sight or sound of Middleton — but that was not to be.
Middleton's body was washed up sometime later on the south coast of England, the country he had fought for so valiantly, and I commend you to read Chaz Bowyer's citation, which embraces the official citation for Middleton's VC, in his book The Bomber VCs.
The navigator, who I wanted to exchange and who remained with Middleton in his very last moments, his body was never found.
And whilst I have gone to Middleton's grave in the village of Mildenhall, I have found that I could in no way criticise his rejection of my plea that he stayed with the Pathfinders.
But what I will say — and it must be said because in Australia it has been put about that I sacked Middleton — Middleton, sadly, sacked himself.
I needed crews such as Middleton's badly and more especially captains like Middleton, but I was aware there was a weakness and that weakness had to be reinforced.
The decision was Middleton's, but I will say — and I have repeated this in Australia.
and what better place to say it than here — had Middleton accepted my alternative he would have had a better chance of living; but I would question very sincerely whether he would have had a VC.
The apprentice period followed sorties to Dusseldorf, Bremen, Krefeld, Osnabruck, and visits to the Ruhr — or "Happy Valley" as the troops called it.
Each sortie seemed to bring some added knowledge to the art of Pathfinding although some attacks were better than others.
Then we had a period on the Italian targets.
Despite being easy trips they did have a valuable effect on crews.
The flight right through France down to Geneva, over the Alps down to Genoa or Turin, was something of a rest from the normal German targets.
One could almost claim that setting course south of Paris for Geneva nearly 250 miles away was a pleasure compared with the more northerly targets.
Strangely enough one  could believe that the slightest glimmer of light on the dark horizon could be the lights of Geneva, and the glimmer became a glow and the glow became more positive and one could distinguish the lights which were real lights and those which were the reflections on the lake.
We steered away from neutrality and headed for the magnificence of the Alps in the moonlight; I always wondered if the Stirling would clear the Matterhorn and it always did with plenty to spare.
It always was a surprise, the pure majesty of the scene approaching the Alps, more especially in moonlight; it seemed odd to me, whilst devouring this special panorama that in a short time we would be raining all the horrors of war down on people not seriously willing to fight.
But they were, at that particular time with the Germans, giving us a bad time in the Western Desert.
It seems odd, in retrospect, that we carried out some excellent Pathfinding, but then we were aided by the lack of any serious opposition.
An amusing reminder of these sorties (I missed one of the larger of these attacks while on leave) springs to mind when, on returning to the squadron.
I was told that I would have to take a strange aircraft that night, I learnt that my aircraft had been damaged by flak — and Italian flak to boot— and one of my lads was in hiding as he claimed I had threatened him with dire punishment if he damaged my aircraft.
The shame of it: to damage the boss's aircraft — by Italian flak!
But all good things must come to an end; back on the old routine mixing it with the Luftwaffe and all they could muster — and their reaction was tremendous.
In the years that I have had to research my Bombing Years lectures I realise now that we never really got to grips with the German defences until the latter stages of the war.
I am aware that there was a steady decrease in the casualty figures and this was welcome to the Harris Offensive and also to the Mighty Eighth, but it always appeared to be that the Luftwaffe were just that one step ahead until, of course, the advent of D-Day and the advance of the Allies on the Continent.
About this time the appearance of the Mustang with the Packard Merlin engine must have seemed like manna in the desert to the Eighth Air Force.
Of course, there was less enemy terrain to fly ever, but at this period the sortie value was diminished — 70 and 80 sorties were common for those who elected to complete two tours and soldier on beyond the 60 cut-off.
Thus the entry into the fourth bombing year could be termed a watershed in the fortunes of the Allied bomber offensive.
Moreover we see both bomber forces gaining weight and flexing muscle; Harris with his 100 bomber squadrons in sight (but still painfully short of the Chief of Air Staff's promised 3,500 aircraft), and the General commanding the Eighth Air Force in no better state, having to fight and fight hard to arrest the diversion of his build-up in aircraft to other theatres.
But it was not all gloom on the side of the Allies: the general trend on the other side was one of gloom and doom.
It is very heartening now to witness some of the excellent combat shots taken at the time — Eighth Air Force bombers being escorted to places as far afield as Berlin with a mass of Packard Merlin-engined Mustangs indulging in a leapfrog technique which meant fighter waves could follow the bombers, fight and be relieved by another escort wave.
Thus those who had done their escorting and fighting, and had dropped their papier mache tanks, could return to base.
This excellent system of continental escorting and  fighting-off the Luftwaffe marked the beginning of the end for the Luftwaffe as we had known it up to the advent of the newly-engined Mustang.
A further echo of the Koln Ju88 strike reverberated the following evening when most of the crew were out in Cambridge celebrating survival and, as it happened on these occasions, most crews had their own favourite watering places.
The squadron's pub in Cambridge was known as The Bun Shop which, many years before, had been a bakery where undergraduates were able to go and buy alcohol as well as buns.
On this occasion I personally moved from The Bun Shop to a pub I believe was called The Volunteer run by a well-known and aged bare-knuckle fighter from London's East End called Joe Mullins.
He had an endearing habit at 10 o'clock of calling on each facet of his customers, starting with the lowest rank of airman, to "piss off" ; and worked through the ranks until he got to Kings (and on this occasion it happened to be King Peter of Yugoslavia).
His ADC took great exception, but then Joe was able to say "all Aides des Camps — piss off!" .
Now on this occasion after "last orders" when Joe had got rid of everyone, save the remnants of my party, we went downstairs into the cellar and were enjoying pints drawn off by Mrs Joe when there was a great thundering on the door.
A very authoritative voice shouted: "Joe, I must come in because I am looking for a wing commander.
Hamish Mahaddie, who I believe you have inside."
The police constable who had been hammering on the door was allowed to come in.
He came down into the cellar and was awarded a pint and we all seemed to be enjoying ourselves when, once more, there was a banging on the door.
This time it was a police sergeant, and when Joe went upstairs the sergeant said: "I am looking for Wg Cdr Mahaddie, and I am also looking for one of my constables," Joe foolishly replied: We might have a wing commander here but we don't have your constable."
and the sergeant replied, "that's odd because his cycle is leaning against your door, Joe" .
So the sergeant came down into the cellar and again was awarded a pint; he explained that the wing commander was wanted back at Oakington immediately because someone at HQ wanted to speak to him.
I do not know why but that did not seem to register with me at the time, and it did not until there was a third assault on the door.
This time it was an inspector I who had come looking for the wing commander, his sergeant and his constable.
He refused to come downstairs into the cellar but more or less instructed me to return to Oakington at once, as the Commander-in-Chief wanted to speak to me.
By this time it was approaching midnight and when I got back to camp and rang Bomber Command the duty officer was most reluctant to put me through to "Bomber" Harris.
When I was eventually connected with my Commander-in-Chief I was to learn that this was the first night he had been abed in 13 consecutive nights of operations.
What my Commander-in-Chief had to say to me is something that I will treasure for the rest of my days — and has only been shared with one other.
The epilogue to this evening's survival devotions was, strange as it may seem, exactly as I should have expected it to turn out, I do not remember when I missed — or at what stage — my flight engineer, but when I returned to camp and was literally wallowing in what the High Master at Command had to say to me.
I was roused from my room with a call from the Cambridge police, Stewart had been  arrested for disorderly conduct and was demanding that his skipper should come down and bail him out.
I had a friend, an inspector in the "cop-shop" , and he advised that after breakfast would be early enough for that procedure.
Next morning I was driven to Cambridge, clutching the flight engineer's personal documents which included his Service conduct sheet.
In the normal run of events these would never come to my notice, but on this occasion I was going to make a plea of mitigation on his behalf and hoped that the Bench would release their prisoner into my care and he would be summarily dealt with in accordance with Air Force Law.
But a brief study of his conduct sheet started warning bells ringing loud and clear — softly, softly, Hamish.
My plea was wholly contained in the events barely a day old and swiftly took the Bench and the entire Court through the squirt of 174 cannon shells, the wounded, the flight engineer's heroic effort in repairing the devastated controls twice, his treatment of the wounded and his immediate award of a DFM, which he had been celebrating.
I think I left the Bench at least with an impression that they had someone very special to deal with, I was, of course, all the time praying that no one for the police would ask for his Conduct Sheet, which they overlooked after making a dutiful response to the Bench, and I hurried away to be met outside the Court by Stewart, who at once asked me to lend him a pound.
 "A pound" I shrieked, "What do you want a pound for?" 
 "To buy the policeman I was fighting with last night a drink." 
There could be no answer to that, none that I could think of at the time.
And sadly the first time he flew without me he perished, leaving Bob Pointer and myself wondering why events in our puny lives are so ordained and arranged as to inflict the maximum hurt at a time like that.
Victory when it came I found tasteless, I was ashamed to be envious of air crews who were able to turn up at reunions with a crew intact, and they still can even 40 years on, and relive those cruel yet wondrous days when the composition of a crew was as binding as the sanctity of marriage.
Remember Ma Christie, our Norwegian Pathfinder, who wondered at how his crew just happened to appear as though from some mystique of chance; how Middleton said in effect "my crew is the best in the Command…leave them be or I return to the Main Force" .
I never had the opportunity to tell Christie of my method of making up crews, At Kinloss when I was chair-bound there for a short period, all too frequently I received complaints about the composition of crews.
Normally a list was published at random and took no account of any previous personal arrangements arrived at by crew members.
This unsettled all aircrew before they even started training at the Operational Training Unit.
I was able to persuade my chief ground instructor to let the crews pick themselves, I placed the pilots' names on a blackboard with four spare slots for the rest of the crew.
The pilots drew cards for their turn and, in less time than you would believe, crews were made up and never a complaint thereafter.
I had good cause to enjoy the many favours bestowed upon me by my inspector friend with the Cambridge police.
It started with a piece of foolishness that could have got me into a deal of trouble had I not have had a wise check in time from the inspector.
I was friendly with one of the local farmers, and I had in mind on one of our "stand-downs" to run a small flock of sheep through the Lion, I would, of course he dressed in ancient drover gear and had no doubt that it would cause something of a riot at the Lion.
In due course my friendly farmer, Cyril Young, delivered four sheep to Oakington and everything was set for a bit of a barny at the Lion.
I changed in The Bun Shop and slipped through an alley to the Lion to be confronted by a police sergeant and two bobbies and there was no way that I and the sheep would put on our act at the Lion.
The whole jape took on a rather serious complexion when the police refused to accept that it was all a joke.
In the meantime, the sheep took off on cue and I could hear they had reached the Lion by the din coming from the main bar, I was put in a police van and off to the "cop-shop" ; when I took off my smock and the stupid hat there really was a frightened wing commander underneath.
Happily my inspector friend was at hand, He opened the Chief Constable's hospitality cupboard, I had a dram and was told that they had been tipped off that afternoon about some Scot that would run some sheep through the Lion.
He was a member of a Scottish organisation and he was known as Aberdeen Angus.
After thanks and apologies all round I was driven back to the Lion to find that my borrowed sheep had been sold and had disappeared.
I was to learn that one of my air gunners had sold the sheep, and he seemed to go into hiding.
Shortly afterwards he went missing in the cauldron of the Ruhr, I only wanted to tell him he should have got more than 30 bob a piece for them.
He was, of course, an Aussie.
An experience of which I am thoroughly ashamed, and thankfully at the time my crew never knew, came to pass one night early in 1943.
It was my role to lead the squadron off and that night we were bound for somewhere in the Ruhr and we were on the short runway at Oakington.
We had instilled in all of us a very strong sense of timing, which had to be to the second, and this had become a habit.
So, as a rule, I would always get out of dispersal in plenty of time, I would get very testy if things weren't exactly right come the take-off time.
On this occasion something had delayed me and I was late.
I was in command of a heavily laden Stirling which was renowned for the fact that on a cold night the engines took a long time, even with the grills closed, to warm up.
The orders were very strict that one could not move off until the oil temperature was above the minimum and on this occasion I was quite determined to make up the time.
I got out to the end of the runway first, applied my brakes and did my run-up and magneto checks, whilst waiting impatiently for the oil temperature to rise to the required degree.
The flight engineer, who had been at Halton as all apprentice with me and had left and later returned to the Air Force, complained bitterly as I was making all the preparations for take-off, but I ignored him.
The navigator was giving me the countdown; as soon as the needles on the oil-temperature gauge started moving I would be off, making sure I took-off on time as this would be vital for the rest of the squadron.
I was very proud of the reputation I had earned for exactness on timing.
Take-off time arrived and the oil temperatures were still somewhat below the criteria, but I opened the throttles and very shortly the tail was up and I was heading down the short runway into a brisk headwind, pointing straight for the little pub outside the camp that had become a second home for us.
The wheels lifted off the runway, up came the undercarriage and, as it was the short runway, I left the flap down a little longer than usual.
To my absolute horror I found that all my controls were completely frozen, I was quite certain I had seen  the ground crew go round and remove all the external locks before I had climbed aboard.
We were climbing away at a very gentle angle and I could not understand why I could not move the controls.
Fortunately the aircraft maintained a perfect climbing attitude while I tried to sort it out, I reached for the elevator trim wheel; one glance told me it was in the normal position.
We were still climbing at full power and a touch of nose up trim enabled me to increase the rate of climb.
As my hand came away from the trim wheel I touched the auto pilot control and, on looking down.
I found to my horror that it was "Engaged" ; I had taken off with "George" in control.
Being one of the most experienced pilots in Bomber Command and having done an instructional tour, meant nothing.
In my hurry and in the conceit that is deep within many of us pilots, with our belief in our own infallibility, I hadn't done my pre-take off checks.
I was able to climb to about 1,200′ at which height I felt it was safe enough for me to control any sudden change of attitude when I disengaged the auto pilot.
Fortunately, when I did we maintained a perfect climbing attitude, I completed my mission, during which I spent sometime thinking about the young airman who had done the daily inspection of the instruments, and had left the auto pilot engaged.
However, I should have done the proper cockpit checks which I certainly did ever after.
Fortune smiled on me that night, and what could have been a disaster was averted.
Despite my wealth of experience and my time as an instructor, I had become over confident in my own ability.
My crew were never aware of my lapse and I am just as ashamed to tell this story today as I would had I told it 45 years ago.
The lessons are of course, don't be distracted and DON'T ASSUME — CHECK.
Quite apart from my constant wonder at how crews withstood the enormous pressures about this period (and that was the early part of 1943 whilst we were learning our craft, or the art, of Pathfinding) was the great belief that crews had in themselves.
Our losses in the first few months of 1943 were rather harmful, and would have been very damaging to morale; something happened about that time which affected me very deeply.
Do you speak English?
Despite the rigours of the time, whenever there was a stand-down aircrews — generally headed by Canadians — would get out on the airfield and they would mark out a pitch and play baseball.
From somewhere they would suddenly turn up in all sorts of fancy gear, funny sorts of knickerbockers and sweatshirts with strange devices thereon, and also funny hats.
I thought this was marvellous, good for the lads, and got us all out in the open air.
However, I found the most frightful difficulty in persuading the various captains of these teams from one flight or the other to let me join in.
 "No Boss," they would say,"you Scots are all very well at this and that, but this is baseball, this is quite different.
You won't be any good at this".
Eventually I got very browned-off.
 "Well if you don't let me play," I said, "you can't have my airfield!" 
So they agreed to let me play and I asked them where they wanted me.
 "Go out in the airfield and we will tell you, and field away out," they said, I went away out to the most remarkable end until I was on the edge of the main runway.
Now I could not hear what was going on and I was quite sure nobody could hit a ball, or whatever they use in baseball, away out where I was standing.
However, they had got me out of the way and I felt at least with a following wind a big lad would hit the ball in my direction and I might be able to do something.
Now it was whilst I was standing out there on my own — and really feeling very, very, browned-off — that I saw an aeroplane approach the airfield and make a quiet and dignified circuit.
I just do not know what aircraft this was, I had never seen such a type before, but he made a very cautious circuit and then to my amazement an approach to land despite the red Very lights pooped off from the control tower.
He landed down wind (not that there was much wind), but he landed very carefully and taxied with his tail up to where I was standing, roughly about halfway or a little more up the runway.
Out popped a very strange gentleman from this aircraft that I noticed had American markings, but I still did not know what the aircraft was, I had a vague idea but I was not sure.
This strange gentleman came round who was wearing a sort of baseball cap like all my Canadians were.
He came towards me and stopped about 10 to 15 yards away, put his hand inside his bomber jacket and brought out a monster hand-held cannon which he pointed in my direction.
It was the sort of weapon that you saw John Wayne wielding so well and twisting round his finger, but I did not like the idea of this thing which I was looking straight up the barrel of.
 "Hi Bud" he called, "do you speak English?" 
 "Well" I said, "there is some considerable doubt about that: I am a Scotsman" .
"Oh…
What is that town down there a piece?"he asked, pointing a thumb behind him towards Cambridge.
 "That's Cambridge, the university city of Cambridge." 
He paused for a moment.
 "Oh, is that the same as Yale and Harvard?" 
 "Well" I said, "there is even more doubt about that" .
At this stage a very smart young officer got out, immaculate in the rig of what I was to learn was the American Army Air Corps.
He looked as if he had just stepped straight out of one of those bespoke tailors in Saville Row in London's West End.
 "Everything all right, Hank?" he said to the gentleman who was holding this artillery piece in his hand.
 "Yes, it seems alright," he replied.
Then the officer spoke to me:
 "Tell me, sir, what are those aircraft?" 
 "They are Stirlings — Stirling bombers." 
I cannot remember if he asked if they were British or not, but there seemed to be some doubt as to whose side these bombers were on.
Then the officer enquired:
 "Tell me sir, are we far from Alconbury?" 
By this time I was feeling very friendly towards them and I might have said something to the effect: "If you will just mosey on down this trail (meaning the main road between Cambridge and Huntingdon) you will come to Alconbury, some 15 to 16 miles away." 
 "Thank you very much," and he saluted smartly.
I got some vague sort of signal from the gentleman with the artillery piece which he put away in his bomber jacket again, and they turned round and took off — this time into wind — and sped towards Alconbury.
But the thing that I reflected on was here we were, into our third bombing year, and the mighty Eighth Air Force had come to our aid over thousands of miles of land and 2,000 miles plus of sea; and they can come down through the clouds and land almost within sight of the place they were making for, with no navigation aids at all.
More especially, I wondered at their risk when I learnt that some of them had landed across the Channel and were astonished to find that the natives did not speak English.
In fact they did not speak French either, they spoke a sort of fractured German.
But this was a great feeling of what we had been used to over the years in watching American movies and, with our tongue in cheek and a bit of a giggle, seeing the adventures of the cavalry arriving, And for the first time in our years of combat I had a glow, a rosy glow, inside me and I knew and was certain for the very first time now we could not be beaten.
It was a feeling that I never had until that nice little man with a funny hat and a big gun got out of a strange aeroplane and asked me: "Do you speak English?" 
13 A Question of Morale and Moral Fibre
In my wanderings to the Staff Colleges and branches of the Royal Aeronautical Society all over the world, the USAF Academy, Colorado Springs, and also that incredible edifice of aeronautical and technical learning — the Smithsonian in Washington, the main question that always crops up and in almost entirely the same way is "how was it possible to maintain morale?" 
How did it just happen that Harris could maintain his Offensive despite disastrous occasions like Nuremburg.
We could not have sustained many Nuremburgs when we lost more aircrew in one night than was lost in the entire Battle of Britain (in several months).
I am not drawing comparisons here, I am just making the point that 500-plus were lost in the Battle of Britain and nearly 700 were lost at Nuremburg on one raid.
By the same token the Americans, on their not entirely successful Schweinfurt ventures, lost a great number of aircraft.
It is said — and I have never been able to verify this figure — 70%, and not all were shot down by the fighters, although the majority of aircraft were.
Some reached the UK, crashed on landing and were written off; others fell into the sea.
When we look at these disasters we must again ask ourselves how it was that Harris and Eaker could sustain those losses and go time and again.
We, of course, began to think — and think very seriously — what if our losses got beyond 10%?
The Americans could take this a little further, but after Schweinfurt they had to stop and lick their wounds; and so this leads on to the inevitable topic when I am confronted with the audiences I meet in all those places.
The question is simple and with some concern "how was morale maintained?" 
And I fear I cannot answer that question to anyone's satisfaction.
First of all it comes from the top, I think all of us were in great sympathy with what Harris and the American generals had to do.
Their brief was simple and straight: attack the morale of the enemy, That is just a simplification, but that is what it amounted to.
So down at squadron level we had this very much in our minds when in time the orders came down through Group, through station, right to the people who had to do the carting and the bombing, I feel I should explain right at the outset that I can only view at the later stages of the war the state of morale as I saw it in the entire Pathfinder Force.
Please to remember I had finished my own stint, and I had served a period on Bennett's staff as his "horse-thief" — the recruiter and trainer, I was the Group training inspector.
My function was to select and train the Pathfinders, I was given the choice of what I  claim was the best and if I did not pick the best.
I was the only one who could be charged with dereliction of duty, I Judged who I thought was the best: I selected them and then took them to my station — Warboys — where they were trained as Pathfinders.
Now let me just add very quickly here, I am not going to tell you or anyone that I got the best out of Bomber Command.
Whilst I did track down what I thought was the best, several of them, in fact quite a number of them, said "no" .
For one reason or another the loyalty of the squadron of some other loyalty said "no I won't join the Pathfinders, I want to stay where I am" .
I know that many of you might doubt that, but I hope you will take my word for it.
There were cases where chaps said "I don't like leaving the WAAF" .
Now they did not say "the wife" , they said "the WAAF" , and I said quite clearly "she can come too" .
It was no problem for me to post a crew, and I did, and many of you must know I did post WAAF at the same time.
Now I have been digressing and let me say quite clearly that I never knew the answer and I do not know it now, how the tremendously high level of morale was sustained, not just in the Pathfinders, but throughout the Command as a whole.
Of course, if you want a particular example, certain squadrons like 617 had their own particular style of morale and nobody can say how that was acquired; I think in a way its success produced its own style of morale in any event, and in this case one has to look no further than Guy Gibson.
After all Confucius he say: "fish go rotten by the head" , therefore the converse must apply.
But as I am reflecting now, let me just leave you with this thought about morale.
As I said in the case of No 617 Squadron, their enormous success on the Dams raid and on some of the less spectacular sorties that they had flown, rubbed off on all 617's sorties thereafter.
Years later, even, when 617 just happened to be in my Canberra Wing at Binbrook after the war, oddly enough both Nos 617 and 9 Squadrons found themselves together in my four-squadron wing.
The enormous rivalry between those two squadrons started way back on 1, November 1944 when, together, they attacked and sank the Tirpitz in Tromso fjord.
No one would dare tell 9 that it was 617 that turned her over, and the reverse holds with 617.
To this day — and I have exhaustively researched that particular sortie led by Willie Tait — and, despite watching several 8mm films of the bombs falling, shot by the camera crew in a No 463 Squadron Lancaster.
I still cannot say whose bomb did turn the Tirpitz over, But this is all good for morale; like the piece of the Tirpit: that I was able to secure for these two happy squadrons, encased in a large frame of good British oak, and displayed at Binbrook as a trophy of what Willie Tait and his gang of two — 617 and 9, or 9 and 617, the choice is yours — achieved.
However, with regard to the length of each operational tour of duty, it is obvious that there was a deal of confusion between the Commands.
It is clear that each Command had a basis for judging tour length; for example, Bomber Command seemed to feature the number of sorties to establish this.
Fighter and Coastal Commands felt that 200/300 hours of operational flying could embrace a tour.
To resolve these differences a meeting was called by the Chief of the Air Staff, at which I was present, and the result for Bomber Command was as follows: the first tour should consist of 30 sorties and the second tour should normally not exceed 20 sorties.
The Pathfinder Force should be on a different basis and these should consist of 45 sorties, but crews could be withdrawn at any time after the completion of 30 sorties.
This in effect meant that PFF actually did 45 sorties, but please to remember that few Pathfinder aircrew elected to opt out at the 45 mark and most carried on to the magic 60, And further take note that over 100 PFF aircrew managed the ton (100 sorties).
Let me leave you there for the moment with my views of high morale as I saw it, and I saw a great deal of it during my constant circuit within the Command.
In the last two years of the war I was in orbit visiting every station and squadron in my endless quest for Pathfinders.
Thus, let me leave the Command and the Pathfinders and turn to the darker side of morale — the lack of moral fibre.
I never actually experienced the drama of dealing with any lack of moral fibre (LMF) cases, although I can imagine the difficulty faced by a CO who is trying to run a squadron in wartime if suddenly he was confronted with a case of LMF.
It was obviously much easier during the Kaiser's war when a short sharp Court Martial was followed by the offender being shot the next morning.
Happily, we lived in a much more enlightened time during World War 2, I never understood the treatment of LMF cases; it was something I could not understand as outlined in the Air Ministry Order, which was a very harsh document and did not give much leeway in the treatment of a chap if he felt he could not do any more.
He was stigmatised, hounded and humiliated.
My sympathies, however, were very much with the wretched fellow who had the courage to own up that he could not face the prospect any longer of flying against a lethal enemy.
Whether, of course, I would have taken this view were I to have had someone in my squadron who turned LMF is open to question, When I reflect on the young aircrew that I helped to train in 1940 at Kinloss, some 10   years younger than myself, I marvel that the conversation stage was the last stint before they were to confront a highly lethal opponent.
I am still amazed that, despite our losses at the time — and they would worsen until well into 1942 — some would survive what I called my "trough of despair" .
Don Bennett had always publicly — and to my embarrassment — told anyone who would listen, that I recruited 16,000 Pathfinders for our heavy bomber squadrons and the mosquitos of the Light Night Striking Force.
Now I would say to you, without fear or favour, that the only people recruited in that period of my appointment that I would not of had in the Pathfinder Force were people that came in through some rather dubious trap-door.
They were either bought in by Don Bennett himself, and there were very few of those that got through my fine mesh, or those who were somehow or other forced on us by agencies over which we had no control.
So out of the 16,000 Pathfinders I personally recruited from the very first day of my appointment to the Pathfinder Force, to the last day of the war, I am not aware of one occasion on which a member of aircrew, whatever his category, was dealt with under the terms of the AMO.
What I will tell you, and I will tell for the very first time, is that I personally dealt with people whose future may well have been considered under the terms of the AMO.
A squadron commander would suggest to me that "old so-and-so is getting a bit teased-out and perhaps he should be rested" , or "it might be convenient if he did not return after his next leave" — these leaves were quite frequent, something like six or seven days every six or seven weeks.
And so in these circumstances I dealt with much speed and remarkably low Scottish cunning.
So it would be futile to say that no more than three or four, or at the very most five, of these categories were dealt with during the whole of the period of the Pathfinder Force.
Now I personally felt that it would be quite inhumane to deal with someone who was somewhere near the magic 60 cut-off, for reasons that it would be impossible to examine with any clarity the reasons for this change of heart, and the strong will that he had shown during his previous operational record.
I find now that I can take a little comfort for acting beyond my authority and without Don Bennett's knowledge of what I was doing.
I also take some comfort from the fact that I have enormous pleasure in remembering all those who I dealt with in this capacity returned to the Pathfinder Force before the end and wished sincerely to finish their Pathfinder tour.
Sadly two of them perished before the end of the war and the two remaining, that I remember well, saw the end of the war.
And as far as their consciences were concerned, they justified the colour under their brevets that they earned during the period when they were having grave doubts about their own efficiency.
None of these eternal operators faired very well when they had a posting to a training unit.
They were not welcome, they grated on the conscience of many in these establishments who had no intention of operating.
But I will say, and this is without criticism, they were doing a much better job instructing than they could possibly done on operations.
Very few of the most senior people training establishments bedded down well within the operational theatre.
Bomber Command also organised from the "petrified Forest" the operational training units through non-operational Groups, and it was very important after Harris's one-off  when he stopped training to mount his 1,000-Plan, that some of the more senior and very experienced training instructors remained operational;.
it may sound impossible to many that a sergeant or a young junior officer coming straight from the Empire Training Scheme either in Canada or Rhodesia, was a far better prospect than shall we say a group captain or a wing commander, or even a squadron leader, who had spent the entire war in the training machine.
It was my experience that seldom did the more senior of his element — and there were many of them — fit into the operational set-up, more especially as it got towards the end of the war.
One of the things I do recall, Command in its wisdom used to send some of its very senior people to spend a period — not to fly mind you — but just to see and taste the scene at an operational station.
They would come, spend a night and then they would go through the entire paraphernalia.
The orders came from Command right down to squadron level; the preparations started about mid-morning as soon as this vast sheet of paper from the teleprinter indicating every facet of the job ahead arrived.
Each section would grab its particular portion of what was called the "Y" Form, the gunners would be briefed and tactics would be discussed.
Flight engineers would know how much fuel and its distribution.
The navigators would disappear into their hideout and work out their courses and prepare their charts.
The set operators — that is the navigator or observer who would operate the HS set — also had plenty of preparation, and the captain would be a sort of overseer who went round each section.
He could glean from each category what was happening and, of course at a convenient time, he would test the aircraft itself and then put it on line so that the bombload could be installed before mid-afternoon or early evening.
He would then have an aircrew meal and attend the final briefing.
Now these people who did come as visitors went through all of this, and then they would spend the rest of the evening in the Mess.
The people that were left behind such as the section leaders — the gunnery leader, flight engineer leader, navigation leader and one or two people that were not on the battle order for that night, would meet these people and speak to them.
We were always rather intrigued with their eagerness and how they all seemed to pick up and wallow in the atmosphere of this period when it was very trying for the squadron commander if he was not on the evening.
His great worry was literally following in hid mind's eyes the squadron's contribution to the target that night and wondering how they were getting on.
Then later when they started coming home his real concern was counting them in, and it was in this period that these pleasant and very charming visitors frequently wanted to get nearer to the operational scene.
Some of the squadron commanders, and maybe the odd flight commander who again was not flying, invariably pointed out they need not go back to their operational training unit, they could remain and we would send for their kit.
I don not recall that offer ever being taken up seriously.
But let me make it very clear that it probably was not the best place, a Pathfinder station, for anyone to get near to absorbing the incredible state of affairs.
As we made our way through 1944 the advancing Allied forces were able to give us more room — by that I mean there was more Allied occupied (and therefore less hostile) territory for us to fly over in order to get to our targets.
Please to remember I was no longer actually the horse-thief, but I was now at Warboys with  the Pathfinder Training Unit and so I was training replacements.
It is probably prudent to suggest here that as the war progressed, especially after mid-1944 until the end, aircrew generally throughout the Command — and more especially in the Pathfinders — improved enormously, First of all starting in 1944 the loss factor was diminishing and once ground forces were proceeding to recapture and liberate large portions of Europe, the sortie value was debased and it was quite common for no one to bother to consider the 60 sorties as cut-off for a Pathfinder tour.
I would like, if I may, to give just one illustration of how this happened throughout the Pathfinders and to the same degree within the Main Force.
I commend to you, therefore, a delightful little paperback entitled Rear Gunner Pathfinder.
Here is a story of a very ordinary sort of chap who, when the cut-off time was 60, became a Gunnery Leader.
That meant he carried on and when someone at the last moment dropped out, he dropped in; it was more or less par for the course that, by the end of 1944, a very large number of Pathfinders had notched up 70 or more sorties.
But now I shall leave you with one final anecdote which impinges on both issues of morale and moral fibre.
The Commander-in-Chief in 1939 felt it necessary to review his"troops'; and when he came to Driffield he obviously felt that the Occasion was so important that he spoke to the officers in one corner of the hangar and spoke to the sergeant pilots in another.
One idiot amongst the sergeants asked him "How long, sir, do you think we will last?" 
And the great man looked very tense and thoughtful and answered: "I think about two or maybe three sorties." 
I can assure you that did less than nothing for my morale at the time.