

AGAINST ALL ODDS
GREENPEACE
Against all odds, Greenpeace has brought the plight of the natural world to the attention of caring people.
Terrible abuses to the environment, often carried out in remote places or far out to sea have been headlined on television and in the press.
Greenpeace began with a protest voyage into a nuclear test zone.
The test was disrupted.
Today, the site at Amchitka in the Aleutian Islands is a bird sanctuary.
Then Greenpeace sent its tiny inflatable boats to protect the whales.
They took up position between the harpoons and the fleeing whales.
Today, commercial whaling is banned.
On the ice floes of Newfoundland, Greenpeace volunteers placed their bodies between the gaffs of the seal hunters and the helpless seal pups.
The hunt has since been called off.
In the North Atlantic, Greenpeace drove its inflatables underneath falling barrels of radioactive waste.
Now nuclear waste dumping at sea has been stopped.
In the North Sea, Greenpeace swimmers turned back dump ships carrying chemical wastes.
New laws to protect the North Sea have been promised.
Peaceful direct action by Greenpeace has invoked the power of public opinion which in turn has forced changes in the law to protect wildlife and to stop the pollution of the natural world.
Greenpeace has: Stopped the French testing nuclear weapons in the atmosphere.
Helped bring an end to commercial whaling.
Prevented baby seals being killed in Newfoundland and the Orkney Isles.
Won an agreement in principle to end radioactive waste discharges into the Irish Sea.
Won agreements to end the dumping of chemical sludges in to the North Sea.
Forced an end to the burning of hazardous wastes in the North Sea.
Blocked proposals to dispose of radioactive wastes at a number of sites within the UK.
Stopped the dumping of radioactive wastes at sea.
Won a review of import procedures of endangered species products into the EEC.
Helped persuade the Government to spend £200m cleaning Britain's beaches and £600m cleaning aerial discharges from coal-fired power stations.
GREENPEACE STANDS FOR A SAFE AND NUCLEAR-FREE WORLD.
FRESH AIR.
CLEAN WATER.
THE PROTECTION OF WILDLIFE AND THEIR HABITATS
Greenpeace is an international environmental pressure group which maintains complete independence from all political parties anywhere in the world.
Greenpeace campaigns to save the whales * to stop nuclear weapons tests * to protect seals, dolphins, porpoises and sea turtles * to stop the disposal of radioactive waste and dangerous chemicals at sea * to close down nuclear power stations and nuclear reprocessing plants * to stop acid rain and protect the atmosphere * to reduce the trade in endangered species products.
GREENPEACE CAMPAIGNS
Greenpeace campaigns for stricter control over chemical waste disposal on land and to declare Antarctica a World Park — free of military and industrial exploitation.
If we condense this inconceivable time-span into an understandable concept, we can liken Earth to a person of 46 years of age.
PLANET EARTH IS 4,600 MILLION YEARS OLD
Nothing is known about the first 7 years of this person's life, and whilst only scattered information exists about the middle span, we know that only at the age 42 did the Earth begin to flower.
Dinosaurs and the great reptiles did not appear until one year ago, when the planet was 45.
Mammals arrived only 8 months ago; in the middle of last week man-like apes evolved into ape-like men, and at the weekend the last ice age enveloped the Earth.
Modern man has been around for 4 hours.
During the last hour.
Man discovered agriculture.
The industrial revolution began a minute ago.
During those sixty seconds of biological time, Modern Man has made a rubbish tip of Paradise.
He has multiplied his numbers to plague proportions, caused the extinction of 500 species of animals, ransacked the planet for fuels and now stands like a brutish infant, gloating over this meteoric rise to ascendancy, on the brink of a war to end all wars and of effectively destroying this oasis of life in the solar system.