

Why Bob Geldof thinks you should read the New Internationalist
"It looks brilliant.
It certainly fills a large gap in the market with interesting and challenging text."
Bob Geldof, organizer of BAND AID
"The NI makes an important contribution to the debates surrounding development issues.
At a time of so much egocentric materialism it's refreshing to see the NI fighting so effectively for imaginative humanitarianism."
Frank Judd, director of OXFAM
"Congratulations on your superb work.
NI is the one journal that anyone concerned about international development must read."
Frances Moore Lappe, co-author of DIET FOR A SMALL PLANET.
 "It is always interesting, well presented and doesn't preach to the converted." 
Glenda Jackson, actress
"We in Christian Aid are proud to have been in at the start of this magazine which campaigns relentlessly for a better, fairer, environmentally purer and politically more aware world.
The NI has now established itself — but it is not, and can never be, part of the Establishment."
Michael Taylor, director of CHRISTIAN AID
 "NI covers the issues that matter in way that counts." 
Jonathon Porritt, director of FRIENDS OF THE EARTH
 "NI is rational and informative — often brilliantly so." 
Glenys Kinnock, chair of ONE WORLD
Reply Slip Three Magazines, A World Map and a Poster Free to New Subscribers
Fill in and return the payment instruction overleaf and for the next three months you'll receive the New Internationalist magazine absolutely free and with no obligation, plus your gifts.
You can keep these gifts at no cost even if you decide you don't want to subscribe.
If that's the case, simply write to us within 10 days of receiving your third magazine to cancel your instruction.
If you do want to go on receiving the New Internationalist you need do nothing.
The subscription price — currently £14.70 — will be charged to your account annually until you cancel.
Just fill in the form overleaf and send it to us in the envelope provided — no stamp needed.
New Internationalist Freepost Mitcham CR4 9AR (No stamp needed) Yes Please send me, without obligation, my free copies of the next three issues of the New Internationalist plus the world map and book token.
If I do not wish to continue after the three monthly issues I will write and let you know within 10 days of receiving my third issue and will not owe you a penny.
If I do wish to continue receiving the New Internationalist each month I need do nothing.
The direct debit instruction will be paid on the 1st of the following month.
And you will charge to my account annually until cancelled the subscription price — currently £14.70.
To my bank manager — Direct Debiting Instruction I instruct you to pay direct debits from my account at the request of New International Publications Ltd (NIP Ltd).
The amounts are variable and may be debited on various dates but NIP Ltd may only change the amounts and dates after giving me prior notice.
I will inform the bank in writing if I wish to cancel this instruction, and I understand that if any direct debit which breaks the terms of this instruction, the bank will make a refund.