

1992 AREN'T YOU SICK OF IT
Worried About Being Taken Over?
Competitors Threatening Your Market?
Swamped With Information?
New Finance To Fund Expansion?
Every Cloud…
Has a Silver Lining
Croner's Europe!
Some publishers are making heavy weather of 1992.
If the sheer quantity of information about 1992 is clouding your vision, look no further for the silver lining.
As you would expect of Britain's leading publisher of legal information for business and industry, we have devised a loose-leaf reference service that will keep you up-to-date monthly with all the important legal developments likely to affect your business.
In addition, CRONER'S EUROPE will address the key business and tax issues of the Single Market and offer advice on such matters as how to research new markets, how to establish the creditworthiness of potential business partners and where to find invitations to tender for contracts in Europe.
A unique feature, which is all part of the service, is a monthly newsletter (the pink pages) which will bring you hot information from Brussels on developments in the previous month.
In addition, we include a checklist of directives in the pipeline for 1992, together with a short commentary, reference, date of adoption, and date of implementation in the United Kingdom.
This checklist is also updated monthly.
Until now this material has been obtainable only on a very expensive basis.
Croner throw it in at no extra charge!
We have broken with 40 years of tradition to publish this service as a monthly partwork to ensure you receive all the information and informed comment you need, as you need it.
(Please see the full list of contents overleaf).
The loose-leaf will be complete in March 1989.
Thereafter it will be kept up-to-date each month to the customary high Croner standard.
There are two traditions which we are not breaking: firstly, we have assembled a very impressive team of contributors; secondly, we offer traditional Croner value for money.
The price of the book, the first twelve monthly instalments, the newsletter and all postage and packing is just £80 (in Eire or the rest of Europe £94.00).
Renewal of the amendment service after one year is presently £40.00 (in Eire or the rest of Europe £46.40).
If you're feeling under the weather as yet more 1992 bumf lands on your desk, order the silver lining, CRONER'S EUROPE on 10 days free approval now.
When you become a Croner subscriber, we make you a promise.
THE CRONER PROMISE
We guarantee to provide you with the most authoritative, reliable and up-to-date information at the best value for money, and there are never any hidden extras.
Only Croner can make you this promise, which is backed by our considerable expertise gained over 50 years as Britain's leading loose-leaf publisher.
Most people, when they think of "loose leaf" think of "Croner" .
However, not every loose-leaf is published by Croner — this means that people don't always get the best advice, but they 'phone us to complain!
While we are happy to answer any queries about our own products, we cannot answer for the content of other publisher's works.
The safest way to ensure that you are getting the best practical business advice for your money is to buy from Croner.
So, in the case of loose-leaf reference, it's vital that you judge the book by its cover.
Accept no substitutes! if it doesn't say Croner, it isn't.