

Election Communication London North Constituency
Your Communist Euro Candidate Thursday June 15 European Community Elections Communist Party
Vote Lorna Reith
15 million people did it in 1985 — will you be one of them this time?
In 1985, 48 Communist Euro-MPs were elected with a total of 15 million votes.
Most European Community economic policies serve the interests of big business.
The Single European Act, fully in force from 1992, will be a bonus for business but will do little for the rest of us.
A Community run for the people
Communists will campaign for democratic control of multinational companies, for safety at work and job security.
Our pensions and benefits should be the best in Europe, not nearly the worst.
The Tories have failed to get Euro-money for London, although we have some of Britain's worst poverty.
But then, the Tories say that poverty has been abolished!
The European Community is run by a complicated bureaucracy.
The real power lies with appointed bodies which are not elected by the people.
We want a stronger, more democratic European Parliament, elected by proportional representation.
A Community run by the people
NO MORE NUKES!
Britain and Europe must seize the opportunity that Gorbachev has helped to create, to negotiate away the military blocs of Nato and Warsaw Pact, get rid of nuclear weapons and cut the arms budget.
Scrap Trident now!
A Community working for peace — and the planet
Pollution crosses frontiers.
We can  only stop it by international agreement and enforcement.
The Community has a vital role to play — but it needs more power and resources.
The Common Agricultural Policy encourages intensive, destructive and unhealthy farming.
It should be scrapped and replaced by a sustainable system of healthy food production.
Communist Euro-MPs will fight for fairer trade with the developing world and for sanctions against Apartheid in South Africa.
1992 threatens the rights of black people in Britain.
Fifteen million guest workers in the EC have no civic rights and no right to vote.
We believe that everyone resident in the Community should have equal rights — to travel within the Community, to family unity  and to benefits and services.
Lesbian and gay couples should have these rights, too.
A Community for all the people
in Britain against the Tories.
Thatcher can be beaten, if opposition parties unite at the next General Election and campaign now!
Communists Stand For:
An electoral pact
Nowhere else in Europe has such an unfair tax.
Against the Poll Tax
and extend it with more preventative care.
To Defend The Health Service
Britain is the only member of the EC not using PR.
For Proportional Representation
We need an integrated transport system with better tubes and buses, traffic controls and space for cyclists and pedestrians.
Against New Roads in London
Defeating the Tories is a necessary first step towards a socialist future for Europe.
Lorna Reith is 36 and lives with her partner and cat, Fearless, in Tottenham.
She works for a national campaign on homelessness.
Lorna has been active as a tenants leader and was elected by tenants to represent them on Haringey Council's Housing Committee.
Thursday 15 June Vote Communist Party
Your Communist Party candidate in London North Constituency is Lorna Reith
Lorna is joint secretary of THORN — a local campaign against new highways.
She has always been an internationalist — and since 1975 has been membership secretary of the Chile Solidarity Campaign.
Jigsaws, walking, Fearless, U2, Eastenders.
Likes:
Judge Pickles, foxhunting, Thatcher.
Dislikes:
"Margaret Thatcher's done no favours to women.
she has opposed every new European law which would give women more justice.
She's very pro-EC when it comes to helping big business, but she suddenly turns "patriotic" when the European Community tries to help ordinary people.
Our Candidate says:
"We need stronger European-wide laws to protect the environment, to protect workers — especially part-time and temporary workers who are mainly women.
We need more money to improve transport in London, and provide jobs where people need them.
We need investment in our people, in their education, training, health and housing.
"This Euro-election constituency includes Thatcher's Finchley.
Tell Thatcher you are against what she's doing and vote Communist."