

The interpretation of leases
A lease of business property is a commercial contract.
It must, therefore, be drafted and perused against the background of the principles developed by the courts for construing commercial contracts.
The most important of these principles are briefly set out below.
A fuller treatment of the principles applicable to the interpretation of contracts may be found in The Interpretation of Contracts (Sweet and Maxwell, 1989) by the author.
1 Intention of the parties
The object sought to be achieved in construing any commercial contract is to ascertain what the mutual intentions of the parties were as to the legal obligations each assumed by the contractual words in which they chose to express them (Pioneer Shipping Ltd v BTP Tioxide Ltd [1981]2 All ER 1030).
When one speaks of the intention of the parties to the contract one is speaking objectively—the parties cannot themselves give direct evidence of what their intention was.
What must be ascertained is the intention that a reasonable person would have had if placed in the situation of the parties.
What the court must do is place itself in thought in the same factual matrix as that of the parties (Reardon Smith Line Ltd v Hansen-Tangen [1976]3 All ER 570).
Thus, in construing a written agreement the court is entitled to take account of surrounding circumstances (with reference to which the words of the agreement were used) and the object appearing from those circumstances that the person had in view; but the court may not look at the prior negotiations of the parties as an aid to  construction of the written contract resulting from those negotiations (Prenn v Simmonds [1971]3 All ER 237).
For example, the standard of repair required by a covenant to keep property in repair will be determined by reference to the age, character and locality of the demised property at the time of the demise (Proudfoot v Hart (1890) 25 QBD 42).
So also the size of the property may be relevant to the interpretation of the use covenant (Basildon Development Corpn v Mactro Ltd [1986]1 EGLR 137 per O"Connor LJ), as is its physical layout (Levermore v Jobey [1956]2 All ER 362).
Equally, in construing a rent review clause, the court has been aided by a consideration of valuation methods which the parties must have envisaged would be applied at the review date (Pivot Properties v Secretary of State for the Environment (1980) 41 P & CR 248).
Where the extent of the demise is ambiguous or lacks definition, oral evidence will be admitted to identify it (Bisney v Swanston (1972) 225 EG 229).
In general, however, the intention of the parties is to be ascertained from the words of the lease itself and oral evidence will not be admitted to vary or contradict the written document.
Thus, where a covenant in a lease provided for the payment of rent in advance, the tenant was not entitled to prove an antecedent oral agreement under which he was to pay by way of bill of exchange maturing some time after tender (Henderson v Arthur [1907]1 KB 10).
There are some exceptions to the rigours of this rule: an oral agreement was allowed to be proved where it formed one comprehensive contract with the written lease (Walker Property Investments (Brighton) Ltd v Walker (1947) 177 LT 204); and a tenant in breach of the user covenant in his written lease was allowed to prove an antecedent oral collateral contract permitting the breach complained of (City and Westminster Properties (1934) Ltd v Mudd [1959]Ch 129).
Nevertheless, the aim of the draftsman must always be to ensure that the lease as executed represents the full intention of the parties.
The parties cannot, however, by an express statement of intention alter the legal consequences of their bargain.
Thus an express term that a transaction is not intended to be a lease but is intended to be a licence will not be given effect (Street v Mountford [1985]AC 809).
Similarly, where a clause in a written agreement states that exclusive possession is not granted to the occupier, the clause will  not be taken into account in deciding whether a licence or a tenancy is created (Family Housing Association v Jones [1990]1 WLR 779).
2 Ordinary and technical words
Where there is nothing to show that the parties have used language in any other than its strict and ordinary sense, and where the words interpreted in that sense are sensible with reference to extrinsic circumstances, it is an inflexible rule of construction that the words shall be interpreted in that strict and primary sense even though they may be capable of some popular or secondary interpretation and even though the most conclusive evidence of the intention to use them in such popular sense is tendered (Enlayde Ltd v Roberts [1917]1 Ch 109: obligation to reinstate property destroyed by fire included an obligation to reinstate where the destruction was caused by incendiary bombs).
If the parties wish to give an ordinary word some special meaning, an express definition clause should be included.
Where a definition in a lease states that a defined term "includes" a particular meaning, the term may also be construed in its ordinary sense, even if that sense is not within the definition (Adelphi (Estates) v Christie (1984) 269 EG 221).
Technical words will be construed in a technical sense.
Many words and phrases commonly found in leases are terms of art—for example, "the usual quarter days" .
These will be given the meaning they bear among lawyers.
In some cases evidence may be admitted to show that a word is used in a technical or local meaning.
An odd example of the rule is provided by an old case in which it was proved that 1,000 rabbits meant 1,200 rabbits (Smith v Wilson (1832) 3 B & Ad 728).
A more modern example is "prime position" as applied to a shop (Ashburn Anstalt v Arnold [1988]2 All ER 147).
Even the meaning of a word such as "supermarket" may be proved by oral evidence (Calabar (Woolwich) Ltd v Tesco Stores Ltd (1977) 245 EG 479).
Where a word used in a lease has multiple meanings, one of which is its ordinary meaning and the other of which is some technical meaning, there must be some objective evidence that the parties intended the technical meaning to be adopted, otherwise the word will be construed in its ordinary sense (Holt & Co v Collyer (1881) 16 ChD 719).
3 Lease construed as a whole
The court must take into consideration the whole of the lease and the purposes for which it was granted, and then see what is the proper construction of a particular covenant (Bickmore v Dimmer [1903]1 Ch 158).
The draftsman must, therefore, express himself consistently throughout the lease, for a word used in one part of the lease will probably be construed as having the same meaning if used in another part of the same document.
Thus, where the draftsman used the phrase "adjoining premises" in one part of the lease and the phrase "adjoining or neighbouring premises" in another part of it, it was held that the former phrase only applied to property that came into physical contact with the demised property because the words "or neighbouring" must have added something to the word "adjoining" (White v Harrow (1902) 86 LT 4).
The danger of inconsistency is most pronounced where the draftsman takes parts of his draft from different precedents.
If there is an inconsistency between lease and counterpart prima facie the lease prevails.
However, where there is an ambiguity on the face of the lease it is permissible to look at the counterpart to explain it.
Thus, a proviso for re-entry on breach of the "covenant" contained in the lease was construed as extending to all covenants in the lease (Matthews v Smallwood [1910]1 Ch 777).
4 Construction against grantor
It is a well-known maxim of construction that in case of ambiguity a contract is construed contra proferentem.
In the case of a lease this will usually mean that the ambiguity will be construed against the landlord (Killick v Second Covent Garden Property Co Ltd [1973]2 All ER 337, although in Amax International Ltd v Custodian Holdings Ltd [1986]2 EGLR 111, Hoffmann J suggested that, technically, the tenant might be the proferens).
The landlord is usually the party who settles the form of the lease (albeit it may be amended many times before execution) and most of the covenants are inserted for his protection.
He will, therefore, usually be the proferens.
But this does not mean that a dispute about the interpretation of the lease must be decided  against the landlord if it possibly can be.
Thus where the issue is the width of the use covenant, the application of the contra proferentem rule points towards greater freedom of use on the part of the tenant rather than narrower, even if the tenant is arguing for a narrower use so as to secure a benefit on rent review (Skillion v Keltec Industrial Research [1992]1 EGLR 123).
However, some parts of the lease will be construed against the tenent, since by a legal fiction he may be treated as a grantor.
This is seen at its most capricious in the case of exceptions and reservations.
It is a settled rule of construction that where there is a grant and an exception out of it the exception is taken as inserted for the benefit of the grantor and is to be construed in favour of the grantee (Savill Brothers Ltd v Bethell [1902]2 Ch 523).
In the case of an exception the grantor will be the landlord and the grantee will be the tenant.
However, where the lease contains a reservation in favour of the landlord it is construed as if the right reserved had been granted to the landlord by the tenant.
Any ambiguity will be construed against the tenant (St Edmundsbury & Ipswich Diocesan Board of Finance v Clark (No 2)[1975]1 All ER 772).
A covenant by a surety will be construed strictly against the principal creditor (Eastern Counties Building Society v Russell [1947]2 All ER 724).
5 Implied terms
Certain terms will be implied in a lease by operation of law, although many such terms may be excluded by agreement.
Thus, the use of the word "demise" will give rise to two implied covenants on the part of the landlord: namely, that he is entitled to grant some term in the demised property and that the tenant shall have quiet enjoyment of the demised property.
However, there is no room for the implication of the covenant in a demise if the landlord enters into an express covenant for quiet enjoyment (and gives no covenant for title).
The reason for this is that an express covenant as to one branch of the covenant implied by the word "demise" excludes the other branch on the principle that expressio unius est exclusio alterius (the expression of one thing is the exclusion of another)(Miller v Emcer Products Ltd [1956]Ch  304).
The court is, however, reluctant to find implied terms in commercial contracts especially where there is a formal document which, on the face of it, represents the apparently complete bargain between the parties (Westminster (Duke) v Guild [1984]3 All ER 144).
An unexpressed term can be implied if and only if the court finds that the parties must have intended that term to form part of their contract: it is not enough for the court to find that such a term would have been adopted by the parties as reasonable men if it had been suggested to them.
It must have been a term that went without saying, a term necessary to give business efficacy to the contract, a term that, although tacit, formed part of the contract the parties made for themselves (Trollope & Colls Ltd v North West Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board [1973]2 All ER 260).
Thus, the court has refused to imply a term that a landlord entitled to recover the cost of insurance from his tenant is obliged to choose the cheapest method of insuring (Bandar Property Holdings Ltd v Darwen (JS)(Successors) Ltd [1968]2 All ER 305) or that the tenant is under an obligation not to use the demised property for an immoral purpose (Burfort Financial Investments Ltd v Chotard (1976) 239 EGH 891) or that the landlord is entitled to interest on a retrospective increase in rent (Trust House Forte Albany Hotels Ltd v Daejan Investments Ltd (1980) 256 EG 915).
However, the court will readily imply the grant of such easements as may be necessary to give effect to the common intention of the parties with reference to the manner and purposes for which the demised property is to be used.
It is essential for this purpose that the parties intend that the demised property should be used in some definite and particular manner.
It is not enough that the property should be intended to be used in a manner that may or may not involve this definite and particular manner (Pwllbach Colliery Co Ltd v Woodman [1915]AC 634).
Thus, where a tenant covenanted to use a basement as a restaurant, not to cause any nuisance, to control and eliminate all smells and to comply with Food Hygiene Regulations, he was entitled to an easement to erect a ventilation duct on his landlord's wall (Wong v Beaumont Property Trust Ltd [1965]1 QB 173).
Certain other terms are implied into leases by virtue of statute and these are dealt with in their respective contexts.
In some cases a term implied by statute may not be excluded by agreement.
6 Principles of construction
(a) Expressio unius est exclusio alterius This principle of construction has already been touched on.
Its basic principle is: where one specific thing is mentioned but another is not, that other thing is taken to have been deliberately not mentioned.
Where, for example, a tenant covenants "to keep in repair the demised property and the windows, window frames, boilers and air conditioning plant" it might be successfully argued on his behalf that he is not liable to repair the doors because they were not mentioned in the catalogue.
Thus, the draftsman should be especially careful before embarking on a long list of matters that fall within a particular covenant.
However, this principle is of little weight where it produces an unfair and unreasonable result (Basingstoke and Deane BC v Host Group [1988]1 WLR 348).
Similarly, where an agreement specifies the time for doing three things (eg, taking procedural steps towards a rent review) and two of the three are stated to have a time limit which is of the essence of the contract and the other one does not, then it follows that, in all probability, where it is not stated to be of the essence, it is not intended to be of the essence.
If the parties, when they wish something to be made of the essence, say so in terms, then obviously it is of the essence if they do say so, and the probability is, that where they do not say so, it is not intended to be of the essence (Amherst v Walker (James) Goldsmith & Silversmith Ltd (1980) 254 EG 123).
(b) Express terms negative implied terms An express term in a lease generally excludes the possibility of the implication of a term dealing with the same subject matter as the implied term.
Thus, where a lease contained a covenant to build certain buildings by a specified date and an obligation to keep them in repair, it was held that once the tenant had failed to build the buildings on time, no further covenant to build could be implied from the covenant to repair (Stephens v Junior Army and Navy Stores [1914]2 Ch 516).
(c) Eiusdem generis The eiusdem generis rule is an important principle of construction.
If one can find that the things described by particular words have some common characteristic one ought to limit the general words that follow them to things of that genus (Lambourn v McLellan [1903]2 Ch 268).
Thus, where there was a contract for the sale of land and "buildings material etc" it was held that the word "etc" referred to "material" and did not embrace a right of way (Re Walmsley and Shaw's Contract [1917]1 Ch 93).
Similarly, a power entitling a landlord to re-enter for "building sites or planting or other purposes" did not entitle him to re-enter in order to build a sports stadium (Coats v Diment [1951]1 All ER 890).
The rule usually applies where a genus can be found.
For example, where a tenant covenanted to yield up certain articles together with "all doors, wainscots, shelves, presses, dressers, drawers, locks, keys, bolts, bars, staples, hinges, hearths, chimney pieces, mantelpieces, chimney-jambs, floor-pans, slabs, covings, window-shutters, partitions, sinks, water-closets, cisterns, pumps, and rails and water-tanks and other additions, improvements, fixtures and things" it was held that there was no discernible genus which restricted the general words (Wilson v Whateley (1860) 1 J & H 436).
It is, therefore, possible by sheer verbosity to defeat the operation of the rule; but this is hardly a method to be recommended.
However, the absence of a genus does not of itself preclude the operation of the rule: it is an indication that the parties did not intend the general words to be restricted (Chandris v Isbrandtsen-Moller [1951]1 KB 240; Skillion v Keltec Industrial Research [1992]1 EGLR 123).
One method of avoiding the operation of the rule is to reverse the order of the two parts of the clause so that the general words are placed first and the list of specific items are prefaced by a phrase like "for example" , or "without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing" , or "such as " .
(d) Party not to take advantage of his own wrong A lease will be construed so far as possible so as not to permit a party to it to take advantage of his own wrong.
Thus the tenant will not be permitted to rely on his own breach of his repairing obligations in order to depress the rent payable on review  (Harmsworth Pension Funds Trustees v Charringtons Industrial Holdings (1985) 49 P&CR 297), and a surety who had guaranteed the obligations of a tenant was not allowed to rely on the tenant's failure to register an assignment with the landlord in order to escape liability under his surety covenant (Cerium Investments v Evans (1991) 62 P&CR 203).
7 Uncertainty
The court is always reluctant to find a provision void for uncertainty, particularly where the provision is contained in a commercial agreement.
 "No doubt there may be cases in which the draftsman's ineptitude will succeed in defeating the court's efforts to find a meaning for the provision in question; but only if the court is driven to it will it find a provision is void for uncertainty" (Brown v Gould [1972]Ch 53 per Megarry J).
A provision will be void for uncertainty where there is real conceptual uncertainty—for example an option to renew "at a rent to be agreed" where there was no indication of how the rent was to be agreed, not on what basis, not what was to happen if the parties failed to agree (King's Motors (Oxford) v Lax [1969]3 All ER 665).
Where the difficulty is one of applying the provision rather than a conceptual uncertainty the court will not hold it to be void (Brown v Gould); and a provision in a lease will not be uncertain if it can be made certain.
Thus, a lease which contains a rent review clause will not be uncertain merely because the amount of the rent is not known at the date of the lease.
To attract the remedy of distress, however, the rent must be certain at the time it falls due (United Scientific Holdings Ltd v Burnley BC [1978]AC 904).
The principle is different in relation to the term for which a lease is granted.
A term created by a lease must be expressed either with certainty and specifically or by reference to something that can at the time the lease takes effect be looked to as a certain ascertainment of what the term is meant to be (Lace v Chantler [1944]KB 368: lease "for the duration of the war" was void for uncertainty).
Thus a tenancy granted until the land was required for road widening was void for uncertainty (Prudential Assurance  Co v London Residuary Body [1992]3 All ER 504).
If the draftsman wishes to create a lease for a period that cannot be made certain at the time of the demise the only way is to express it as being granted for a fixed term subject to a power to break at the expiry of the period.
8 Prima facie assumptions
Sometimes the court lays down a prima facie assumption applicable to a certain kind of provision (eg the rule that time is not of the essence of a rent review timetable).
These rules are very important, because they bring consistency to the interpretation of leases and enable parties buying and selling leases and reversions to obtain more reliable advice on what their rights and liabilities are likely to be.
Thus the court will not fritter away the prima facie assumption on small differences in drafting (Laura Investments v Havering LBC [1992]1 EGLR 155).
9 Statutory rules of construction
In a number of cases statute has intervened.
Thus, in all leases granted after 1925 unless the context otherwise requires: 1 "month" means calendar month; 2 "person" includes a corporation; 3 the singular includes the plural and vice versa; 4 the masculine includes the feminine and vice versa (Law of Property Act 1925, s61).
Many leases repeat these definitions although it is unnecessary to do so.
Similarly, an instrument that is expressed to be "supplemental" to a previous instrument is construed as if the supplemental instrument contained a full recital of the previous instrument (Law of Property Act 1925, s58).
In construing the supplemental instrument the whole of the previous instrument may be looked at (Plumrose Ltd v Real and Leasehold Estates Investment Society Ltd [1969]3 All ER 1441).
Stipulations in a contract, as to time or otherwise, which according to rules of equity are not deemed to be of the essence of the contract, are construed at law in accordance with the same  rules (Law of Property Act 1925, s41).
After a flurry of litigation it is now settled that stipulations as to time in a rent review clause are prima facie not of the essence (United Scientific Holdings Ltd v Burnley BC [1977]2 All ER 62); nor is an obligation to prepare service charge accounts (West Central Investments Ltd v Borovik (1977) 241 EG 609).
However, it is not certain how far this rule of construction extends.
Would it, for example, apply to a covenant to redecorate the demised property in the seventh year of the term?
It is suggested that if the timetable is important (as for example, a development timetable in a building lease) the draftsman should provide expressly that time is to be of the essence.
Sometimes a lease incorporates parts of a statute by reference (eg the "disregards" in s34 of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954).
It is important for the draftsman to make clear whether amendments to the statute are also incorporated (cf Brett v Brett Essex Golf Club Ltd [1986]1 EGLR 154).
Moreover, part of a statute incorporated by reference will be construed in accordance with the ordinary canons of construction as applied to the lease, not necessarily in accordance with the way the statute itself is construed (ibid).
Where a lease defines something by reference to a statute or statutory instruments (eg the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order), a change in the statute or statutory instrument will not alter the terms of the lease (Brewers Co v Viewplan [1989]2 EGLR 133).
10 Date for applying rules of construction
Prima facie the rules of construction must be applied as at the date of execution of the lease: thus a word will be interpreted in the sense it bore at the time (Texaco Antilles Ltd v Kernochan [1973]AC 609: the phrase "public garage" was given the meaning it bore in 1933 and not the one it bore at the date of the litigation; St Marylebone Property Co Ltd v Tesco Stores Ltd [1988]27 EG 72 construing the word "grocer" ).
The same principle probably applies where the lease refers to an Act of Parliament or statutory instruments by name.
Thus, where the user covenant permits the tenant to use the demised property for any purpose falling within  a class of the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1972 (SI No 1385) the covenant will be construed as referring to the use class as it existed at the date of the demise.
Thus a covenant in that form will not allow the tenant to take advantage of the much greater flexibility of use permitted by the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (SI No 764)(Brewers Co v Viewplan).
The same would be the case if the 1987 Order were to be amended.
In order to avoid this result the draftsman should define a reference to an Act of Parliament etc as including a reference to that Act etc as amended or re-enacted from time to time.
Equally, the standard of repair demanded by a covenant to keep the demised property in repair will be determined by reference to the age, character and locality of the property at the date of the demise.
If the locality deteriorates during the term the standard of repair required will not (Anstruther-Gough-Calthorpe v McOscar [1924]1 KB 716).
11 Making it work
All the above rules of construction will yield to the overriding importance of making the lease work.
If detailed semantic and syntactical analysis of words in a commercial contract is going to lead to a conclusion that flouts business common sense, it must be made to yield to business common sense (The Antaios [1984]3 All ER 229 at 233).
Thus the court has modified a use covenant in a lease for the purposes of a rent review (The Law Land Company Ltd v Consumers' Association Ltd (1980) 255 EG 617, in which Brightman LJ recognised that some modification had to be made to the strict wording of the rent review clause if it was to work.
He justified that approach on the basis that "the lease is a commercial document and we have to find a commercial solution to the problem posed" ).
Similarly, the court has implied the grant of a right of way, solely for the purpose of a rent review, in order that the rent review clause should have a practical effect (Jefferies v O "Neill (1983) 269 EG 131) and has enlarged a definition of" lessor"in a lease in order to give effect to a general scheme for the maintenance of a building and the recovery of a service charge (Adelphi (Estates) Ltd v Christie (1983) 269 EG 221).
The  development of this approach to commercial documents is in its infancy, but it may well lead to greater judicial activity in shaping the mutual obligations of the parties.
At its most extreme, it may result in the court rewriting the terms of a lease in order to do what is fair and reasonable between the parties in circumstances which they did not foresee at the date of the lease (Pole Properties Ltd v Feinberg (1981) 259 EG 417).
 "A lease is not intended to be either a mental exercise or an essay in literature; it is a practical document dealing with a practical situation" (Levermore v Jobey [1956]2 All ER 362 per Dankwerts LJ at 370).
For this reason, in drafting a lease the draftsman should constantly have in mind the nature of the demised property.
A long lease of a large property acquired for investment may well require far different treatment from a lease of second rate property let to a small businessman at a rack rent.
Many of the burdensome covenants inserted in the former kind of lease will be wholly inappropriate to the latter.
Although the draftsman may never see the lease again once it has been executed, others will have to live with it and try to manage the property according to its terms.
An over-sophisticated document may make that task far more difficult than it need be.
12 Practicalities
This approach is reflected in the forms in the Appendix.
Although some of them have been drafted in an "institutional" style, others have been deliberately kept simple.
The simpler forms are designed for less prestigious or valuable property.
The essential point is that the draftsman always has the choice.
Example 1:1 Definitions clause for business lease (1) The following definitions apply: "Act" means an Act of Parliament whenever passed and a reference to a specific Act includes any legislation amending or replacing it or made under it "Approved" means approved in writing by the Landlord "Consent" means the Landlord's written consent "Insured Risks" means the risks covered by the policy of insurance arranged by the Landlord to include (subject to cover being available on reasonable terms) loss or damage by fire storm tempest flood earthquake aircraft and articles dropped from them riot or civil commotion malicious damage impact bursting and overflowing of pipes tanks and other apparatus and any other risks insured against by the Landlord "Landlord" includes the successors in title of the original landlord and where there is a superior landlord includes him as well "Last Year" means the period of twelve months ending on the Termination of the Term "Legislation" means any regulation or directive of the European Community, any Act and any subordinate legislation made under or by virtue of them "Notice" means written notice "Tenant" includes the successors in title of the original tenant "Term" includes both the term expressly granted by this Lease and also any statutory continuation of it "Termination of the Term" includes termination by effluxion of time, notice, forfeiture, surrender, disclaimer or any other means (2) Where a party consists of two or more persons the obligations of that party are joint and several (3) Any covenant by the tenant not to do something includes a covenant not to permit or suffer that thing to be done (4) All payments to be made by the tenant are exclusive of VAT 
Description of property
1 The use of plans
Where the demised property is clearly bounded there is no need for a plan to be included in the lease.
In other cases a plan is desirable, provided that the plan is drawn on sufficiently large a scale not to be merely confusing.
If the lease is to be registered at HM Land Registry and the demised property is part only of a building, then unless the land can be accurately identified on the General Map a plan must be provided (Land Registration Rules 1925, r54).
In every case the draftsman should consider whether the plan is to prevail over the verbal description or vice versa.
On this decision will depend the phrase by which the plan is referred to in the parcels clause itself.
If the plan is small scale or consists of an extract of the Ordnance Survey map it is suggested that the verbal description should prevail.
In the former case the plan is unlikely to provide sufficient information to enable the boundaries to be accurately ascertained, while in the latter case the plan will reflect features on the ground rather than boundaries between different owners.
It is absolutely essential that each parcel should be described with such particularity and precision that there is no room for doubt about the boundaries of each, and for such purposes if a plan is intended to control the description of part only of a building, an Ordnance map on a scale of 1:2500 is worse than useless (Scarfe v Adams [1981]1 All ER 843).
The following phrases will prevent the plan from prevailing over the verbal description: "for the purpose of identification only"  "for the purpose of facilitating identification only"  "only for the purposes of identification" (Hopgood v Brown [1955]1 WLR 213; Webb v Nightingale (1957) 169 EG 330).
On the other hand the following phrases will prevent the verbal description from prevailing over the plan: "more particularly delineated"  "more particularly described"  "more precisely delineated" (Eastwood v Ashton [1915]AC 900; Wallington v Townsend [1939]Ch 588).
A middle course may be achieved by the phrase: "for the purpose of delineation only" , which has been held to mean that the plan must not be taken to be drawn to scale but the lines are correct diagrammatically (Re Freeman and Taylor's Contract (1907) 97 LT 39).
Where the plan is subordinate to the verbal description it may be referred to in order to elucidate boundaries, so long as it does not conflict with anything explicit in the verbal description (Wiggington & Milner v Winster Engineering [1978]3 All ER 436).
2 Forms of plan
There is no implied warranty that a plan used in a lease is accurate (Re Sparrow and James' Contract [1910]2 Ch 60).
Nevertheless, an inacurrate plan that prevails over the verbal description may have the same effect as a verbal misdescription.
The landlord may also owe the tenant a duty of care as regards the preparation of accurate plans (see Tromans Commercial Leases (Sweet & Maxwell 1987) p18).
Accordingly, the draftsman should so far as possible ensure that the plan is accurate.
The lease plan is often based on an extract from the Ordnance map.
The Ordnance map may well show the boundary of the parcel as the centre line of any boundary feature, irrespective of its legal ownership (see Fisher v Winch [1939]1 KB 666).
Judicial notice is taken of this practice (Davey v Harrow Corporation [1958]1 QB 60).
Accordingly, where the parcels are described simply by references to the Ordnance map (either by specifying the numbers of the enclosures or by a plan that prevails over a verbal description) the parcels will be taken to be those shown on  the Ordnance map (Fisher v Winch).
The tenant may, therefore, find that his demise does not include the whole of a boundary feature, contrary to the intention of the parties.
This problem can usually be resolved by the standard preliminary enquiries.
Where the Ordnance map is used as the basis of the lease plan the draftsman should ensure that the edition he has used is clearly specified in the lease.
A problem that arises from time to time is that a new edition of the Ordnance map is published with altered enclosured numbers and often altered enclosures.
A plan usually shows the boundaries of the property in question at ground level (or floor level).
Where the demised property is an entire building with curtilage this will usually be sufficient.
Where the property is part only of a building the draftsman should also consider whether some further visual description is necessary.
Although the use of vertical elevations or sectional drawings is rare in leases there is no reason why they should not be used; and where the property overhangs or interlocks with another property they may be the only practical or readily comprehensible way of describing it.
The same problem may also arise where the demised property is to include some projection.
Developments in modern technology may make it possible for three dimensional models of the property to be stored on computer.
When construing a plan an objective approach must be assumed, namely that a plan is addressed to a lay reader and is to be construed by the ordinary reasonable observer.
It must not be construed in isolation, but in context, including replies to enquiries before contract and the surrounding circumstances.
The question is: what would the reasonable layman think he was buying?
(Toplis v Green [1992]EGCS 20).
3 Boundaries
(a) Hedges and ditches Prima facie the boundary runs along the edge of the ditch away from the hedge.
The rationale behind this presumption is that the ditch digger is assumed to have dug the ditch at the extremity of his own land and then to have thrown the spoil onto his own land to make a bank on which the hedge is planted (Fisher v Winch [1939]1 KB 666).
(b) Roads Prima facie a lease of land adjoining a road operates to pass one half in width of the road, even where the road is a private one (Lang v House (1961) 178 EG 801).
The presumption probably only operates where the conveyancing history of the land is unknown, and may not operate at all where the land in question is part of a building estate (Giles v County Building Constructors (Hertford) Ltd (1971) 22 P & CR 978).
In any event the presumption is rebuttable and will be fairly easily rebutted where a developer needs to retain ownership of the road in order to build it or to dedicate it as a public highway.
There is no similar presumption in relation to land bounded by a railway (Thompson v Hickman [1907]1 Ch 550).
(c) External wall In the case of a demise of one floor of a building, or of a room on any floor that is bounded or enclosed on one or more sides by an outside wall, unless the outside wall is excepted or reserved, or there is some context which leads to the contrary conclusion, prima facie the premises demised comprise both sides of the outside wall (Hope Brothers Ltd v Cowan [1913]2 Ch 312 per Joyce; Goldfoot v Welch [1914]1 Ch 213; Sturge v Hackett [1962]3 All ER 166).
If such walls are not excepted, the landlord may, for example, be restrained from maintaining an advertisement on the walls enclosing the demise (Re Webb's Lease [1951]Ch 808).
(d) Horizontal divisions There are no clear presumptions relating to horizontal divisions between individually let parts of buildings.
It is, however, established that the demise of one floor of a building extends at least as far as the underside of the joists supporting the floor above it (Sturge v Hackett).
The ordinary expectation is that the tenant will be entitled to occupy all that space between the floor of his demise and the underside of the floor above, unless there are cogent reasons to assume otherwise (Graystone Property Investments Ltd v Margulies (1983) 269 EG 538).
So the demise of a flat or a particular floor of a building will include a roof space accessible only from that flat where there is no reservation to the landlord of  any rights relating to the roof space (Hatfield v Moss [1988]40 EG 122).
However, a demise of a "suite of rooms" on the top floor of a building will not include the common roof (Cockburn v Smith [1924]2 KB 119).
Equally, it has been said that half the ceiling structure and half the floor structure is included in a lease of the space between them (Phelps v City of London Corporation [1916]2 Ch 255).
The position is different where the demise is freestanding or is a building in a terrace.
In such a case the roof and the airspace above it will normally be included in the demise (Strandley Investments Ltd v Barpress Ltd [1987]1 EGLR 69; Tennant Radiant Heat Ltd v Warrington Development Corporation [1988]1 EGLR 41).
If the precise boundaries of the demised property are of importance (as where the tenant covenants to keep "the demised property" in repair) the draftsman should make express provision for horizontal divisions.
(e) Projections Prima facie an external feature (whether ornamental or not) fixed to an external wall enclosing the demise will itself be part of the demised property (Sturge v Hackett).
Likewise, where the footings on eaves of a building project beyond the edge of an external wall they will be included in the demised property, although the column of air between them will not (Truckell v Stock [1957]1 All ER 74).
(f) Airspace and underground It is a fundamental proposition that in the absence of indications to the contrary a conveyance of land includes not only everything on the surface but everything beneath it down to the centre of the earth and the space directly above (Grigsby v Melville [1973]3 All ER 455).
Thus, a conveyance of land may include a cellar below ground level that can only be reached from an adjoining shop (ibid).
Similarly, part of a room that projected above ground level into the property conveyed has been held to pass in the conveyance (Laybourn v Gridley [1892]2 Ch 53).
Nowadays different considerations affect airspace.
It appears that the rights of an owner of land in the airspace above his land extend only to such height as is necessary for the ordinary use and  enjoyment of the land and any structure upon it (Bernstein of Leigh (Baron) v Skyviews & General Ltd [1978]QB 479).
Nevertheless, in the absence of a reservation the landlord may find that he is unable to display advertisements on his adjoining property or that he is unable to redevelop adjoining property economically if those activities would involve a trespass to his tenant's airspace (Kelsen v Imperial Tobacco Co Ltd [1957]2 QB 334; Woollerton & Wilson Ltd v Costain (Richard) Ltd [1970]1 WLR 411).
A lease of the top floor of a building which includes the roof may well carry with it the airspace over the building, thereby entitling the tenant to enlarge the premises into the airspace (Davies v Yadegar [1990]1 EGLR 71; Haines v Florensa [1990]1 EGLR 73).
Where the demise includes the whole of a building (or the top floor) the draftsman may therefore wish to consider whether the airspace above the building should be excluded from the demise.
The advantage of so doing, from the landlord's point of view, is that the tenant will not be entitled to raise the height of the building (eg by adding additional floors) without committing a prespass.
Accordingly, if the question should later arise, the landlord will be free to demand a premium or an increased rent as the price of a demise of the airspace.
But if the airspace is excluded from the demise, the tenant's adviser should ensure that the tenant obtains a right to enter the airspace for the purpose of performing his covenants. (g) Fences In the case of wooden fences it is likely to be inferred that in the absence of freeboard the owner of land will use his land to the fullest extent; and the fence will be deemed to belong to the person on whose side the rails and posts are placed, the palings being placed on his neighbour's side (Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th edn, vol 4, para 849).
(h) Windows The lease should make clear whether windows are included in or excluded from the demise, especially where the responsibility for  repair is divided between landlord and tenant (Reston v Hudson [1990]2 EGLR 51).
The draftsman should consider not only window glass, but also window frames, window sills, mastic joints, soffits.
If the building is constructed with glazed curtain walling, care must be taken over the precise words used.
Example 2:1 Parcels clause of office suite ALL THAT suite of rooms on the floor of the building known as (excluding the outer faces of the walls enclosing the said building and its roof and roof structure but including the structure supporting the floor of the said rooms) and for the purpose of identification only edged in red on the attached plan Example 2:2 Parcels clause of open land ALL THAT parcel of land in and numbered on the Ordnance Map (1968 edition) for the said district a copy of which is attached hereto (including the entirety of the hedge and ditch on the western boundary of enclosure number but excluding the entirety of the hedges and ditches on the northern boundaries of the said enclosures and the entirety of the road on the southern boundaries thereof) Example 2:3 Parcels clause of building excluding airspace ALL THAT building known as shown edged red on the attached plan but excluding the airspace lying above the existing roof of that building together with a right for the tenant with or without workmen to enter that airspace for the sole purpose of inspecting the building or carrying out any works for which the tenant is liable under this lease Example 2:4 Parcels clause with details of boundaries ALL THAT the floor of the building known as ( "the property" ) including (i) all non-loadbearing walls situated wholly within the red edging on the attached plan (ii) one half (severed vertically) of all non-loadbearing walls separating the property from any other part of the building (iii) all plaster or other decorative finish applied to any wall bounding the property and not included in paragraphs (i) or  (ii) above or applied to any column or loadbearing wall within the property (iv) the whole of all doors door frames windows window frames (including mastic joints or seals) bounding the property (v) all ceilings bounding the property and any void between any suspended ceiling and the structural slat above (vi) all floor finishes and floor screeds including raised floors and floor jacks supporting such floors (vii) all light fittings and air conditioning units incorporated in any ceiling but not any other part of the air conditioning system 
4 Party Structures
Where the landlord retains no property adjoining the demised property, the question of party structures will rarely arise as between him and his tenant.
In such cases the best course is for the lease to remain silent, leaving problems to be resolved as and when they arise.
Where the landlord retains adjoining property, or where he lets a building in separate parts, party structures must be considered.
(a) Inner London Party structures in the Inner London boroughs are regulated by Part VI of the London Building Acts (Amendment) Act 1939.
The Act applies to party walls and party fence walls (defined in s44 and s4 of the Act) separating lands or buildings belonging to different owners.
For this purpose the owner will include any person in occupation other than as a tenant from year to year or for any less term or as tenant at will (London Building Act 1930, s5).
The Act provides a comprehensive code regulating the repair, demolition and rebuilding of party walls.
Accordingly, where each adjoining tenant is an "owner" within the meaning of the Act there is no need for the landlord to allocate responsibility for party walls.
The Act does not apply to all party floors but only to a floor partition which separates buildings or parts of buildings approached solely by separate staircases or entrances from without (London Building Acts (Amendment) Act 1939, s4).
Thus, where parts of a building are separated by a party floor, the draftsman should define the boundaries between each part and allocate responsibility for repairs.
It is suggested that either each adjoining tenant should be responsible for carrying out repairs to half the structure or the landlord should be responsible for carrying out all the repairs, subject to reimbursement of the cost of so doing.
(b) Other areas In other areas party structures are regulated by the common law and by the Law of Property Act 1925, s38.
Where the landlord is able to choose how to divide ownership and responsibility for a party structure it is suggested that the structure be divided between adjoining owners and that each owner have an easement of support over the other's half.
If the lease contains a comprehensive service charge the landlord should undertake responsibility for repair of party structures; if it does not, each adjoining tenant should be liable to carry out repairs and to pay a fair proportion of the cost of repairs carried out by the other.
The tenant's liability to carry out repairs will be covered by a covenant to keep "the demised property" in repair; but a covenant to pay a fair proportion of the cost of repairing party structures not included in the demise must be separately imposed.
Example 2:5 Declaration as to party structures It is hereby agreed that:(1) one half in thickness of every internal wall floor and ceiling separating the demised property from any adjoining property is included in this demise (2) each such structure is a party structure (3) the tenant shall maintain each of them as such and shall be liable to pay a fair proportion of the cost of repairing or maintaining any such structure which shall have been incurred by any adjoining occupier or tenant or by the landlord such proportion to be determined (in default of agreement) by an arbitrator appointed by the President for the time being of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors  
5 Appurtenances and curtilage
Property is often demised together with the "appurtenances" or the "curtilage" belonging to it.
Each of these expressions deserves consideration.
Strictly, land cannot be appurtenant to other land.
Thus, a lease of a shop "with appurtenances thereto" was held not to pass the forecourt immediately in front of the shop (Owens v Thomas Scott & Sons (Bakers) Ltd [1939]3 All ER 663).
However, appurtenances will include incorporeal hereditaments such as rights of way (Hansford v Jago [1921]1 Ch 322) and in the case of a demise of a house they will also include an orchard, yard, garden or curtilage (Trim v Sturminster RDC [1938]2 KB 508) but not a paddock (Methuen-Campbell v Walters [1970]QB 525).
What is included in the appurtenances of property is a question of fact.
It is doubtful whether a right of way over other land belonging to the landlord can ever be an appurtenance, strictly so called(Re Walmsley and Shaw's Contract [1917]1 Ch 93).
A curtilage is a small and necessary area of land about a building (Dyer v Dorset CC [1989]QB 346).
The curtilage of a building will include the ground that is used for the comfortable enjoyment of that building even though it has not been marked off or enclosed in any way (Sinclair-Lockhart's Trustees v Central Land Board (1950) 1 P & CR 195).
However, it is not sufficient to constitute two pieces of land parts of one and the same curtilage that they should have been conveyed or demised together, for a single conveyance or lease can comprise more than one parcel of land, neither of which need be in any sense an appurtenance of the other or within the curtilage of the other; nor is it sufficient that they have been occupied together; nor is the test whether the enjoyment of one is advantageous or convenient or necessary for the full enjoyment of the other.
For one corporeal hereditament to fall within the curtilage of another the former must be so intimately associated with the latter as to lead to the conclusion that the former in truth forms part and parcel of the latter (Methuen-Campbell v Walters).
General words will be implied in all leases (other than an agreement for lease for a term exceeding three years (Borman v Griffith [1930]1 Ch 493)) unless a contrary intention appears in the lease.
By the Law of Property Act 1925, s62, a lease of land  with buildings thereon will include all outhouses, cellars, areas, courtyards, sewers, drains, ways, passages and other rights appertaining or reputed to appertain to the property or at the time of the conveyance occupied or enjoyed therewith.
Where a building is demised together with its curtilage, or where the draftsman chooses not to exclude the operation of s62, consideration should be given to the taking of special covenants from the tenant.
For example, it will be of importance to some tenants (particularly greengrocers and other shopkeepers) to know whether they are entitled to trade from a forecourt.
This should be dealt with expressly in the lease.
Equally, the landlord may wish to ensure that a yard adjoining a building does not become obstructed by trade empties or unrestricted car parking.
Failure to deal with these matters on the grant of the lease often leads to complaints from adjoining tenants and sometimes to an action against the landlord for derogation from his grant.
6 Access
(a) Roads If access is gained by a road that serves only the demised property, the draftsman should include the road in the demise.
The landlord will have no need to retain day-to-day control over it and any necessary restrictions can be imposed by covenant.
In this way the tenant will also be under an obligation to keep the road in repair if he covenants to keep "the demised property" in repair.
If other properties in the landlord's ownership are also served by the road it may be more convenient for him to retain it.
Although no tenant will be directly responsible for the repair and maintenance of the road the landlord may recover his outlay by way of a suitably drawn service charge.
In such a case the tenant's adviser should insist on an express covenant by the landlord to keep the road in repair and the grant of an express easement to the tenant to use the road.
Where the landlord retains a roadway he may be under a positive duty to the tenant to prevent obstruction of it (Hilton v Smith (James) & Sons (Norwood) Ltd (1979) 257 EG 1063).
The mode of use of the road should be clearly defined, although some restriction on user may be implicit in the physical nature of  the road itself (St Edmundsbury & Ipswich Diocesan Board of Finance v Clark (No 2)[1975]1 WLR 468).
If the right of way is in terms a right to use it with vehicles it will be difficult, in the absence of express words, to show that it is restricted to a particular type or size of vehicle (ibid).
In many cases, therefore, the draftsmen should take express instructions on the capacity of the road.
The grant of a right of way over a road will include the following ancillary rights:(1) the right to stop for such time as is necessary to load and unload vehicles (McIlraith v Grady [1968]1 QB 468) but only where there is no other convenient place to stop London and Suburban Land v Carey (1991) 62 P & CR 480); and (2) the right to a sufficiency of vertical space immediately above the road for the purpose of loading and unloading (VT Engineering Ltd v Barland (Richard) & Co Ltd (1968) 19 P & CR 890).
It will not, however, include:(i) any lateral space outside the limits of the road (VT Engineering Ltd v Barland (Richard) & Co Ltd); or (ii) a right to visibility splays beyond the edges of the road (Hayns v Secretary of State (1977) 36 P & CR 317).
These implied ancillary rights may be excluded by agreement; but the tenant's adviser should not agree to their exclusion unless the tenant has access to delimited loading bays and an express right to load and unload.
Special restrictions on loading and unloading may be imposed.
It will usually be desirable for the landlord to have power to make regulations about traffic management.
This is normally done by imposing upon the tenant a covenant to comply with regulations made from time by the landlord.
The tenant's adviser should seek to restrict the power to the making of reasonable regulations.
If the draftsman wishes to restrict the identity of the persons whom the tenant may authorise to use the road (eg staff but not customers) this must be done expressly (see Woodhouse & Co Ltd v Kirkland (Derby) Ltd [1970]2 All ER 587).
Example 2:6 Right of way: unlimited times and vehicles The right in common with the landlord and all others having the like right to pass and repass (but not to park or except in  emergency to stop) with or without vehicles at all times and for all purposes connected with the use of the demised property (but not otherwise) over the road coloured on the attached plan Example 2:7 Right of way: limited times and vehicles; right to load, etc The right in common with the landlord and all others having the like right to pass and repass on foot and with vehicles not exceeding…feet in length or…tonnes (unladen weight) at any time between 6 am on Monday and 8 pm on Friday in each week (except public holidays) for all purposes connected with the use of the demised property (but not otherwise) over the road coloured on the attached plan and to park any such vehicle for such period as may be reasonable for the purpose only of loading or unloading it Example 2:8 Right of way: right to load etc in loading bay The right at all times with or without vehicles to pass and repass over the road leading from to the demised property (but not to halt or park any vehicle thereon except in case of emergency) for all purposes connected with the use of the demised property and the right for the same purposes to use the loading bay coloured on the attached plan for loading and unloading any such vehicle (b) Stairs and passages In a lease of property on an upper floor of a building there will be implied an easement of necessity to use a staircase that is its sole means of access (Altmann v Boatman (1963) 186 EG 109).
The tenant will also have implied rights to use any passages or corridors that are necessary means of access.
Nevertheless, it is good practice to grant the tenant express rights of access over the common parts of the building.
The landlord may seek to restrict access over common parts to specified parts of the day, or to "normal working hours" .
In the case of a self-contained building this should not be accepted by the tenant.
But in the case of a single floor of an office building or a unit in a covered shopping centre, the landlord may have a legitimate concern to avoid the necessity of providing services (eg heating, lighting, hot water, security) for one tenant only.
The tenant's adviser has two approaches.
If the additional expenditure would be recoverable by the landlord through the service charge, he may reasonably point out that the landlord will not suffer any actual loss.
Consequently, the landlord has no financial interest in preventing the tenant from using the building round the clock, and may have a financial interest in permitting him to do so, since the rent may be enhanced on review.
If, however, the expenditure is not so recoverable, the tenant may have to agree either to forego such services out of hours or to pay the costs of them.
In any case, however, the landlord should insist that the tenant either pays for the costs of security, or indemnifies the landlord against third party claims arising out of the use of the building out of hours.
It should also be noted that a covenant limiting hours of access may not limit hours of use of the demised property, provided that the tenant arrives before permitted hours cease and leaves after they recommence.
The tenant's adviser should ensure that the landlord undertakes responsibility for the repair, maintenance and cleaning of the common parts.
In the absence of express provision certain duties are imposed on the landlord at common law and by statute.
At common law the landlord will be liable to take reasonable care to keep in repair any essential means of access retained in his possession.
Similarly, if the access is useless without artificial lighting he will be liable to take reasonable care to maintain adequate lighting (Liverpool City Council v Irwin [1977]AC 239).
In the case of buildings let in separate parts for use as factories, more onerous duties are imposed on the landlord.
He will in such cases be under an absolute duty to keep floors, stairs, passages and gangways maintained in an efficient state and in good repair (Factories Act 1961, s28(1), s176(1); Galashiels Gas Co Ltd v O'Donnell [1949]AC 275).
A corresponding duty is imposed in the case of lettings of offices and shops (Offices Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963, s16).
Example 2:9 Right of way: limited times The right in common with the landlord and all others having the like right at all times between 8.30 am and 6.30 pm on weekdays and between 8.30 am and 1.30 pm on Saturdays  (but not on public holidays) to pass and repass on foot only through the main entrance to the building of which the demised property forms part and over the stairs and corridors leading therefrom to the demised property (c) Lifts A right to use a lift may be implied in the case of a letting on, say, the tenth floor of a block (Liverpool City Council v Irwin [1977]AC 239) or where it would be inconvenient and uneconomic for the tenant to use the stairs (Dikstein v Kanevsky [1947]VLR 216).
A right to use a lift is in the nature of an easement.
Where property is demised together with the use of the lift the landlord will be under a duty to provide a working lift (De Meza v Ve-Ri-Best Manufacturing Co Ltd (1952) 160 EG 364).
Equally, where the lift is an essential means of access he will be under a duty to take reasonable care to keep it in working order (Liverpool City Council v Irwin).
Such an obligation may be enforced against the landlord by way of specific performance (Francis v Cowliffe Ltd (1976) 33 P & CR 368).
In the case of a building let in separate parts for use as factories, the landlord will be under an absolute duty to keep lifts in an efficient state and in good repair (Factories Act 1961, s22(1), s176(1)).
A corresponding duty is imposed on him in the case of lettings of offices and shops (Offices Shops and Railway Premises (Hoists and Lifts) Regulations 1968 (SI No 849)).
In addition, the landlord must ensure that every hoist or lift is thoroughly examined by a competent person as least once in every six months (Factories Act 1961, s22(2); Offices Shops and Railway Premises (Hoists and Lifts) Regulations 1968, reg 6(1)).
This will usually be done by the landlord entering into a long-term maintenance contract with a specialist.
In such cases the draftsman should provide for the costs of periodic maintenance and inspection to be recoverable from the tenants, for they may not always fall within a provision to pay the cost of repairs.
In most cases the tenant should not be permitted to load the lift to an unlimited extent.
This may be achieved either by way of limitation in the grant of the right itself or by way of separate covenant.
It may also be necessary to specify in the lease the lifts that are passenger lifts and those that are goods lifts.
Example 2:10 Right to use passenger lift The right at all times in connection with the use of the demised property (but not otherwise) to use the lifts in the building for the carriage of passengers only and their hand luggage provided that the landlord shall not be liable for any loss or damage caused by a temporary failure of the lifts.
Example 2:11 Right to use passenger and goods lift The right in common with the landlord and all others having the like right during normal office hours to use:(1) the lift marked on the attached plan for the carriage of passengers only and their hand luggage (2) the lift marked on the attached plan for the carriage of goods provided that the lift shall not be loaded in excess of the permitted weight displayed therein 
7 Car parking
Where there is car parking space attached to the building or development in question, the draftsman has two basic methods of dealing with it.
On the one hand, he may include individual parking spaces within each demise; on the other, he may grant each tenant a general right to park cars, either limited to a specified number of cars per tenant or on a daily "first come first served" basis.
The grant of a right to park in a defined area takes effect as a legal easement (Newman v Jones (1982) unreported; London and Blenheim Estates v Ladbroke Retail Parks [1992]1 WLR 1278).
It is suggested that the best solution is to combine both methods.
The inclusion of specified car parking spaces within each demise has the advantage that each tenant knows precisely how many cars he (or his staff or visitors) may park, and where.
However, it has the disadvantage that there is no flexibility in available space.
Thus, if a tenant's business expands or becomes more labour intensive unauthorised encroachments may be made into the parking spaces of other tenants, or there may be parking on access and service roads.
It is by no means unusual for an aggrieved tenant to sue the landlord for derogation from his grant.
The grant of a right, but not the exclusive right, to park cars has the advantage of flexibility.
However, the very fact that the right to park is not exclusive means that one tenant may appropriate more than his fair share of parking spaces.
If the landlord attempts to take counter measures (eg by erecting lockable posts in some spaces and issuing keys to some of the tenants and not others) he may face an action for interfering with the other tenants' easements.
Accordingly, the draftsman should attempt to combine both methods.
He should include in each demise a small number of spaces the availability of which the tenant can be sure.
In addition, the tenant should be granted a right to park in a delineated area, subject to the availability of space from time to time .
It may also be desirable to set aside a small area for short-term parking and the use of that area may be restricted to the tenants' visitors.
If this is done the tenants and their staff should be expressly prohibited from using the visitors' car park and time limits on parking there should be imposed.
The right to park is often limited to "private" motor vehicles.
A "private" motor vehicle is one which is used for personal or domestic purposes: not for business purposes (Bell v Franks (Alfred) & Bartlett Co Ltd [1980]1 All ER 356).
It is suggested, therefore, that if the tenant wishes to park vehicles actively used for business purposes, the word "private" should be deleted from the draft lease.
Example 2:12 Composite rights of parking Together with:(1) the parking spaces numbered and marked on the attached plan (2) the right in common with the landlord and all others having the like right to park private motor vehicles belonging to the tenant and the tenant's staff (subject to the availability of space from time to time) in the area designed "staff Car Park" on the attached plan (3) the right for the tenant's visitors in common with the visitors of other tenants in the building to park private motor vehicles for temporary periods not exceeding one hour in any period of twenty-four hours (subject to the availability of space from time to time ) in the area designated "Visitors' Car Park" on the attached plan  
8 Advertisements, signs and nameplates
In the absence of agreement to the contrary the tenant will be entitled to exhibit advertisements, signs and nameplates in any part of the property included in the demise.
The nature of the advertisements is not restricted to purposes connected with the tenant's business (Clapman v Edwards [1938]2 All ER 507).
Conversely, the landlord will not be entitled to maintain an advertisement on any part of the demised property, even if the advertisement was in position at the beginning of the tenancy (Re Webb's Lease [1952]Ch 808).
These rights concern only the property actually demised; not the common parts.
If a tenant takes only an upper floor of a building and has no more than a right to use the entrance hall for the purposes of approaching the property demised he must stipulate for the right to put a nameplate outside the property (other than that part demised to him) if he desires this convenience (Berry (Frederick) Ltd v Royal Bank of Scotland [1949]1 KB 619 per Lord Goddard CJ at 621).
If such a right is granted to the tenant it will take effect as a legal easement (Moody v Steggles (1879) 12 Ch D 261; William Hill (Southern) Ltd v Cabras Ltd [1987]1 EGLR 37).
The draftsman should either designate in the lease the place where the advertisement may be maintained, or grant the tenant a right to maintain an advertisement in such place as may be designated from time to time by the landlord or his surveyor.
The form of the advertisement may either be left to the discretion of the landlord (or his surveyors) or be dealt with in the lease.
If the draftsman chooses the latter course it is suggested that the tenant be permitted to display any advertisement permitted by the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) Regulations 1992 (SI No 666).
If further restrictions on displaying advertisements are to be imposed, the tenant's adviser should ensure that the tenant still has sufficient ability to carry on his business efficiently (eg by exhibiting advertisements as part of a window display).
Example 2:13 Right to display advertisement permitted by regulations The right to display in and on the demised property any advertisement permitted to be displayed without the express consent of the local planning authority by virtue of the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) Regulations 1992 or any modification or replacement thereof Example 2:14 Right to display advertisement in prescribed form The right to display on the front door of the demised property a name plate not exceeding in area and advertising the business carried on in the demised property and to display the name or style of that business on the name board situated in the entrance hall of the building of which the demised property forms part with letters provided by the landlord 
9 Sanitary facilities
Where the demised property consists of part only of a building the draftsman may either include sanitary facilities in each demise or he may grant each tenant a right to use communal facilities.
The right to use a lavatory will take effect as a legal easement (Miller v Emcer Products Ltd [1956]Ch 304) as will a right to use a washroom (Heywood v Mallalieu (1883) 25 Ch D 357); but a right to a supply of hot water is a matter of personal contract rather than an easement (Regis Property Co Ltd v Redman [1956]2 QB 612).
Sanitary facilities may be included in a demise where the building is amply provided with them or where the position of the lavatories and washrooms is such that access cannot be directly obtained from the common parts.
In all other cases it is advisable to grant tenants easements to use the facilities in common with the other tenants in the building.
The principal reason for so doing is the effect of statutory duties imposed on the landlord in respect of the provision of sanitary facilities in a multi-occupied building.
Where part of a building is let off as a separate factory the landlord will be responsible for providing and maintaining in efficient working order and good repair sufficient and suitable  sanitary conveniences for the persons employed in the factory (Factories Act 1961, s7(1), s122).
A corresponding duty is imposed on him in respect of lettings of offices and shops (Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963, ss9(1), 42(6), 43(4)).
The number of conveniences required to be provided varies according to the number of persons employed in the building (Sanitary Accommodation Regulations 1938 (SI No 611); Sanitary Conveniences Regulations 1964 (SI No 966) The Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1992 (SI No 3004)).
The draftsman should, therefore, consider whether to impose on the tenant a limit to the number of persons who may be employed in the demised property in order to avoid overloading the available facilities.
In the absence of an express obligation, the landlord will have no duty to keep in repair any pipe or drain through which the tenant discharges soil or water, even if the pipe or drain is retained in the possession of the landlord (Westminster (Duke) v Guild [1984]3 All ER 144).
However, the tenant has the implied right to enter the landlord's land in order to carry out any necessary works of repair (ibid).
This situation is unlikely to be satisfactory to either party especially if the pipe is shared or runs under a shared access.
Accordingly, provision should be made for the expenses of cleaning and maintaining the sanitary facilities.
This may be done by including such expenses among the items for which the landlord is entitled to recover a service charge.
Example 2:15 Easement to use sanitary facilities The right in common with the other tenants of the building to use the ladies' lavatories and washrooms on the floor of the building and the gentlemen's lavatories and washroom on the floor of the building 
10 Telecommunications
The tenant must consider whether the needs of his business require the grant of rights to maintain telecommunication apparatus on the building (eg satellite dishes).
If so, this should be covered by the grant of an express right.
Although provision is made for the acquisition of such rights under the Telecommunications  Code (Telecommunications Act 1984, Sched 2), it is unwise merely to rely on the statutory machinery.
A covenant prohibiting alterations has effect in relation to the installation and running of telecommunication systems as if it were a covenant not to alter without the landlord's consent such consent not to be unreasonably withheld (Telecommunications Act 1984, s96).
Reasonableness is determined having regard to the principle that no person should unreasonably be denied access to a telecommuncation system (ibid).
11 Exceptions and reservations
Although used almost interchangeably the words "exception" and "reservation" are, strictly, different mechanisms.
An exception is always of part of the thing granted, and only a thing that exists can be excepted; a reservation is of a thing not in existence, but newly created or reserved out of land (Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th edn, vol 12, para 1529).
Thus, the retention of an exterior wall will be an exception, but the retention of a right to enter the demised property will be a reservation.
The practical significance of this distinction is that in cases of ambiguity an exception will be construed against the landlord, while a reservation will be construed against the tenant (St Edmundsbury & Ipswich Diocesan Board of Finance v Clark (No 2)[1975]1 All ER 772).
(a) Right to enter Where the landlord has undertaken obligations to repair or decorate the demised property, he has an implied right to enter the demised property for that purpose (Saner v Bilton (1878) 7 Ch D 815).
In the exercise of that right the landlord may exclude the tenant from occupation, but only for a reasonable time, and only if to do so is essential for the execution of the work (McGreal v Wake (1984) 269 EG 1254).
But where the landlord has no such obligations, then in the absence of an express right he is not entitled to enter the demised property in order to carry out repairs even where the tenant has failed to repair and is in breach of covenant (Regional Properties Ltd v City of London Real Property Co Ltd (1980) 257 EG 64).
Accordingly, the draftsman should  reserve to the landlord a right to enter the demised property for the purposes of inspecting the state of repair and making good defects if the tenant fails to do so.
Where the demised property is part only of a building the right should extend to entering the demised property for the purpose of repairing other parts of the building not included in the demise.
A right of entry to repair will not entitle the landlord to enter to carry out improvements (Rothschild v Moser [1986]NPC 46).
The draftsman should therefore consider whether the landlord should have the right to enter the demise for other purposes also (eg testing the property, taking samples from it or measuring it for the purpose of rent review).
However, the draftsman should not draw the right too widely.
If, for example, the landlord is entitled to enter the demised property in order to carry out substantial improvements or to reconstruct it the tenant may be able to defeat a claim to determine his tenancy on the ground of demolition and reconstruction (Heath v Drown [1973]AC 498).
Thus, where a landlord was entitled to enter the demised property to carry out such improvements, additions and alterations as he considered reasonable, he was held to be entitled to demolish and reconstruct all the existing buildings comprising the demised property without putting an end to the tenancy (Price v Esso Petroleum Co Ltd (1980) 255 EG 243).
A power to carry out improvements will not usually entitle a landlord to replace existing buildings with buildings in which the tenant cannot carry on the business permitted under the lease (Leathwoods Ltd v Total Oil (Great Britain) Ltd [1985]2 EGLR 237).
The landlord will have to make good damage to decorations caused by carrying out of works by him (Bradley v Chorley BC [1985]2 EGLR 49).
But it is good practice for the tenant's adviser to ensure that a right of entry is expressly conditional on the landlord making good any damage caused by his entry.
Consideration should be given to the question whether "damage" is to be restricted to physical damage or is to extend to loss of profits caused by disturbance of the tenant's business.
(b) Right to develop adjoining property Where the landlord retains adjoining property, a right to develop it should be reserved.
If it is not, the landlord will be unable to deal with the property if to do so would interfere materially with  the demised property (Aldin v Latimer Clark Muirhead & Co [1894]2 Ch 437).
Even the erection of temporary scaffolding may amount to a breach of covenant for quiet enjoyment (Owen v Gadd [1956]2 QB 99).
These restrictions originate in the doctrine of non-derogation from grant, and such restrictions will apply equally to land acquired by the landlord after the date of the lease (Johnston & Sons Ltd v Holland [1988]1 EGLR 264).
Where such a right is reserved, it will give the landlord power to interfere with easements granted to the tenant, provided that the interference stops short of total extinguishment (Overcom Properties v Stockleigh Hall Residents Management (1989) 58 P & CR 1).
The tenant's adviser should, therefore ensure that such a power is kept as narrow as possible.
(c) Right to use services Prima facie a reservation of a right to the free passage of water gas and electricity through the demised property will be constructed as a right to use the existing system and will not entitle the landlord to introduce any new wires or pipes (Taylor v British Legal Life Assurance Co [1925]Ch 395).
If the landlord wishes to have the right to introduce new wires and pipes it must be expressly reserved, but such a right will not be exercisable outside the perpetuity period (Dunn v Blackdown Properties Ltd [1961]Ch 433).
It should be made clear that the right is to extend to wires of a novel kind, eg computer cables (Trailfinders Ltd v Razuki (1988) 30 EG 59).
(d) Other rights Where the tenant has been granted rights (eg a right of support) the landlord will be entitled to rights that are in their nature reciprocal to the rights he has granted, or is taken to have granted, to the tenant (Re Webb's Lease [1952]Ch 808).
Nevertheless, it is good practice to reserve such rights expressly.
Example 2:16 Exceptions and reservations Excepting and reserving to the landlord:(1) Easement rights and privileges over the demised property corresponding to those expressly granted to the tenant over the other parts of the building  (2) The right to build on develop deal with use any adjoining or neighbouring property retained by the landlord in such manner as he thinks fit even though the amenity of the demised property or the access of light or air thereto may be lessened thereby and without making any compensation to the tenant (3) The right at reasonable times and on reasonable notice (except in emergency) to enter the demised property for the purposes of (i) inspecting the condition and state of repair thereof;(ii) carrying out any works (whether of repair or otherwise) for which the landlord or the tenant is liable under this lease (iii) carrying out any works (whether of repair or otherwise) to any property adjoining the demised property or to any party structure sewer drain or other thing used by the tenant in common with others (iv) measuring testing or valuing the demised property (including the right to take samples of materials and to open up parts of the demised property which would otherwise be inaccessible) but making good any damage caused by such an entry (4) The right for the landlord and the other tenants of the building to pass through the demised property in case of fire or other emergency Example 2:17 Definition of service pipes' "service pipe" means any pipe, drain, sewer, flue, duct, gutter, wire, cable, optic fibre, conduit, channel or other means of passage or transmission of water, soil, gas, air, smoke, electricity, light, information or other matter and all ancillary equipment or structures 
12 Perpetuity
Prima facie the rules against perpetuities applies to the grant of easements over things not in existence at the date of the lease.
This will apply, for example to the grant of a right to introduce future installations into the property (eg pipes or cables)(Dunn v Blackdown Properties Ltd [1961]Ch 433) or to park on land which the landlord does not own at the date of the lease (see London & Blenheim Estates v Ladbroke Retail Parks [1992]1 WLR 1278).
However, a perpetuity period not exceeding 80 years may be specified in the lease (Perpetuities and Accumulations Act 1964, s1); and where the grant of future rights is contemplated, this should be done.
13 Fixtures
The general maxim of the law is that what is annexed to the land becomes part of the land.
Whether annexation is sufficient depends on the circumstances of each case, and mainly on two circumstances, as indicating intention, namely the degree of annexation and the object of the annexation (Holland v Hodgson (1872) LR 7 CP 328 per Blackburn J).
If an object is annexed to land in order to enjoy it as a chattel (eg a carpet nailed to the floor) it will not become a fixture but will remain a chattel.
It will not therefore form part of the demised property and obligations relating to the demised property will not apply to it.
Where an article has become a fixture it is treated as part of the demise during the term.
Accordingly, the landlord may not distrain upon it (Crossley v Lee [1908]1 KB 86).
But at the expiry of the term the tenant has the right to remove those fixtures which are tenant's fixtures.
Tenant's fixtures are those fixtures which the tenant fixes into the property for the purposes of his trade, but which do not become part of the structure itself (New Zealand Government Property Corp v H M & S Ltd [1982]1 All ER 624).
The essential qualities of a tenant's fixture are that it may be removed without causing irreparable damage to the building and that it may be set up and used again in another building or place (Webb v Bevis (Frank) Ltd [1940]1 All ER 247; Young v Dalgety plc [1987]1 EGLR 116).
Accordingly, fixtures such as office partitioning which cannot be removed without destroying the partitions will be a landlord's fixture rather than a tenant's fixture.
The tenant may exercise his right to remove tenant's fixtures so long as he is in possession as a tenant, whether under the original contract of tenancy or a new tenancy or by holding over (New Zealand Government Property Corp v H M & S Ltd).
Where the right is exercised, the tenant must make good damage caused by the removal of the fixtures (Mancetter Developments Ltd v Garmanson [1986]QB 1212).
However, it is important to remember  that the tenant has a right and not a duty to remove tenant's fixtures, unless the fixtures were affixed in breach of covenant (Never-Stop Railway (Wembley) Ltd v British Empire Exhibition (1924) Inc [1926]1 Ch 877).
But if the tenant chooses to leave fixtures, they must be left in repair.
Accordingly, when damages for dilapidations at the end of the term come to be assessed, the tenant is entitled to have the damages assessed according to the cheaper option of stripping out the fixtures or leaving them in repair.
This position may be altered by agreement.
Thus, a tenant may contract to yield up the demised property including tenant's fixtures (Leschallas v Woolf [1908]1 Ch 641).
Conversely the tenant may contract to remove fixtures either unconditionally, or conditionally upon being requested to do so by the landlord.
In a case where substantial fitting out work is in contemplation it is suggested that the draftsman should give the landlord the right to require the removal of fixtures.
Where the landlord has such a right, it is often overlooked in practice, and the landlord does not make a requirement until it is too late.
Accordingly, the draftsman should consider imposing on the tenant an obligation to ask the landlord, say six months before the expiry of the term which (if any) fixtures the landlord requires him to remove.
Example 2:18 Covenant to yield up tenant's fixtures at the expiry or sooner determination of the tenancy to yield up the demised property including all tenant's fixtures in good repair and clean and tidy Example 2:19 Covenant to remove tenant's fixtures if required if so required by the landlord by written notice given not later than three months before the term date to remove (or pay for the removal of) all fixtures affixed to the demised property by the tenant or such of them as may be specified in the notice Example 2:20 Covenant by tenant to inquire about removal of fixtures not later than six months before the expiry of the term to inquire in writing of the landlord which (if any) tenant's fixtures the landlord requires the tenant to remove on the termination of the term  
14 Renewal leases
(a) Extent of the demise Although the tenant is entitled to the protection of Part II of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 in respect of the whole of the property comprised in his tenancy, he is only entitled to be granted a new tenancy of his holding.
The tenant's holding is that part of the property occupied by him (whether or not for business purposes) or by an employee of his employed in the business giving rise to protection (s23(3)).
If there is no agreement as to the extent of the holding, it is designated by the court by reference to the circumstances existing at the date of the order (s32(2)).
The court cannot normally order the grant of a new tenancy of part only of the holding (Fernandez v Walding [1968]2 QB 606).
However, where the landlord opposes the grant of a new tenancy on redevelopment grounds, the tenant may be entitled to a new tenancy of an economically separable part of the holding if the landlord's redevelopment would not be impeded (s31A; s32(1A)).
Equally, the court cannot normally order the grant of a new tenancy of more than the holding.
But the landlord has an absolute right to require the tenant to take a new tenancy of the whole of the property comprised in the current tenancy even though the tenant does not occupy the whole of it (s32(2)).
(b) Ancillary rights Where the current tenancy includes rights enjoyed by the tenant in connection with the holding, those rights are included in the new tenancy unless the landlord and tenant agree or the court determines otherwise (s32(3)).
However, the court cannot create new rights over the landlord's land and cannot elevate informal personal privileges into property rights (Orlik (G)(Meat Products) Ltd v Hastings and Thanet BS (1974) 29 P & CR 126).
In addition the rights must still be subsisting at the date of the court's order (Kirkwood v Johnson (1979) 38 P & CR 392).
(c) Law of Property Act 1925, s62 By the Law of Property Act 1925, s62 a lease of land will include all liberties, privileges, easements, rights, and advantages whatsoever appertaining or reputed to appertain to the land or any part thereof at the date of the lease, demised, occupied, or enjoyed with or reputed or known as part or parcel of or appertenant to the land or any part thereof.
Where the tenant is already in occupation at the date of execution of the lease, s62 may convert mere personal licences into legal rights, provided that they are rights known to the law (Wright v Macadam [1949]2 KB 744; Goldberg v Edwards [1950]Ch 247).
Section 62 may be excluded by the terms of the lease (s62(4)).
The draftsman should give consideration to doing so in all renewal leases (see Form 15) but if this is done, the tenant's adviser must ensure that all necessary ancillary rights are expressly granted by the lease.
The term of the lease
1 Practical problems
The length of the term that the landlord is prepared to grant, and the tenant to take, is usually outside the draftsman's province.
It is almost always determined by commercial considerations.
The draftsman should, nevertheless, be aware of some of the practical problems that arise in connection with the choice of tenancy to be granted and in appropriate cases should draw them to the attention of his client.
The norm for the duration of commercial leases has for many years been twenty-five years.
This has been prompted by investment considerations.
The landlord requires security of income for a long period, and this is specially desirable where the landlord is an investing institution which pays out pensions or insurance policies, because a period of twenty-five years' secure income facilitates the actuarial calculations necessary in order to determine the level of payments which the landlord can make.
Since such institutions are the heaviest investors in commercial property, their requirements have driven the market, so that even landlords who are not institutions require an "institutionally acceptable" investment.
In addition, income security for a long period decreases the risks associated with the investment.
This in turn diminishes the yield (or rate of return) required by an investor.
Since the capital value of an investment is determined by a multiple of the rent, and the multiplier (or years' purchase) is the reciprocal of the yield, the lower the yield, the higher the capital value of the investment.
However, in the recession of the early 1990s, landlords became less able to impose these requirements on tenants who were unwilling to enter into such a long term contractual commitment.
Although the basic pattern of a twenty-five year lease remained largely intact, tenants were able to secure the right to terminate the lease before its expiry.
In addition, the pace of development in technology meant that office buildings had a shorter economic life, so that landlords recognised the need to refurbish at intervals more frequent than twenty-five years.
Where the landlord has redevelopment plans for the property in question, the term of the lease should be short enough for him to be able to recover possession in time to redevelop.
This is of great importance in practice because planning permissions are invariably granted subject to a condition that the permitted development is begun within a stipulated time.
It is often forgotten that the service of a notice determining the tenant's tenancy under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, s25, is only the first step in the process of recovering possession.
After the service of the notice the tenant is entitled to apply to the court for a new tenancy.
The application will take several months (or longer) to come on for hearing.
Even if the application is dismissed, the tenant's tenancy will continue for a further three months plus time for appeal, which is currently four weeks.
Moreover, except by consent, the court cannot make an order for possession against the tenant in the application; so that if the tenant refuses to leave at the expiry date of his tenancy, the landlord will be compelled to take fresh proceedings against him.
It is, therefore, quite possible that the tenant is still in occupation of the demised property two or more years after his tenancy was expressed to expire.
Where the landlord is the owner of other property adjoining the demised property, or where the demised property is part only of a building, the date on which the tenancy is expressed to expire may be of importance.
On the one hand, if the landlord has redevelopment plans or if a higher rent could be achieved on a reletting of a greater part of the building, it will be in the landlord's interest to ensure that all tenancies are expressed to expire on the same date.
On the other hand, if the landlord is likely to relet the demised property at the end of the tenancy without incorporating it into any greater unit it may be prudent to spread the termination dates so as to prevent a cash flow crisis, which might be occasioned by too many voids at the same time.
Where the landlord is himself a leaseholder, the draftsman should have in mind the length of the landlord's own lease.
If he  grants a sublease for a term longer than the term of his own lease, the grant may take effect as an assignment of that lease (contrast Milmo v Carreras [1946]KB 306 and Skelton (William) & Son v Harrison & Pinder Ltd [1975]QB 361).
If he retains a short but more than nominal reversion he may find that at the expiry of the sublease he is unable to relet the property.
On the other hand, if his reversion is less than 14 months longer than the sublease, on the expiry of the sublease he will not be the competent landlord for the purposes of Part II of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 if his own landlord is prompt in serving a section 25 notice.
In that case he will not be able to increase the rent payable under the subtenancy or to oppose the grant of a new tenancy to the subtenant should he wish to do so (see "Business Tenancies—Traps for the Unwary" (1978) LSG 371).
The tenant's adviser should have in mind and advise the tenant about the obligations assumed by an original tenant.
It is well known that an original tenant remains liable on the covenants in the lease, even after an assignment.
But the original tenant will also be bound to pay the rent agreed upon review by an assignee (Centrovincial Estate plc v Bulk Storage Ltd (1983) 268 EG 59) and will be bound by any variation of the lease agreed between the landlord and the assignee (Selous Street Properties Ltd v Oronel Fabrics Ltd (1984) 270 EG 643, 743).
He may even be compelled to pay interest on arrears of rent even though he did not know that the rent was in arrear (Allied London Investments Ltd v Hambro Life Assurance plc [1985]2 EGLR 45).
In addition, the original tenant will be liable to pay damages if an assignee holds over unlawfully as a trespasser (Thames Manufacturing Co Ltd v Perrots (Nichol & Peyton) Ltd (1984) 271 EG 284).
He will not, however, be liable for rent which accrues due after the expiry of the contractual term if an assignee holds over under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, unless there are clear contractual provisions to this effect (City of London Corporation v Fell [1993]04 EG 115).
The Law Commission has recommended the partial abolition of these rules.
They recommend a system under which each tenant is obliged to guarantee performance of obligations by his immediate successor, but not by later assignees (Landlord and Tenant Law: Privity of Contract and Estate (Law Com No 174)).
These recommendations will become law, but only in relation to new leases.
However, until these recommendations become law, the tenant should carefully consider whether his interests would be better served by the negotiation of a short term, trusting to the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 for security of tenure.
Alternative methods of protecting the original tenant include:(1) limiting his contractual liability to the period of his tenure as tenant;(2) stipulating for a tenant's break clause at regular intervals throughout the term;(3) limiting the landlord's right to impose retrospective liability on the original tenant without warning;(4) requiring the landlord to exhaust other remedies first;(5) reserving a right of re-entry on any assignment (Shiloh Spinners v Harding [1973]AC 691).
Example 3.2 is inspired by (though does not wholly follow) the Law Commission's proposals.
Example 3:1 Limitation on liability of original tenant (1) in this clause "the original tenant" means the said…only and this clause applies to any period after the term hereby granted ceases to be vested in the original tenant (2) if and so often as the tenant fails to pay the rent or any other sum properly due under this lease or commits any breach of covenant known to the landlord then the landlord shall forthwith notify the original tenant of that fact (3) the landlord shall not be entitled to recover from the original tenant any arrears of rent or other sums payable under this lease where the rent or other sums claimed became due earlier than three months before the original tenant was notified under sub-clause (2) above (4) the original tenant shall not be liable for any arrears of rent or other sum falling due after the date upon which this lease is expressed to expire or any breach of covenant committed after that date Example 3:2 Limitation on liability of tenant (1) In this clause (a) "the original tenant" means only (b) "the original assignee" means a person to whom the original tenant lawfully assigns this lease (2) upon a lawful assignment of this lease by the original tenant the original tenant  (a) shall be released from further personal liability for any breach of any of the tenant's obligations under this lease occurring after the date of the assignment but (b) shall guarantee performance by the original assignee of those obligations until the expiry or other determination of the term or (if sooner) a lawful assignment of this lease by the original assignee Example 3:3 Restriction on landlord's ability to sue original tenant at any time after the lawful assignment of this lease by [name of original tenant]the landlord shall not be entitled to enforce against him the tenant's obligations under this lease unless the landlord shall have first (1) recovered judgment against all other persons against whom the landlord is or has become entitled to enforce those obligations either as principal or surety and (2) attempted to levy excution upon such judgment and upon payment by [name of original tenant]of any sum due under such judgment the landlord shall assign to him the benefit of it Example 3:4 Definition clause making tenant liable for rent during holding over period "the term" includes not only the term expressed to be granted by this lease but also any period after the date on which the term is expressed to expire during which the tenancy continues under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 Example 3:5 Clause making the tenant liable to pay rent and interim rent promptly to pay the rent reserved by this lease without any deduction or set-off and any rent substituted for it either as a result of a rent review under this lease or the agreement or determination of a rent payable by virtue of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, s24A 
2 Tenancy at will
Part II of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 does not apply to tenancies at will (Hagee (London) Ltd v Erikson (A B) and Larson [1976]QB 209).
The essence of such a tenancy is that  either party may determine it at will.
Accordingly, it may at first sight seem advantageous to a landlord to grant such a tenancy.
However, the court will look very carefully at any agreement that is alleged to be a tenancy at will, particularly if the circumstances are not the classic circumstances of holding over or holding pending negotiation.
Only a genuine tenancy at will will escape the provisions of the 1954 Act.
A tenancy that is something else—that is to say, either periodic or for a term certain but described as a tenancy at will—will inevitably be caught (ibid per Scarman LJ at 217).
Features that will tend towards a tenancy at will are:(1) the absence of a right of re-entry;(2) the absence of onerous repairing covenants;(3) the absence of a prohibition against assignment;(4) the absence of any specified period of notice;(5) a rent payable on demand.
Since machinery now exists that permits a term certain to be contracted out of the 1954 Act's security of tenure, it is unwise except in special circumstances, for a landlord to take a risk of granting a tenancy at will.
It is safer to grant a tenancy for a term certain, subject to a break-clause, that is contracted out of the 1954 Act (Scholl Mfg Co Ltd v Clifton (Slim-Line) Ltd [1967]Ch 41 at 51).
Equally, from the tenant's point of view the interest granted him under a tenancy at will is so precarious that he would almost always be better off with a fixed term to which the 1954 Act did not apply.
Example 3:6 Informal tenancy at will Dear Sirs, Our clients [name]are prepared to permit you to occupy [parcels]from [date]on the following terms:(1) You will have exclusive possession of the premises as tenant at will only.
(2) Throughout your occupation you will pay rent calculated at the rate of £ per annum payable on demand in advance (but periodic demands shall not convert this tenancy into a periodic tenancy).
(3) A proportionate part of any advance payment will be refunded to you if this tenancy is determined before the expiry of the period which such payment is intended to cover.
(4) You may use the premises for the sole purpose of…(5) You will keep the premises clean and tidy and will leave them in no worse condition than that in which they are at the date of this letter and free from rubbish.
(6) You may not do or permit to be done in the premises anything which may invalidate or increase the premium payable for any policy of insurance maintained by our clients and you will comply with all requirements and recommendations of our clients' insurers.
(7) You may not allow any other person to occupy the whole or any part of the premises.
If you agree to the above terms, please sign the enclosed copy of this letter and return it to us.
Yours etc.
3 Term certain
The term certain, or fixed term tenancy, is the most common form of business letting.
It is only one species of the term of years absolute (defined in the Law of Property Act 1925, s205(1) (xxvii)).
Its main characteristic is that it can be predicated with certainty before the commencement of the term that it will come to an end (subject to any right of re-entry or option to determine) on a known date.
Thus, a tenancy for a term of "seven years and thereafter from year to year" is not a term certain because the tenancy will not come to an end until notice is served.
From the landlord's point of view one principal advantage of the term of years certain is that it can be contracted out of the security of tenure that would otherwise be provided by the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954.
This may be done with the consent of the tenant and the leave of the court (Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, s38(4)).
A term certain of less than one year may also be contracted out (Re Land and Premises at Liss, Hants [1971]Ch 986).
From the tenant's point of view, he has assured security for the term of the lease, subject to compliance with his obligations and continuing solvency.
A miscellaneous series of incidents attach to various lengths of term.
For convenience the most important of them are set out below.
Term Characteristic Six months Part II of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 does not apply to a tenancy for a term of  years certain not exceeding six months unless:(1) it contains provision for renewing the term or extending it beyond six months from its beginning; or (2) the tenant has been in occupation for a period which, together with any period during which any predecessor in his business was in occupation, exceeds twelve months (Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, s43(3)).
One year A tenant may only serve a request for a new tenancy under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, s26, if his tenancy was granted for a term of years certain exceeding one year or for a term of years certain and thereafter from year to year (Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, s26(1)).
He may, however, serve a counter-notice in response to a landlord's notice under s25 of that Act irrespective of the length of his tenancy.
Three years A lease taking effect in possession for a term not exceeding three years at a rack rent need not be made by deed and may be made orally (Law of Property Act 1925, s54).
A tenancy granted for a term of years certain of which not less than three years remain unexpired is an owner's interest for the purpose of serving blight notices (Town and Country Planning Act 1990, s168).
Five years The tenant's right to compensation under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, s37, may be excluded or modified by agreement unless:(1) during the whole of the five years immediately preceding the date on which the tenant, under a tenancy to which the Act applies is to quit the holding, premises being or comprised in the holding have been occupied for the purposes of a business carried on by the occupier or for those and other purposes; and (2) if, during those five years, there was a  change in the occupier of the premises, the new occupier was a successor to the business carried on by the old occupier (Landlord and Tenant Act 1958, s38(2),(3)).
Note that the crucial date is the date on which the occupier quits, not the date on which the lease is expressed to expire.
Seven years The Leasehold Property (Repairs) Act 1938 does not apply to a tenancy granted for a term of years certain of less than seven years (Leasehold Property (Repairs) Act 1938, s7).
A lease for a term of less than seven years need not be produced to the Commissioners of Inland Revenue (Finance Act 1931, s28).
Stamp Duty is charged at the lowest rate for a term not exceeding seven years (Stamp Act 1891, Sched 1, as amended).
Fourteen years The tenant will be entitled (in certain circumstances) to compensation under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, s37, equal to the production of the appropriate multiplier and twice the rateable value of the holding if:(1) during the whole of the fourteen years immediately preceding the termination of his tenancy, premises being or comprised in the holding have been occupied for the purposes of a business carried on by the occupier or for those and other purposes; and (2) if during those fourteen years, there was a change in the occupier of the premises, the new occupier was the successor to the business carried on by the old occupier (Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, s37(2),(3)).
In all other cases the amount of the compensation will be equal to the product of the appropriate multiplier and the rateable value of the holding.
Twenty-one years A lease for a term of years less than twenty-one is not registrable at HM Land Registry  (Land Registration Act 1925, s8).
A lease for a term certain exceeding twenty-one years is a major interest for the purposes of VAT (Value Added Tax Act 1983, s48(1) and Sched 5, para 8).
Thirty-five years Stamp Duty is charged at a lower rate if the term does not exceed thirty-five years (Stamp Act 1891, Sched 1 as amended).
Forty years Where a term of more than forty years is created the tenant may, after the expiry of twenty-five years of the term, apply to the court for the discharge of any restriction affecting the user of the demised property (Law of Property Act 1925, s84(12)).
In a compulsory registration area a lease granted for a term of forty years or more must be registered at HM Land Registry (Land Registration Act 1925, s123).
A building lease for a term of more than forty years, where the lessor is not a public body, is freely assignable even if it contains a qualified covenant against alienation (Landlord and Tenant Act 1927, s19(1) (b)).
Fifty years A lease for a term of more than fifty years is a long lease for the purposes of income and corporation taxes.
There is a series of complex rules for determining the true length of a lease (Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988, s38).
A lease will usually be a wasting asset for the purposes of capital gains tax when its duration does not exceed fifty years (Taxation of Chargeable Gains Act 1992, Sched 8, para 1).
Sixty years A lease for a term not exceeding sixty years is a depreciating asset for the purposes of roll-over relief (Taxation of Chargeable Gains Act 1992, s154(7)).
4 Commencement of the term
The date on which the term is to begin should always be clearly expressed in the lease.
It is normal for a fixed term tenancy to begin on one of the usual quarter days (25 March, 24 June, 29 September and 25 December).
This practice is convenient both for the purposes of managing the property (since most managing agents, or their computers, send out rent demands by reference to quarter days) and for the purpose of calculating the rent (since broken periods can often be avoided).
If the rent is payable monthly it is usually best that the tenancy should begin on the first of the month.
If possible the term should be expressed as a whole number of years.
This will ease the calculation of important dates during the term (for example rent review dates or years in which the tenant is liable to paint).
If the tenant is let into possession or the lease is completed at a time that makes this inconvenient, the commencement date should be back-dated to a convenient date.
For the purposes of calculation the term will then run from the date on which it is expressed to begin, although the tenant's interest will not vest until the date on which the lease is actually executed (Cadogan (Earl) v Guinness [1936]Ch 515).
Where a lease creates a term of years which is expressed to run from some date earlier than that of the execution of the lease, the term created will be a term which begins on the date the lease is executed, and not the earlier date.
No act or omission before the date on which the lease is executed will normally constitute a breach of the obligations of the lease.
These principles do not prevent the parties from defining the expiration of the term by reference to a date before that of execution of the lease, or from making contractual provisions which take effect by reference to such a date, as by defining the period for the operation of a break-clause or an increase of rent.
There is nothing in these principles to prevent the lease from creating obligations in respect of any period before the execution of the lease.
Whether in fact any such obligations have been created depends on the construction of the lease; and there is nothing which requires the lease to be constructed in such a way as to avoid, if possible, the creation of such obligations (Bradshaw v Pawley [1980]1 WLR 10, where liability for rent was held to be retrospective).
Normally, rent  review dates and dates for the exercise of options will be calculated from the date on which the term is expressed to begin, rather than the date of execution of the lease (Beaumont Property Trust v Tai (1982) 265 EG 872; Page v Mallow Investments Ltd (1974) 29 P & CR 168).
The term of a lease is often expressed to run "from" a particular date.
Prima facie the term will be treated as beginning at midnight between the named date and the day following it (Meggeson v Groves [1917]1 Ch 158).
Thus, a lease for seven years "from 25 March 1970" will begin at midnight between 25 March 1970 and 26 March 1970; and it will end at the stroke of midnight at the end of 25 March 1977.
However, this presumption may be easily rebutted.
The court will, for example, try to construe a lease so that all payments of rent fall due during the term and in respect of periods that fall wholly within it (Ladyman v Wirral Estates Ltd [1968]2 All ER 197, Whelton Sinclair v Hyland [1992]2 EGLR 158).
Thus, where rent is payable quarterly in advance on the usual quarter days a term of "seven years from 25 March" will be construed as beginning at the first moment of 25 March, so that the first payment of rent will fall due on the first day of the term and the last payment of rent would be made in respect of a complete quarter, which ends at the last moment of the term.
Conversely, if the rent is payable quarterly in arrear the term will be taken to begin at the first moment of 26 March, so that the last payment of rent will fall due on the last day of the term rather than the day after its expiry by effluxion of time.
The safest course for the draftsman to adopt is to express the term as "beginning on" a particular date.
If the rent is payable in advance, the date chosen should be a rent day.
If the rent is payable in arrear, the date chosen should be the day after a rent day.
If the term is expressed to begin in the middle of a rental period, this may distort other parts of the lease; for example, a rent review timetable (East v Pantiles (Plant Hire) Ltd (1981) 263 EG 61).
5 Break-clauses
Either the landlord or the tenant may be entitled to determine a term certain at a date earlier than that on which it would otherwise expire by effluxion of time.
If the landlord is to have  such a power it must be expressly conferred on him; if the lease is silent as to the person by whom it is exercisable it will be exercisable by the tenant alone (Wingfield (L R) v Clapton Construction Co Ltd (1967) 201 EG 769).
In drafting a break-clause the draftsman should consider:(1) the time at which the break-clause may be exercised;(2) the manner in which it may be exercised;(3) whether the circumstances in which the break-clause may be exercised should be limited in any way;(4) the effect on other parts of the lease of the inclusion of a break-clause. (a) Time of exercise A break-clause is a species of option properly so called.
Accordingly, any prescribed time limits must be strictly complied with unless there is express provision to the contrary.
A break-clause may be exercisable on a specified date; for example "at the expiry of the seventh year of the term" .
This form is not to be recommended to a landlord, because if his power is restricted to a power to determine for certain specified purposes, he may lose the power altogether if he cannot establish the purpose at the crucial date.
A better form is "at any time after the expiry of the seventh year of the term" .
However, from the tenant's point of view this is undesirable.
Even if he is able to negotiate a minimum fixed term before the landlord's power to break can be exercised, once that period has expired a notice can come at any time.
This greatly impairs proper business planning and may well paralyse investment by the tenant in the property.
The tenant is better served if the landlord's power to break arises only at fixed intervals.
One matter for the landlord to consider is the impact of the break clause on rent review (see R & A Millett (Shops) Ltd v Legal and General Assurance Society Ltd [1985]1 EGLR 103).
Alternatively, a break-clause may be exercisable on the happening of an uncertain event; for example, if a dangerous structure notice is served or if planning permission for a particular use is refused.
If the break-clause is of this kind, the party entitled to break may equally need flexibility in his choice of time at which to exercise the power.
For example, if the tenant has the right to break if the local planning authority refuses to renew a temporary  planning permission he may wish to appeal against that refusal.
In those circumstances he would be wise to insist that provision be made for a late exercise of the break-clause following an unsuccessful appeal.
The draftsman should also be aware of the incidence of compensation under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, s37.
If, for example, the landlord has the right to break at the expiry of the twelfth year of the term, rather than at the expiry of the fourteenth year of the term, the tenant's right to compensation on quitting may be halved.
(b) Manner of exercise A break-clause is usually exercisable by notice in writing.
The length of notice is a matter of negotiation between the parties.
Where the tenancy in question is one to which Part II of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 applies, it is often convenient if the minimum period of notice is six months and the form of the notice is capable of being that prescribed for the purposes of s25 of that Act.
In that way the landlord need serve only one notice (the section 25 notice), which will be effective to bring the tenancy to an end, even if the landlord is not going to oppose any application for a new tenancy (Scholl Mfg Co Ltd v Clifton (Slim-Line) Ltd [1967]Ch 41; Rene Claro (Haute Coiffure) Ltd v Halle Concerts Society [1969]2 All ER 842; Keith Bayley Rogers & Co v Cubes Ltd (1975) 31 P & CR 412).
If notice is given that is sufficient to satisfy the terms of the lease but not the provisions of the 1954 Act, the effect of the notice will be to convert the tenancy from a fixed term tenancy into a tenancy continuing by virtue of s24 of the 1954 Act,(Weinbergs Weatherproofs Ltd v Radcliffe Paper Mill Co Ltd [1958]Ch 437).
In those circumstances the landlord will have to serve a further notice under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, s25.
The section 25 notice may expire any time after the expiry of the break-notice.
This method of operating the break-clause may be advantageous to the landlord in that he may delay the service of a section 25 notice until he is in a position to establish a ground of opposition to an application for a new tenancy.
The tenant, however, need only give such notice as satisfies the terms of the lease.
Where a lease contains a tenant's break-clause, and the tenancy is protected by the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, it is possible that instead of serving a contractual break notice, the tenant can serve a request for a new tenancy under s26 of the Act (Scholl Mfg Co Ltd v Clifton (Slim-Line) Ltd).
This would entitle the tenant to have a new tenancy at the then prevailing market rent.
In a falling market the tenant can thus engineer a downwards rent review.
The draftsman can prevent this risk from arising by ensuring that the tenant's break clause must be exercised by more than twelve months' notice.
Since a request for a new tenancy must specify a commencement date for the new tenancy not more than twelve months after the service of the notice, this means that at the date when the tenant must serve the break notice he is not in a position to serve a request for a new tenancy.
And once the tenant has served a break notice, he loses the right to make a request for a new tenancy (Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, s26(4)).
If a landlord's notice expires in the middle of a rental period, rent paid in advance may need to be apportioned and part repaid.
The tenant's adviser would do well to include an express provision to that effect.
However, this may be resisted by the landlord since the tenant, if he is protected by the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, may remain in occupation of the demised property even after the expiry of a break notice, pending an application to the court for a new tenancy.
In the case of a tenant's notice a requirement that rent be apportioned may work to the prejudice of the landlord since he will need time to arrange a reletting. (c) Circumstances of exercise It is rare nowadays for the landlord to have an unrestricted power to determine a lease.
The usual way in which his power is circumscribed is by limiting it to a right to break for certain specified purposes.
The commonest of these purposes are those of redevelopment and of occupation for the purposes of a business carried on by the landlord.
It will be a condition precedent to the exercise of the break-clause that the landlord has the necessary bona fide intention (I R Comrs v Southend-on-Sea Estates Co Ltd [1915]AC 428).
However, some latitude is allowed if the landlord has only one opportunity to determine the lease on a specified  date.
Thus, where landlords were entitled to determine a twenty-one year lease "at the expiration of fourteen years if they shall require the premises for the purposes of a business carried on by them" it was held to be sufficient for them to show that they would need at least part of the premises before the date on which the lease would otherwise have expired by effluxion of time (Parkinson v Barclays Bank Ltd [1951]1 KB 368).
On the other hand, where a landlord was entitled to determine a lease for "building sites or planting or other purposes" , he was held not to be entitled to determine it for the purpose of constructing a sports stadium (Coates v Diment [1951]1 All ER 890).
The most satisfactory solution for the landlord (and probably for the tenant) is for the power to break to be modelled closely on the provisions of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, s30(1) (f) or (g) and for the power to be exercisable on or after a specified date.
In that way the determination of the lease and of the tenant's rights under the 1954 Act can proceed in tandem.
Moreover, the weight of authority on the construction of those two subsections will enable both the landlord and the tenant to be more certain of the legal scope of the power.
However, it is not advisable to incorporate the section itself.
First, the section deals only with "the holding" which may not be the whole of the demise; and secondly the impact of s31A of the Act may need to be considered.
Both these features give unnecessary complexity to the termination of the contractual relationship.
Where the tenancy is protected by the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, a break-clause which relates to only part of the property is wholly ineffective (Southport Old Links Ltd v Naylor and Another (1984) 273 EG 767).
If it is desired to resume possession of part of the property to be let to a tenant, that part should be demised by a separate lease.
The two tenancies may be contained in a single document (Moss v Mobil Oil Co Ltd [1988]1 EGLR 71).
Alternatively, the break-clause should relate to the whole property, leaving the landlord free to oppose the grant of a new tenancy.
Conditions may also be attached to the exercise of a tenant's break-clause.
The tenant's adviser should resist the exercise of the break-clause being conditional on compliance with the tenant's covenants, for strict compliance will be necessary (West Country Cleaners (Falmouth) Ltd v Saly [1966]3 All ER 210).
It is  common, however, for the exercise of the break-clause to be conditional on payment by the tenant of a multiple of the annual rent in order to compensate the landlord for the void which will ensue.
(d) Effect of break-clause The draftsman should be aware of two important consequences of the insertion of a break-clause.
First, whether the power is exercisable by the landlord or the tenant, the effect of its exercise will be to determine the tenancy prior to the expiry of the term.
Thus, any covenant that takes effect at a date calculated by reference to the expiry of the term, will be unenforceable if the power is exercised.
For example, where a tenant covenanted to paint in the "last quarter of the said term" it was held that the exercise of a break-clause relieved him from his obligation (Dickinson v St Aubyn [1944]KB 454).
It would have been otherwise if he had covenanted to paint in the quarter "preceding the expiry or sooner determination of the said term" .
Secondly, if the tenant is entitled to break at a specified date linked to a rent review, the effect of the break-clause may be to make time of the essence as far as the review is concerned (United Scientific Holdings Ltd v Burnley Borough Council [1977]2 All ER 62 at 77, 98).
If the parties wish to link a tenant's break to a rent review, one solution would be to link it not to the review date itself, but to the date on which the new rent is agreed or otherwise determined.
However, if this is done, in the tenant's interest there must be a limit on the landlord's power to operate the review retrospectively.
In the normal course of events, the exercise by the tenant of a break-clause will prevent him from applying to the court for the grant of a new tenancy (Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, s26(4); s69(1) defining "notice to quit" : s24(2)).
However, it may be possible for a tenant to preserve his rights where the break-clause is exercised by means of a section 26 request.
If this is done it is probable that this will have the effect of releasing any original tenant or surety from liability in the event that the tenant should hold over under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 after the expiry of the break-notice (cf Junction Estates Ltd v Cope (1974) 27 P & CR 482; City of London Corporation v Fell (1993) 04 EG 115).
On a commercial note, it may well be that the insertion of a landlord's break will reduce the market rent obtainable for the property, a fact which will doubtless manifest itself at the time of the first rent review after the landlord's power to break has become exercisable.
Example 3:7 Landlord's power to break (1) The landlord shall be entitled to determine this tenancy by not less than six months' notice in writing expiring on or after [date]if he intends at the expiry of such notice either:(a) to demolish or reconstruct the demised property or a substantial part of it or to carry out substantial work of construction on the demised property or part of it; or (b) to occupy the demised property for the purposes or partly for the purposes of a business to be carried on by him (2) The service of a notice under s25 of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 shall be sufficient notice and good service for the purposes of the preceding subclause Example 3:8 Tenant's power to break on refusal of planning permission The tenant shall be entitled to determine this tenancy by not less than three nor more than six months' notice in writing served not more than one month after the happening of any of the following events:(1) the refusal or deemed refusal by the local planning authority to renew the planning permission dated [date]permitting the use of the demised property for;(2) the dismissal by the Secretary of State or an appointed person of any appeal against any such refusal;(3) the expiry of the said planning permission Example 3:9 Tenant's right to break preventing exercise of rights under Landlord and Tenant Act The tenant shall be entitled to determine this tenancy on…by giving not less than thirteen months' previous notice to that effect Example 3:10 Tenant's conditional right to break The tenant shall be entitled to determine this tenancy on…if:(1) he gives thirteen months' written notice to that effect; and (2) both at the date of the notice and at the date of its expiry there are neither any outstanding arrears of rent nor any subsisting breach of covenant by the tenant for which the landlord would be entitled to recover damages of more than a nominal amount 
6 Options to renew
Options to renew have become less frequent in commercial leases since the passing of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954.
There is, nowadays, little reason for the tenant to seek to incorporate an option to renew in his lease unless by reason of his bargaining strength he can secure that the rent payable under the new lease will be lower than that which would be fixed by the court on an application for a new tenancy under the 1954 Act.
The only circumstances in which an option to renew will be of practical value to the tenant are where the landlord might be able successfully to oppose the grant of a new tenancy.
In such circumstances, however, it is unlikely that the landlord would be prepared to grant an option to renew.
Alternatively, an option to renew might be granted where the tenancy has been "contracted out" of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954.
The grant of a "contracted out" tenancy, followed by the grant of an option to renew for a term which will not be contracted out is a useful mechanism to achieve a position where the tenant's loss of security of tenure is only temporary.
In such cases the tenant's adviser should ensure that exercise of the option is not conditional on the performance by the tenant of his covenants.
However, there may be cases where the landlord requires that the tenant should not acquire security of tenure.
In such circumstances the draftsman should ensure that any new tenancy is also "contracted out" .
In any event, the grant of an option to renew may depress the value of the landlord's reversion and reduce the number of potential purchasers of it since the plans of a purchaser who wishes to redevelop or to occupy the property for the purposes of his own business may be frustrated by the exercise of the option.
The following matters must be dealt with in drafting an option to renew:(1) the time at which it may be exercised;(2) the manner in which it may be exercised;(3) the conditions (if any) which the tenant is required to fulfil;(4) the terms of the new lease;(5) registration of the option.
(a) Time of exercise It is usual to provide that the tenant must exercise the option within a few months before the expiry of the lease.
Such time limits must be strictly observed unless there is express provision to the contrary.
However, the draftsman should choose his words with care.
For example, an option exercisable six months before the "expiry of the tenancy" might permit the tenant to exercise the option during any continuation tenancy (under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, s24); conversely, an option exercisable six months before "the date on which the term hereby granted is expressed to expire" would not.
The clause should also state the earliest date upon which the option may be exercised.
If no date is specified the court would probably conclude that it was to be exercised within a reasonable period ending on the last day for exercise (Multon v Cordell [1986]1 EGLR 44).
(b) Manner of exercise An option to renew is usually exercisable by notice in writing.
There is rarely any need to specify a form of notice, although it is sensible to provide for service of the notice.
This is usually done by incorporating the provisions of the Law of Property Act 1925, s196, or those of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1927, s23.
Which of the two is incorporated is largely a matter of taste.
It is suggested that one or other method of service be expressly incorporated.
Although the Law of Property Act 1925, s196(5),(which incorporates the method of service therein prescribed) applies to all leases unless a contrary intention appears it applies only in respect of notices "required" to be served by the lease in question.
It does not apply to notices "permitted" to be served by the lease.
It is arguable that notices exercising options do not fall within s196(5).
There is no need to take any special measures in order to comply with Law of Property (Miscellaneous) Provisions Act 1989, s2.
The service of a traditional form of notice exercising an option is sufficient to bring a binding contract into existence, provided that the original grant of the option (ie the lease) was in writing and contained all the terms of the option (Spiro v Glencrown Properties [1991]2 WLR 931).
(c) Conditions precedent If conditions precedent are prescribed the tenant must fulfil them strictly.
It is common for an option to provide that the tenant must have paid all the rent and performed all the covenants.
If this form is chosen even a trivial breach of covenant will defeat the tenant's option (West Country Cleaners (Falmouth) Ltd v Saly [1966]3 All ER 210; Bairstow Eves (Securities) Ltd v Ripley (1992) 65 P & CR 220).
However, a breach for this purpose means a subsisting breach, not a "spent" breach in respect of which the landlord no longer has a cause of action (Bass Holdings Ltd v Morton Music Ltd [1987]2 All ER 1001).
The strict approach was questioned but nevertheless applied in Kitney v Greater London Properties Ltd (1984) 272 EG 786.
In almost all cases an obstructive landlord will be able to find some subsisting breach of covenant on the tenant's part and thereby defeat the option.
This form may, therefore, work hardship to tenants, particularly where there is a genuine dispute as to liability.
The tenant's adviser should, therefore, insist that the requirement be that the tenant shall have "reasonably" performed his covenants.
In such a case the exercise of the option will be good if the tenant has performed his covenants to the extent that a reasonably-minded tenant would have done (Gardner v Blaxill [1960]2 All ER 457).
The inclusion of the word "reasonably" gives the court a discretion which will be exercised in the tenant's favour where for example he has made one or two late payments of rent, but not where he has been persistently in arrear throughout the term (Bassett v Whiteley (1982) 54 P & CR 87).
The draftsman should next consider whether the conditions are to be fulfilled at the time of the service of the notice or at the end of the term.
If they are to be fulfilled at the time of the service of the notice then, for example, the landlord may not be able to rely  on a breach of covenant to decorate "in the last year of the term" since no breach of that covenant can be positively asserted until the expiry of the complete year.
On the other hand, if the conditions are to be fulfilled at the expiry of the term, the tenant will have the opportunity to remedy any breach of covenant between the service of the notice and its expiry (Simons v Associated Furnishers Ltd [1931]1 Ch 379).
This latter form is fairer to both parties.
(d) Terms of the new lease The terms of the new lease should be clearly specified in the grant of the option.
Usually the terms of the new lease will be the same as the terms of the old, but there is no reason why the parties should not provide for variations in those terms.
The draftsman should take care in dealing with the option to renew itself.
If the option to renew is included in the terms of the new lease, the lease may be treated as a perpetually renewable lease taking effect as a term of two thousand years (Parkus v Greenwood [1950]Ch 644; Caerphilly Concrete Products Ltd v Owen [1972]1 WLR 372; Law of Property Act 1922, s145 and Sched 15).
However, where an option clause enabled the tenant to renew for a term of seven years, and provided that the new lease was to "contain a like covenant for renewal for a further term of seven years on the expiration of the term thereby granted" , it was held that the tenant was entitled to renew twice only (Burnett (Majorie) Ltd v Barclay (1981) 258 EG 642).
It is difficult to see any significant differences between that case and those in which a perpetually renewable lease has been found to have been created.
Accordingly, where the draftsman wishes to create more than one right to renew, it is suggested that a perpetually renewable lease should be expressly negatived.
As far as the new rent is concerned, options fall into four categories:(1) options to renew "at a rent to be agreed" : such options are void for uncertainty unless some provision is made for determination of the rent in default of agreement (King's Motors (Oxford) Ltd v Lax [1969]3 All ER 665) or some provision is made for a minimum or a maximum rent (Corson v Rhuddlan BC [1990]1 EGLR 255);(2) options to renew at a rent to be determined in accordance with some stated formula, without any effective machinery for working it out: if necessary the court will supply the machinery in such cases (Brown v Gould [1972]Ch 53);(3) options with machinery but no detailed formula: in such cases the court is likely to imply a term that the rent is to be fair and reasonable between the landlord and the tenant and will supply machinery for its determination (Sudbrooke Trading Estate Ltd v Eggleton [1982]3 All ER 1);(4) options which provide both a formula and the machinery for working it out: the draftsman should attempt to make his draft fall into this category.
If the term of the new lease is to exceed, say, five years, the draftsman should make provision for the inclusion in the new lease of machinery for reviewing the rent.
In the absence of express provision to this effect, the person responsible for determining the new rent will not be able to include rent reviews, nor will he be able to fix a stepped rent (National Westminster Bank Ltd v BSC Footwear Ltd (1980) 257 EG 277; Bracknell Development Corporation v Greenlees Lennards Ltd (1982) 260 EG 500).
In example 3.11 below, the arbitrator is given the powers exercisable by the court on a renewal under the 1954 Act.
Those powers contain the power to include in the new lease provision for varying the rent (Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, s34(3)).
The drafting of a suitable formula is considered in more detail in the context of rent review.
(e) Registration An option for renewal is registrable as a Class C (iv) land charge (Beesly v Hallwood Estates Ltd [1961]Ch 105).
If it is not registered it will be void against a purchaser of the reversion where the land in question is unregistered land.
Where the land is registered land at the time of the demise, if the tenant is in actual occupation of the property the option to renew will be an overriding interest under the Land Registration Act 1925, s70(1) (g), and will be enforceable against such a purchaser.
Nevertheless, the option can and should be protected by notice or caution on the register.
If the option is defeated against a purchaser of the reversion for  want of registration, it appears that the tenant may still maintain an action against the original landlord for breach of covenant (Wright v Dean [1948]Ch 686).
It will, therefore, be in the landlord's interest as well as the tenant's to ensure that the option is protected by registration in the appropriate register.
This may be done by including in the grant of the option a proviso that it is to be void if it is not registered as an estate contract within, say, three months from the date of the lease.
Example 3:11 Option to renew (1) The tenant may by notice in writing served not less than six months before the date on which the term hereby granted is expressed to expire call upon the landlord for a further lease of the demised property ( "the further lease" ) provided that up to that date he has paid the rent and reasonably performed and observed his covenants (2) The further lease shall be for a term of ten years from the said date upon the same terms and conditions as this lease (save as to rent and as to this option for renewal) and at a rent to be agreed between the parties or in default of agreement to be determined by a single arbitrator to be appointed by the President for the time being of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (3) In determining the rent payable under the further lease the arbitrator shall have the same powers as would be enjoyed by the court determining a rent for the demised property under section 34 of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 and shall disregard the same matters as are therein specified (4) This option shall be of no effect if the tenant fails to register it as an estate contract within three months from the date of this lease Example 3:12 Option to renew contracted out tenancy If:(1) the tenant wishes to take a further tenancy of the demised property for a term of five years from the expiry date of the term hereby created; and (2) the tenant gives written notice of his desire to the landlord not more than six nor less than three months before the expiry of the term; and (3) up to the date of the notice the tenant has paid the rent and substantially performed his covenants; and  (4) the tenant joins with the landlord in making an application to the court for an order authorising the exclusion of the provisions of ss24-28 of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 in relation to the further tenancy; and (5) the court makes such an order then the landlord shall let the demised property to the tenant for a term of five years from the expiry of the term hereby created at a rent to be agreed between the parties or in default of agreement to be determined by arbitration and otherwise upon the terms of this lease (except this option for renewal) Example 3:13 Clause negativing perpetual renewal Nothing in this clause shall entitle the tenant to renew the tenancy for any term expiring more than twenty years after the beginning of the term of this lease 
7 Renewal leases
(a) Duration of tenancy The duration of a new tenancy granted under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 is to be such term as is reasonable in all the circumstances (Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, s33).
However, unless the landlord and the tenant agree, the court cannot order the grant of a term exceeding fourteen years (ibid).
The following factors are among those which are taken into account:(1) the length of the previous tenancy or tenancies (Betty's Cafes Ltd v Phillips Furnishing Stores Ltd [1957]1 Ch 67 at 88);(2) any period during which the tenant has held over pending resolution of his application (London and Provincial Millinery Stores Ltd v Barclays Bank Ltd [1962]1 WLR 510);(3) the landlord's intentions as regards his own occupation of the property (Wig Creations Ltd v Colour Film Services Ltd (1969) 113 SJ 688 where it was held that the new tenancy should expire shortly after the landlord would become  entitled to rely upon s30(1) (g) of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954);(4) the prospects of redevelopment of the property (Reohorn v Barry Corporation [1956]2 All ER 742; London and Provincial Millinery Stores Ltd v Barclays Bank Ltd);(5) the balance of hardship, and the relative bargaining positions of the parties (Upsons Ltd v Robins (E) Ltd [1956]1 QB 131; Amika Motors Ltd v Colebrook Holdings Ltd (1981) 259 EG 243);(6) the tenant's business needs (CBS (United Kingdom) Ltd v London Scottish Properties Ltd (1985) 275 EG 718).
(b) Break-clauses Where the landlord asserts that there are redevelopment prospects, the court will usually order the new tenancy to contain a break-clause enabling the landlord to terminate the lease for redevelopment.
It is no part of the policy of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 to give security of tenure to a business tenant at the expense of preventing redevelopment (Adams v Green (1978) 247 EG 49).
Accordingly, where the landlord proves an intention to redevelop not immediately capable of implementation, the court will order the inclusion of a break-clause exercisable when the landlord is ready.
It does not matter that the redevelopment is likely to be carried out by a purchaser from the landlord rather than the landlord himself (Adams v Green); nor that the redevelopment proposals are very tentative (Edwards (JH) & Sons Ltd v Central London Commercial Estates Ltd (1983) 271 EG 697).
The function of the court in such circumstances is to strike a reasonable balance between the conflicting considerations of not preventing redevelopment on the one hand, and giving the tenant a reasonable degree of security of tenure on the other (ibid).
The court has two objects in mind: first to give the tenant security for as long as the holding is not required for development; secondly to ensure that when the landlord is ready to proceed with the development, the development is not held up by rights possessed by the tenant (National Car Parks v Paternoster Consortium [1990]1 EGLR 99).
But the court may take into account hardship to the tenant.
Thus, where the tenant had been innocently misled  into believing that he would obtain a long term, and had invested heavily in the property next door, whereas the landlord in fact had plans for immediate redevelopment, the Court of Appeal upheld an order for a break-clause exercisable after the first three years of the term (Amika Motors Ltd v Colebrook Holdings Ltd (1981) 259 EG 243).
The court will take into account the fact that the landlord must prove a statutory ground of opposition in order effectively to operate the break-clause (Adams v Green) and accordingly will not attach much weight to objections which could be raised by the tenant when the landlord seeks to operate the break-clause (Amika Motors Ltd v Colebrook Holdings Ltd).
In the present state of the law the landlord is in a strong position if he wishes to include a break-clause in a new lease.
Where the landlord seeks a break clause on renewal, the tenant should press for any right to break to be mutual.
If the tenant accepts that the property may be redeveloped he will probably wish to be looking for alternative accommodation sooner rather than later, and he will wish to move in and terminate his liability under his existing lease as soon as he finds it.
(c) Options The court has no jurisdiction to order a new tenancy to contain an option entitling the tenant to purchase the landlord's reversion (Kirkwood v Johnson (1979) 38 P & CR 392).
It is suggested that the court would not order a new lease to contain a contractual option to renew, since the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 itself contains the code for enabling tenants to renew their leases.
Rent and rent review
1 The initial rent and rent free periods
The fixing of the initial rent is obviously beyond the province of the draftsman.
However, there are some drafting points which should be considered.
The first concerns stamp duty.
In assessing rent for the purposes of stamp duty, the Inland Revenue applies what is called the "contingency principle" .
This means that stamp duty is assessed by reference to the highest ascertainable rent which might become payable under the lease.
Thus, where a lease reserved a rent calculated by a percentage of development expenditure up to a specified limit, stamp duty was assessed on the basis that the limit would be reached (Coventry CC v IRC [1979]Ch 142).
Had the limit not been stated, the rent would have been unascertainable, and the stamp duty would have been £2.
Where a lease reserves a fixed rent for part of the term and an unascertainable rent for the balance, it is stamped ad valorem on the fixed rent and £2 on the unascertainable rent.
A rent will be unascertainable if it is fixed by reference to facts which cannot be known at the date of the lease, eg the market rental value at a future date.
Thus if a lease provides for a rent-free period to be followed by a rent review by reference to market values at the end of the rent-free period, stamp duty will be avoided.
Of course, if there is a minimum rent stated in the lease, stamp duty will be levied on that minimum, on the "contingency principle" .
Secondly, the draftsman must now consider the potential impact of VAT.
Where there is a causal link between the grant of a rent-free period and the carrying out by the tenant of work to  the property, and the tenant is obliged to carry out such work (eg shopfitting), the tenant will be treated as making a supply to the landlord of an amount equivalent to the rent foregone.
The tenant will be liable for the VAT (Ridgeons Bulk v Commissioners of Customs & Excise LON/1990/1702 discussed in [1992]37 EG 97).
In addition, where the landlord pays an inducement to the tenant in order to persuade the tenant to take up the lease, that is a payment on which the tenant must account for VAT (Nevile Russell v Commissioners of Customs & Excise [1987]VATTR 194).
The general principle for VAT is that consideration for a supply is inclusive of VAT unless otherwise stated.
Thus, if the landlord has elected to waive the exemption from VAT in respect of a particular building, he will not be able to add VAT to the rent if it is expressed as a single figure.
If the rate of VAT changes, he will be able to pass on any increase.
However, if the landlord has not elected to waive the exemption from VAT, VAT will not be chargeable on the rent.
If he subsequently decides to waive the exemption, he will be able to add VAT unless that is forbidden by the terms of the lease (VAT Act 1983, s42).
A term in a lease does not negative this rule unless it refers specifically to VAT or to s42 of the Act (VAT Act 1983, s42(1A)).
The exemption can only be waived on a building-by-building basis.
However, it seems that although the exemption can only be waived on a building-by-building basis, if the exemption is waived for a building as a whole, but if a lease of part of the building prohibits the addition of VAT, the landlord will have to account to Customs & Excise for VAT out of the net rent.
Some tenants prefer, however, to seek to obtain from the landlord a covenant not to waive the exemption.
If this route is taken it will be necessary, from the tenant's point of view, for the landlord to covenant to procure a similar covenant from successors in title.
If the tenant is to covenant expressly to pay VAT on rent, the VAT should itself be reserved as rent.
This is because if it is not reserved as rent, the Stamp Office take the view that the application of the "contingency principle" means that stamp duty is payable on the full amount of VAT which may become payable over the whole term of the lease.
This is much more than the duty levied on an annual rent increased by 17.5 per cent(see Marsh [1991]42 EG 94).
Example 4:1 Clause preventing landlord from charging VAT in the event that the landlord elects to waive any exemption from value added tax in relation to the demised property or the building of which it forms part, no value added tax shall be added to the rent reserved by this lease Example 4:2 Clause preventing landlord from waiving exemption from VAT (1) not to elect to waive any exemption from VAT in relation to the demised property or the building of which it forms part (2) on any assignment of the whole or part of the reversion expectant on this lease, or the grant of any concurrent lease of the whole or part of the property, to procure that the assignee or lessee gives a covenant in the terms of this clause 
2 Rent review
In recent years it has become the practice in leases granted for more than five years or so to contain some machinery for enabling the rent to be reviewed, either continuously or at periodic intervals.
The rent review clause, or the indexation of rent, is the product of the conflict between the tenant who wishes to have the maximum length of term and the landlord who wishes to have the maximum return on his investment.
It is nowadays quite unrealistic for a tenant even to attempt to secure a long letting of commercial property at a fixed rack rent; and no well-advised landlord would grant such a lease.
Since the value of a property investment is primarily the receipt of a secure rent, the rent review clause is the most important provision in the whole lease.
The revision of rents can be achieved in a number of ways.
The most common is for the rent to be periodically revised to a figure agreed between the parties, with procedure for determination by a third party if the landlord and tenant fail to agree.
This is the best method because it is most closely related to the value of the property itself.
It is not, however, the only method and others are considered below.
An extended treatment of the subject may be found in Clarke and Adams, Rent Reviews and Variable Rents, 3rd ed (Longman, 1988).
3 Index-linked rents
Draftsmen have sometimes attempted to link the rent payable under a lease to movements in an official index, such as the Index of Retail Prices (as happened in Blumenthal v Gallery Five Ltd (1971 220 EG 33).
It is understood that such clauses are more common on the Continent.
Commercially, such a rent review clause may work to the disadvantage of either party.
On the one hand, if the chosen index rises faster than rents, or if rents fall, the tenant may find himself paying a rent in excess of the market rent; on the other hand, if rents rise faster than the chosen index, the landlord may find himself receiving an uneconomic return from his property.
In addition, a rent which is index-linked will not reflect any change in the property itself.
Thus, if a High Street is turned into a four-lane urban clearway the trading potential of a shop may be severely affected, but an index-linked rent will not be capable of reflecting that change.
The drafting of an indexation clause presents various problems.
First, the parties must agree on their chosen index.
Various indices now exist and it may be that the choice of index should to some extent be determined by the nature of the property.
Thus, the rent of a shop might be determined by reference to the Index of Retail Prices, the rent of a warehouse by reference to the Index of Wholesale Prices, and the rent of a builder's merchant's yard by reference to an index of construction costs.
The index most often used for this purpose is the General Index of Retail Prices published by the Department of Employment.
Some of the larger firms of surveyors produce property indices, but the statistical sample is probably too small to enable them to be reliable.
Secondly, the parties should be aware that the items taken into account in compiling the index may vary from time to time.
Accordingly, the basis on which the rent is calculated may itself be changed through a change in the composition of the index.
This was the problem that arose in Blumenthal v Gallery Five Ltd (1971) 220 EG 33 and Cumshaw v Bowen [1987]1 EGLR 30.
It is unusual to provide expressly for this contingency and the lease is probably best left silent on this point.
A major change in the composition of the index is one of the gambles inherent in this form of rent review.
Thirdly, the base figure upon which the index is calculated may  be updated.
Thus, if the index starts with a base figure of 100 in, say, January 1984 and rises to 300 by September 1990, the index may be recalculated from October 1990 onwards by reference to the figure shown in the index for September 1990, which becomes the new base figure of 100.
The draftsman must provide expressly for this contingency, otherwise the landlord will face a sudden drop in the rent if the base figure used for the index is recalculated.
There are two principal methods of dealing with this.
One is to provide that the rent shall be calculated as if the index had not been adjusted.
This method works fairly well provided that the publishers of the index provide a conversion table enabling the current figures to be related to earlier figures, and usually they do so.
However, it may give rise to the necessity for a fairly sophisticated mathematical calculation if a conversion table is not published.
If the clause provides for the substitution of figures, it is important to ensure that all necessary mathematical information is given to enable the rent to be calculated (see Wyndham Investments v Motorway Tyres and Accessories [1991]2 EGLR 114 for a case where this was not done, and the index linked rent failed completely).
The alternative method is to provide that upon any adjustment of the base figure, the rent payable immediately before the adjustment becomes a fixed amount payable under the terms of the lease (or is substituted for a fixed amount previously reserved).
The indexation process then begins again, using the new figures.
The advantage of this method is that there is no need for any conversion from one set of figures to another.
However, the disadvantage from the tenant's point of view is that the minimum rent payable under the lease will be increased.
Accordingly, he will be unable to take the benefit of any fall in the index.
The fourth point that the draftsman must cover is the possible abandonment of the index.
It may become impossible to calculate the index-linked rent.
Again, there are two principal methods of dealing with this contingency.
First, the draftsman may provide for the substitution of a different index to be agreed between the parties or determined by a third party in default of agreement.
Alternatively, he may provide for a change in the method of rent review, and if this is done it is usual to revert to the more traditional method of periodic reviews to market rent.
A third choice is to leave the new method of rent review open  for agreement at the time indexation proves to be impossible.
In this way either party will be able to take advantage of any significant change in market practice during the currency of the lease.
Fifthly, the clause must be mathematically correct.
Since it is often difficult to translate mathematical concepts into words (see London Regional Transport v Wimpey Group Construction [1986]2 EGLR 41 for judicial commendation of algebra), the formula must be checked mathematically either with a calculator or a computer.
Allied to the indexation of rent is the reservation of rent calculated by reference to the price of some specified commodity, such as gold, or by reference to the value of the pound in relation to a foreign currency.
In Treseder-Griffin v Co-operative Insurance Society Ltd [1956]2 QB 127 the rent reserved was £1,900 "either in gold sterling or Bank of England notes to the equivalent value in gold sterling" .
The Court of Appeal held that the rent payable was £1,900 rather than the realisable value of 1,900 gold sovereigns.
The decision was based on two grounds.
First, it was held by Denning LJ that a "gold clause" in a domestic contract was void as being contrary to public policy.
Secondly, it was held that on the proper construction of the lease the provisions relating to gold regulated the manner of payment rather than the amount of payment.
It is suggested that the first of these reasons would no longer be valid if litigated again (see Multiservice Bookbinding Ltd v Marden [1979]Ch 84, where Browne-Wilkinson J upheld a mortgage under which the interest payments were linked to the value of the Swiss franc, cited with apparent approval by Lord Denning MR in Staffordshire Area Health Authority v South Staffordshire Waterworks Co [1978]3 All ER 769).
The second of these reasons can be overcome by careful drafting.
Example 4:3 Index-linked rent: upwards only YIELDING AND PAYING the annual sum of £…( "the basic rent" ) payable quarterly in advance on the 25th of March the 24th of June the 29th of September and the 25th of December in each year and in addition such sum payable on each of the above dates in advance ( "the index-linked rent" ) as bears the same proportion to one quarter of the basic rent as is borne by the figure shown in the General Index of Retail  Prices ( "the index" ) for the month immediately preceding the months in which payment of any particular instalment of rent is due to the figure (which is the figure shown in that index for the month of…) minus one quarter of the basic rent PROVIDED THAT(1) if after the date of this lease the index is calculated by reference to a different base date or base figure then the index-linked rent shall be calculated as if that change had not taken place (2) if the index ceases to be published or if for any reason it becomes impossible or impracticable to calculate the index-linked rent then either the landlord or the tenant may by notice require the rent to be thenceforth reviewed at such times and in such manner as may be agreed between them or in default of agreement be determined by a single arbitrator to be appointed by the President for the time being of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors who shall have regard to market practice prevailing at the time of such notice in relation to new lettings of property of the same type as the demised property (3) in no circumstances shall the total rent payable under this lease be less than the basic rent 
4 Turnover rents
Rents linked to the tenant's turnover have been common for many years, particularly in mining leases.
Recently they have been applied to other commercial lettings, notably to lettings of shops, hotels and restaurants.
However, it has been judicially observed that the objection to a rent representing a percentage of the tenant's turnover is that, if the price of a commodity rises at a faster rate than the cost of living, pressure is likely to develop on dealers in that commodity to reduce their margin of profit or rate of commission (Naylor v Uttoxeter UDC (1974) 231 EG 619 per Brightman J).
Accordingly, the tenant may find that the proportion of rent to profit increases.
The same result may occur even if the tenant does not consciously reduce his profit margin.
For example, if the government were to increase the rate of VAT gross turnover may increase (and with it the rent) while the tenant's net profit remains static.
This problem arose in a rather more specialised form in Tucker v Granada Motorway Services  Ltd [1977]3 All ER 865.
In that case the Minister of Transport granted the tenant a lease of a motorway service area at a fixed rent and an additional variable rent.
The variable rent payable each year was a percentage of the gross takings for the previous year from the petrol filling station and catering services provided and from any other business activities on the service area.
The gross takings included the amount of tobacco duty concealed in the selling price of tobacco.
Thus, when the Chancellor of the Exchequer increased tobacco duty, the tenant's rent increased, although its ratio of profit to turnover decreased and its actual profit on each packet of cigarettes was generally speaking not favourably affected.
The tenant's business was rendered uneconomic and eventually the terms of the lease were renegotiated at a cost of £122,220 to the tenant.
In times of recession, turnover rents are more favourable to tenants because the tenant's liability to pay rent is related to his ability to pay.
The tenant's advisers should study carefully the definition of turnover upon which the rent is to be calculated.
It should as far as possible be related to the actual profit made by the tenant.
However, from the landlord's point of view too close a relationship between rent and profit means that his income will depend to a large extent on the efficiency with which the tenant carries on business rather than on the value of the demised property.
Further matters must be taken into account when drafting a turnover rent.
Should a basic rent be reserved?
This is usually done.
Sometimes there is a guaranteed minimum reviewed at periodic intervals.
Next, the tenant's adviser should ensure that there is a minimum turnover figure, which is not to be taken into account in assessing the rent, and possibly a maximum figure above which turnover is ignored.
Where the tenant's business includes a substantial number of transactions in which he gives credit to his customers the draftsman will have to consider whether the amount of the transaction should be brought into account at the time of the transaction or at the time of payment; whether interest payments are to be included in the calculation of turnover and whether the tenant is to have an allowance for bad debts.
Conversely, where the tenant is likely to give discounts to certain customers (eg those who pay by credit card, or employees), or where he is likely to have sales  or special offers, his advisers should attempt to ensure that it is the amount he receives rather than the full retail price which is to be included in the calculation of turnover.
The demised property may be part only of the premises on which the tenant carries on business and in such cases the turnover may need to be apportioned.
For example, a tenant who uses the demised property for the business of a dry cleaner, may receive goods for cleaning on the property but process them elsewhere.
The place at which the cleaning is actually carried out may be entirely dependent on reception centres, yet the tenant may be paying rent for it.
In such circumstances if the turnover of the reception centres is not apportioned in some way, the tenant will in effect pay double rent for the place at which the cleaning is carried out.
The draftsman must provide for the landlord to have sufficient power of inspection of the tenant's books to satisfy himself that any information supplied by the tenant is correct.
There should probably be a provision for independent determination (by an accountant rather than a surveyor) in case of dispute.
However, the tenant should not be subjected to oppressive powers of inspection and he should resist an attempt to make him pay the costs of an inspection, although it would be fair that he should pay the costs if there is a material discrepancy between the information supplied by him and the results of an inspection.
Reliance on the tenant's audited accounts for the purpose of calculating turnover may be unwise for the landlord, not because those accounts may be inaccurate but because they may not be settled until well after the end of the rental period in question.
Accordingly, the tenant should be required to supply regular certificates of his turnover, and there might also be a provision for the payment of interest on rent in case of delay in supplying them.
Clearly, if the demised property ceases to be used for trading, the landlord's income will drop or possibly cease.
The draftsman should, therefore, insert in the lease a positive covenant to keep the demised property open for trading during normal hours (rather than relying on a negative user covenant "not to use the property otherwise than as…" , which would permit the tenant not to use the property at all).
In this way any loss of rent may be claimed as damages for breach of covenant (see Transworld Land Co v J Sainsbury [1990]2 EGLR 255 for the scope of such a  claim).
Nevertheless, it may be prudent to provide expressly for the payment of rent where, for example, the property remains empty while the tenant is seeking to assign his lease.
This may be done by deeming a certain level of turnover during any such period or by reverting to the open market rent.
If the former method is chosen, the draftsman should beware lest the deemed turnover relates to the period immediately preceding the void, since the tenant may have been running down his business in preparation for a move.
A similar problem may arise when the tenant allows someone else into occupation of part of the demised property, either as a subtenant or by way of licence or franchise agreement.
The draftsman should ensure that any licence fee or sub-rent is taken into account in the calculation of the tenant's turnover; indeed, he may think it appropriate to cover the contingency that the tenant grants a licence of part of the demised property at less than the market rate.
This may be done, for example, by providing that the turnover of the subtenant or licensee is to be taken into account in calculating the tenant's turnover.
In addition to example 4.4, Forms 12 and 13 contain examples of rents based on turnover.
Example 4:4 Turnover rent YIELDING AND PAYING THEREFOR by equal quarterly payments in advance on the usual quarter days:(1) the annual sum of £ ( "the basic rent" ); and (2) such sum as is calculated in accordance with the Schedule hereto ( "the turnover rent" ) SCHEDULE (1) In this schedule the following expressions have the following meanings:(a) "gross turnover" means the aggregate of all sums:(i) received by the tenant in return for goods supplied or services rendered in the course of any trade or business carried on by him in the demised property or partly in the demised property and partly elsewhere; and (ii) payable to the tenant by any person in consideration of the use or occupation of the whole or any part of the demised property (b) "a rental year" means a period of twelve calendar months beginning on  (c) "net turnover" means the gross turnover less:(i) any sum actually paid by the tenant to HM Commissioners of Customs and Excise by way of VAT or other tax chargeable on the supply of goods or services;(ii) any sum refunded by the tenant to his customers in respect of defective or unsatisfactory goods or services;(iii) per cent of any sums received by the tenant in return for services for which orders are received at the demised property but are performed wholly elsewhere (d) "qualified accountant" means a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (2) The turnover rent for a rental year shall be:(a) per cent of the net turnover for the year immediately preceding that rental year exceeding £ but less than £ and (b) per cent of the net turnover for the year immediately preceding that rental year exceeding £ but less than £ (3) Within one month after the beginning of each rental year (time being of the essence) the tenant shall deliver to the landlord a certificate signed by a qualified accountant of the tenant's gross turnover and net turnover for the year immediately preceding that rental year.
(4) The tenant shall upon reasonable notice permit the landlord or his agent to inspect and take copies of the tenant's books of accounts or any other document or record which in the opinion of the landlord or such agent is relevant to the determination of the turnover rent and shall bear the costs of such inspection if there shall be any material discrepancy between the information supplied by the tenant under paragraph 3 above and the results of such inspection.
(5) The turnover rent shall be determined by a qualified accountant (acting as an expert) and whose decision shall be final (except so far as concerns matters of law) to be appointed by the President for the time being of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales:(a) if the tenant fails to supply a certificate in accordance with paragraph 3 above (in which case the landlord's costs of the determination and the expert's fee shall be borne by the tenant) or (b) if there shall be any dispute between the parties as to the calculation of the turnover rent (in which case the  costs of the determination and the expert's fee shall be borne as the expert directs)(6) Until the determination of the turnover rent for any rental year the tenant shall continue to pay rent at the rate payable immediately before the beginning of the rental year in question and upon such determination there shall be due as arrears of rent or as the case may be refunded to the tenant the difference (if any) between the rent paid by the tenant for that year and the rent which ought to have been paid by him for that year plus (if the turnover rent is determined by an expert) such amount of interest as may be directed by the expert (7) If the turnover rent for any rental year falls below £ the landlord may by notice in writing served on the tenant not more than one month after the determination of the turnover rent for that year (time not being of the essence) require that there be substituted for the basic rent and the turnover rent for that year the amount for which the demised property might reasonably be expected to be let on the open market at the beginning of the year in question for a term equal to the residue of this lease then unexpired and on the same terms as this lease (save as to rent but on the assumption that the rent may be revised every five years) there being disregarded the matters set out in section 34 of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 (as amended) and in default of agreement the said amount shall be determined by an independent surveyor (acting as an expert not as an arbitrator) to be appointed by the President for the time being of the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors whose decision shall be final and whose fee shall be borne as he directs Example 4:5 Turnover rent for theatre or cinema based on box office receipts1 (1) In this schedule:(a) "box office receipts" means the gross amount of all moneys payable to the tenant or any group company on the sale of tickets for theatrical cinematic or other performances in the demised property or the right to stage productions or hold conferences or other events (whether public or private) in the demised property and any moneys payable on the sale of programmes souvenirs or similar items;(i) treating any sale by credit card as having been a sale in consideration of the net amount recoverable  by the tenant from the credit card company (ii) treating any amount which the tenant is entitled to receive by way of grant gift or sponsorship as part of the box office receipts and (iii) deducting any value added tax payable by the tenant to HM Customs and Excise (b) "bar receipts" means the gross amount of all moneys payable to the tenant or any group company for the supply of food and drink in the demised property:(i) treating any sale by credit card as having been a sale in consideration of the net amount recoverable by the tenant from the credit card company (ii) allowing the tenant a reduction of two per cent for wastage (2) The rent payable by the tenant shall be the aggregate of:(a) £…per annum(b) 5 per cent of the first 60 per cent of the box office receipts for any year (c) 10 per cent of the remainder of the box office receipts (d) 7.5 per cent of the bar receipts payable annually in arrear on 31 December in each year (3) The tenant shall pay on account of the rent on 1 January 1 April 1 July and 1 October:(a) in the first year of the term £…by four equal instalments (b) in the second and every subsequent year of the term payments at the rate of the rent payable for the last preceding year of the term by four equal instalments and as soon as possible after the end of the second and each subsequent year the amounts payable for that year under paragraph 2 above shall be agreed or otherwise determined and all necessary adjustments (whether by way further payment by the tenant or credit given by the landlord) shall be made (4) The tenant shall:(a) keep full and accurate books or records of account (b) permit the landlord (or a person nominated by the landlord) to inspect the books or records of account (but not more often than once every three months) and if so required to provide the books or records in a readily legible form (5)(a) at the end of each year of the term either the landlord or the tenant may require an audit of the tenant's books and records by an independent auditor (acting as an expert) to be appointed (in default of agreement) by the  President of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (b) the auditor shall certify the amount of the box office receipts and the bar receipts for the year in question and his certificate shall be binding on the parties (except in so far as concerns matters of law)(c) the auditor has power to determine how his costs and the costs of any representations to him shall be borne 
5 Rent geared to subrents
Where the landlord lets property that the tenant will sublet, it is not uncommon for the rent due under the headlease to be geared to the rents due under subleases granted by the tenant.
The rent due under the headlease will usually be a basic rent plus a percentage of the subrents.
This concept is mainly found in development leases, where the parties are in economic (though not legal) partnership.
The landlower puts in the land, the tenant puts in the construction costs and his development skills, and the result is an investment in which both landlord and tenant participate.
The landlord will require a return on the land value; the tenant will require a return on the costs and risk of development; and both parties may wish to participate in any super profit.
This kind of scheme is often known as a side by side scheme.
In these cases the rental income is often divided between the landlord and the tenant in slices, each slice representing a particular return on investment by landlord and tenant respectively.
If this is done, care must be taken to ensure that each slice receives its proper priority in order of payment, otherwise one party may take the lion's share of the income at the expense of the other.
As with index-linked rents, any mathematical formula should be carefully checked by calculator or computer.
Where the head rent is a fraction of market rental value rather than rents receivable, slightly different problems may arise.
(a) Receipts The principal receipt will be the rents payable under the sub-leases.
But there may also be:(1) receipts of mesne profits in the case of subtenants holding over;(2) premiums paid for surrenders or lease variations;(3) money payable under insurance policies for damage to the scheme or for loss of rent and commissions paid by the insurers to the tenant;(4) damages for breach of covenant (eg dilapidations);(5) interest on late rent, on reviewed rent, and on damages;(6) grants or other public money paid for works to the scheme;(7) compensation for compulsory acquisition.
All these ought to be considered.
(b) Deductions If the headtenant is liable to pay the rates under the terms of some or all of the subleases, and is also liable to pay the rates under the terms of the headlease, the rates should be deducted from the gross amount of the subrents for the purposes of the rent review under the headlease.
Similarly, if the headtenant collects VAT from the subtenants in respect of any services which he provides for them, the amount of such VAT should also be deducted.
Where VAT is payable on the sub-rents, that should also be deducted, whether or not VAT is charged on the head-rent.
Problems may also arise where the headtenant provides services to his subtenants, particularly where the subtenant's service charge is reserved as rent.
It will clearly be in the interest of the headtenant if the service charge is left out of account for the purposes of the rent review under the headlease.
On the other hand, if the headtenant charges a profit element or management fee to the subtenants, the landlord may argue that profit ought to be taken into account.
Such a profit element may include not only a straightforward management fee but also a hidden profit, such as a discount, which may be given to the headtenant under a block policy of insurance.
The tenant may also find that in order to attract subtenants he must pay inducements, often in the form of a contribution to the subtenant's fitting-out costs.
This must be deducted from the income received.
There is considerable debate among valuers about the correct method of amortising such payments.
Preferably the parties' surveyors should agree on an appropriate method  of amortising such payments, which can then be written into the lease.
In addition the tenant may have to pay compensation to occupying subtenants for non-renewal of tenancies under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 and may himself have to pay damages for breach of obligation (eg an unreasonable refusal of consent to assign).
He will seek to ensure that these are permitted deductions. (c) Premiums It may be that the headtenant will grant subleases in consideration of a premium and a low rent.
The premium may be a payment in cash or a payment in kind (such as the carrying out of substantial repairs or improvements).
The draftsman should cover this possibility and there are at least four methods of doing so.
First, the draftsman may provide that a specified proportion of the premium be paid by the headtenant to the landlord.
If this is expressly provided for in the lease the parties will not fall foul of the Law of Property Act 1925, s144.
A payment of this kind may be capital or income (for tax purposes) in the hands of the landlord, depending on the circumstances.
The draftsman should consider this question as well as whether the landlord's cash flow position would be appreciably helped by the payment of a proportion of premiums exacted by the headtenant.
Secondly, he may provide for the premium to be decapitalised, either at a fixed number of years' purchase or at the rate prevailing at the time of the subletting, with the amount thus calculated being added to the rent reserved by the sublease for the purposes of the rent review under the headlease.
The tenant may well benefit from this arrangement since he will have in his hands a lump sum before he is called upon to make any payment to his own landlord.
Thirdly, he may provide that for the purposes of the rent review under the headlease, the sublet property shall be deemed to be let at a rack rent.
This is probably the most satisfactory method for the landlord since the regularity of his cash flow will be maintained.
However, the tenant's advisers must study closely the terms of the deemed subletting.
First, is the deemed subletting to be at a fixed rent or at a rent subject to review?
It is probably in  the tenant's interest for a fixed rent to be assumed.
However, if a review is to be assumed the tenant should ensure that the notional review coincides with the actual review under the headlease, otherwise there may be periods when the headtenant's profit rent is eroded.
Fourthly, the terms of the lease may prohibit letting except at a rack rent.
This is the most common method of dealing with the problem.
From the point of view of the landlord, the income payable by the headtenant remains secured by the income payable by the subtenants.
The calculation of the head rent is also easier if there are subleases in existence.
From the point of view of the tenant, he has the security of the rents payable by the subtenants, and is not called on to find income from other resources.
(d) Voids The tenant's advisers should attempt to secure some allowance for the tenant in case of voids.
This may well be resisted by the landlord on the basis that the risk of unlet property should fall on the tenant.
If the landlord proves the stronger, the draftsman should make provision for the assessment of rent for empty property.
This is best done by assuming a letting at a rack rent for a reasonable length of term; say, ten years.
Nevertheless, the tenant should insist that he be given a reasonable rent-free period in which to find a new subtenant.
Where the head rent is based on rents received, so that the scheme is a side by side scheme, the landlord should be satisfied by a covenant by the tenant to do his best to keep the scheme fully let.
Thus, the risk of voids will fall on both parties, and both will suffer the loss in the proportions in which they are entitled to participate in income.
(e) Occupation by the headtenant The draftsman should provide expressly for the occupation of the whole or part of the demised property by the headtenant.
This was forgotten by the draftsman in British Railways Board v Elgar House Ltd (1969) 209 EG 1313, where it was nevertheless held that for the purposes of the rent calculation parts of the demised property occupied by the headtenant should be deemed to be let at a  rack rent.
The court will try to prevent the tenant from cheating the landlord out of his share of the rental income (Freehold & Leasehold Shop Properties Ltd v Friends Provident Life Office (1984) 271 EG 451 per Griffiths LJ).
As with the case of voids the terms of any deemed subletting should be carefully considered by the tenant's advisers.
(f) Improvements A rent geared to subrents is most commonly found in building leases.
Accordingly, the tenant will have carried out substantial improvements, the cost of which will form a large part of the consideration given by him for the grant of the lease.
His sublettings, on the other hand, will be sublettings of the improved property.
It is, therefore, important that the value of those improvements be taken into account in assessing the rent of any part of the property deemed to be sublet.
Accordingly, the draftsman should not provide for the usual disregard of tenant's improvements in the valuation formula.
However, it should be borne in mind that the subtenants may themselves carry out improvements which, as against the tenant, are to be disregarded on rent review.
Normally it is unnecessary to make special provision for this since the rent the tenant pays is linked to the rent he receives.
In a special case, however, it may be appropriate to deal expressly with improvements made by subtenants. (g) Other obligations Since the landlord's income will usually depend on rents generated by actual lettings of the property, the landlord will require the tenant to enter into a series of obligations designed to ensure that the scheme is kept fully let at rack rents.
Those obligations will include:(1) a covenant to try his best to keep the scheme fully let;(2) a covenant not to let at less than the market rent obtainable at the date of the letting;(3) a covenant not to grant rent free periods or concessionary rent periods without the landlord's consent;(4) a covenant not to sublet except in defined subletting units;(5) a covenant not to waive or commute any rental payments under subleases;(6) a covenant not to accept any surrender of any sublease without the landlord's consent;(7) a covenant to enforce subtenants' covenants in subleases;(8) a covenant not to permit any sub-underletting of a sub-let part.
All these obligations are designed to ensure that the tenant keeps up the real value of the scheme and that the landlord's income remains as high as possible.
Example 4:6 Rent geared to subrents receivable YIELDING AND PAYING THEREFOR by equal quarterly payments in advance on 1 January 1 April 1 July and 1 October in each year per cent of the net rents which the tenant is entitled to receive for the whole or any part of the demised property and calculated in accordance with the schedule hereto SCHEDULE (1) In this schedule the following expressions have the following meanings:(a) "full rack rental value" means the best rent at which the demised property (or as the case may be the part of the demised property in question) might reasonably be expected to be let in the open market by a willing landlord to a willing tenant (i) in the case of property falling within paragraph (2) below on the terms (other than as to rent or other pecuniary consideration) upon which it is actually occupied (ii) in the case of property falling within paragraph (3) below on the terms (other than as to rent or other pecuniary consideration) of this lease (iii) in the case of property falling within paragraph (4) below on the terms (other than as to rent or other pecuniary consideration) upon which it was last occupied and in any case disregarding the matters set out in paragraphs (a) and (b) of section 34(1) of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 (as amended) and on the assumption that the rent so determined will be revised every five years  (b) "qualified accountant" means a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales or the Association of Certified Accountants (2) If the tenant lets or permits to be occupied the whole or any part of the demised property in return for any pecuniary consideration other than the full rack rental value thereof as at the date of such letting or permission or in return for no pecuniary consideration then he shall be deemed for the purposes of this schedule to be entitled to receive the full rack rental value thereof determined as at the date of such letting or permission and redetermined as at every fifth anniversary thereof (3) If the tenant himself occupies the whole or any part of the demised property then he shall be deemed for the purposes of this schedule to be entitled to receive the full rack rental value thereof determined as at the date on which he went into occupation and redetermined as at every fifth anniversary thereof (4) If the whole or any part of the demised property remains vacant for three months or more then at the expiry of such period of three months the tenant shall until the same is next occupied be deemed to be entitled to receive the full rack rental value thereof determined as at the date upon which the said period expired and redetermined as at every fifth anniversary thereof (5) The tenant shall one month before the beginning of each quarter (time being of the essence) deliver to the landlord a certificate signed by a qualified accountant showing a true summary of:(a) the gross amount of all rents and licence fees which the tenant is entitled (or deemed to be entitled) to receive in respect of the demised property and each part thereof for that quarter and (b) the amount of any sum included in (a) above which the tenant is entitled to recover from any subtenant or occupier of the whole or any part of the demised property either by way of VAT or by way of service charge in respect of services or works performed or to be performed (6) Subject to paragraph (7) below the net rents shall be the difference between the two amounts shown in the said certificate (7) The net rents shall be determined by a single arbitrator to be appointed by the President for the time being of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors if:(a) the tenant fails to deliver a certificate in accordance with paragraph (5) above (in which case the tenant shall pay interest on the net rents at the rate of…per cent from the quarter day in question until payment) or (b) any dispute or difference arises between the parties in connection with the calculation of the net rents (in which case the arbitrator shall determine the amount of interest if any to be paid by the tenant)(8) The tenant shall permit the landlord or his agent to inspect and take copies of the tenant's books or account or any other document or record (and if necessary the tenant shall procure any computer print-out) which in the opinion of the landlord or such agent is relevant to the calculation of the net rents and shall bear the costs of such inspection if there shall be any material discrepancy between the certificate delivered by the tenant under paragraph 5 above and the results of such inspection.
Example 4:7 Side by side rent sharing SCHEDULE (1) In this schedule:(a) "rental income" means the aggregate of:(i) any yearly or other periodical sums payable under an occupational lease including sums payable by virtue of any enactment;(ii) any sums payable by way of interest under an occupational lease;(iii) any sums payable by way of damages or compensation for any breach of a tenant's obligation under an occupational lease;(iv) any sum payable by a guarantor of a tenant's obligation under an occupational lease pursuant to his guarantee;(v) any premium paid or other capital payment made by a tenant under an occupational lease in connection with the grant assignment variation or surrender of an occupational lease;(vi) any sum payable under a policy of insurance in respect of loss of rent or other income (b) "permitted deductions" means the aggregate of:(i) expenses reasonably incurred by the tenant in order to comply with its obligations as landlord under an occupational lease;(ii) legal costs incurred by the tenant in enforcing obligations under occupational leases except to the  extent that the tenant recovers those costs from a party to an occupational lease;(iii) the amount of any compensation or damages which the tenant is liable by statute or ordered to pay to any party to an occupational lease whether for non-renewal of a tenancy breach of covenant breach of obligation compensation for improvements or otherwise;(iv) the cost of management and rent collection not exceeding…per cent of rental income (c) "notional rental income" means the rack rental value of any lettable unit which is either unlet or vacant or occupied by the tenant or by a group company the value to be determined as at the date on which the unit in question ceased to be let or occupied or as the case may be become occupied by the tenant or a group company and redetermined every year (d) "lettable unit" means a part of the property which is designed constructed or adapted for letting to an occupying retail trader (e) "occupational lease" means a lease under which physical possession of a lettable unit was granted by the tenant (f) "rack rental value" of any lettable unit at any time means the rent at which that unit might reasonably be expected to be let in the open market for a term of not less than ten years with an upwards only rent review on every fifth anniversary of the beginning of the term and on such other terms as would be expected to be negotiated in the open market (including such financial inducements and concessions as are usual in the market at that time)(g) "group company" means a company which would be treated as a member of the same group of companies as the tenant for the purposes of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 (h) "divisible income" means the difference between:(i) rental income plus notional rental income; and (ii) permitted deductions but divisible income shall never be less than nil (i) "the first slice" means such part of divisible income as does not exceed £ (j) "the second slice" means such part of divisible income as exceeds £ but does not exceed £ (k) "the top slice" means such part of divisible income as exceeds £  (2) The rent payable by the tenant is the aggregate of:(a)…per cent of the first slice;(b)…per cent of the second slice; and (c)…per cent of the top slice to be paid by equal quarterly payments on the usual quarter days 
6 Rent geared to head rent
Some subleases reserve a rent which is linked to the rent payable under the headlease.
The reasons which prompt such a bargain are a desire on the part of the landlord to ensure that he suffers no rental shortfall, and in some cases a desire to have a guaranteed profit rental.
If faced with such a clause, the tenant's adviser should ensure that the tenant ascertains the amount of the head rent and receives advice from a valuer as to whether it is a fair rent (see County Personnel Ltd v Alan R Pulver & Co [1987]1 All ER 289).
If the rent under the sublease is made to increase at the same rate as the rent under the headlease, and the rent under the headlease is less than a market rent at the date of grant of the sublease, the rent under the sublease may well exceed the true market rent after the first rent review.
The draftsman of a clause linking the subrent to the headrent must make it clear what is to happen if the head landlord does not exercise his right to a rent under the headlease, or if the headlease is surrendered.
In Lorien Textiles v SI Pension Trustees Ltd (1981) 259 EG 771 the rent under the sublease was to be assessed "on the basis set out" in the headlease.
It was held that this merely incorporated the words of the headlease, and that the continuing existence of the headlease was not a condition precedent to the right to review the rent under the sublease.
So also where a sublease provided for the rent to be a proportion of the rent "payable" by the landlord "in the manner fixed" under the headlease, it was held that the rent review clause in the sublease was capable of operation despite the surrender of the headlease (R & A Millett (Shops) Ltd v Leon Allan International Fashions Ltd [1989]1 EGLR 138).
If the sublease merely incorporates the valuation formula and machinery contained in the headlease, the rent review clause in  the sublease will be capable of operation whether or not the rent review clause is exercised in the headlease.
However, the corollary is that the rent review under the headlease and the rent review under the sublease will in effect be independent valuations and consequently there is a risk that the rent payable under each will be different.
Example 4:8 Definition of rent linked to head rent "the reviewed rent" means the highest of (1) the rent contractually payable immediately before the relevant review date (2) the market rent and (3) per cent of the rent payable under the headlease (assuming if it is not the fact that the headlease is in existence on the relevant review date) Example 4:9 Alternative definition if at any time the rent payable under the headlease is increased the payable under this lease shall be increased with effect from the date as from which the rent payable under the headlease is increased so as to equal per cent of that rent 
7 Periodic review to market rent
The periodic review to market rent is the most common form of rent review clause found in occupational business leases.
Its principal advantage is that it most accurately reflects changes in the value of the demised property rather than the business efficiency of a particular tenant or inflation generally.
In most cases the clause will operate by postulating a hypothetical letting of the demised property in the open market.
Under normal circumstances this is as fair a valuation method to both parties as can be achieved.
However, there are cases (such as property specially built or adapted for a particular occupier) where modifications are needed.
Judicial statements abound that the purpose of a rent review clause is to ensure that the rent payable reflects changes in the value of money and the value of the property let (eg Basingstoke and Deane BC v Host Group [1988]1 WLR 348; British Airways v  Heathrow Airport [1992]1 EGLR 141).
However, there are two different perspectives from which this general purpose can be viewed.
The first perspective is that the purpose of the rent review is to revalue the original bargain between the parties in the light of changes in the value of money and of the property.
This perspective leads to the conclusion that in the absence of clear words to the contrary, the hypothetical letting will be on the same terms as the actual letting.
But the second perspective is that the rent review clause is the landlord's price for the grant of a long term, in the absence of which he would have granted a shorter term.
Thus, the purpose of a rent review clause is not to revalue the original bargain between the parties, but to give the landlord the income which he would have got, on the terms on which he would have let, if he had had the property in hand on the rent review date.
This would mean that in the absence of clear words, the terms of the hypothetical letting would be dictated by the market at the review date, and not by the terms of the lease.
So far, the courts have approached rent review clauses from the first perspective only.
But the parties are not confined to the first perspective.
Many of the failures of rent review clauses result from a failure to consider carefully the object which the clause is designed to achieve.
A well-drawn rent review clause must provide for each of the following:(1) the review dates;(2) the method of initiating the review;(3) the procedure for resolving disputes;(4) the timetable;(5) the valuation formula.
It should also state whether time is or is not of the essence at any of the procedural stages.
The choice of review dates is one of the basic terms of the lease which will have been agreed between the parties before the matter passes into the hands of solicitors.
Some landlords attempt to introduce a review date on the last or penultimate day of the term.
The purpose of doing so is to attempt to obtain for the landlord a higher rent than would be awarded by the court on an application for an interim rent under s24A of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954.
The rent awarded by the court under s24A may be considerably tempered by judicial discretion.
A discount  of 10-15 per cent is not uncommon and in an extreme case the Court of Appeal refused to disturb a discount of 50 per cent(Charles Follett Ltd v Cabtell Investments Ltd [1987]2 EGLR 88).
The tenant will always be better off without such a review, and consequently should resist its introduction.
If, however, it is agreed that there should be a review at the end of the term, the draftsman should ensure that the term of the hypothetical lease is long enough to be realistic.
Clearly letting for the residue of the actual term will not produce a worthwhile rent.
There are two methods of defining the review dates.
One is to specify the actual dates of review in the lease.
This produces certainty, but the tenant's adviser should be careful to ensure that the hypothetical lease has proper provision for rent review.
The problem does not arise where the review takes place on the assumption of a hypothetical letting for the residue of the actual term.
However, where the assumption is a letting for a term expiring after the actual term on the terms of the actual lease, the hypothetical lease may have a long period without review.
For example a lease provides for rent reviews at fixed dates in the years 1995, 2000, 2005 and 2010.
The term of the lease is limited to expire in 2015.
The review clause provides for a hypothetical lease for a term of twenty-five years from the rent review date but otherwise on the terms of the actual lease.
A literal interpretation of these terms would mean that on the second rent review date what was to be assumed was a lease expiring in 2025 with rent reviews in 2005 and 2010 only, leaving fifteen years without review at the end of the hypothetical lease.
The effect on the final rent review would be even more drastic.
The second method is to define review dates by reference to the anniversaries of the commencement of the lease.
The draftsman must, however, make it clear whether the periods are to be measured from the date from which the term of the lease is computed or from the date of the lease itself.
Prima facie a clause which specifies review date by reference to the commencement of the term requires the measurement to be taken from the date from which the term is computed, and not the date of the lease (Beaumont Property Trust v Tai (1982) 265 EG 872).
The valuation date will usually be the rent review date; and the court will lean in favour of a construction which produces the result that the rent is valued by reference to values prevailing at  the start of the period for which it is payable (Glofield Properties v Morley (No 2)[1989]2 EGLR 118).
But if the clause clearly specifies another valuation date, the court will give effect to the clause (Prudential Assurance Co v Gray [1987]2 EGLR 134; Parkside Investments v German Food Centre [1990]2 EGLR 265).
8 Time limits in rent review procedure
(a) The presumption Much of the early litigation about rent review clauses concentrated on the question whether limits were of the essence.
That question was thought to have been partially settled by the House of Lords in United Scientific Holdings Ltd v Burnley BC [1978]AC 904 where it was held that prima facie time limits are not of the essence, with the result that if a time limit is missed the review can still take place.
However, it was said that the prima facie rule could be displaced:(1) by express words;(2) by contra-indications in the rent review clause;(3) by the interrelationship of the rent review clause and other clauses in the lease.
(b) The presumption rebutted (i) By express words The parties may always provide expressly that time limits are to be of the essence.
If they do so, the court will give effect to their expressed intention, even if this means overriding words in the reddendum (Weller v Akehurst [1981]3 All ER 411).
However, if the draftsman wishes to make time of the essence of some but not all of the procedural steps he should be particularly careful to make it clear which steps carry strict time limits and which do not (as the draftsman failed to do in Bradley (C) & Sons Ltd v Telefusion Ltd (1981) 259 EG 337 and Art & Sound v West End Litho [1992]1 EGLR 138).
If it is not clear that time is of the essence of a particular procedural provision, the presumption that  time is not of the essence will apply (Panavia Air Cargo Ltd v Southend-on-Sea BC [1988]1 EGLR 124).
Should the parties agree that time is to be of the essence?
From the tenant's point of view such an agreement has much to commend it.
If the review is upwards only he is highly unlikely to want to initiate the review himself, but the uncertainty of not knowing what his rent is may hamper him in conducting or investing in his business, or in disposing of his lease.
If time is of the essence, the business tenant knows where he stands.
On the other hand, as Lord Salmon observed in United Scientific Holdings Ltd v Burnley BC [1978]AC 904: I would add that a well-advised landlord is hardly likely to agree to rent revision clause which laid down that its provisions as to time were of the essence of the contract.
Were he to do so, it would mean that should he take any step later than the time specified in the clause then however slight the delay and however little it affected the tenant, he would lose the benefit of the clause for the next five, seven or ten years or whatever the intervals for revision might be.
By contrast, where time is not of the essence for the service of a landlord's notice calling for a rent review, mere delay by the landlord, however lengthy and even if coupled with hardship to the tenant, does not of itself destroy the contractual right which the landlord has to serve a notice.
In order to show that a landlord is precluded from exercising his right to call for a rent review, the tenant must show that the lease or the rent review clause has been abrogated by mutual consent or that the landlord's conduct has been such that he is estopped from exercising his right to a rent review (Amherst v Walker (James) Goldsmith & Silversmith Ltd [1983]2 All ER 1067).
The practical consequences of time limits which are not of the essence of the contract are such that they are virtually meaningless.
If, therefore, the parties agree that the rent review is to be initiated and conducted according to a timetable laid down in the lease, it is suggested that time should be of the essence of the timetable.
If the parties do not wish to be bound by time limits there should be none in the lease.
One possible solution is for the last step in the procedure to be the subject of a strict time limit.
Normally, that step is the reference of a dispute to an independent third party.
If the chosen  third party is an expert, the court cannot interfere with the contractual time limit.
However, if the chosen third party is an arbitrator, the court can extend time if undue hardship would otherwise result (Arbitration Act 1950, s27), even if only one party has the right to refer the matter to arbitration (Pittalis v Sherefettin [1986]QB 868).
The tenant's adviser should press for the tenant to have the right to serve notice on the landlord in the event of delay, calling upon the landlord either to exercise the rent review or abandon it.
Such a notice may also contain a proposal by the tenant as to the amount of the rent.
But it should be made clear that any time limit within which the landlord is to act is to be of the essence, otherwise the contractual notice will be ineffective except as a preliminary to the service of yet another notice making time of the essence (Phipps-Faire Ltd v Malbern Construction Ltd [1987]1 EGLR 129 although this relaxed approach has not been taken in Scotland (Visionhire v Britel Fund Trustees [1992]1 EGLR 128).
(ii) By contra-indications in the rent review clause It is extremely difficult to extract any coherent principles from the decisions of the court in relation to contra-indications in the rent review clause.
This only serves to emphasise the desirability of stating expressly whether time is or is not to be of the essence.
In Drebbond Ltd v Horsham DC (1978) 246 EG 1013 the landlord was entitled to require arbitration by notice in writing given to the tenant within three months after the review date "but not otherwise" .
The words "but not otherwise" were held to be a sufficient contra-indication to make time of the essence.
In Touche Ross & Co v Secretary of State for the Environment (1982) 265 EG 982 the lease provided that the question of what was a fair market rent was to be referred to an expert "as soon as practicable and in any event not later than" three months after service of a rent review notice.
It was held that time was not of the essence.
Dillon LJ pointed out that small differences in language will lead in some cases to opposite conclusions.
In other cases the fact that the rent was to be "conclusively fixed" by the landlord's trigger notice if the tenant failed to give counter-notice in time was held to be a sufficient indication that time was of the essence (Mammoth Greeting Cards v Agra [1990]2 EGLR 124; Barrett Estate  Services v David Greig (Retail)[1991]2 EGLR 123).
All those cases turned on the effect of particular words in the rent review clause.
In other cases, however, the court has relied more on the procedure for review laid down in the lease.
In Lewis v Barnet (1982) 264 EG 1079 the lease provided that in default of agreement the rent was to be determined by a surveyor appointed by the President of the RICS on the application of the landlord made not less than three months before the review date.
It was further provided that if the parties had not agreed the rent six months before the review date, and the landlord had not made the application to the President, then any notice given by the landlord to trigger the review should be void and of no effect.
It was held that that provision was sufficient to make time of the essence of the time limit for the landlord's application.
In Smith's (Henry) Charity Trustees v AWADA Trading and Promotion Services Ltd (1983) 269 EG 729 the rent review clause prescribed an elaborate procedure of notices and counterpoints.
At each stage the clause set out the consequence of failure to serve the requisite notice or counternotice.
The court held that time was of the essence of the timetable.
Similarly, in Greenhaven Securities Ltd v Compton (1985) 275 EG 628 the review clause prescribed three alternative ways in which the rent was to be determined, two of them introduced by "if" clauses.
It was held that time was of the essence.
In Mecca Leisure Ltd v Renown Investments (Holdings) Ltd (1984) 271 EG 989 the court reached a different conclusion.
The review clause in that case provided that the reviewed rent was to be a sum specified in a notice served by the landlord, unless the tenant served a counternotice on the landlord within a stated period.
It further provided that if the tenant failed to serve a counternotice he should be deemed to have agreed the rent specified in the landlord's notice.
The court held that the deeming provision was not sufficient to make time of the essence of the time limit for the service of the counternotice.
An attempt to reconcile the cases was made in Taylor Woodrow Property Co Ltd v Lonrho Textiles Ltd (1985) 275 EG 632, where it was held that a "two-way" deeming provision (ie which applied to both landlord and tenant) made time of the essence, but a "one-way" deeming provision (ie which applied to the tenant alone) did not.
However, it is unlikely that such a rigid distinction may be  made.
Where the parties have not only required a step to be taken within a specified time but have expressly provided for the consequences in case of default, this provides an indication, of greater or less strength, that time is to be of the essence, but it is not necessarily decisive.
Whether it is so or not depends on all the circumstances of the case including the context and wording of the provisions, the degree of emphasis, the purpose and effect of the default clause and any other relevant consideration.
In the end, the matter is one of impression (Power Securities (Manchester) Ltd v Prudential Assurance Co Ltd [1987]1 EGLR 121).
As a result of these cases it is clear that relatively small differences in the drafting of a rent review clause may have great practical consequences.
In all cases it is suggested that the parties must consider whether or not to have strict time limits and ensure that their intention is clearly expressed.
(iii) By the interrelationship of the rent review clause and other clauses in the lease The classic case of the interrelationship of the rent review clause and other clauses in the lease making time of the essence is a case where the tenant has an option to determine the term by the service of a break notice.
Whether the right to review the rent and the right to determine are contained in the same subclause of the lease (Al Saloom v Shirley James Travel Service Ltd (1981) 42 P & CR 181) or in different subclauses (Legal & General Assurance (Pension Management) Ltd v Cheshire CC (1983) 265 EG 781) makes no difference.
Nor does it matter whether the tenant may give notice after the last date for service of a rent review notice (Coventry CC v J Hepworth & Son Ltd (1982) 265 EG 608) or at a time which coincides with time during which a landlord may serve such a notice (Legal & General Assurance (Pension Management) Ltd v Cheshire CC).
Where, however, the tenant also had the right to initiate the rent review and the date for the tenant's notice terminating the lease was linked to a date over which the landlord had no control (the decision of the arbitrator), the link between the rent review and the break-clause was held not to make time of the essence (Metrolands Investments Ltd v J H Dewhurst Ltd [1986]3 All ER 659).
The essential feature to displace the presumption is a link between a rent review timetable and the  timetable for the exercise of the tenant's right to determine the lease.
Where there is no such interrelation, as where the landlord does not have to serve a notice in order to exercise his right to review the rent, the mere existence of a tenant's break-clause will not lead the court to impose time limits on the landlord (Woodhouse (Edwin) Trustee Co Ltd v Sheffield Brick Co plc (1983) 270 EG 548).
The same conclusion would probably be reached if the tenant's break notice had to be served before the last date for service of the landlord's notice calling for a rent review.
However, if the tenant has the right to determine the lease, the draftsman must be careful lest that right should have the effect of making time limits in the rent review procedure of the essence.
This danger may be met in two ways.
First, the draftsman may insert in the rent review clause an express provision that time is not to be of the essence.
If he chooses this method, the landlord may serve a late notice, but the tenant will not be able to serve a late break notice.
Accordingly, his break notice must be given in ignorance of what the new rent would be.
Secondly, the draftsman may ensure that the two timetables are not interrelated.
This may be done by conferring on the tenant a right to serve a late notice in the event that the rent has not been determined in accordance with the timetable specified in the lease.
Alternatively, the draftsman may dispense with a timetable for the rent review, and dispense with the requirement for the landlord to serve a rent review notice in order to exercise the right to review the rent.
Example 4:10 Tenant's power to make time of the essence (1) if the landlord fails to take any step in the procedure for rent review within a period of time prescribed by this lease (whether or not that step could also have been taken by the tenant) the tenant may give the landlord written notice:(a) referring to the step which the landlord has failed to take (b) requiring the landlord to take that step within such period of not less than 21 days as may be specified in the notice and (c) informing the landlord that if he fails to take that step within the period specified in the notice he will be precluded thereafter from taking it and that time is of the essence of the period so specified  (2) if the landlord fails to take the step specified in a notice under paragraph (1) within the time specified in that notice (time being of the essence) he shall thereafter be precluded from taking it 
9 Review procedure
(a) Initiating the review Many rent review clauses provide for the procedure to be initiated by the service of a notice.
The principal advantage of such a requirement is that it signals, in a formal way, that the procedure is under way.
If the lease requires the service of a notice, informal discussions between the parties are unlikely to be held to amount to a review of the rent (Esso Petroleum Co Ltd v Anthony Gibbs Financial Services Ltd (1983) 267 EG 351).
However, unless the rent review is to be conducted in accordance with a prescribed timetable, there is much to be said for dispensing with notices, and removing a fertile source of potential dispute.
Some review clauses require a review notice to be in a particular form (for example, proposing a new rent); others do not.
Unless one of the steps in the review machinery is the service of a counternotice by the person upon whom the review notice is served, it is better not to stipulate for a particular form of notice because the fewer the requirements that have to be complied with the less scope there is for litigation.
It is however a fundamental requirement of a review notice that it leaves the recipient in no doubt that it is intended to be the formal document invoking the landlord's right to review the rent (Schirlcar Properties Ltd v Heinitz (1983) 268 EG 362).
If a particular form of notice is prescribed, failure to serve notice in the prescribed form will not generally invalidate the notice (Dean and Chapter of Chichester Cathedral v Lennards Ltd (1977) 35 P & CR 309); although where the timetable is tight and the landlord's notice is required to state a rental figure it may be of the essence that the notice should do so (Commission for New Towns v R Levy & Co [1990]2 EGLR 121).
If the general presumption does not apply in the particular case, a defective notice may usually be followed by a late notice in proper form.
The general presumption might not apply where a notice initiating  the review is to be followed by a counternotice objecting to the rent proposed in the initial notice.
In such a case, unless the initial notice specifies the proposed rent, a counternotice cannot be served.
(b) Counternotices Where the initiator of the review is required to specify the proposed new rent it is sometimes provided that the figure so specified shall be the new rent unless the other party serves a counternotice within a given period.
Usually it is the landlord who initiates the review and the tenant who is obliged to serve the counternotice.
Generally the period for serving the counternotice will not be of the essence (Davstone (Holdings) Ltd v Al-Rifai (1976) 32 P & CR 18) even where the clause also provides that in the absence of a counternotice the tenant is deemed to have agreed the rent specified in the landlord's notice (Mecca Leisure Ltd v Renown Investments (Holdings) Ltd (1984) 271 EG 989).
However, it is often the case that the service of a counternotice is the only step in the review procedure of which time is expressly made of the essence.
The tenant's adviser should be on his guard against such a provision since it is little more than a trap for the tenant, particularly since the figure specified by the landlord need not be a bona fide and genuine pre-estimate of the market rent (Amalgamated Estates Ltd v Joystretch Manufacturing Ltd (1980) 257 EG 489).
The tenant's adviser should, therefore delete from the draft any provision making time of the essence in relation to the service of a counternotice; or he should delete the entire requirement to serve a counternotice.
He may derive some support from the statement of Templeman LJ in Amalgamated Estates Ltd v Joystretch Manufacturing Ltd: I think it is a great pity that any landlord should require, or that any tenant should accept, a provision making time of the essence when the consequences are so onerous.
If the landlord will not accept the amendment, then the tenant's adviser should seek to ensure that any dispute about the rent is determined by arbitration rather than by an expert.
A unilateral right to require a dispute about the rent to be referred to arbitration is "an agreement to refer future disputes to arbitration" (Arbitration Act 1950, s27; Pitallis v Sherefettin [1986]QB 868) and the court has power to extend the time for service of a counternotice if undue hardship would otherwise result (ibid).
The court tends to adopt a relatively liberal attitude towards extensions of time for commencing arbitration (Patel v Peel Developments (South)[1992]30 EG 88).
Accordingly, it is suggested that the tenant will be better off if the rent is to be determined by arbitration rather than by expert.
(c) Agreeing the new rent There should be a period in which the parties are able to agree the amount of the new rent before the necessity for independent determination.
In the normal case three months should suffice and the period should be made to run from the service of a review notice.
If the landlord is not required to serve a notice in order to initiate the review, then no fixed timetable will be necessary.
The right to have an independent determination arises when negotiations between the parties have broken down; but what if the parties have never tried to agree?
A phrase such as "in default of agreement" does not imply that the parties must have tried to agree (Re Essoldo (Bingo) Ltd's Underlease (1971) 23 P & CR 1), and neither does the phrase "in the event of the parties failing to reach agreement" (Wrenbridge Ltd v Harries (Southern Properties) Ltd (1981) 260 EG 1195).
It is suggested that whichever phrase is used, the court would be reluctant to construe it as imposing on the parties a positive obligation to negotiate.
(d) Independent determinationThree questions arise in drafting a provision for determination of the new rent by an independent person.
First, who is to have the power to require such determination?
Secondly, should the determination be made by an expert or by an arbitrator?
Thirdly, should the lease lay down any particular procedure to be followed?
Both parties should have the right to apply for the appointment of the expert or arbitrator, even if the landlord alone has the right to initiate the rent review.
If the lease is silent on the point, either party may apply (United Scientific Holdings v Burnley BC [1978]AC 904 at 960).
Where either party may apply the tenant is not entitled to serve notice making time of the essence of the landlord's right to apply: if he is prejudiced by delay his remedy is to make the application himself (Factory Holdings Group Ltd v Leboff International Ltd [1987]1 EGLR 135).
This minor disadvantage to the tenant does not outweigh the advantage to the tenant in being able to initiate the determination of the rent.
The draftsman should specify the person who is to nominate the expert or arbitrator.
That person is frequently the President of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors who has set up an efficient administrative machinery for such appointments.
If the clause specifies the President as the appointor of the expert or arbitrator, it is thought that he must do so personally.
Some clauses therefore provide that an appointment may be made by a duly authorised deputy, or a person acting on behalf of the President.
If, for some reason the nominated appointor cannot or will not make an appointment, the court is likely to provide alternative machinery for determining the rent (Sudbrook Trading Estate Ltd v Eggleton [1982]3 All ER 1).
Where a clause requires the making of an application to the President of the RICS it is sufficient for the applicant merely to send a letter making the application, even though the application will not be processed (and hence will not come to the attention of the other party) until the requisite fee is paid (Staines Warehousing Co Ltd v Montagu Executor & Trustee Co Ltd [1987]2 EGLR 130).
The tenant's adviser should therefore press for an obligation on the landlord to notify the tenant of any application made by him to the President.
Alternatively the tenant's adviser could amend the timetable by requiring the landlord to apply to the President and pay any requisite fee within the prescribed period.
The appointor is usually required to appoint "an independent surveyor" .
This formula may be unnecessarily restrictive where the new rent is to be determined by an arbitrator (rather than an expert).
For example, if the only issue between the parties is a point of construction of the lease it may be better to have a solicitor or barrister as arbitrator.
This would be possible if the lease provided for the appointment of "an independent person" .
Before deciding whether to provide for determination by expert rather than by arbitration, it is essential to appreciate the differences between them.
An arbitrator is a person who is  appointed to resolve a formulated dispute between the parties.
He will hear evidence and submissions from each party (although these may be written rather than oral) and is bound to make his decision solely on the evidence presented to him.
He has a wide range of powers under the Arbitration Act 1950, including the power to order discovery of documents and attendance of witnesses.
His award may be enforced as if it were a judgment of the court, and there is a limited right of appeal from his award to the High Court on a point of law.
He also has power to make an order as to the costs of the arbitration, and any clause in the lease which provides that a particular party is to pay his own costs (or the costs of the other party) is void (Arbitration Act 1950, s18(3); Windvale Ltd v Darlington Insulation Co Ltd (1983) The Times, 22 December).
In addition, as has been noted, the court has power to extend the time within which an arbitration must be commenced (Arbitration Act 1950, s27).
If the arbitrator dies or is unwilling or incapable of acting a new arbitrator may be appointed under the Arbitration Act 1950, and at least while he is acting within his jurisdiction an arbitrator is immune from liability for negligence (Sirros v Moore [1975]QB 118).
On the other hand, an expert is a person appointed to fix the new rent.
He is not bound to afford the parties an opportunity to tender evidence or submissions; and, even if a right to do so is conferred upon them by the terms of the lease, it is doubtful whether the expert need pay any attention to them.
He acts on his own skill and judgment in reaching his decision, and that decision will be binding on the parties even if it is wrong (Campbell v Edwards [1976]1 All ER 785).
The expert's decision will be binding on the parties even if the error is a legal error and it is clear on the face of the award what the error is (Jones v Sherwood Computer Services [1992]1 WLR 277; Nikko Hotels (UK) v MEPC [1991]2 EGLR 103).
Indeed if a question of law falls within the area of the dispute referred to the expert, it seems that the court has no jurisdiction to consider that question of law, in the absence of specific ad hoc agreement by the parties (Norwich Union Life Insurance Society v P & O Property Holdings [1993]13 EG 108, CA).
This is now to be seen as a major disadvantage in the position of an expert, and if an expert is selected as the appropriate machinery for resolving disputes, questions of law  should be excluded from his remit except with the consent of the parties.
If the expert is negligent he may be sued by either party (Arenson v Casson Beckman Rutley & Co [1977]AC 405).
He has no power to order discovery of documents or the attendance of witnesses or to make any order as to costs (unless such power is expressly conferred on him by the lease); and if he dies or becomes incapable or unwilling to continue, it is doubtful whether another expert could be appointed under the lease.
However, the death or incapacity of experts does not seem to have presented any problem in practice, and in any event the court would not allow a rent review to be frustrated by a breakdown in the machinery.
Which method should the draftsman choose?
In general terms it is suggested that determination by expert is quicker and cheaper than determination by arbitrator.
On the other hand the expert will not have had the benefit of hearing the arguments, and some observers have suggested that expert valuers rarely assess rents from the tenant's point of view.
Where the demised property is of a common type both in character and size, determination by expert is likely to be the better method.
Comparables will be fairly easy to find and the determination will be able to proceed quickly.
In addition the costs of the determination will remain a reasonable proportion of the rental value of the property.
In a time of rapidly changing markets, or where the true market is obscured by confidentiality clauses attached to the terms of transactions, some tenants fear that a concentration on comparable evidence which is capable of proper proof is in itself a distortion of the market.
There is therefore a growing feeling among tenants that, since an expert is not tied to the rules of evidence, his judgment may be a more accurate reflector of the real market.
Of course while this point may work in the tenant's favour in a falling market, it is just as likely to work in the landlord's favour in a rising market.
Where the demised property is unusual either in size or in character, or where it is so valuable that small points have large financial consequences, determination by arbitration may be the better method since there will be an opportunity for full argument.
Arbitration is also the better method where points of law may arise or where extensive discovery might be needed.
If the  determination is to be by an expert, the court has no jurisdiction to consider questions of law arising out of the matters referred to the expert.
If no particular difficulties arise at the time of the rent review the costs of the arbitration need not be great since evidence and submissions can be presented informally.
However, in the case of an arbitration, either party has the right to insist on an oral hearing (Henry Southeran v Norwich Union Life Assurance Society [1992]31 EG 70).
In some cases it may be desirable for the choice of method of determination of the rent to remain flexible.
If so the draftsman should consider giving one of the parties (usually the landlord) the right to choose whether the person to be appointed to determine the new rent should act as expert or arbitrator.
Such a right should be made exercisable by notice given before the earliest date upon which an appointment may be made.
The procedure to be adopted should be left to the discretion of the person conducting the reference.
In the case of an arbitrator, the court has a supervisory jurisdiction over his conduct of the reference.
No such jurisdiction exists in the case of an expert.
However, it is nevertheless suggested that the draftsman is unlikely to be able to provide a satisfactory procedure for future disputes without losing most of the advantages of determination by expert.
For example some leases require the expert to receive submissions or evidence from the parties.
Almost invariably they are written.
It is suggested that it is unsatisfactory to allow the rent to be fixed in reliance on assertions made by the parties which cannot be challenged by cross examination, and where the expert is not to be given an opportunity of seeing and evaluating the quality of the witnesses.
If the parties wish to adduce evidence in support of their cases, the appropriate way of determining the rent is by arbitration.
A formal hearing may be dispensed with if the parties do not wish to avail themselves of their right to have one.
In the absence of consent of all parties, or an express term in the lease, an arbitrator cannot order a dispute referred to arbitration to be heard or determined together with another dispute involving a stranger, even though the two disputes are closely related, and a consolidated hearing would be convenient (Oxford Shipping Co Ltd v Nippon Yusen Kaisha [1984]3 All ER 835).
Where the draftsman can anticipate this problem arising (eg  where the lease in question is a sublease or is one of a parade of indentical shops) he should consider enlarging the powers of the arbitrator.
Example 4:11 Rent review machinery; notice, counternotice reference to arbitration (1) the landlord may serve upon the tenant not earlier than one year before the review date in question a notice ( "a Review Notice" ) calling for a review of the rent (2) if the landlord serves a Review Notice then the rent payable with effect from the review date to which it relates shall be:(a) such sum as may be specified in the Review Notice or (b) the higher of the rent payable immediately before that review date and the Market Rent if (but only if) the tenant so elects by counternotice in writing served on the landlord not later than two months (time being of essence) after the service of a Review Notice (3) if the tenant serves a counternotice the Market Rent shall be determined in default of agreement within two months after the service of the counternotice by arbitration.
Example 4:12 Rent review machinery; no notice; determination by expert (1) if the landlord and the tenant have not agreed the Market rent three months before the relevant review date it shall be determined by an independent surveyor acting as an expert (2) the independent surveyor shall (a) be appointed in default of agreement by the President (b) give the landlord and the tenant an opportunity to make representations to him and to reply to each other 's representations (but shall not be bound by them)(c) have power to determine how the costs of the reference shall be borne (d) publish his decision within two months of his appointment (3) if the independent surveyor dies delays or becomes unwilling or incapable of acting or if for any reason the President thinks fit he may discharge the independent surveyor and appoint another in his place and may repeat this procedure as often as necessary  Example 4:13 Landlord's option to select method of resolving disputes if the landlord and the tenant have not agreed the Market Rent three months before the relevant review date it shall be determined by arbitration or (if the landlord so elects by notice in writing given not later than one month before the relevant review date time being of the essence) by an independent surveyor acting as an expert
Example 4:14 Disputes procedure for inclusion in an underlease
if the landlord and the tenant have not agreed the Market Rent three months before the relevant review date it shall be determined by (1) an independent surveyor acting as an expert appointed in default of agreement by the President or (2) at the election of either party (made not later than the making of an application to the President for an appointment time being of the essence) by the person (if any) appointed to determine the rent payable under the headlease acting in the capacity in which he is appointed thereunder 