

Futures Trading: Customer Categorisation Under the SFA Rules
Charles Abrams
Introduction
The Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) brought its new conduct of business rules (COB Rules) into force in April 1992.
As its name suggests, the SFA regulates both the cash market and derivatives.
The COB Rules accordingly use the same language for both, although there are two special classes of transaction—the contingent liability transaction and the marginal transaction—which particularly relate to futures and other derivatives.
The COB Rules differentiate between dealing with a customer as a counterparty and dealing for him as an agent; this chapter follows that differentiation and also distinguishes between "clients" and "mere" counterparties (with whom there is no client relationship but who the COB Rules treat as a "customer" , as discussed below).
In the futures market, most deals are on-exchange in standard contracts.
However, as explained at page 32 below, dealings on exchanges which are not recognised investment exchanges (RIEs) or designated investment exchanges (DIEs) may in fact be treated as "off-exchange" for the purposes of the COB Rules; moreover, qualifying futures contracts may still be within the money market exemption (see page 24 below) provided that they are not bought or sold, or expressed to be as bought or sold, on an RIE.
The characterisation of futures brokers as "agents" is at first sight inappropriate since most markets now operate on a "principals only" basis where their members are concerned.
Accordingly, where the broker is a member and is required by the exchange's rules to deal only as principal (as on LIFFE), the contract for the client is in effect split in two: one contract is between the broker and the market (another member), and the other—a matching contract—between the broker and the client.
Because the broker deals only as principal, his client would not be able to read through his contract to the market  (and so require its performance) if the broker defaults; this contrasts significantly with the position on the London Stock Exchange.
However, if the broker fills an order left with him by his client or deals on a discretionary basis, he is as a matter of law dealing on both sides of the "client" contract; he is agent for the client, in that he binds the client to the contract, and at the same time he is technically the client's counterparty.
The contract is thus a "dual capacity" transaction in the strict sense and the broker enters into it both as agent for the client and as principal.
Indeed, if the effect of the exchange's rules is only that the member is liable to other members (or the clearing house) as a principal, he may actually be dealing as an agent in any event, and his client may be able to read through the contract to the market.
The broker may, in any event, act only as agent if he is not a member of the exchange at all but deals on the exchange through a member or, indeed, in the case of over-the-counter transactions.
This chapter follows the COB Rules in referring to SFA members as dealing as principal or as agent depending on the circumstances.
It relates to the COB Rules in force as at 2 June 1993.
Scope of the COB Rules
Application of the COB Rules
The COB Rules of the Securities and Futures Authority primarily regulate firms that are members of SFA (firms) only in respect of business involving customers.
A "customer" is a person with or for whom a firm carries on, or merely intends to carry on, "regulated business" or other business carried on in connection with that regulated business; the reference to "other business" does not make someone a customer if he would not otherwise be but seems merely to extend the scope of the activities covered by the COB Rules.
The definition of customer is qualified by certain exemptions spelled out in the COB Rules.
The COB Rules do not define the relevant transactions that make someone a customer.
Consequently a customer is, in general terms, quite simply a client (whether the firm deals for him or with him), subject to the express provisions of the COB Rules and the question of "mere" counterparties (see page 28 below).
Regulated business
 "Regulated business" is defined by the COB Rules to mean either of the following:(1) Investment business carried on from a UK office (of the firm or of an appointed representative); this is the case even if the customer is a non-UK client and even if an account officer goes overseas to meet him; or (2) Investment business carried on from a non-UK office with or for customers in the UK, except where that business would not be treated as carried on in the UK (and so would not require FSA authorisation) if the non-UK office had been a separate person; this exception, in effect, provides the "foreign business carve-out" from the COB Rules for business with UK customers (see page 40 below); certain marketing rules are, however, brought back in (see page 42 below).
 "Investment business" is business that is regulated by the FSA and falls outside the exemptions from authorisation in Pt III of Sched 1 to the FSA (but see below for its extended scope).
Unless an exemption applies, it therefore includes dealing in, arranging transactions in or advising on futures contracts (which term is used in this chapter to include contracts for differences and options on futures), or managing a portfolio including futures contracts.
As a result of the definition of "regulated business" , business from a non-UK office is usually outside the COB Rules, at least in the case of non-private customers.
However, if the customer is in the UK, certain specified marketing and related record-keeping rules will apply (see page 42 below).
In particular, the firm must make a "prescribed disclosure" to private customers in the UK about the fact that all or most of the FSA protections will not in fact apply.
The firm must also make the prescribed disclosure if a non-UK office indicates to a private customer of that office outside the UK that the firm is a member of SFA.
Extended scope of the COB Rules
 "Regulated business" has a specially extended meaning in two respects, so widening the scope of the COB Rules.
First, it normally includes (and therefore the COB Rules regulate) dealings as principal, even if they are technically not investment business because of the exemption for qualifying own account transactions in para 17 of Sched 1 to the FSA.
However, this is not relevant to dealings in futures contracts by SFA members; the exemption (in para 17(4)) only applies if the firm is not authorised under the FSA and, as an SFA member, it will be.
Second, dealings with or for other members of the firm's group will normally be subject to SFA's transaction reporting requirements, even if they are not investment business (because of the group exemptions in para 18 of Sched 1) and even though they are not subject to the general COB Rules; certain compliance rules, for example those relating to personal account dealings, will also normally apply in relation to them.
However, the COB Rules that are applied to these group activities will only apply if they would have been regulated business (and so within the territorial scope of the SFA rules) if they had in fact been investment business.
The money market exemption
If the firm is approved as a listed money market institution by the Bank of England under the exemption in s 43 of the FSA, it will be exempted from the need to be authorised for money market activities to which s 43 and Sched 5 apply.
It would be inappropriate if the COB Rules regulated that exempted business merely because the firm was a member of SFA for other activities.
Accordingly, in the case of a listed institution, the COB Rules do not apply to business falling within the exemption.
In particular, this business includes dealings in futures contracts with a nominal contract value of £500,000 if the qualifying conditions are met.
However, the money market exemption does not apply to:(1) Investment management services (whether discretionary or non-discretionary); or (2) Arguably, advisory services, although the SIB has indicated that it does apply to them; or (3) Transactions on, or expressed to be as on, an RIE.
The activities in (1) and (3) and perhaps (2) above are therefore subject to the COB Rules.
In any event, firms will have to comply with the Bank of England's Grey Paper relating to the wholesale money markets if they deal in them, even if they are not in fact listed institutions, and so they may be subject to two tiers of regulation.
Mere counterparties
It is doubtful whether a mere counterparty should be treated as a customer.
Under the COB Rules, it seems that he is a customer because buying or selling investments is treated as investment business.
However, a mere counterparty surely should not be a customer to whom a firm owes customer obligations such as best execution or disclosure of material interests.
These obligations should be owed only if the firm owes the putative customer fiduciary duties, for example where it sells to a brokerage client back-to-back with its own trade in the market, or advises him; perhaps also if the firm is a market maker or holds itself out as a dealer (since that is providing a service).
This problem is, in practice, not too important because best execution would normally apply to mere counterparties only if they are private customers (which perhaps should be required); this is because other customers can waive it and it does not apply to market counterparties (see page 29 below) at all.
However, it is somewhat unsatisfactory as a matter of principle.
In addition, the suitability requirement may apply and the material interests disclosure rules may have to be complied with; caveat emptor may well have disappeared.
Collective investment schemes as customers
The COB Rules make it clear that where a firm manages a collective investment scheme, such as a unit trust or limited partnership, the customer of its investment management activities is the scheme itself and not the investors.
This would seem self-evident but it has in the past exercised the minds of many lawyers, in relation to the IMRO venture capital rules at least.
It is helpful that SFA spells this out clearly.
In addition to, the customer of the firm's "operator" activities would also seem to be the scheme itself, although this is not expressly stated.
Deemed customers
Certain persons who would not otherwise be customers are treated as customers for the purposes of the COB Rules.
Indirect customers: clients of intermediaries
The COB Rules introduce the concept of an "indirect customer" .
In effect, where a firm's customer is an intermediary dealing on behalf of his own clients, the firm must in principle treat the intermediary's client as its own customer if it knows the client's identity (except where the firm is dealing with a market counterparty, see page 29 below); in certain circumstances, however, the intermediary can be treated as the customer (see below).
The indirect customer rules may apply whether the firm is acting as the customer's broker or as a counterparty.
There are, however, two quite common situations where, although the indirect customer rules look as though they apply, they actually don"t.
First a trustee does not act as an agent and, accordingly, the beneficiaries of a trust that is a customer (or, technically, the trustee of which is a customer) are not indirect customers.
Second, if the intermediary merely signs the customer agreement on behalf of the client or receives notifications on his behalf, and the client is the customer name, the client will be a direct customer in any event.
In general terms an indirect customer is a person for whom the firm's direct customer is known to be acting as intermediary, who is identified to the firm before the transaction and who would be a customer of the firm if dealt with direct.
Client particulars given to the firm after the deal is executed to put in the contract note do not identify the intermediary's client for this purpose; he was unidentified when the deal was done.
Although the Consultation Draft issued before the COB Rules were introduced suggested that a third party client of an SRO member should not be treated as identified even if the firm knew his name and address (if that was all), this suggested exclusion was eventually dropped; accordingly, such knowledge is fatal.
In any event, knowledge within the firm of the identity of the intermediary's client may not identify him if the salesman or perhaps the dealer concerned did not know either that the intermediary was acting as intermediary or the identity of the client; this is a Chinese wall-type question.
SFA has some very important rules as to who a firm should treat as a customer in these circumstances.
In effect, the indirect customer is normally treated as a direct customer instead of the intermediary.
However, the firm and a qualifying intermediary can agree in writing that the intermediary's client is not to be treated as an indirect customer (and therefore not as a customer) or is to be treated as an indirect customer in relation to only some of the firm's obligations.
Similarly, the firm and a qualifying intermediary can agree in writing that only the intermediary is to be the customer (in which case the client is not an indirect customer); in practice, this agreement should be linked with the intermediary's agreement that the intermediary's client is not to be treated as an indirect customer.
It is understood that SFA regards an agreement as in writing for this purpose even if its terms are set out in a terms of business letter accepted merely by conduct (which is especially important where the intermediary is not a private customer).
In these cases, the intermediary  is the customer, not his client.
The ability to "contract out" of the indirect customers rule is, however, restricted to where the intermediary is an authorised or exempted firm (eg members of IMRO or most solicitors or accountants) or is an "overseas person" (see page 31 below).
SFA may in due course also include relevant European institutions (see page 37 below) as qualifying intermediaries.
The clients of an investment manager (such as an IMRO member) are not likely to be indirect customers of the firm on the facts.
This is because the usual practice would be for the investment manager to deal only in its own name account client.
It would normally not name its clients (for commercial if no other reasons) and accordingly they would not be identified; thus they cannot be indirect customers.
However, many IMRO members do name the accounts for whom they want the firm to deal and these accounts can therefore qualify as indirect customers.
In practice it is sometimes the case that IMRO members refuse to agree to be the firm's customer instead of their clients, in these circumstances.
Perhaps they assume that if they are the customer they will be liable for their clients' obligations as principal.
This is certainly not the intention or the effect of the SFA rule.
IMRO has been alerted to this problem and is willing to discuss it with IMRO members.
Indirect customers: application of the COB Rules
The SFA requirements relating to notifications, consents or instructions to or from indirect customers who are treated as the firm's customers (see page 25 above), and customer agreements with them, can be discharged by reference to the intermediary; this, however, does not apply where the intermediary acts for only one indirect customer.
Conversely, and importantly, any contract notes, confirmations, valuation reports and, significantly, risk warnings about futures contracts or other derivatives (or warrants) must be issued to each indirect customer separately.
They can, however, be sent to the intermediary on his behalf; it will be sufficient if the intermediary confirms to the firm that the indirect customer has signed the risk warning.
The firm can rely on the intermediary if it has no reasonable grounds to doubt what he says.
If the intermediary's client is to be treated as the firm's customer and a two-way customer agreement is required for him, it can be entered into with the intermediary (if there is more than one indirect customer), and can cover all the clients for whom he acts.
Even if the intermediary is an ordinary business investor (see page 36  below), the customer agreement will have to be a private customer agreement if the indirect customer route is adopted and any of the intermediary's clients to whom it relates are private.
This may lead firms to introduce different agreements with the same intermediary each covering different classes of indirect customer.
Although the COB Rules provide that no customer agreement is required for an indirect customer as such, the purpose of these provisions is to treat him as a direct customer in the particular circumstances and so that exclusion is irrelevant.
It seems to be directed at the SIB's use of the term "indirect customer" (which applies even where the intermediary is the customer) and not SFA's (which does not).
If, however, the intermediary is the firm's customer and (as would be normal) the intermediary is an ordinary business investor (typically, a member of IMRO or a member of a recognised professional body (an RPB), such as a solicitor or accountant), there is no need for a two-way customer agreement unless, exceptionally, he is a discretionary customer.
Conversely, if the intermediary is a market counterparty (see page 29 below), the intermediary rules are irrelevant even if the client is identified; the intermediary is not a customer and therefore the rules do not apply.
Similarly, if the client would have been a market counterparty if the firm had dealt with him direct, he will not be a customer in any event.
Potential customers
Potential customers are to be treated as actual customers.
Customers of the firm's appointed representatives
The customers of a firm's appointed representative are treated as customers of the firm.
This makes it clear that those customers have a direct customer relationship with the firm itself, and the customer agreement must therefore be entered into by the firm.
It should be remembered that a company can only be the firm's appointed representative if the firm accepts responsibility for the whole of the investment business it carries on on the firm's behalf.
Who are nonetheless not customers?
The COB Rules make it clear that certain categories of client or counterparty are not to be treated as customers; as a result, most  COB rules will not apply.
So far as futures dealing is concerned, the key exclusion is that for market counterparties, although investors in corporate finance transactions can also be excluded (see page 33 below) and trust beneficiaries are in any event not customers (see page 34 below).
Market counterparties: introduction
There are two different classes of market counterparty:(1) A counterparty treated as a market counterparty on a transaction-by-transaction basis; and (2) A person falling in a particular category listed in the COB Rules (such as members of SFA) who is treated as a market counterparty by virtue of his status as such, but (except in the case of SFA members and inter-dealer brokers) only in relation to particular classes of investments.
Because of the complicated nature of this exemption, and the relaxed regime introduced for non-private customers, it would seem advisable in practice to treat all prospective market counterparties as non-private customers unless they are members of SFA.
The transactional test in (1) above is the SIB test and derives from the SIB's core rules, on which the COB Rules are based; it is included in the COB Rules as a result of the definition of market counterparty.
It probably only includes counterparties and not a client for whom the firm acts in a transaction with another firm (eg, an IMRO member who is a client of an SFA broker).
The listed categories test in (2) above is an additional test introduced by SFA with SIB consent; it is quite separate from the SIB test and creates additional classes of market counterparty.
The SFA listed categories test includes advisory clients and clients for whom the firm acts, in addition to counterparties; it excludes many more clients or counterparties from being customers than does the SIB transactional test and is thus very helpful.
Market counterparties: the transactional test
The transactional test of market counterparty relates only to the particular transaction concerned and applies where a person deals with the firm as a principal or as an intermediary for an unidentified client (or, alternatively, an undisclosed intermediary), if he does so in the course of investment business of the same description as the  investment business the firm is carrying on with him.
If the firm does not know whether its counterparty is acting as principal or intermediary, then it is clear that, even if he is acting as intermediary, his client is unidentified.
The same tests will presumably apply (although in reverse) as in the case of indirect customers (see page 26 above).
Although it is unclear, the fact that the putative market counterparty must be dealing in the course of investment business seems to restrict transactional test market counterparties who enter into futures contracts with the firm as principal to persons, such as securities firms or banks, which are authorised under the FSA.
This is because other dealings as principal with the firm may technically not be investment business by the counterparty; because the firm is an authorised person the own account exemption in para 17 of Sched 1 would normally apply.
The Consultation Draft which preceded the issue of the COB Rules explained that in order to carry on investment business of the same description (and so qualify as a market counterparty), the putative market counterparty must carry on an activity in relation to a description of investment which both fall in the same paragraphs of Sched 1 to the FSA as the activity and investments of the firm.
This has subsequently been changed, but suggests the view the SFA might take; it would be logical for it to do so, since a market counterparty of this type is supposed to be someone on the same level as the firm.
It is likely that an investment manager (such as a member of IMRO) who deals as counterparty with a firm for an unidentified client will qualify as a market counterparty; although investment management as such is in a different paragraph in Sched 1 to the FSA (para 14) from dealing as agent or, indeed, principal (para 12), the transactions by an investment manager fall in the same paragraph (para 12).
However, an investment manager (such as an IMRO member) who uses a firm as a broker will not be a market counterparty under this head, and will thus be a customer unless he falls in the listed categories test category of market counterparty; in particular, this means that the best execution rules will apply.
Market counterparties: the listed categories test
The second category of market counterparty consists of persons falling within the list of excluded categories set out in the COB Rules.
It seems that they can be market counterparties even if the firm acts only as their agent and, indeed, even if the firm is acting  for them on a discretionary basis.
However, being on the list of excluded categories is not enough.
It is normally also necessary to check whether the investments themselves qualify for the exemption and to obtain the putative counterparty's consent and this will need detailed compliance procedures.
Provided that the relevant conditions are met (see below), a firm can treat the following as market counterparties:(1) Other members of SFA (in relation to any investments, even if they do not normally deal in them);(2) Trading members of investment exchanges (in relation to investments of the kind traded on the exchange, even if they do not themselves normally deal in them, and related derivatives).
The particular transaction concerned can be off-exchange;(3) Overseas persons who regularly deal off-exchange (in relation only to investments of the actual kind they regularly deal in, and related derivatives).
Overseas persons are overseas (or indeed UK) securities firms (whether brokers, dealers, banks, or investment managers or advisers) who do not have a UK office for investment business (even if they are authorised under the FSA).
If the securities firm is a bank which has a banking branch in the UK, it will nonetheless still qualify as an overseas person if it does no investment business from that branch;(4) Inter-dealer brokers acting as such;(5) Listed money market institutions.
These are included in relation only to limited classes of investments, which, however, cover not only money market investments but also debt investments; it is therefore likely that futures contracts linked to debt securities are included, even if they fall outside the money market exemption (because the transaction is too small or the debt securities have too long a maturity); and (6) Countries, monetary authorities or certain supranational institutions.
They are included only in relation to the same investments as listed institutions.
It is unclear what is meant by investments of the same kind, which is important in relation to both exchange members and overseas persons.
It appears that at most it means falling in the same paragraph of Sched 1.
Accordingly, futures contracts will not be investments of the same kind as debt securities or even contracts for differences, although SFA may perhaps agree that they are of the same kind as  contracts for differences for this purpose; in practice, however, any dealer who normally deals in futures contracts is usually likely to deal in contracts for differences in any event.
The term "off-exchange" , used in relation to overseas persons, is not defined.
However, "on-exchange" is; it means a transaction on, or subject to the rules of, a recognised investment exchange (RIE) or a designated investment exchange (DIE), or a transaction matched and identified as matched with such an exchange transaction (unless prohibited by the exchange).
Off-exchange perhaps means any transaction which is not on-exchange (as defined) and, if so, it includes transactions on an exchange which is not an RIE or DIE; this result would be similar to the money market exemption in s 43 of the FSA, since that includes transactions on any exchange that is not an RIE.
A UK exchange will be an RIE rather than a DIE; overseas exchanges are usually DIEs (which is an SIB rather than an FSA category) but some with dealing facilities in the UK, such as the Chicago Board of Trade and Chicago Mercantile Exchange, are RIEs.
However, a firm may treat a client or counterparty as a market counterparty by virtue of its status as a member of a listed category only if:(1) The investment is of the right kind; this will mean seeking information in advance from overseas persons as to the kinds of investment they regularly deal in and, if necessary, from exchange members as to the kinds of investment dealt in on the exchange;(2) Normally, the firm notifies the client or counterparty in writing in advance that it will be treated as a market counterparty (so that a notification is essential, except as referred to below) and he has not told the firm that he does not want to be treated as a market counterparty in relation to the investments concerned.
Even if he has refused to be a market counterparty in relation to some investments, he can still be a market counterparty in relation to other qualifying investments; and (3) The firm has warned him in its notice that he will not have the benefit of protections afforded to customers.
But there is no need to send a market counterparty notice to another SFA member if both are trading members of the same investment exchange.
Thus one SFA member of LIFFE does not need to send a market counterparty notice to another (even, apparently, to deal in non-LIFFE investments, although that is unclear).
Under the  transitional provisions, it is also unnecessary to send a market counterparty notice to clients or counterparties treated by the firm as market professionals (the predecessor to market counterparties) before April 1992.
If an SFA member which has private customers is itself asked to agree to be a market counterparty of another SFA member, it can agree only if it reasonably believes that its own customers will still be protected.
This was required by the SIB in order to protect customers of smaller firms, which might need to rely on the larger firm with or through whom they are dealing (although it is doubtful that a small securities firm should trade in complicated derivatives at all if it does not have the necessary expertise).
In this context, it should be noted that best execution would not apply, unless one of the SFA members is acting as intermediary for or advises the other and the client firm does not waive it.
Market counterparties: overlap of tests
The limitations discussed at page 32 above apply only to the SFA's listed categories test and do not affect the SIB's transactional test.
Indeed, even if a proposed market counterparty indicates that he does not want to be a market counterparty under the SFA test, he may nonetheless be a market counterparty in relation to the particular transaction concerned under the SIB test.
This should be pointed out in the market counterparty notice.
The notice can in fact be contained in a market counterparty terms of business letter or agreement; this may be used in order to provide for the various commercial protections the firm may want and the material interest disclosures that may still be needed at law as a result of fiduciary obligations even if(exactly because the market counterparty is not a customer) they are not required by the COB Rules.
Corporate finance third parties
In many cases where a firm provides corporate finance services to an issuer of investments, it may make offers to or enter into transactions with prospective investors.
In many of these cases and in other qualifying transactions (such as take-overs), the firm is allowed not to treat the investor as a customer, if it makes it clear that that is the case; SFA has suggested the wording for the disclaimer.
This exemption will not be relevant to most futures dealers and will not be discussed in any greater detail.
Trust beneficiaries
 "Trust beneficiaries" is a specially defined term.
It means beneficiaries of a trust where, exceptionally, the firm is itself the trustee.
The exclusion is therefore highly technical.
The exemption is granted because the beneficiaries are already protected by trust law and therefore do not need to be protected by the COB Rules.
Categories of customer
Private and non-private customers
It is important correctly to classify the category of customer with whom the firm is doing business.
The philosophy of the COB Rules is to deregulate the firm's relationship with non-private customers (see page 35 below) as far as possible; this is the case even if they are discretionary.
However, a customer agreement will normally be needed for discretionary clients even if they are non-private customers.
Best execution will also apply in principle to agency and other fiduciary transactions for non-private customers.
However, they will be able to waive best execution, and indeed can do so even if they are discretionary customers (which is a helpful relaxation and reflects the new spirit of liberalisation); the best practice would be to have this waiver in writing.
In the COB Rules, there are really only two classes of customer: private and non-private.
Private customers are typically individuals and small companies who are not acting in the course of carrying on investment business; non-private customers are, typically, "ordinary business investors" but also include expert private customers who agree to be treated as non-private customers.
Any customer who is not a private customer (as defined) is a non-private customer.
The COB Rules that are expressed to apply to customers apply to both.
There is no category of execution-only customer.
The COB Rules that relate only to advice or the exercise of discretion will just not apply; there is therefore no need to carve-out execution-only customers.
However, the best execution rules will apply and (in the case of contingent liability transactions for an execution-only private customer) so too will the customer agreement rules.
Private customers: individuals and "small business investors" 
Private customers consist of two classes:(1) Individuals.
Unless they agree to be treated as experts (see page 37 below), individuals will always be private customers if they are not acting in the course of carrying on investment business.
These are normally the only customers who can bring an action under s 62 of the FSA for loss resulting from breach of the COB Rules.
The typical individual who is not a private customer because he is carrying on investment business is a "local" on a futures exchange;(2) Small business investors, if they are not acting in the course of carrying on investment business.
These are companies, partnerships, unincorporated associations or trusts which are not large enough to qualify as ordinary business investors on the size test (see page 36 below).
They would include, for example, small charities and pension funds, unless the trustees are themselves ordinary business investors.
A partnership or trust will not be a private customer within (1) above, even if all the partners or trustees are individuals; depending on their size, they are therefore small business investors or ordinary business investors.
Small business investors are, however, sometimes treated as ordinary business investors for other reasons (see pages 37 and 38 below).
Non-private customers: the different categories
Anyone who is not a private customer is a non-private customer.
The main categories of non-private customer are:(1) Ordinary business investors (see page 36 below);(2) Individuals who are acting in the course of carrying on investment business;(3) Expert private customers (whether individuals or small business investors) who have agreed to be treated as non-private customers (see page 37 below);(4) Small business investors who:(a) are acting in the course of carrying on investment business, or (b) the firm reasonably believes are ordinary business investors; or  (c) are trade customers (see page 38 below) in relation to the transaction concerned (who are technically treated as ordinary business investors).
Non-private customers: ordinary business investors
The main category of non-private customer is the ordinary business investor.
If the ordinary business investor is a market counterparty (see page 29 above), he will not be a customer at all.
The various classes of ordinary business investor are:(1) A company that has, or has a holding company or subsidiary that has, net assets or a called up share capital of £5,000,000 (or, if it or a holding company has over 20 members, £500,000); quoted companies and their subsidiaries are therefore almost always ordinary business investors.
The size and number of members tests are separate and can be satisfied by reference to different companies in the group;(2) A partnership or unincorporated association with net assets of at least £5,000,000.
A limited partnership is unlikely to have sufficient net assets to qualify; for technical reasons, it would normally be funded predominantly by partnership loan and so will not qualify unless SFA agrees (like IMRO) that loans owing to partners can be ignored;(3) A trustee of a trust with a portfolio of cash and FSA investments (and so excluding land) of at least £10,000,000;(4) An authorised person, an overseas person (see page 31 above) or a listed money market institution falling outside the above size test categories.
A listed institution apparently qualifies even for transactions outside the money market exemption (eg in shares); and (5) Trade customers (see page 38 below).
The tests in (1),(2) and (3) above are the same as those used in the list of Art 9(3) experts to whom investment advertisements can be issued by a non-authorised person without the approval of an authorised person being required under s 57 of the FSA (under the Financial Services Act 1986 (Investment Advertisements)(Exemptions) Order 1988, as amended).
Investment advertisements sent by the firm only to customers satisfying those tests (or who are themselves authorised under the FSA) are therefore exempt advertisements for the purposes of the COB Rules and normally do not need to comply with the SFA investment advertisement rules.
Advertisements sent to relevant European institutions are also exempt.
Relevant European institutions are banks, building societies or other institutions incorporated in a Member State of the EC outside the UK, which are taking advantage of the European passport granted under the EC's Second Banking Directive.
Technically, they are European institutions carrying on home-regulated investment business in the UK for the purposes of the Banking Co-ordination (Second Council Directive) Regulations 1992 (the Banking Co-ordination Regulations).
Once the European Economic Area arrangements are implemented in any EFTA state, that state is treated as a Member State of the EC for this purpose and banks incorporated in it will also be able to use the passport and will thus also be relevant European institutions.
Advertisements sent to relevant European institutions are exempt because those institutions are treated as Art 9(3) experts in relation to investment advertisements relating to activities falling within their home-regulated business (see para 44 of Sched 10 to the Banking Co-ordination Regulations).
Non-private customers: expert private customers
Expert private customers can elect that they should not be treated as private customers; if they do, they are non-private customers.
However, a private customer can be an expert for this purpose only if:(1) The firm reasonably believes that he has sufficient experience and understanding to waive the private customer protections and can produce evidence of that.
Importantly, the test relates separately to each investment in relation to which the customer is to be treated as an expert, and previous dealings in the investment concerned may not in fact be necessary.
The customer must not only know the protections he is giving up (see (2) below) but must also be aware of the effect of giving them up;(2) The firm has given him a clear written warning of the private customer protections he will lose; all the main protections must be listed (and include, for example, derivatives risk warnings and suitability of advice) and not just those specified by SFA itself in its guidance.
If the firm intends to ask the customer to waive best execution, that should be referred to as well.
This all reflects the general approach of the COB Rules, which rely on full disclosure as a pre-condition of deregulation.
The clearer the disclosure and the description given of the effect of the loss  of protections, the more likely it is that SFA would regard the customer as having sufficient understanding to qualify; and (3) The customer must normally give consent in writing after getting a proper opportunity to consider the warning.
However, a written consent is not needed in the case of a customer outside the UK if the firm reasonably believes that he does not wish to give written consent; the firm must keep a record of its reasons.
The customer must be given the written warning.
There is no need for a warning or consent, however, in the case of the firm's employees who deal through the firm (as is often required for personal account dealings) if they are informed that they will not be treated as private customers.
Expert private customers who are individuals are nonetheless treated as private investors for the purposes of the cold calling rules, and cold calls on them which are permitted by the SIB's 1991 Common Unsolicited Calls Regulations are therefore subject to the SFA's Unsolicited Calls Rules (COB Rules 5–17 and 5–18).
They are also treated as private investors for the purposes of s 62 of the FSA, although the rules whose contravention may allow claims if the contravention causes loss are the non-private customer rules.
Non-private customers: trade customers
The category of trade customer allows a firm to treat a company or partnership which is otherwise a small business investor as an ordinary business investor in relation to any particular transaction if:(1) It has a main business which is not investment business;(2) It enters into the transaction as an integral part of its main business; this term will need to be clarified by SFA in due course;(3) The firm reasonably believes that the customer has sufficient experience and understanding to waive the private customer protections and can produce evidence of that;(4) The firm has given the customer a clear written warning of the main private customer protections that he will lose; the key ones are listed by SFA (and include, for example, derivatives risk warnings and suitability of advice) but if the firm intends to ask the customer to waive best execution that should be referred to as well;(5) The firm notifies the customer in the warning that he can ask to be treated as a private customer; and  (6) The customer has not informed the firm that he wants to be treated as a private customer, either generally or in relation to the particular transaction.
This is a transactional exemption and its scope is not immediately apparent.
It is perhaps intended to help deregulate dealings with corporate treasurers (even for firms that are not listed institutions) and permitted persons.
It would also apply to persons who deal in futures to hedge their trade liabilities (such as manufacturers hedging commodity prices).
Many of these would normally be ordinary business investors on the size test (see page 36 above).
The exemption is limited to integral transactions and does not apply to other investments.
SFA lists certain criteria to be used to judge relevant experience and understanding for the particular transaction.
These include knowledge of risks and financial standing; a know-your-customer exercise is therefore prudent.
The exemption works the opposite way round to the expert customer test (see page 37 above).
The firm can treat the customer as an ordinary business investor even if he does not consent in writing unless he says otherwise; a one-way letter is sufficient.
However, because the customer does not need to state in writing that he wants to be treated as a private customer, it is best to have an express written consent.
The foreign business carve-out
Application of the overseas person exemption
In principle, a non-UK firm needs to be authorised under the FSA for investment business carried on in the UK.
This includes all business carried on from a UK office, even with non-UK customers.
In addition, even if it does not have a UK office, a non-UK firm nonetheless needs to be authorised for investment business carried on from a non-UK office with customers or counterparties in the UK on a services basis unless the FSA's overseas person exemption applies; this indeed also applies to UK firms (see page 43 below).
For this purpose it should be noted that contracts with a UK counterparty may be treated as entered into in the UK, depending on the facts, and the better view is that advice given to an investor in the UK should normally be treated as given in the UK.
Under the overseas person exemption, many types of investment business which are actually carried on in the UK (albeit from a non-UK office), are in effect treated as carried on outside the UK for the  purposes of the FSA (and so do not require authorisation under the FSA) if the firm does not have a UK office from which it carries on investment business and:(1) The firm deals with or through, or arranges transactions with, an FSA-authorised person, such as a UK stockbroker, or an exempted person, such as a listed money market institution, acting within the terms of its exemption (para 26 of Sched 1); this applies even if that person is an affiliate;(2) the firm did not solicit the business in contravention of the FSA's restrictions on the issue of investment advertisements and cold calling (para 27 of Sched 1).
Because of the exemptions provided by the DTI and the SIB respectively, these restrictions in practice normally do not apply to what may be called in general terms business investors, typically persons who are ordinary business investors on the size test (see page 36 above).
The SIB cold calling permissions are very complex and would need to be reviewed in detail.
As a result of these restrictions, the exemption is predominantly used for dealings with business investors.
The exemption in (2) above is very helpful, but it is not comprehensive.
It clearly applies to most dealings and to advisory services; however, it does not cover transactions entered into as intermediary for a non-UK customer, for example, by a non-UK broker or investment manager.
The actual arranging of transactions with a counterparty in the UK is also not covered; however, the better view is that arrangements are only made in the UK if the overseas person physically comes into the UK and, if he does not, the overseas person exemption is, therefore, not needed.
Once a firm becomes a member of SFA, all of its investment business is in principle subject to SFA regulation.
However, it is inappropriate that business from a non-UK office should be regulated if it would not have required authorisation on a stand-alone basis.
This business is therefore defined as falling outside regulated business (see page 23 above) and is exempted from the general COB Rules; the exemption forms part of the foreign business carve-out.
However, certain COB Rules (mainly marketing rules) will still be relevant.
The carve-out also applies, comprehensively this time, to business from a non-UK office with customers outside the UK, unless the firm implicitly indicates to a private customer that the FSA protections apply, in which case a risk warning must be given (see page 41 below).
Business covered by the carve-out
The COB Rules generally regulate not investment business as such but only regulated business (see page 22 above).
Investment business from a non-UK office, however, is not regulated business (and is thus within the foreign business carve-out) if:(1) It is not carried on with or for customers in the UK.
However, the firm will have to make the prescribed disclosure that all or most of the FSA protections do not apply if (even though it does not have to do so) it tells a private customer that it is a member of SFA or is otherwise FSA-authorised; or (2) It is carried on with or for customers in the UK, but the FSA's overseas person exemption would have applied if that non-UK office had been a separate person from the UK office (see page 40 above and also below) or, presumably, is outside the territorial scope of the FSA in any event; or (3) The business is that of an appointed representative of the firm and is not carried on in the UK.
As indicated above, if the firm's activities from the non-UK office do not constitute regulated business, the COB Rules do not normally apply.
However, if the customer is in the UK certain COB rules are specifically applied; this will be the case if the business concerned falls in (2) above.
First, the firm must not indicate that the customer would be a customer of a UK office and, if the customer is a private customer, must give him the prescribed disclosure warning him that all or most of the FSA protections will not apply.
Second, unless an exemption applies, most of the advertising rules, and the record-keeping rules relating to them, will apply, including the detailed disclosure requirements (see page 42 below).
Finally, any other COB rule that expressly indicates that it is not restricted to regulated business will also apply; the firm must therefore comply with those COB Rules that are expressed to apply to investment business (rather than the narrower regulated business).
It should be remembered that, unless it is extended by SFA, the foreign business carve-out only applies to business with customers in the UK if the overseas person exemption would have applied if the non-UK branch had been a separate person; apart from checking that the activities concerned fall within the exemption, the SIB's restrictions on cold calling, therefore, also have to be complied with.
This is because the overseas person exemption from the need for FSA authorisation (and therefore also the foreign business carve-out) does not apply if the investment advertisement restrictions in s 57 of the FSA or the cold calling restrictions in s 56 are contravened.
However, ex hypothesi, the firm cannot contravene s 57 because, as a member of SFA, it is an authorised person (and so the restrictions do not apply).
If, exceptionally, it is a relevant European institution (see page 37 above), it is technically not authorised under the FSA; however, for the purposes of s 57 it is treated as if it was (see para 17 of Sched 9 to the Banking Co-ordination Regulations).
Conversely, the SIB's restrictions on cold calling apply even to SFA members.
But the tougher regime for overseas person calls will not apply to calls on customers in the UK in relation to activities of the firm within its SFA authorisation; this is because the firm is nonetheless an authorised person and the call is therefore not an overseas person call if the subject matter of the call is within its SFA business profile.
Indeed, the firm would normally have a UK office and so would not be an overseas person.
Certain marketing rules still apply
Despite the foreign business carve-out, SFA brings back in certain rules relating to marketing and the related record-keeping requirements (and, in effect, excludes them from the exemption) if the firm carries on investment business with customers in the UK from a non-UK office.
These do not include the restrictions on the issue or approval of direct offer advertisements or advertisements relating to BES schemes, but they do include most of the other advertising rules, for example SFA's rules regulating the procedures for cold calls on private investors (as defined) which are permitted by the SIB's cold calling regulations.
It should be remembered that this is only a qualification on the foreign business carve-out; if the investment business from the non-UK office with customers in the UK falls outside the carve-out, because it actually constitutes regulated business, the general COB Rules will apply in the normal way.
However, the firm does not need to state that it is a member of SFA.
Thus, if it issues an investment advertisement only to business investors, FSA-authorised persons, FSA-exempted persons or relevant European institutions (see page 37 above), the requirement under the COB Rules to apply appropriate expertise and to ensure it is clear and not misleading will not have to apply; but that requirement will apply if the firm indicates that it is a member of the SFA, and s 47 of the FSA (misleading statements) must always be remembered.
Anti-avoidance provisions
The COB Rules contain some sophisticated anti-avoidance provisions, which are intended to prevent firms from routing business offshore in order to take advantage of the foreign business carve-out.
As a result of these anti-avoidance provisions, the foreign business carve-out is excluded, and the general COB Rules apply in relation to the customer concerned, where:(1) A UK office executes a transaction with or for a UK private customer on the instructions of a non-UK office; or (2) A UK office gives investment advice in relation to any transaction to a non-UK office, which the non-UK office passes on to(or uses for the benefit of) a UK private customer if (in either case):(a) the UK office itself transmitted the order to a non-UK office of the firm (even if a different one from that instructing it);(b) the UK office has itself advised the customer in relation to the transaction concerned (and the customer has then directly or indirectly given the order to the non-UK office which deals through the UK office); or (c) the UK office has advised the customer to deal through or seek advice from a non-UK office of the firm (even if the relevant prescribed disclosure was made).
In these anti-avoidance provisions, the relevant test for a "UK customer" is that he is normally resident in the UK and they can therefore apply even if he is physically outside the UK at the relevant time (eg at the non-UK office concerned).
In the application of COB Rules under the foreign business carve-out as such (see page 40 above), the relevant test is whether the customer is physically in the UK.
The SFA's marketing rules will not apply
Except for the need to make the prescribed disclosure (see page 41 above), the retained marketing rules that non-UK offices have to comply with despite the foreign business carve-out apply only where the firm is carrying on investment business in the UK.
This will not be the case, however, if the non-UK office deals only with customers outside the UK, or executes transactions only outside the UK for a customer in the UK unless it gives advice to the customer.
Dealings by non-UK offices of UK firms
Dealings with UK customers: the foreign business carve-out
The foreign business carve-out and the specific marketing and related record-keeping rules relating to the business of non-UK offices of non-UK firms with UK customers (see page 40 above) apply to non-UK offices of UK firms in exactly the same way.
They apply to all firms whether UK or non-UK.
Dealings with non-UK customers exempted
Similarly, the general COB Rules do not apply to business from non-UK offices of UK firms with customers outside the UK.
This is because investment business is not regulated business unless:(1) It is carried on from a UK office; or (2) Where relevant, it is carried on with or for customers in the UK and is within the FSA's territorial scope (see page 39 above).
Requirement for prescribed disclosure
A non-UK office of a UK firm must make the prescribed disclosure that the FSA protections do not apply whenever it tells a non-UK private customer that it is a member of SFA (or, generally, an authorised person) and must do so with equal prominence.
In addition, it must always make the prescribed disclosure when it does business with private customers in the UK falling within the foreign business carve-out (see page 41 above).