

Introduction
1 What is child protection law?
On 14 October 1991 the Children Act 1989 was brought into force.
It introduced a single and unified code of child care law based upon a new concept of parental responsibility.
A new range of private law orders was introduced to provide for the care and upbringing of children.
Clear duties were imposed on local authorities to protect children and provide for their needs in certain circumstances.
New orders were introduced for the assessment and protection of children at risk.
The law relating to care and supervision orders was substantially changed.
This book is concerned with the public law; the ways in which the state may intervene in family life to protect children.
Part One examines the services which local authorities must provide for children in need.
Part Two considers the principles, statutory and otherwise, which govern the investigation of child abuse.
Part Three covers legal procedures to protect children and includes practice and procedure in applications for care and supervision orders, emergency protection orders, child assessment orders and other related matters.
Part Four examines the respective rights, duties and responsibilities of the local authority, parent and child when a child is being looked after by a local authority.
Part Five explains the legal machinery for protecting children looked after outside the family but not by local authorities.
Part Six looks at the machinery for resolving disputes.
The emphasis throughout is on a practical approach concentrating on those areas where legal expertise is most likely to be required.
2 What you need to know and why
The Children Act has broadened the range of proceedings in which the child care lawyer is likely to become involved.
He may be called upon to represent a party to proceedings under Parts II, IV and V of the Act.
If so, he will often need to know what action the local authority has taken before the matter came to court and whether this complied with the requirements of the Act.
It may be appropriate to ask, for example, whether the local authority has fulfilled its obligation to provide services under Part III of the Act or whether a proper investigation has been carried out.
Parents denied local authority services may seek advice on their legal position.
They may require assistance to make representations to the local authority.
It is also becoming more common for families to turn to lawyers during the course of investigation and before legal proceedings are even contemplated.
In these circumstances the child care lawyer must know what services the local authority is obliged to provide and which services are merely discretionary.
He must know when the local authority has a duty to investigate and how that investigation should be conducted.
Once a child is in care, a lawyer may be asked to advise on the respective rights of the parties.
Can the local authority change the child's religion?
Who must consent to essential medical treatment?
Can a parent be denied contact with his child?
To answer these questions and many others the child care lawyer will need a working knowledge of the Children Act and the relevant rules and regulations.
Appendix 1 lists all the statutory instruments made under the Act for easy reference.
The rules and regulations are also referred to extensively in the text where relevant.
The Act has its own language and the child care lawyer will need to be familiar with its terminology.
All the important terms are explained in the text, where relevant, and also listed in the glossary on page xxv.
The Department of Health has published nine separate volumes of guidance on the Children Act.
These are written primarily for social work practitioners and they explain the principles of the Act and associated regulations in the context of good social work practice.
They are essential reading for child care lawyers who wish to represent their clients effectively in court.
It may also be useful on occasions to refer to other Department of Health publications on child protection procedures, patterns in  child placement and the role of the guardian ad litem.
The Lawyers' Library in Appendix 4 gives details of these publications and other useful reading material.
There is inevitably a transition period after the implementation of any major piece of legislation.
It is important to know how the new regime will affect existing orders and pending proceedings.
Appendix 5 contains a short summary of the transitional provisions designed for quick and easy reference.
3 An overview of the Children Act 1989
The child care lawyer needs to know his way around the Children Act.
This is no mean feat as the statute has 108 sections divided into 12 separate parts, together with 15 schedules.
The following summary will tell you very briefly what is in the Act and where to find it, highlighting those provisions which are of particular relevance to this book.
Part I — General principles
This sets out the basic principles upon which courts must decide issues relating to the upbringing of children.
It also introduces the concept of parental responsibility, amends the law of guardianship and makes provision for welfare reports in proceedings under the Act.
The principles in s1 are important as they apply to all legal proceedings under the Act.
Part II — Orders in family proceedings This introduces four new orders known collectively as s8 orders which provide for different aspects of a child's care and upbringing.
A s8 order can control where a child shall live, with whom he shall have contact and other important decisions which affect his welfare.
While these orders are likely to be used in the main to resolve disputes between private individuals, they have a wider function.
Courts may make s8 orders in care proceedings under Part IV of the Act.
Parents, relatives and foster parents may seek a residence order under s8 in order to secure a child's release from care.
A local authority may ask the court to make a specific issue or prohibited steps order under s8 if it is concerned about the welfare of a child who is not in care.
Part III — Local authority support for children and families
This part of the Act imposes a general duty on local authorities to provide a range of services for children in need within their locality.
Sections 17–19 and Sched 2, Part I list the services which authorities must or may provide.
Section 20 imposes a duty on local authorities to provide accommodation for children in certain circumstances.
Sections 22–25 and Sched 2, Part II set out in detail the duties and powers a local authority has in relation to children it is looking after.
Part IV — Care and supervision
This contains the provisions which govern the making of care and supervision orders.
Section 31 sets out the criteria which must be satisfied before the court can make an order.
Section 34 requires local authorities to allow contact with a child in care and gives the court power to make contact orders in certain circumstances.
Section 33 explains the effect of care orders and s35 and Sched 3, Parts I and II set out the duties of a supervisor and the requirements which may be attached to supervision orders.
Section 38 deals with interim orders which may be made in care proceedings.
Section 39 covers discharge and variation of care orders and s40 gives the court power to make orders pending appeal.
Section 36 enables a local education authority to apply for an education supervision order when a child is not being properly educated and Sched 3, Part III explains how such orders operate.
Under s37 a local authority may be directed to investigate a child's circumstances in any family proceedings where it appears to the court that a care or supervision order may be appropriate.
Section 41 imposes a duty on the court to appoint a guardian ad litem in most public law proceedings under the Act.
Section 42 gives the guardian a right of access to social work records.
Part V — Protection of children
This contains the provisions which govern the making of child assessment and emergency protection orders.
Section 43 deals with child assessment orders.
Sections 44, 45 and 48 cover emergency protection orders.
Section 46 gives the police power to remove and accommodate children in an emergency.
Section 47 imposes a duty to investigate on local authorities in certain specified  circumstances.
Sections 49–51 relate to the abduction of children who are in care or subject to emergency orders and the recovery of missing children.
Parts VI, VII and VIII — Children's homes
These parts of the Act govern the provision, conduct and management of the various categories of children's home.
Part VI and Sched 4 apply to community homes, Part VII and Sched 5 to voluntary homes and Part VIII and Sched 6 to privately-run homes.
Part IX — Private arrangements for fostering
Part IX and Sched 8 contain provisions to protect the welfare of privately fostered children.
Part X — Child minding and day care for young children
Part X and Sched 9 contain provisions to protect the welfare of young children who are in day care or looked after by child minders.
Part XI — Secretary of State's supervisory functions and responsibilities
Part XI lists the various duties of the Secretary of State which cover the inspection of children's homes, the funding of research and training, the provision of secure accommodation and the collection and dissemination of information.
The Secretary of State's supervisory role is reinforced by the power to make a default order under s84 where a local authority has failed to comply with any duty imposed under the Act.
Part XII — Miscellaneous and general
This contains provisions governing jurisdiction and procedure, appeals, evidence and legal aid although much of the detail on these matters is contained in secondary legislation, ie statutory orders, rules and regulations made under the Act.
Section 85 contains provisions designed to protect the welfare of children living away from home in long-stay hospitals, residential schools, private nursing homes and independent boarding schools.
Section 100 prohibits the use of the wardship jurisdiction when a child is in care and severely restricts the circumstances in which a local authority may use the jurisdiction.
Section 105 defines the principal terms used in the Act.
Voluntary intervention
Services for children and families
1 Family support
Local authorities have a duty to provide services which will maintain the family unit and enable children to be brought up within it.
The Children Act specifies certain services which every local authority must provide and they are given a power to provide services in other cases.
Before embarking on care proceedings a local authority should always consider whether it could improve the family situation sufficiently by the provision of services on a voluntary basis (Guidance, vol 1, para 3.11).
A local authority which ignores this principle of good practice or fails to comply with its duty to provide services may find it difficult to persuade a court to grant a care or supervision order.
This is because s1(5) of the Children Act precludes the court from making an order unless it considers that this would be better for the child than making no order at all.
The provision of services to the child within the family unit may be an option which the court prefers.
2 Welfare duty
Section 17(1) imposes a general welfare duty on local authorities and obliges them to provide services for a particular group of children identified as children in need.
Thus every local authority has a general duty:(a) to safeguard and promote the welfare of children in need within its area; and (b) so far as is consistent with that duty, to promote the upbringing of such children by their families.
Local authorities must fulfil this duty by providing a range and level of services appropriate to the need within the locality.
These  services may be provided by other individuals or bodies, particularly voluntary organisations, and local authorities may delegate as they see fit (s17(5)).
Certain services must be provided and these are specified in Part III and Sched 2, Part I of the Act.
They fall within three broad categories.
First, there are services to enhance the quality of life of children living at home with their families.
Next, there are preventative services designed to keep children out of court or local authority accommodation.
Finally, there are services to improve life for children who are already living away from home.
Services may be provided to the family generally or to any individual member with a view to safeguarding or promoting the child's welfare (s17(3)).
 "Family" in this context includes any person who has parental responsibility for the child or with whom he is living (s17(10)).
3 Who are children in need?
In most cases a local authority only has a duty to provide services under the Act if a child is in need.
Section 17(10) defines children in need as follows: a child shall be taken to be in need if:(a) he is unlikely to achieve or maintain, or to have the opportunity of achieving or maintaining, a reasonable standard of health or development without the provision for him of services by a local authority under [Part III of the Act];(b) his health or development is likely to be significantly impaired, without the provision for him of such services; or (c) he is disabled.
In this context "development" means physical, intellectual, emotional, social and behavioural development.
 "Health" means physical and mental health (s17(11)).
A child is disabled if he is blind, deaf or dumb or suffers from mental disorder of any kind or is substantially and permanently handicapped by illness, injury or congenital deformity (s17(11)).
The Secretary of State has power to add other specific disabilities to this list.
4 Assessment of need
Paragraphs 2.7 to 2.9 of Volume 2 of The Children Act 1989 Guidance and Regulations explain how local authorities should  carry out an assessment of need.
They are required to act in an open way and to involve the child, those caring for him and other significant people in his life.
The assessment should take into account the child's physical, emotional and educational needs according to his age, sex, religion, culture and language.
Where communication is a problem it is for the local authority to find a way round this.
For example, it may be necessary to employ a sign language interpreter if a parent or child is deaf.
An interpreter may also be necessary where English is not the family's first language.
A local authority may assess a child's needs at the same time as it carries out an assessment required under any other statutory provision.
Dual assessments will be most common where the local authority is assessing a child's special educational needs under the Education Act 1981 or where a child is disabled and the assessment is for the purposes of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1970 or associated legislation.
Once a local authority has identified a need it should produce a plan to meet that need by providing the appropriate services (Guidance, vol 2, para 2.10).
In formulating the plan "it is important to recognise the benefits of developing packages of services appropriate to the assessed needs of individual children and their families, rather than directing them to existing services which may not be appropriate" (para 2.11).
Local authorities may sometimes need to be reminded of this.
The local authority plan should form the basis of an agreement with the parent or person caring for the child and should be reviewed at appropriate intervals.
These are matters of good practice and there is no statutory requirement to make a plan or indeed review it.
Nevertheless, the Guidance suggests that local authorities review service provision plans for children in need in the same way as they are required by regulation to review their plans for children they are looking after (see Chapter 16, 8).
If the same timetable were followed this would mean an initial review within four weeks, a second review within the next three months and subsequent reviews at intervals not exceeding six months.
5 What services must be provided?
Local authorities must provide a range and level of services appropriate to meet the need within their areas.
To do this they must assess the extent to which there are children in need (Sched  2, para 1) and plan appropriately.
The following specific services are mentioned in Part III and Sched 2, Part I of the Children Act.
(a) Day care Every local authority must provide such day care as is appropriate for children in need within their area who are aged five or under and not yet attending school (s18(1)).
This is a general duty to make sure that there are sufficient day care facilities available within the area.
An authority which consistently fails to provide sufficient places is clearly failing in its duty.
Lack of proper planning and provision is likely to be picked up in the review of day care services which local authorities are obliged to conduct every three years (s19).
Any individual or body can make representations as part of the review process and the results of the review must be published.
Day care in this context means any form of care or supervised activity provided for children during the day on a regular basis or otherwise.
It can include nurseries, playgroups, child minding schemes, parent and toddler groups, toy libraries, drop-in centres and playbuses (Guidance, vol 2, paras 3.11–3.17).
An authority can arrange for some or all of these services to be provided by voluntary organisations or the private sector.
When making arrangements, however, local authorities must consider the different racial groups to which the children in need within their area belong (Sched 2, para 11(a)) and this should presumably be reflected in the facilities available.
Securing a day care place is often extremely important if a child in need is to remain within the family.
Good practice requires local authorities to give full consideration to the views of parents and children when deciding whether or not to offer day care services to children in need (Guidance, vol 2, para 3.5).
A local authority may provide day care for children who are not in need but there is no obligation to do so (s18(2)).
(b) Activities for school children Local authorities must provide appropriate care or supervised activities outside school hours and during the school holidays for children in need who are of school age (s18(6)).
This may include out-of-school clubs for children who would otherwise return to an empty home, holiday schemes and special interest activities.
These schemes may be set up in liaison with local education  authorities and school governors.
Local authorities are expected to take account of the child's views when offering such provision and, where possible, to arrange for a child to go to the club or scheme of his choice (Guidance, vol 2, para 3.11).
(c) Family centres Local authorities have a general duty to provide such family centres as they consider appropriate for the children within their area (Sched 2, para 9).
Note that there is a general duty to provide family centres for all children and not just children in need.
A family centre is a place where a child and his parents or those caring for him may go for occupational, social or recreational activities, or for advice, guidance or counselling.
A family centre may also accommodate the child and his family while they receive advice, guidance and counselling.
The Guidance identifies three main types of family centre: the therapeutic centre where skilled workers carry out intensive casework with families; the community centre where local voluntary groups provide a neighbourhood meeting place for particular activities and the self-help centre often run on co-operative lines to provide an informal support service for families (Guidance, vol 2, para 3.20).
The therapeutic centre may be used typically to observe and monitor families which are not functioning well and to teach adequate parenting skills where these are lacking.
It is for a local authority to decide the mix of family centres which is appropriate for the children in its area.
The essential feature of the family centre is that it provides a service to the whole family and not just the child although family centres may also provide other child-centred services such as day care, out-of-school activities and child health clinics. (d) Support at home Local authorities must make appropriate provision for the following services to be available to children in need who are living with their families (Sched 2, para 8):(i) advice, guidance and counselling;(ii) occupational, social, cultural and recreational activities;(iii) home help (including laundry facilities);(iv) transport or assistance with travel expenses to and from the home so that the child may take advantage of any service offered;(v) assistance to enable the child and his family to have a holiday.
(e) Support for children away from home Local authorities have a duty to protect the welfare of any child in need within their area who is living apart from his family but is not being looked after by the authority (Sched 2, para 10).
Where reasonably practicable, the authority must take steps to reunite the child and his family or promote contact between them if in their opinion this would safeguard or promote the child's welfare.
Children may be living apart from their families for a variety of reasons.
Local authorities must be notified of private fostering arrangements and of children accommodated by health or education authorities or living in residential care or nursing homes on a long-stay basis (see Chapter 18).
Once notified the authority has a duty to consider the welfare of such children and to act where necessary to safeguard and promote a child's welfare.
(f) Preventative services Local authorities must take reasonable steps, through the provision of services under Part III of the Act, to prevent children within their area suffering ill-treatment or neglect (Sched 2, para 4(1)).
They must also take steps to reduce the need for children to be brought before a court (whether in care, wardship, or criminal proceedings) or placed in secure accommodation (Sched 2, para 7).
If a local authority believes that a child within its area at any time is likely to suffer harm but the child lives or proposes to live in another area, there is a duty to notify the "home" authority (Sched 2, para 4(2)).
In this way children at risk should not escape notice simply because the family moves away.
(g) Services for the disabled Disabled children fall within the general definition of children in need and must therefore be provided with services under Part III of the Act.
In addition, Sched 2, para 6 specifies that local authorities must provide them with services designed to minimise their disabilities and give them the opportunity to lead lives which are as normal as possible (Sched 2, para 6).
Every local authority must open and maintain a register of disabled children within their area so that appropriate provision can be made (Sched 2, para 2(1)).
The Children Act 1989 Guidance and Regulations, Volume 6 considers in detail the provision of services to disabled children.
(h) Provision of information Local authorities have a duty to publish information about the services they provide and, where appropriate, the services others provide on their behalf.
They must take reasonable steps to ensure that this information is available to those who might benefit (Sched 2, para 1).
This means translating publicity material into the language of any ethnic minorities within the area and also using the appropriate medium to reach those with handicaps.
6 What services may be provided?
(a) Financial assistance Local authorities may provide assistance in kind, or in exceptional circumstances, in cash for the benefit of children in need (s17(6)).
This is a power, not a duty.
Assistance in kind may include the provision of clothing, furniture, nursery equipment or toys.
Assistance may be conditional upon repayment in full or part (s17(7)).
This will depend on the means of the child concerned and each parent.
Repayment cannot be claimed from a person who is in receipt of income support or family credit under the social security scheme (s17(9)).
(b) Alternative accommodation for alleged abusers Where a child is suffering or likely to suffer ill-treatment within the home and the alleged abuser proposes to move from the premises, a local authority may assist him to obtain alternative accommodation (Sched 2, para 5).
Assistance may take the form of an offer of alternative accommodation or a cash payment.
Financial assistance may be conditional upon repayment in full or part unless the recipient is in receipt of income support or family credit under the social security scheme.
As a matter of good practice, local authorities should consider using this power as an alternative to removing the child under an emergency protection order (Guidance, vol 1, para 4.31).
(c) Day care and after-school activities Local authorities may provide day care for under-fives and activities for school-age children even though they are not in need.
7 Charges for services
A local authority may impose a reasonable charge for any of the above services other than the provision of advice, guidance and counselling (s29(1)).
Charges are recoverable summarily as a civil debt (s29(5)).
Where a service is provided for a child under 16, the parents are expected to meet any charge.
Children over the age of 16 and other members of the family provided with a service may be required to pay any charges themselves.
Any person in receipt of income support or family credit is exempt from payment.
Those of insufficient means to pay the full charge may be expected to make a reasonable contribution.
8 Provision of accommodation
It may not always be possible or appropriate to provide services to maintain a child at home.
Local authorities have a duty to accommodate children in certain circumstances and a power to do so in others.
The provision of accommodation by a local authority should be regarded as a service to the family.
An "accommodated" child is not in care and as a general rule he may be removed at any time without prior notice.
Parental responsibility remains with the parents and is not acquired by the local authority.
(a) Children in need Section 20(1) requires every local authority: to provide accommodation for any child in need within their area who appears to them to require accommodation as a result of:(a) there being no person who has parental responsibility for him;(b) his being lost or having been abandoned; or (c) the person who has been caring for him being prevented (whether or not permanently, and for whatever reason) from providing him with suitable accommodation or care.
The duty applies to children up to the age of 18 years.
The term abandoned is not defined in the Act but it will clearly apply where a person caring for a child has left without indicating his intention to return or making arrangements for the child's care in his absence.
The provision of accommodation for a child under s20(1) is not a solution to homelessness and should not be offered to relieve a housing authority of its obligations under the Housing Acts.
Where the real issue is homelessness, a local authority social  services department has the power to request the co-operation of any local housing authority (s27 and see 9 below).
A housing authority is obliged to comply with a request for help in these circumstances if it is compatible with its own statutory duties and obligations and does not unduly prejudice the discharge of its own functions (s27(2)).
Where accommodation is provided for a child ordinarily resident in the area of another local authority, the home authority may take over responsibility for accommodating the child within three months of receiving written notification of the situation (s20(2)).
Until responsibility is transferred the accommodating authority may recover from the home authority any reasonable expenses incurred in accommodating and maintaining the child (s29(7)).
Local authorities are expected to resolve any questions as to a child's ordinary residence by agreement, failing which the Secretary of State will decide (s30(2)).
(b) Adolescents in need There is a separate and additional duty for every local authority "to provide accommodation for any child in need within their area who has reached the age of 16 and whose welfare the authority consider is likely to be seriously prejudiced if they do not provide him with accommodation" (s20(3)).
Although the primary obligation to accommodate young people under this provision falls on social services departments, they may request the assistance of other agencies including the local housing authority (s27(1)).
Young people of 16 or 17 years may be accommodated under this provision against the wishes of their parents.
(c) All children and young persons Local authorities are given a power but not a duty to provide accommodation to a wider group of children and young persons on welfare grounds.
Under s20(4) a local authority may provide accommodation for any child within their area if they consider that this would safeguard and promote the child's welfare (s20(4)).
Accommodation may be offered even if there is a person with parental responsibility able to provide accommodation for the child.
The child does not have to be a child in need as defined in the Act.
This general power to provide accommodation on welfare grounds applies only to children under the age of 18 years.
There  is a specific power in s20(5) to accommodate young people between the ages of 16 and 21 years in any community home which takes children over the age of 16 if a local authority considers that this would safeguard and promote the child's welfare.
Local authorities may wish to use these powers to offer short periods of "respite care" to children in need whose families are otherwise able to accommodate them.
Young people in training or further education may benefit from the provision of accommodation in community homes if they have no permanent home of their own.
Young people previously in care and those estranged from their families may fall into this category.
(d) Duty to consult child Local authorities have a duty to consult a child before providing accommodation under s20.
They must ascertain the child's wishes with regard to the provision of accommodation so far as this is reasonably practicable and consistent with his welfare (s20(6)).
Due consideration must then be given to the child's views having regard to his age and understanding.
(e) Removal from accommodation The provision of accommodation is a service which parents accept on a voluntary basis.
A local authority may not therefore provide accommodation against the wishes of any person with parental responsibility who is willing and able to provide or arrange accommodation for the child himself (s20(7)).
Any person with parental responsibility can remove the child at any time (s20(8)) although parents are expected to make "sensible arrangements…for terminating use of the service that will not mitigate against the child's best interests" (Guidance, vol 2, para 3.28).
Parents may therefore voluntarily agree to give notice before recovering their children.
Arrangements for returning the child should be included in the written agreement which must be made in respect of all children who are looked after by local authorities (see Chapter 16, 4).
There are two situations in which the usual parental rights are restricted.
(1) If there is a residence order in force relating to a child and the "residential parent" agrees to the provision of accommodation, anyone else with parental responsibility is powerless to object and cannot remove the child.
The same applies if a person having care of a child by virtue of an order made by the High Court in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction agrees to the provision of accommodation.
(2) A local authority may accommodate a 16 or 17 year old under s20(3) against parental wishes and those with parental responsibility have no power to remove the child.
A local authority may prevent a child's legitimate removal from accommodation by obtaining an emergency protection order or an interim care order if it is able to satisfy the relevant grounds (see Chapter 9, 7(a) and Chapter 12, 7).
If there is insufficient time to go to court the police may be asked to exercise their powers of protection under s46 of the Act to prevent a child's removal (see Chapter 13, 1).
Where there is insufficient time to do either a local authority may rely on its power under s3(5) of the Act to "do what is reasonable in all the circumstances of the case for the purpose of safeguarding or promoting the child's welfare" .
It could, for example, refuse to hand a child back to a drunk parent but the child's continued detention against parental wishes would have to be authorised by court order as soon as possible.
(f) Status of an accommodated child Section 22 and Sched 2, Part II of the Act set out the duties which local authorities have towards children they are looking after.
Accommodated children (together with children in care) fall within this category.
Much of the detail is contained in regulations and guidance which are discussed in Part Four of this book.
The local authority must formulate a plan for the child after consultation with all those concerned (Guidance, vol 2, para 3.32).
The plan should form the basis of a written agreement with those having parental responsibility for the child.
It should set out:(i) the reasons for, purpose and anticipated length of the child's stay in local authority accommodation;(ii) arrangements for contact;(iii) any delegation of parental responsibility which may be necessary;(iv) arrangements for the child's return.
9 Co-operation between authorities
The duty to provide services for children in need is not confined to the local authority social services department.
In some cases the service required can only be provided by, or with the co-operation of, another department within the same authority or by an external authority.
In these circumstances s27 enables a social services department to request help from any of the following:(a) any local authority;(b) any local education authority;(c) any local housing authority;(d) any health authority.
An authority whose help is requested must comply with the request if it is compatible with its own duties and obligations and does not unduly prejudice the discharge of any of its own functions (s27(2)).
The Secretary of State has power to extend the duty to co-operate to other bodies and individuals.
10 Resolution of disputes
There are two principal areas for dispute in relation to the provision of services.
A parent or person caring for a child may challenge a local authority's refusal to classify the child as "a child in need" .
Where there is no dispute about this there may nevertheless be disagreement as to the nature and level of service to be provided.
The remedies available generally in relation to the provision or non-provision of services and the machinery for resolving disputes where a child is accommodated by a local authority are discussed in Chapter 20.
Investigation of child abuse
Investigation and child protection
1 When must a local authority investigate?
Parents and those caring for children need to know when local authorities have a duty to investigate and what form that investigation must take.
The three distinct situations in which the Children Act imposes a duty on local authorities to investigate are as follows.
(a) Child at risk Under s47 a local authority must investigate the circumstances of any child who lives or is found in its area:(i) if informed that the child is the subject of an emergency protection order or is in police protection; or (ii) it has reasonable cause to suspect that the child is suffering, or is likely to suffer, significant harm (s47(1)).
Emergency protection orders and police protection are discussed in Chapters 12 and 13.
The concept of significant harm is fundamental to the Act and provides a threshold for legal intervention.
Its scope and meaning is discussed at pp96-97.
A local authority obliged to investigate under s47 must make whatever inquiries it considers to be necessary to enable it to decide whether it should take any action to safeguard or promote the child's welfare (s47(1)).
If the local authority has itself obtained an emergency protection order it must make inquiries to ascertain what action it should take next (s47(2)).
All or part of the investigation may be delegated to another agency such as the NSPCC.
The purpose of the investigation is to establish whether the authority should make an application for a court order or exercise any other powers it may have under the Act (s47(3) (a)).
This  refers primarily to the provision of services under Part III of the Act as discussed in Chapter 2.
It must be remembered that the right to apply for an EPO is not limited to local authorities.
If a child subject to an EPO is not living in local authority accommodation, inquiries should establish whether it would be in the child's best interests to be moved (s47(3) (b)).
This will be particularly relevant where an EPO has been granted to an applicant representing another agency such as the NSPCC or to a private individual.
If the child is in police protection the authority should consider whether to ask the police to apply for an EPO on its behalf (s47(3) (c) and see Chapter 13, 1(d)).
(b) Section 37 direction
A local authority must also investigate when directed to do so by a court in the course of family proceedings (s37(1)).
Family proceedings are defined in s8(3) and (4) of the Act and include:(i) proceedings under Parts I, II and IV of the Children Act;(ii) matrimonial, domestic violence and adoption proceedings;(iii) proceedings under the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court in relation to children, including wardship.
A court may make a s37 direction whenever a question arises as to the welfare of a child and it seems that a care or supervision order may be appropriate.
The relevant local authority will be the one in whose area the child is ordinarily resident (s37(5) (a)).
Where the child does not reside in the area of a local authority it will be the authority in whose area any circumstances arose leading to the direction (s37(5) (b)).
Procedure is governed by FPCR, r26 in the magistrates' court and FPR, r4.26 in the High Court and the county court.
A copy of the direction must be served on the local authority and all parties to the proceedings.
In addition the court may direct that the local authority be provided with copies of all or part of the documentary evidence in the case.
The local authority must consider whether:(i) to apply for a care order or a supervision order;(ii) to provide services or assistance for the child or his family; or (iii) to take any other action with respect to the child (s37(2)).
The local authority must complete the investigation and report back to the court within eight weeks unless the court directs  otherwise.
The court can specify a longer or shorter period for investigation.
When making a s37 direction the court can also make an interim care or supervision order (s38(1) (b)).
A first interim order may last up to eight weeks which corresponds with the usual period allowed for investigation under s37 (s38(4)).
If the authority decides to apply for a care or supervision order it will be expected to file an application under s31 within the investigation period.
If it decides not to apply for an order it must inform the court in writing.
The court must be given reasons for the decision, together with details of any service or assistance actually provided or to be provided in the future, or any other action taken or proposed (s37(3)).
Whatever view the court may take it cannot compel a local authority to apply for an order.
When no legal action is to be taken the local authority must consider whether it would be appropriate to review the case at a later stage and, if so, it must fix a review date (s37(6)).
(c) Education cases A local authority may be required to investigate in the following situations.
(i) When directed to do so by a court on the discharge of an education supervision order (Sched 3, para 17(2)).
(ii) When notified by a local education authority that a child is persistently failing to comply with directions given under an education supervision order (Sched 3, para 19(2)).
In both cases investigation is required because the education supervision order has failed to achieve its purpose and the local authority must consider what action it could usefully take to assist the child and his family.
It may be appropriate, for example, to apply for a care or supervision order or to provide services under Part III of the Act.
Education supervision orders are considered in greater detail in Chapter 10.
2 Access to child
Access to the child may become a contentious issue during an investigation.
Section 47 imposes a positive duty on investigating authorities to see the child and to take legal action if access is denied.
Under s47(6) they must take "such steps as are reasonably practicable" to obtain access to the child unless satisfied that they  already have sufficient information (s47(4)).
If access is refused, or information about the child's whereabouts withheld, they must apply for an emergency protection, child assessment, care or supervision order unless satisfied that the child's welfare can be satisfactorily safeguarded without such action (s47(6)).
Unreasonable refusal of access to a child in the course of inquiries is in itself a ground for making an emergency protection order where the applicant has reasonable cause to believe that access is required as a matter of urgency (s44(1) (b) and see p149).
Parents and carers who are being less than co-operative in the course of an investigation should be made aware of this.
An authority may authorise another person to obtain access on its behalf.
For example, arrangements may be made for an NSPCC officer or a health service professional to see the child.
3 Inter-agency co-operation
It has long been recognised that the proper and effective investigation of child abuse requires co-operation between those agencies with child care responsibilities.
A local authority may call upon another agency to provide information or advice in the course of its inquiries.
The Children Act imposes a duty on certain agencies to assist "unless it would be unreasonable in all the circumstances of the case" to expect them to do so (s47(9) (10)).
This applies to any local authority, local education authority, local housing authority and health authority.
The Secretary of State has power to extend the duty to other bodies or individuals.
In certain circumstances an investigating authority is obliged to consult other agencies.
If, for example, there are matters connected with the child's education which require investigation, the local education authority must be consulted (s47(5)).
If it appears that the child is ordinarily resident elsewhere, his "home" authority must be consulted and they may take over the investigation (s47(12)).
While the duty to co-operate is imposed by statute, arrangements for inter-agency co-operation are to be found in government guidance published under the title of Working Together under the Children Act 1989 (HMSO, 1991).
This establishes a framework for agencies to work together to protect children from abuse.
The forum for inter-agency co-operation in each area is the Area Child Protection Committee (ACPC).
Each ACPC  should contain representatives from the local authority social services department, the NSPCC, the local health authority, local family practitioner services, local education services, the police, the probation services and, if there is a major service base in the area, the armed services.
It is the responsibility of the ACPC for each locality to establish local inter-agency guidelines on procedures to be followed in individual cases but these must comply with the standards set in Working Together.
Local guidelines will cover practical matters as follows:(a) How members of the public and employees of agencies represented on the ACPC should refer any concerns they have about individual children.
(b) Arrangements for the police and local authority to carry out joint investigations in appropriate cases.
(c) Facilities for the medical examination of suspected child abuse victims.
(d) Availability and use of video recording facilities for interview purposes.
(e) Ways of encouraging the participation of parents and children in child protection conferences and criteria for their exclusion.
It is also the role of the ACPC to organise a comprehensive case review whenever child abuse is a known or suspected factor in the death of any child in the area.
This includes cases in which the deceased child was accommodated by a local authority in residential accommodation or with foster parents.
4 Action following investigation
The Children Act requires an investigating authority to act upon its findings.
If, as a result of its inquiries under s47, it concludes that certain action should be taken to safeguard or promote a child's welfare it must take that action so far as it is both within its power and reasonably practicable for it to do so (s47(8)).
If it decides not to apply for an emergency protection, child assessment, care or supervision order it must consider whether it would be appropriate to review the case at a later date (s47(7) (a)).
If a review is appropriate a date should be fixed and the need for a further date to be fixed should be considered on each subsequent review (s47(7) (b)).
The Guidance (vol 2, para 4.86) also requires local authorities to consider review, as a matter of good practice, following an unsuccessful application for a court order.
(a) The child protection conference Very often a child protection conference, or case conference as it is often called, will be convened at the culmination of inquiries.
A conference may be convened before a child is actually born if there is sufficient concern about future risk.
The child protection conference is not a creature of statute.
Local guidelines drawn up in accordance with Working Together govern the circumstances in which a conference may be convened and who may attend.
Another government publication The Care of Children Principles and Practice in Regulations and Guidance (HMSO, 1989) sets out 42 fundamental principles of good child care practice and these will clearly be relevant when the conference is considering its recommendations.
All paragraph references in this and the following sections are to Working Together unless otherwise stated.
An initial child protection conference should not be called until there has been a s47 investigation into any incident or allegation of abuse which gives rise to concern.
Working Together, para 5.15.3 states that an initial child protection conference should take place within eight days of referral unless there are special reasons for delay when a maximum of 15 days may elapse.
A child protection review, discussed below, is another type of child protection conference convened to review arrangements for the protection of a child.
It should not be confused with the initial child protection conference.
It is now clearly established as a principle of good practice that parents should be invited to attend case conferences, although they may be excluded from part of the proceedings.
If they are not invited "the reasons for this should be explicit, justified and recorded" (Principles and Practice, principle 12).
Examples given in "Working Together" which may justify exclusion include cases where parents are likely to be disruptive or violent to the child or professional participants (para 6.15).
The fact that a parent is at risk of criminal prosecution for an offence against the child will not justify exclusion.
Parents who cannot attend or have been excluded should be given an opportunity to have their views represented.
They may do this by letter or tape recording, or a social worker or other professional may speak on their behalf  with their agreement (para 6.17).
Children should be encouraged to attend where they have sufficient understanding and are able to express their wishes and feelings and participate in the process (para 6.13).
If it is inappropriate for the child to attend or he does not wish to do so, the conference should be given a clear and up-to-date statement of his views by one of the professionals working with him.
Both parents and children should be encouraged to bring a friend or supporter.
Parents, in particular, may wish to bring a lawyer.
This is permissible although the chair of the conference, usually a senior social worker from the local authority or the NSPCC, must clarify the lawyer's role.
According to Working Together, para 6.18 "legal representation is not appropriate" as the conference is not a tribunal to decide whether abuse has occurred.
Parents, of course, may feel differently.
Those convening conferences should facilitate the attendance of parents and children by:(i) arranging conferences at a time convenient to parents and children as well as the professionals involved;(ii) ensuring that the family are prepared for the conference by the professional worker best known to them;(iii) arranging for them to meet the chair in advance;(iv) ensuring that the family are briefed in advance on the issues to be raised so that they can seek advice and prepare what they have to say;(v) limiting numbers to those who really need to attend (para 6.23).
Other participants will include members of those agencies or groups represented on the ACPC and the local authority solicitor, if legal proceedings are contemplated.
The case conference provides a forum for sharing information and taking advice.
When abuse or potential abuse is confirmed the conference may decide to place a child's name on the child protection register.
It should only do so if satisfied that the child has suffered, or is likely to suffer, significant harm leading to the need for a child protection plan.
Where suffering has occurred there must be "one or more identifiable incidents which can be described as having adversely affected the child" and these may result from acts of commission or omission (para 6.39(i)).
There must also be professional judgement that further incidents are likely.
If registration is to be based on likely rather than actual harm this must be supported by professional judgement, findings  on investigation, or research data (para 6.39(ii)).
There are four main categories of abuse for registration: neglect, physical injury, sexual abuse and emotional abuse.
The conference has no other powers, it can only make recommendations.
It may recommend, for example, that the local authority or the NSPCC commence care proceedings or apply for a child assessment or emergency protection order.
While such a recommendation will obviously carry great weight, the final decision on legal action rests with the local authority as the agency carrying statutory responsibility.
In this context it is important to remember that any individual may seek an emergency protection order.
Another agency may therefore apply for an EPO if it disagrees with the recommendation of the case conference or that recommendation has not been acted upon by the local authority.
Care proceedings can only follow, however, at the instigation of the local authority or the NSPCC. (b) The child protection register Each area covered by a social services authority must have a child protection register to be maintained by the social services department.
In some areas maintenance of the register has been delegated to the NSPCC.
Child protection registers first came into being in the 1970s and owe their existence not to statute but to a series of departmental circulars.
The data to be held on the register is specified in Appendix 4 of Working Together and includes details of any relevant offences committed by any adult members of, or regular visitors to, the child's household.
Once a child's name is placed on the register an inter-agency child protection plan must be formulated and a key worker appointed with responsibility for implementing this plan.
The purpose of registration is to provide a record of all children in the area who are currently the subject of an inter-agency protection plan and to ensure that the plans are formally reviewed.
A child protection review must be held at least once every six months.
Parents and children should be encouraged to attend, as with the initial child protection conference.
A child's name should only be removed from the register when it is agreed unanimously at the review that an inter-agency protection plan is no longer necessary to protect the child.
The possibility of de-registration should be considered at each review.
It may be justified where:(i) the original factors leading to registration no longer apply;(ii) the child and his family have moved to another area (and responsibility for the case has been transferred to another authority);(iii) the child has reached the age of 18 years or married; or (iv) the child has died (para 6.45).
Attempts by parents to challenge case conference decisions through the courts have not met with much success.
In R v London Borough of Harrow, ex pDeal [1989]FCR 729 the Court of Appeal confirmed that judicial review would lie if a decision to place a child's name on the register could be shown to be utterly unreasonable.
However, it was thought that recourse to judicial review was likely to be rare.
In fact, the mother's request to attend the initial case conference had been refused although she was given an opportunity to make written representations.
The court was satisfied that the conference had been conducted in a fair manner and stressed that it was not a judicial process.
In R v East Sussex CC, ex pR [1990]FLR 837 the President of the Family Division supported this view and said that judicial review should only be used in exceptional circumstances to challenge a case conference decision which did not result in a child's removal from home.
An entry on the register is not a finding of fact or confirmation of guilt.
Nevertheless it can have a far-reaching effect on the lives of those identified as known or suspected abusers.
While there is no reason why local authorities should not keep a list of known offenders in the area who have been convicted of offences against children, they should not keep a blacklist of those suspected but not convicted of such offences (R v Norfolk County Council, ex pM [1989]FCR 667).
Extra care must be taken with case records which contain information about suspected rather than convicted abusers and suspects must be informed and given an opportunity to challenge the information and make representations (para 6.54).
5 Access to information
Parents and others may want to know what has been said about them during the course of an investigation and what information has been recorded about the child.
Individuals have a right of access to personal information about themselves held by local authority social services departments.
The procedure for seeking access to information and the circumstances in which it may be  denied are discussed at Chapter 16, 10.
A local authority is not obliged to disclose information which would identify an informant in a child abuse case without that person's consent.
This principle was first upheld by the House of Lords in the case of D v NSPCC [1978]AC 171 and is now recognised within the statutory code.
As a consequence, a parent is unlikely to discover the identity of an informant if that person has requested confidentiality.
A parent may have similar difficulty gaining access to case conference minutes.
In the case of Re S and W (Minors)[1982]12 FLR 151, CA, the Court of Appeal held that these were privileged and refused to order disclosure to a parent in the course of wardship proceedings.
It should be noted, however, that this case was decided when parental attendance at case conferences was rare.
Now that this is no longer the case there can, presumably, be few grounds for refusal to disclose minutes to a parent who attended the full case conference.
Indeed, Working Together, para 6.19 states that minutes should be sent to all present.
Where parents or children were not present for the whole conference they should receive as a minimum "written confirmation of the main findings of the conference, a note of who attended and who was absent and confirmation of the decisions and recommended plan of action" .
Legal intervention
The court system
The magistrates' court, county court and High Court have concurrent jurisdiction in proceedings under the Children Act.
The Children (Allocation of Proceedings) Order 1991 (SI No 1677 (L 21)) specifies the level at which the various applications under the Act must be commenced.
Cases may be transferred up, down and across the court system subject to certain criteria.
Public law proceedings must be commenced in a magistrates' court unless there are already public law proceedings pending in a county court or the High Court or the application is made by a local authority following a s37 direction to investigate made in family proceedings in either court (see Chapter 3, 1(b)).
1 The family proceedings court
At magistrates' level jurisdiction under the Children Act is exercised by the family proceedings court.
The Family Proceedings Courts (Constitution) Rules 1991 (SI No 1405 (L 18)) govern the constitution of the court except in Inner London where separate rules apply.
A family proceedings bench may comprise no more than three justices drawn from the specially trained Family Panel (MCA 1980, s66(1)).
So far as practicable the bench should include a member of each sex.
A family bench may include a stipendiary magistrate in which case he must preside.
In Inner London a metropolitan stipendiary magistrate may sit alone if it is not practicable to constitute a full bench (MCA 1980, s66(2)).
Certain powers of the court may be delegated to a single justice or a justices' clerk.
(a) Powers of a single justice A single justice may exercise the jurisdiction of the family proceedings court:(1) To make the following orders on an ex parte application:(i) a prohibited steps or specific issue order (s10);(ii) an emergency protection order (s44(1));(iii) a warrant for police assistance in the execution of an emergency protection order (s48(9));(iv) a recovery order (s50(1));(v) cancellation of registration or variation of requirement imposed on person providing day care (s75(1));(vi) a warrant for police assistance to search for children or inspect premises in circumstances specified in s102(6). (2) To grant leave to commence proceedings:(i) to a child wishing to apply for the discharge of a parental responsibility order (s4(3) (b));(ii) to a person not otherwise entitled to apply for contact with a child in care (s34(1) (b));(iii) to anyone wishing to apply for a child assessment order, the substitution of supervision order for a care order or the discharge of a care order, supervision order, or education supervision order within six months of a previous application (s91(15));(iv) to anyone wishing to make a further application for a contact order under s34 (contact with a child in care) within six months of refusal of a previous application (s91(17));(v) to a child wishing to apply for discharge of an existing custody or access order under the transitional provisions (Sched 4, para 11(4)).
(3) To make an interim care, supervision or s8 order provided that a previous interim order on the same terms has been made in the proceedings and all parties and the guardian ad litem have endorsed their consent on a written request for the order (FPCR, r28).
(4) To request a welfare report (s7).
(5) To make a s37 direction in family proceedings.
(6) To appoint a guardian ad litem or solicitor for a child (s41).
(7) To vary a direction for contact or examination/assessment in emergency protection proceedings.
(8) To authorise an applicant for an emergency protection order to return a child to a person without parental responsibility where it is safe to do so (s44(11) (b)(iii)).
(9) To authorise an applicant for an emergency protection order to search for another child on the same premises (s48(4)).
(10) To take action under s63(3) of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 to enforce a residence order (s14).
(11) To transfer proceedings to another magistrates' court or to a county court.
(12) As specified in the FPCR, rr3—8, 10–19, 21, 22 or 27 (orders and directions in relation to procedural matters).
The FPCR apply to a single justice exercising any of the above delegated functions as they do to the court and all references to "the court" should be read accordingly (see Chapter 5).
(b) Powers of a justices' clerk Certain functions of the court may be performed by a justices' clerk who may in turn delegate these functions to any clerk of the court authorised for this purpose.
A clerk may:(i) transfer proceedings to another court;(ii) appoint a guardian ad litem or a solicitor for a child;(iii) give, vary or revoke directions for the conduct of proceedings under FPCR, r14;(iv) make repeat interim care, supervision or s8 orders which are unopposed and on the same terms as previous orders;(v) issue a witness summons under s97 of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980;(vi) request a welfare report.
2 The county court care centre
Only specially designated county court care centres have jurisdiction to hear public law cases.
There are 51 care centres in England and Wales.
Each petty sessions area has an allocated care centre to which cases may be transferred if the relevant criteria are met.
The Principal Registry of the Family Division at Somerset House operates as the care centre for London.
In certain circumstances public law proceedings may be commenced in a county court care centre.
Appendix 2 contains a full list of  care centres for each petty sessions area.
Within care centres public law cases may be heard by designated family judges or nominated care judges.
There are 50 designated family judges.
They have full jurisdiction in public and private law matters and also chair the local Family Court Business and Services Committees.
Nominated care judges have the same jurisdiction but do not have as wide an administrative role.
There are 52 nominated care judges.
Certain district judges who have been specially nominated and trained have power to act in public law cases.
Nominated care district judges can:(a) transfer cases up to the High Court following transfer from the family proceedings court;(b) consider "appeals" against a justices' clerk's refusal to transfer a case;(c) make emergency protection orders in proceedings issued in the county court or transferred up from the family proceedings court;(d) give directions and make uncontested public law orders;(e) make some public law orders in contested cases, eg education supervision orders.
Note that appeal lies from the decision of a district judge to the designated family judge or a nominated care judge within the same court.
For procedure see Chapter 7.
The arrangements within the Principal Registry of the Family Division in London differ slightly.
District judges within the Principal Registry have wider jurisdiction and can exercise the powers of a nominated care judge.
An appeal from a district judge in the Principal Registry will therefore lie to a judge of the Family Division of the High Court.
3 The High Court
The Family Division of the High Court has jurisdiction to hear public law cases which have been transferred up the court system or issued at High Court level.
In practice, it is anticipated that only 7 per cent of substantive hearings will take place in the High Court.
Judges of the Family Division will also hear appeals from the family proceedings court in public law cases.
See Chapter 7 on appeals.
4 The Court of Appeal
Appeal lies from a county court care centre to the Court of Appeal (County Courts Act 1984, s77(1); Supreme Court Act 1981, s16).
5 Which court?
(a) Public law proceedings Article 3 of the APO ensures that public law proceedings are commenced in the magistrates' court unless it is appropriate to consolidate with existing proceedings elsewhere.
Thus, the following applications must be made in the family proceedings court:(i) secure accommodation orders (s25);(ii) care and supervision orders (s31);(iii) leave to change name of child in care or remove from United Kingdom (s33(7));(iv) contact with child in care (s34);(v) education supervision orders (s36);(vi) child assessment orders (s43);(vii) emergency protection orders and related applications (ss44, 45, 46(7), 48);(viii) recovery orders (s50);(ix) contribution orders in respect of a child in care (Sched 2, para 23);(x) approval to emigration of a child in care (Sched 2, para 19);(xi) police warrant of assistance (s102).
Note that any of the above applications may be made to a county court care centre or the High Court if there are already public law proceedings pending in that court in relation to the same child (APO, art 3(3)).
Proceedings within paragraphs (ii)(iii)(vi) and (vii) above may also be brought in a county court care centre or the High Court if they arise from a s37 investigation made in the course of family proceedings in either court (APO, art 3(2)).
Applications relating to former wards of court in care should be made to the High Court if the order sought may have the effect of varying or discharging an order or direction made in wardship (In Re C (a Minor), CA (1991), The Times, 16 December and see  5(c) below).
The normal rules apply where applications do not have this effect although there may be a good argument for transferring such cases up to the High Court.
It should be remembered in this context that wards of court placed in care prior to 14 October 1991 ceased to be wards on that date unless proceedings were still pending although any directions given by the wardship court remain effective until varied or discharged.
In pending cases wardship ceases on 14 October 1992 and all applications prior to that date must therefore be made to the High Court whether or not they have the effect of varying an existing order (see Appendix 5).
A wardship case is "pending" for this purpose if the substantive or any ancillary application was genuinely active on 14 October 1991 (In Re C (a Minor), cited above).
(b) Private law proceedings There is a choice of venue for private law applications.
A local authority seeking leave to apply for a prohibited steps or specific issue order may therefore apply in the magistrates' court, the county court or the High Court.
(c) Variation and discharge of orders An application to extend, vary or discharge an existing order must be made to the court which made the original order.
This also applies to an application for any order which would have the effect of varying or discharging an existing order.
Thus, a parent or any other person seeking a residence order in relation to a child in care must apply to the court which made the care order.
This is because the making of a residence order with respect to a child in care discharges an existing care order.
There is an exception to this general principle.
Where a county court which is not a care centre makes an interim care or supervision order with a s37 direction for investigation, any application relating to the interim order must be made to a care centre and not the original county court.
An application under the Children Act which would have the effect of varying or discharging a direction or order made in wardship proceedings before 14 October 1991 should be made to the High Court even though the wardship itself may have ceased on that date under the transitional provisions (In Re C (a Minor), CA (1991), cited above, see also Appendix 5).
6 Transfer of proceedings
Public law cases may be transferred up, down and across the court system where this will avoid delay, facilitate consolidation or allow the case to be heard at an appropriate level.
When considering transfer the court must have regard to the general principle in s1(2) that any delay in determining matters is likely to prejudice the welfare of the child.
The court may therefore refuse to transfer a case, even where the relevant criteria are met, if this would unduly delay the proceedings to the child's detriment.
(a) Transfer to another magistrates' court A magistrates' court must transfer a case to another magistrates' court if this would be in the child's interests:(i) because it will significantly accelerate determination of the proceedings;(ii) because it would be appropriate for the case to be heard with other family proceedings pending in the receiving court; or (iii) for some other reason (APO, art 6).
Transfer may be justified in the child's interests, for example, where it would enable the case to be heard in a court closer to the child's home.
The question of transfer will usually be considered by the clerk immediately after an application is filed.
A case may only be transferred with the consent of the receiving court.
(b) Transfer to the county court A magistrates' court may transfer any public law case (other than proceedings relating to emergency protection orders, contribution orders (see Chapter 16, 5) and certain appeals relating to privately fostered children (see Chapter 18, 6), child minders and day care facilities (see Chapter 19)) to a county court care centre where it is in the child's interests to do so because:(i) the case is exceptionally grave, important or complex;(ii) it is appropriate for the case to be heard with other family proceedings pending in the county court; or (iii) transfer is likely significantly to accelerate the determination of the proceedings (APO, art 7).
Applications under s25 (secure accommodation orders) and s102 (police warrant of assistance) may only be transferred to a  county court to consolidate with other pending family proceedings arising out of the same circumstances (APO, art 7(3)).
Article 7(1) (c) militates against transfer upwards to avoid delay.
It prevents proceedings being transferred for this reason unless it can be shown that no other method, including transfer to another magistrates' court, is appropriate and that delay would seriously prejudice the child's interests.
Cases may be considered exceptionally grave, important or complex, in particular, because:(i) of complicated or conflicting evidence about risks to the child's physical or moral well-being or about other matters relating to the child's welfare;(ii) a large number of parties are involved;(iii) there is a conflict with the law of another jurisdiction;(iv) there is a difficult or novel point of law involved;(v) there is a question of general public interest.
This list is not exhaustive and it is always open to a party seeking transfer to satisfy the court that the case is exceptionally grave, important or complex for other reasons.
A magistrates' court may transfer private law proceedings where in the interests of the child they could be dealt with more appropriately in the county court (APO, art 8).
The court must, however, have regard to the general principle in s1(2) when considering transfer on this ground.
Note that a county court may transfer proceedings back to the magistrates' court at any time before trial if the criteria for transfer are not met or no longer apply but the court must have regard to the child's interests and the need to avoid delay (APO, art 11).
It is possible to appeal against a decision to transfer proceedings back to the family proceedings court (The Children (Allocation of Proceedings)(Appeals) Order 1991 (SI No 1801, art 2)).
Appeal lies to a circuit judge where the decision was made by a district judge and otherwise to a judge of the Family Division.
In London, where orders for transfer are made by district judges of the Principal Registry, appeal lies to a judge of the Family Division.
(c) Procedure for transfer Any party to proceedings may request that a case be transferred to another family proceedings court or to a county court (FPCR, r6).
The court also has power to order transfer of its own  motion and the question should be considered at a very early stage in the proceedings.
Application should be made in writing but there is no specified form.
If the court grants the request it must issue a certificate of transfer in form CHA 64.
If it refuses it must issue a certificate of refusal in form CHA 65.
A copy of the certificate will then be sent to all parties, any guardian ad litem and, where transfer is granted, to the receiving court.
A justices' clerk has power to grant or refuse an application for transfer.
If a request for transfer is refused the applicant can ask the appropriate county court care centre to review the decision and the application may be dealt with by a nominated care district judge.
Procedure is governed by FPR, r4.6.
The applicant must file form CHA 58, together with the certificate of refusal.
Copies must be served personally on all parties to the proceedings.
The request for reconsideration must be filed within two days of receiving the certificate of refusal from the magistrates' court and copy documents must be served on the parties within this time limit.
The other parties then have two days after service to file written representations at court.
The court cannot consider the matter until the fourth day after the application is filed unless the parties consent to earlier consideration.
The court can either grant the application or fix a hearing date, in which case it must give the parties at least one day's notice.
The parties will then have an opportunity to attend the hearing and make representations before the court makes a final decision.
When deciding whether to grant a request for transfer, the court must have regard to the general principle in s1(2) that delay is likely to be prejudicial to the child's welfare and should apply the criteria for transfer in APO, art 7 (see (b) above).
The court has a discretion in the matter and is not obliged to order transfer, even if the relevant criteria are met.
If a case is transferred, any directions in force at the time of transfer will continue to apply unless and until varied by the receiving court (FPCR, r14(11); FPR, r4.14(9)).
(d) Transfer to another county court One care centre may transfer proceedings to another care centre if this would be in the child's interests having regard to the need to avoid delay.
There are no specific criteria for transfer in these circumstances and the parties are given no right to apply.
(e) Transfer to the High Court A county court may transfer proceedings to the High Court if it is appropriate and in the child's interests for the case to be determined there (APO, art 12).
As always, the court must have regard to the need to avoid delay.
Following transfer, any directions in force will continue to apply unless and until varied by the High Court.
Note that there is no power to transfer cases from the magistrates' court direct to the High Court.
When a case is transferred to the county court from the magistrates' court, the county court must immediately consider whether further transfer to the High Court would be appropriate (FPR, r4.6(4)).
The court may order transfer forthwith or invite written representations from the parties or fix a hearing date to consider the matter.
(f) Transfer from the High Court The High Court may transfer proceedings down to a care centre if it is both appropriate and in the child's interests to do so (APO, art 13).
This applies whether proceedings were initiated in the High Court or arrived there by way of transfer from the county court.
As always, the court must have regard to the need to avoid delay when considering transfer.
7 Wrong court
Where proceedings are commenced in the wrong court or transferred in contravention of the APO they are not rendered invalid and it is not possible to appeal against a final order on this basis alone (APO, art 21).
Procedure
Certain procedural rules are common to all applications under the Children Act 1989.
These are discussed in this chapter.
Procedural rules which apply to specific applications or orders are discussed in the relevant chapters.
The Family Proceedings Courts (Children Act 1989) Rules 1991 (SI No 1395 (L 17)) apply in the magistrates' court.
The Family Proceedings Rules 1991 (SI No 1247), as amended by the Family Proceedings (Amendment) Rules 1991 apply in the county court and the High Court.
Where no special provision is made in the 1991 rules for any matter of procedure the usual rules of court apply; the Magistrates' Courts Rules 1981, the County Court Rules 1981 or the Rules of the Supreme Court 1965, as appropriate.
Where the procedural matter in issue does not appear to be covered by any of the statutory provisions the court has an inherent jurisdiction to regulate its own procedure.
In the case of magistrates this was confirmed in Croydon LBC v N and Others [1987]2 FLR 61 although the inherent jurisdiction cannot be exercised to contravene any statutory provision, regulation or rule binding upon the court.
Home Office Circular 48/1991 contains guidance for magistrates on procedural and other matters relating to the Children Act.
In the family proceedings court certain procedural functions may be carried out by a single justice or in certain circumstances a justices' clerk (see Chapter 4, 1).
In the county court district judges nominated to deal with public law cases may carry out many of the procedural functions of the court (see Chapter 4, 2).
1 Application
To commence proceedings an applicant must file at court a written application in the appropriate form with sufficient copies to be served on all respondents (FPCR, r4(1); FPR, r4.4(1)).
There are detailed and relatively simple forms for most applications under the Children Act and these are reproduced in a schedule to both sets of rules (FPCR, Sched 1; FPR, Appendix 3).
Forms may be obtained from the court and from the usual legal stationers.
Solicitors may produce their own forms provided that the content and format is the same.
If no form exists for a particular application, the applicant should simply apply in writing.
If orders are sought for more than one child in the same family, a separate form must be completed for each child.
The court will allocate a file number to the case and endorse a date for a hearing or a directions appointment on the copies for service.
2 Ex parte applications
Where there is an urgent need to protect a child an ex parte application may be made for the following orders:(a) an emergency protection order;(b) a prohibited steps or a specific issue order under s8;(c) a recovery order;(d) a warrant under s48(9) (police assistance in the execution of an EPO).
In the family proceedings court leave must first be obtained from the justices' clerk.
A copy of the relevant application form must be filed when the application is made or as the clerk directs (FPCR, r4(4)).
In the county court or High Court emergency applications may be made by telephone out of court hours and an application form must then be filed at court within 24 hours (FPR, r4.4(4)).
Where the court refuses to make an order on an ex parte application it may direct that the application be made inter partes.
If an emergency protection, prohibited steps or specific issue order is made ex parte the applicant must serve a copy of the application on each respondent within 48 hours.
If there are likely to be any problems in complying with these time limits the court can be asked for an extension (FPCR, r14(2) (b) and 14(6); FPR, r4.14(2) (b) and 4.14(4)).
In the family  proceedings court the justices' clerk has power to vary any time limit imposed by the rules.
3 Application for leave
An applicant is required to obtain the leave of the court before certain applications can be made.
Where this is the case the applicant must file at court:(a) a written request for leave setting out the reasons for the application; and (b) a draft of the application for which leave is sought on the appropriate form, with sufficient copies for service on all respondents (FPCR, r3(1); FPR, r4.3(1)).
The court may grant leave on the written request alone or direct that a date be fixed for hearing in which case notice must be given to the applicant and other persons as directed by the court (FPCR, r3(2); FPR, r4.3(2)).
Any respondent to the proposed application is likely to be given notice of hearing of any request for leave.
A single justice has power to grant leave to bring proceedings in certain cases (see Chapter 4, 1).
If leave is granted, the applicant will not have to file a fresh application for the substantive order sought.
The draft application filed with the request for leave will suffice.
Criteria for granting leave will depend on the nature of the application although the welfare of the child must always be the court's paramount consideration.
Section 10(9) of the Children Act lays down specific criteria which the court must apply when an applicant seeks leave to apply for a s8 order (see pp171-172).
4 Parties
A copy of the application duly endorsed must be served on every respondent to the proceedings.
The rules of court contain a table which lists the various applications which may be made under the Act and specifies who must be named as a respondent (FPCR, Sched 2; FPR, Appendix 3).
This is reproduced in Appendix 3 of this book.
(a) People with parental responsibility Every person whom the applicant believes to have parental responsibility for the child is entitled to respondent status in all proceedings under the Act.
This will include:(i) the mother;(ii) the father if he was married to the mother when the child was born;(iii) the father, if he was not married to the child's mother when the child was born but he has since married her or now has a residence order, a court order which gives him parental responsibility or a formal parental responsibility agreement made with the mother in accordance with s4(2) of the Act;(iv) a guardian of the child which in this context means a testamentary guardian appointed in accordance with s5 of the Act;(v) anyone who holds a custody or residence order relating to the child;(vi) a local authority which has a care order in respect of the child;(vii) anyone who has been granted an emergency protection order;(viii) in the case of an adopted child, the adopters in place of the natural parents.
When advising an unmarried father it is important to note that party status is based on parental responsibility and not paternity.
The unmarried father who has not acquired parental responsibility by court order or formal agreement is, however, entitled to notice of the proceedings in most cases and may apply for party status (see (c) below).
(b) The child The child is entitled to respondent status in:(i) applications under Parts IV and V of the Act (proceedings which relate to care, supervision, contact, child assessment, emergency protection and recovery orders);(ii) applications under Part III of the Act (secure accommodation orders and approval to the emigration of children in care);(iii) any application for a residence order under s8 in relation to a child in care;(iv) any family proceedings in which the court has made a direction for investigation under s37(1) (see Chapter 3, 1(b)) and has either made or is considering whether to make an interim care order.
Note that the child does not have automatic party status when  an application is made for a s8 order except in the circumstances specified in (iii) and (iv) above although he can apply for party status as explained below.
(c) Others Others may be entitled to party status in relation to specific applications.
See Appendix 2 for relevant details and Chapters 9 to 14 on specific orders.
Any person not named as a respondent may seek party status for himself or any other person by filing a written request at court (FPCR, r7(2); FPR, r4.7(2)).
There is no application form; a simple letter setting out the reasons for the application will suffice.
If a person seeking party status has parental responsibility for the child but has not been named as a respondent, the court must grant his request.
Otherwise it may:(i) grant or refuse the request without a hearing or representations;(ii) fix a date for consideration of the request and give notice to the applicant in the proceedings; or (iii) invite all or any of the parties to make written representations before proceeding as in (i) or (ii) above.
There are no fixed criteria governing the granting of party status in these circumstances.
As in all proceedings relating to the upbringing of a child, the paramount consideration for the court must be the welfare of the child.
Applications for party status are likely to come most commonly from those entitled to notice of the proceedings (see 6 below).
The court may join any person as a party to the proceedings of its own volition (FPCR, r7(5) (a); FPR, r4.7(5) (a)).
The guardian ad litem has a duty to inform the court of the identity of any person who wishes to have party status or should be granted it.
(d) Termination of party status Any person may ask the court to order that he or another person cease to be a party to proceedings (FPCR, r7(2); FPR, r4.7(2)).
The request must be in writing.
The court will then fix a date for consideration and serve notice on the applicant.
It may also invite all or any of the parties to make written representations before the hearing.
The court can also remove party status from any party to  the proceedings of its own volition (FPCR, r7(5) (b); FPR, r4.7(5) (b)).
5 Service
The copy application may be served on each respondent personally or delivered or sent by first-class post to his residence or last known residence (FPCR, r8(1); FPR, r4.8(1)).
If a respondent is known to be acting by a solicitor, service may be effected on the solicitor by delivery to his office, by first-class post, by use of a document exchange or by fax.
The minimum period for service varies in relation to different applications.
For the time limits in relation to specific orders see Appendix 3.
Documents served by post are deemed to be served on the second business day after posting; those delivered via a document exchange on the second business day after the day on which they were left for collection.
A business day means any weekday other than Christmas Day, Good Friday or any bank holiday.
The court can waive any requirement to serve a document or direct that service be effected in a particular manner (FPCR, r4(8); FPR, r4.4(8)).
In the family proceedings court this power may be exercised by a justices' clerk.
Special rules apply to service on a child.
Documents must be served on the child's solicitor, or the guardian ad litem where the child does not have a solicitor.
Where there is no solicitor or guardian, documents may be served on the child but only with the leave of the court.
In the family proceedings court leave may be given by a justices' clerk.
If leave is refused a direction must be made dispensing with service or providing for the documents to be served in some other manner.
Where a child is a party to proceedings and required to serve a document, service must be effected by the child's solicitor or by the guardian ad litem where the child has no solicitor.
In the absence of a solicitor or guardian, the court must effect service on the child's behalf.
At or before the first directions appointment or hearing, whichever occurs first, the applicant must file at court a statement on Form CHA 72 confirming that a copy of the application has been served on each respondent (FPCR, r4(7); FPR, r4.4(7)).
The statement must indicate the manner, date, time and place of service and, in the case of postal service, the date, time and place of posting.
6 Others to be notified
Certain other people must be given written notice of proceedings although they are not entitled to party status (FPCR, r4(3); FPR, r4.4(3)).
This includes any local authority which is providing accommodation for a child at the time an application is made and anyone caring for the child when proceedings are commenced.
Details of those entitled to notice are given in the table reproduced in Appendix 3 and discussed where relevant in the chapters on individual orders.
Form CHA 71 should be used to give notice of proceedings to anyone who is not also a respondent.
It will inform the recipient of the date, time and place of the first directions appointment or hearing, as appropriate.
Notice of proceedings should be served on non-parties at the same time as copy applications are served on the respondents.
The same rules as to service apply and the written statement of service to be filed at court must include details as with service on respondents (see 5 above).
Those entitled to notice of proceedings but not party status will not receive a copy of the application.
They may apply for party status as explained in 4 above.
7 Withdrawal of application
Once filed an application can only be withdrawn with the leave of the court (FPCR, r5(1); FPR, r4.5(1)).
Application to withdraw may be made orally to the court if the parties and any guardian ad litem appointed by the court are present.
Otherwise a written request for leave, giving reasons, must be filed at court and served on the parties.
If all parties consent, and the guardian has had an opportunity to make representations, the court may grant the request without a hearing.
In any other case a date must be fixed for hearing and the parties and the guardian ad litem must be given seven days' notice.
In R v Birmingham Juvenile Court, ex pG [1988]3 All ER 726, a case decided under the old law, it was held that a local authority should always consult the guardian ad litem before applying for leave to withdraw an application.
This remains a principle of good practice to be followed today as it is always open to the court to find the case proved on evidence adduced by the guardian despite the local authority's desire to withdraw proceedings.
8 The guardian ad litem (a) Appointment The court has a positive duty to appoint a guardian ad litem in the following proceedings unless satisfied that this is not necessary in order to safeguard the child's interests (s41):(i) application for a care or supervision order;(ii) direction to investigate under s37 when an interim care order has been made or is under consideration;(iii) application for discharge of a care order;(iv) application for variation or discharge of a supervision order;(v) application to extend a supervision order;(vi) application to substitute a supervision order for a care order;(vii) consideration of a residence order for a child in care;(viii) application relating to contact with a child in care;(ix) proceedings relating to emergency protection and child assessment orders;(x) proceedings relating to secure accommodation orders;(xi) application for leave to change the surname of a child in care;(xii) application for leave to remove a child in care from the United Kingdom for a period exceeding one month;(xiii) application for leave to permit the emigration of a child in care;(xiv) appeal against the making or refusal to make, vary or discharge above orders.
It is safe to assume that a guardian will be appointed in most cases and the rules state that the appointment should be made as soon as practicable after the commencement of proceedings (FPCR, r10(1); FPR, r4.10(1)).
In the family proceedings court an appointment may be made by a justices' clerk.
Where a guardian ad litem is not appointed initially there is power to appoint at any subsequent stage in the proceedings.
Early appointment is obviously essential when an emergency protection order is made as the guardian must consider whether to apply for early discharge on the child's behalf.
Duty rotas of guardians, who may be called upon at short notice, have been set up in many areas for this purpose.
In other cases early appointment is clearly desirable so that the guardian can attend the first directions appointment.
The parties must be notified of the decision to appoint, or as  the case may be, not to appoint a guardian.
Where no guardian is appointed initially any party may apply for an appointment to be made at any stage in the proceedings (FPCR, r10(2); FPR, r4.10(2)).
An application may be made without notice to the other parties unless the court directs otherwise.
In the family proceedings court the application may be dealt with by a justices' clerk.
If the application is rejected reasons must be given.
The guardian must be selected from the panel maintained by the local authority for the area which the court serves.
The regulations governing the provision of a guardian ad litem service and the procedure for appointment, case allocation, monitoring and review are considered in detail in Guidance and Regulations, vol 7 (HMSO, 1991).
The court must consider appointing as guardian anyone who has previously acted in this capacity for the child but is not obliged to re-appoint.
There may, for example, be circumstances which make such an appointment undesirable.
A guardian ad litem appointed in emergency protection proceedings will usually continue to act in any care proceedings which follow.
A guardian's appointment should not be affected by transfer of the case to another court unless the receiving court terminates the appointment (Home Office Circular 48/1991, para 50).
A guardian must have no conflict of interest.
The court cannot therefore appoint anyone who is a member, officer or employee of a local authority which is a party to the proceedings.
Neither may it appoint anyone who is or may have been a member, officer or employee of a local authority or voluntary organisation and who has in that capacity been directly concerned with arrangements for the child's care, accommodation or welfare during the five years before the proceedings.
A serving probation officer employed full-time in that capacity cannot act as a guardian ad litem.
A part-time probation officer may do so in his own time provided that he has not previously been concerned with the child and his family in a professional capacity.
The independence of the guardian ad litem is vital and local authorities must not compromise this by imposing restrictions directly or indirectly on the manner in which the guardian carries out his duties.
Thus in R v Cornwall County Council, ex pCornwall and Isles of Scilly GALRO Panel (1991) The Times, 20 November an attempt to limit guardians to a maximum of 65 hours paid work in all but exceptionally complex cases was quashed.
The court may terminate a guardian's appointment at any time but must give its reasons in writing for doing so.
(b) Powers and duties of the guardian ad litem The powers and duties of the guardian ad litem are set out in FPCR, r11 and FPCR, r4.11.
The guardian has a general duty to safeguard the interests of the child (s41(2) (b)).
In fulfilling this role he must bear in mind the principle set out in s1(2) of the Act that delay is likely to prejudice the child's welfare.
He must also have regard to the matters set out in paragraphs (a) to (f) of the checklist in s1(3) (see Chapter 9, 6(b)) as if it were addressed to him and not to the court.
The guardian is given the following specific duties: To appoint a solicitorto represent the child unless a solicitor has already been appointed.
To instruct any solicitorappointed on all matters relevant to the child's interests, including the possibilities for appeal, unless the child wishes to give conflicting instructions and has sufficient understanding to do so.
To advise the childas appropriate having regard to his understanding.
To attend all directions appointments and hearings, unless excused, and to advise the court orally or in writing:(i) whether the child is of sufficient understanding for any purpose including refusal to submit to medical or psychiatric examination or other assessment;(ii) what the child's wishes are in relation to any matter relevant to the proceedings including his own attendance at court;(iii) which is the appropriate forum for the proceedings;(iv) what is the appropriate timing of the proceedings;(v) what options are available to the court, the suitability of each and what order should be made.
To give the court any other informationhe considers it should have and to advise on any other matter as required.
To notify any person, whose involvement in the proceedings is likely to safeguard the child's interests, of their right to seek party status.
To inform the courtof any potential parties notified as above or impossible to contact and anyone who may wish to be granted party status.
To serve and accept serviceof documents on the child's behalf and to explain the contents to the child if he has sufficient understanding.
To investigateas necessary, and in particular:(i) to contactor seek to interview people as appropriate or as the court directs;(ii) to bring to the court's attentionall records and documents inspected which may assist the court in deciding the case;(iii) to obtain professional adviceas appropriate or as the court may direct;(iv) to file at court a written reportat least seven days before the final hearing, unless the court directs otherwise; the court will then distribute copies of the report to the other parties.
The Children Act places great emphasis on the child's right to make decisions where he has sufficient understanding to do so.
The guardian is given the important task of assessing whether this degree of understanding has been achieved.
Where, for example, the child has sufficient understanding to give instructions to his solicitor and these conflict with the instructions of the guardian, the child will prevail.
The guardian must continue to perform his other duties but cannot give instructions to the child's solicitor.
This will also apply where the child intends to represent himself in the proceedings and is capable of doing so.
In these circumstances the guardian may, with the leave of the court, have separate legal representation but cannot be granted legal aid for this purpose (FPCR, r11(3); FPR, r4.11(3)).
Any legal fees must be met by the panel from which the guardian is drawn and the cost will ultimately fall upon the local authorities which fund the panel.
Guardians will have to seek approval from the panel before instructing a solicitor in this situation.
The Department of Health publishes a Manual of Practice for  Guardians ad Litem and Reporting Officers (HMSO, 1991).
There is also a Code of Practice and Ethics available from the National Association of Guardians ad Litem and Reporting Officers (see Appendix 6 for address).
Lawyers representing children and other parties may on occasion find it helpful to refer to these publications.
(c) Access to records One of the guardian's most important functions is to investigate the case and he is given a right of access to social work records compiled or held by the local authority and the NSPCC (s42).
This right extends to records directly connected with the application and other social work records which relate to the child including records kept under the regulations which govern foster placements and community homes.
The guardian also has a right to see and copy case records and registers maintained by voluntary organisations and those responsible for registered children's homes (The Arrangements for Placement of Children (General) Regulations 1991, reg 11; Children's Homes Regulations 1991, reg 16; The Foster Placement (Children) Regulations 1991, reg 14(4)).
The guardian may examine and take copies of the records at all reasonable times.
Any copy taken under s42(1) is admissible as evidence of any matter referred to in the guardian's report or in evidence given by him (s42(2)).
If the guardian believes that it would assist the court to see all or any of the records or documents he has inspected he must notify the court (FPCR, r11(9) (b); FPR, r4.11(9) (b)).
It may then direct that the records or documents be disclosed to other parties to the proceedings.
A direction may be given by a justices' clerk.
There may be circumstances in which a local authority or the NSPCC objects to disclosure of certain documents to parties other than the guardian ad litem.
It may be claimed that the documents are privileged on public interest grounds.
The question of privilege and social work records is considered further at Chapter 6, 6.
In this context it is also relevant to note that the rules of court expressly protect the confidentiality of all documents held by the court and limit their circulation to the parties, their legal representatives, the guardian ad litem or welfare officer and the Legal Aid Board (FPCR, r23(1); FPR, r4.23(1)).
9 Role of the court welfare officer
A guardian ad litem cannot generally be appointed in private law proceedings even if they involve a local authority.
The only exceptions are cases in which the court:(a) is considering whether to make a residence order in respect of a child in care (s41(6) (e)); or (b) has given a direction for investigation under s37 and has made or is considering whether to make an interim care order (s41(6) (b)).
Private law proceedings are in the main the province of the court welfare officer although there is power to request a report from a welfare officer in any proceedings under the Children Act (s7).
Such a request would be unusual in public law applications as it would duplicate the role of the guardian ad litem.
Where a public law application is consolidated with private law proceedings, however, a court welfare officer may already be involved.
While the rules do not prevent this, Home Officer Circular 48/1991, para 58 makes it clear that such an arrangement involves unnecessary duplication and should only be allowed in exceptional circumstances.
In most cases the court would be expected to terminate the welfare officer's involvement as the guardian has a duty to consider and report on all the options including the making of private law orders.
10 Role of the Official Solicitor
Where public law cases are to be heard in the High Court the Official Solicitor may be appointed to act as guardian ad litem and will then have all the usual powers and duties of a guardian (s41(8)).
The Official Solicitor should only be appointed if the child does not have a guardian ad litem and there are exceptional circumstances which make this desirable in the interests of the child's welfare (Lord Chancellor's Direction, 7 October 1991).
The following factors should be taken into account:(a) any foreign element in the case which would be likely to require the guardian ad litem to make inquiries, or take other action, outside the jurisdiction of the court;(b) the likely burden on the guardian where he has to represent several children in the proceedings;(c) the existence of proceedings relating to the child in any  other Division of the High Court in which the Official Solicitor is representing the child; and (d) any other relevant circumstances.
In the case of Re C (a Minor)(1991) The Times, 18 November it was stated to be advisable, for example, for the Official Solicitor to continue to act as guardian in public law proceedings relating to a former ward of court where these are transferred up to the High Court.
The Official Solicitor is available to give advice to guardians ad litem involved in High Court proceedings and may be asked by the court to instruct counsel to appear as amicus curiae in any proceedings under the Act which give rise to an issue of general public importance.
Note that the Official Solicitor will not act in any capacity in the magistrates' court.
11 Appointment of a solicitor
In the majority of cases the guardian ad litem will appoint a solicitor to represent the child.
The solicitor should be a member of the Law Society's Children Panel.
The court may appoint a solicitor for the child if no guardian has been appointed (s41(3) (4)(a)).
It also has a residual power to make an appointment if the child has sufficient understanding to give instructions himself and wishes to do so or if it considers that it would be in the child's best interests to be legally represented (s41(3) (4)(a) and (b)).
It is possible therefore for the court to appoint a solicitor even though a guardian has been appointed.
This power may be used, for example, where there is likely to be a delay in allocating the case to a named guardian on the panel or where the guardian is being dilatory in appointing a solicitor.
A child with sufficient understanding to give instructions may select his own solicitor.
If he does so there should be no need for the court to exercise its power of appointment under s41(3).
Parents should not instruct a solicitor to represent the child.
They are entitled to legal representation on their own behalf and any solicitor they appoint will represent their interests in the proceedings.
The rules clarify the solicitor's role (FPCR, r12; FPR, r4.12).
Where a guardian ad litem has been appointed the solicitor must take instructions from the guardian.
If the child has sufficient understanding to give instructions and these conflict with those of  the guardian, the solicitor must accept instructions from the child.
In these circumstances the solicitor must decide whether the child has a sufficient degree of understanding but must take into account the guardian's views on the subject.
Lawyers are not particularly well trained to ascertain a child's capacity to understand and this may pose problems.
It is a matter of fact in each case whether a child has sufficient understanding to make certain decisions or take certain actions.
This was made clear by the House of Lords in the landmark case of Gillick v West Norfolk and Wisbech Area Health Authority [1986]AC 112.
Age is relevant but by no means conclusive evidence of capacity.
While many older children will be able to understand the proceedings and give coherent instructions, others may not because their capacity to understand is hampered by permanent or temporary disability.
Where a child's capacity to understand fluctuates his overall competence must be suspect.
This was the position In Re R (a Minor)(Wardship: Medical Treatment)(1991) The Times, 31 July.
A mentally disturbed 15 year old was fully capable of understanding the implications of psychiatric treatment on her "good" days but her mental condition rendered her totally incapable at other times.
The Court of Appeal decided that no child could be considered competent in that situation.
Lawyers may find it helpful to employ communication techniques more commonly used by other child care professionals to ascertain a child's degree of understanding.
See Appendix 4 for details of a guide to the use of pictures in interviews with children.
Where no guardian has been appointed and the child is unable to give instructions the solicitor must act "in furtherance of the child's interests" (FPCR, r12(1) (c); FPR, r4.12(1) (c)).
In practice this will place a considerable burden on the solicitor and it is likely that his first step in such circumstances will be to apply to the court for the appointment of a guardian.
In R v Plymouth Juvenile Court, ex pF and F [1987]1 FLR 169, a case decided under the old law, the court recognised that a solicitor would find it difficult to carry out the necessary close investigation of the facts without the aid of a guardian ad litem.
This is no less true today.
The child's solicitor must serve and accept service of documents on the child's behalf where there is no guardian.
If the child has the capacity to understand what is in the documents this must be explained to him.
The child may apply to the court for his solicitor's appointment to be terminated.
In these circumstances the solicitor and the guardian ad litem should be given an opportunity to make representations.
Where the court has appointed a solicitor the guardian ad litem may apply for termination of his appointment.
In this case the solicitor and the child, if he is of sufficient understanding, must have an opportunity to make representations.
Solicitors owe a duty of confidentiality to their clients.
This may pose particular problems in child abuse cases and The Law Society's Guide on Confidentiality and Privilege — Child Abuse and Abduction (published in the Law Society Professional Standards Bulletin No 5) offers guidance to the profession.
It makes it clear that solicitors may only breach the duty of confidentiality they owe to clients, whether adult or child, in exceptional circumstances.
If, for example, a client discloses to a solicitor, in confidence, the fact that a child is being abused by another person, this information can only be passed on if the public interest in protecting children from serious harm outweighs the public interest in maintaining confidentiality between solicitor and client.
Where the disclosure is made in confidence by a child victim to his solicitor, the solicitor's entitlement to breach his duty of confidentiality depends on the child's degree of maturity.
If the child has the capacity to make an informed decision, the solicitor should not divulge the information without his consent unless he knows or suspects that younger children are being abused or the child is in fear of his life or serious injury.
If the child is immature, the solicitor must decide whether disclosure without consent is justified on public interest grounds.
Whatever the circumstances, a solicitor should always consider whether a child can be protected in any other way before confidentiality is breached.
12 Directions
The court is likely to fix a directions appointment in all cases but it is not obliged to do so.
The directions appointment is a form of preliminary hearing before a single justice or clerk in the family proceedings court and a district judge in the county court.
It provides an opportunity to resolve important practical issues relating to the conduct of the case.
Particular matters to be addressed by directions are:(a) the timetabling of the case;(b) the need to vary any time limits imposed by the rules;(c) the attendance of the child;(d) the appointment of a guardian ad litem;(e) the appointment of a solicitor;(f) the service of documents;(g) the submission of evidence including expert reports;(h) the preparation of welfare reports;(i) the transfer of proceedings;(j) consolidation with other proceedings.
In the family proceedings court the clerk must consider the need to give directions on these matters on receipt of an application.
In most cases a date will be given for a directions appointment and this will be endorsed on the copy applications for service on the respondents.
Very often a guardian ad litem will be appointed before the directions appointment so that he may attend.
All parties given notice of the appointment must attend unless the court or justices' clerk directs otherwise (FPCR, r16(1); FPR, r4.16(1)).
Attendance by legal representative will suffice for this purpose but that person must be conversant with the case and have full authority to act (Home Office Circular 48/1991, para 62).
Any party, including the child, may be excluded from a directions hearing if they are legally represented and their absence is desirable in the child's interests in view of the matters to be discussed (FPCR, r16(2); FPR, r4.16(2)).
An absent child may be represented by the guardian ad litem or a solicitor.
The court may proceed with a directions appointment in the absence of either the applicant or one or more of the respondents (FPCR, r16(3) and 16(6); FPR, r4.16(3) and 16(5)).
Where neither attend despite being given notice of the appointment, the court may refuse to make directions.
The court may give directions or vary or revoke an existing direction at any stage in the proceedings provided that the parties are given notice and an opportunity to attend and be heard or to make written representations.
Any party, including the guardian ad litem, may apply in writing for specific directions or for an existing direction to be varied or revoked.
The court will then fix a directions appointment giving at least two days' notice to the parties.
In urgent cases an application for directions may be made orally and ex parte with the leave of the court or a justices' clerk.
Where all parties consent, the court may make, vary or revoke directions without  the need for attendance at court.
In this case a consent application should be filed in writing and signed by all parties.
In the family proceedings court a justices' clerk or a single justice may make, vary or revoke directions and may refer any matter to the full court for consideration.
The court may then give appropriate directions (FPCR, r14(3)).
Time limits imposed in directions must be strictly adhered to and cannot be extended simply by agreement between the parties, or more usually their legal representatives.
An application to vary the direction must be made as above.
Where a party seeks to extend a time limit imposed in the rules, he must apply for directions as above (FPCR, r15(4); FPR, r4.15(1)).
In some cases it may be necessary to apply for time limits to be abridged.
An applicant may, for example, find it impossible to give a respondent sufficient notice of an application as specified in the rules.
In these circumstances, the court has the power to abridge the time for service.
Note that where directions or rules of court require any action to be taken within a period of seven days or less, only business days need be taken into account.
Saturdays, Sundays, Good Friday, Christmas Day and any bank holiday may be excluded from any computation of time (FPCR, r12(2); FPR, r1.5(4)).
Where the time fixed for filing any document at court expires on a day when the court office is closed, the document may be filed on the next working day (FPCR, r15(3); FPR, r1.5. (5)).
13 Welfare reports
The court may ask a court welfare officer or a local authority to provide a report on particular matters relating to a child's welfare (s7).
This is additional to the report the guardian ad litem is obliged to prepare although it would be unusual to request a report from a court welfare officer where a guardian is already involved.
In the family proceedings court a single justice or a clerk may request a report under s7.
A local authority may be asked to provide a report from one of its own officers or to arrange for another person to provide a report as appropriate.
Where another agency has the information required by the court, for example, it will obviously be more sensible for that agency to prepare the report.
14 The hearing
(a) Attendance of parties The rules do not require the parties to attend the final hearing of an application although the guardian ad litem is required to attend all hearings unless excused.
If the applicant does not attend, however, the court is likely to dismiss the application although it may proceed in his absence if sufficient evidence has been received on a previous occasion (FPCR, r16(5); FPR, r4.16(5)).
If neither the applicant nor any respondent attends, the court may refuse the application and is likely to do so.
The court can proceed in the absence of any respondent but should not do so unless satisfied that the respondent has received reasonable notice of the hearing or that the circumstances justify proceeding in his absence (FPCR, r16(3) and (4); FPR, r4.16(3) and (4)).
Any party who is legally represented may be excluded from all or any part of the proceedings if the court considers this to be in the child's interests having regard to the matters to be discussed or evidence likely to be given (FPCR, r16(2); FPR, r4.16(2)).
(b) Attendance of child In proceedings under Parts IV and V of the Act the court may direct that the child attend any interim or final hearing (s95(1)).
The guardian ad litem is required to ascertain the child's wishes on attendance and to convey these to the court.
This should then be considered at the directions stage.
In addition to making an order for the child's attendance the court may order any person who is in a position to do so to bring the child to court (s95(5)).
Where there is reasonable cause to believe that a person has information about the child's whereabouts he may be ordered to disclose it (s95(6)).
If an order for the child's attendance is not complied with or the court has reasonable cause to believe that this will be the case, it may seek police assistance.
Under s95(4) a police constable can be authorised to take charge of the child and bring him to court and to enter and search any named premises if he has reasonable cause to believe that the child may be found there (s95(4)).
Identical powers may be given to any other named individual including a social worker although it is likely that police support will be most commonly enlisted.
Where the child's attendance is not expressly ordered it is a matter for the child himself to decide where he has sufficient  understanding to do so.
The court may exclude the child from all or any part of the proceedings if it considers this to be in his interests having regard to matters to be discussed or evidence likely to be given.
This power may be invoked where it would be distressing for the child to sit through certain testimony.
(c) Attendance of witnesses A witness can be compelled to attend the hearing and produce specified documents by issue of a witness summons.
Before issuing such a summons the court must be satisfied that the witness may be able to give material evidence or that any document he is required to produce is material to the proceedings.
A witness summons should not be issued to compel the attendance of a child witness where this would be oppressive or damaging to the child's welfare to an extent which would outweigh the legitimate interest of any other party to the proceedings (R v Birmingham CC, ex pP [1991]1 WLR 221).
A witness summons should be served personally and the witness offered a reasonable sum of money to cover his travel expenses.
In the family proceedings court a summons may be issued by a single justice or a justices' clerk (FPCR, r33 and MCA 1980, s97).
A warrant may be issued for the arrest of any witness who fails to answer a witness summons provided the court is satisfied on oath that:(i) he is a material witness;(ii) he has been served with the summons;(iii) conduct money has been paid or tendered; and (iv) there is no just cause for failure to attend (MCA 1980, s97(3)).
A warrant may be issued at first instance if the court is satisfied by evidence on oath that a summons is unlikely to secure the attendance of a reluctant witness (MCA 1980, s97(2)).
A witness in the family proceedings court who refuses to give evidence or produce any document once he gets to court may be committed to prison for a term not exceeding one month or fined up to £1,000 or both (MCA, s97(4)).
(d) Privacy All hearings in the county court or High Court will be in chambers unless the court directs otherwise (FPR, r4.16(7)).
The press are not normally allowed to be present during chambers applications.
In the family proceedings court s69(1) of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 stipulates that only the following may be present:(i) officers of the court;(ii) the parties, their solicitors and counsel, witnesses and others directly concerned in the case;(iii) representatives of the press;(iv) any person given permission by the court, eg trainee social workers, researchers etc.
There are strict limitations on the reporting of proceedings and the press may be excluded altogether if the court considers it expedient in the interests of the child (FPCR, r16(7)).
Reports in the press or on radio or television must not reveal the name or address of the child, his school or any other information which is intended or likely to identify him (s97(2)).
Publication in contravention of this provision is an offence punishable on summary conviction with a fine not exceeding £1,000.
It is a defence for the accused to prove that he did not know, and had no reason to suspect, that the published material was intended or likely to identify the child (s97(3)).
The court or the Secretary of State may waive reporting restrictions in individual cases for the benefit of the child.
If the child were missing, for example, publicity in the press and broadcasting media could assist in his recovery.
(e) Order of evidence The court may give directions as to order of evidence and speeches (FPCR, r21(2); FPR, r4.21(1)).
In the absence of any express directions the parties are expected to adduce their evidence in the following order (FPCR, r21(3); FPR, r4.21(2)):(i) the applicant;(ii) any party with parental responsibility;(iii) other respondents;(iv) the guardian ad litem;(v) the child if there is no guardian ad litem (or he is conducting his own case or giving instructions to a solicitor on his own behalf).
In practice this order will also be followed for the purposes of cross-examination and closing speeches unless the court directs otherwise.
The applicant will usually address the court before calling any evidence.
The opening speech should set out the relevant facts, summarise the evidence to be called and remind the court of the  statutory criteria to be met.
The court should have read written statements of the evidence and any expert reports before the hearing (FPCR, r21(1); FPR, r4.21(1)).
In a final hearing it will also have seen the guardian ad litem 's report.
The applicant should remember this and avoid unnecessary repetition and detail.
After opening the applicant should call his witnesses and take them through their evidence-in-chief (but see Chapter 6, 7 on the use of written statements).
They may then be cross-examined by the respondents.
Any respondent may make a submission of no case to answer at the conclusion of the applicant's evidence.
If the submission is unsuccessful the person making it cannot then give or call any further evidence.
For this reason alone it is not usually advantageous to make a submission in child protection cases.
It is well established that the court will only exercise its power to dismiss a case at this stage in exceptional circumstances.
It must be shown, for example, that an applicant has no case in law or that his evidence cannot be believed (R v Chertsey Justices, ex pE [1987]2 FLR 415).
Most courts are likely to heed the advice given by the Court of Appeal in M v Westminster City Council [1985]FLR 325 and hear all the evidence before deciding what is best for the child.
Once the applicant has put his case, the respondents may adduce their evidence in the above order which should also be followed for cross-examination purposes.
The same order will apply when the respondents make their closing speeches.
(f) Exclusion of witnesses In family proceedings, which are civil, there is no requirement that witnesses be excluded from court prior to giving evidence.
This is a matter entirely within the court's discretion although witnesses are likely to be excluded if any party to the proceedings objects to their presence.
Expert witnesses are usually allowed to remain in court during the testimony of other experts in their field, and sometimes throughout the hearing if it is important that they hear all the evidence.
Social workers often have a dual role in child protection cases.
They attend court as representatives of the local authority, a party to the proceedings, and as such have practical charge of the case.
They may also be a witness on the local authority's behalf.
The first role clearly requires their presence in court throughout the hearing to instruct the local authority solicitor as necessary.
Their status as a witness, however, may lead to requests for their exclusion.
In R v Willesden Justices, ex p the London Borough of Brent [1989]2 FLR 95, the High Court considered the position and decided that a social worker in charge of a case should only be excluded from the court in exceptional circumstances.
It is for the justices to decide in each case whether these criteria are met.
Where the local authority is the applicant in the proceedings difficulties may be avoided by calling the social worker as first witness.
(g) Adjournment The court may adjourn proceedings at any stage and may fix a date, time and place for the resumed hearing or leave this to be determined at a later date.
If an adjournment is granted in care proceedings the court may make an interim care or supervision order under s38 (see Chapter 9, 7(a)).
The court may make an interim s8 order in any family proceedings (see Chapter 9, 7(b)).
The term "family proceedings" as defined in s11(3) includes an application for a care or supervision order but not an application under Part V of the Act for a child assessment or emergency protection order.
Section 1(2) of the Act requires the court to have particular regard to the general principle that any delay in determining a question relating to a child's upbringing is likely to prejudice the child's welfare.
This is of particular relevance when the court is considering an application for adjournment.
While the legal rights of all parties must be respected the welfare of the child must be the court's paramount consideration.
It can sometimes be argued that the child's interests will be served by allowing a parent or another party to the proceedings further time to prepare for a hearing but this will depend very much on the circumstances of the case.
Where there are concurrent criminal proceedings a parent may seek an adjournment of the care proceedings until the criminal process is completed.
It is unlikely that an adjournment will be granted in these circumstances unless there are particularly compelling reasons.
For a discussion of the relevant case law see Chapter 9, 6(d).  (h) The decision The court is not obliged to reach a decision at the final hearing but it must do so as soon as is practicable (FPCR, r21(4); FPR, r4.21(3)).
When making an order or refusing an application the court must state any findings of fact and the reasons for its decision.
A copy of the order must be served on all parties to the proceedings and on any person with whom the child is living.
The court is responsible for service although emergency protection orders and recovery orders granted ex parte must be served by the applicant (see Chapter 12, 6).
15 Costs
The court can order one party to pay all or any part of the costs of another party.
In the family proceedings court the award of costs is governed by FPCR, r22(1).
When the court is considering making a costs order against a party it must give that party an opportunity to make representations as to why the order should not be made (FPCR, r22(2)).
An order for wasted costs may be made against a legal representative on the application of any party to the proceedings or by the court on its own motion (Magistrates' Courts (Costs Against Legal Representatives in Civil Proceedings) Rules 1991 (SI No 2096)).
A solicitor threatened with a wasted costs order must always be given an opportunity to make representations before an order is made.
No order may be made more than six months after disposal of the proceedings.
In the High Court the power to award costs is governed by RSC Order 62.
Although the general rule that costs should follow the event does not apply in the Family Division (RSC Order 62, r3(5)) the Court of Appeal decided in Gojkovic v Gojkovic (1991) The Times, 1 May that it provides a useful starting point.
It is, however, a presumption that may be more easily displaced in family cases particularly those involving children where it has not in the past been usual practice to award costs against an unsuccessful party.
Similar considerations apply in the county court which also has the power to award costs.
A legally aided party who is successful in proceedings has a duty to claim costs if it would be in the interests of a paying client to do so in the same circumstances.
Any costs recovered will be paid into the legal aid fund.
In certain circumstances an unassisted party may be awarded costs from the legal aid fund if his opponent is legally aided.
An order may only be made against the legal aid fund if:(a) an order for costs would be made in any event;(b) the proceedings were instituted by the assisted party and the unassisted party would suffer severe financial hardship unless an order were made; and (c) in any case the court is satisfied that it is just and equitable for the costs to be paid out of public funds (Legal Aid Act 1988, s18(4)).
Note that condition (b) does not have to be satisfied in relation to costs incurred on an appeal.
There is no reason in principle why a local authority or an organisation such as the NSPCC should not satisfy these criteria and obtain an order against the fund (R v Greenwich LBC, ex pLovelance and Another [1991]3 All ER 511, CA).
To prove severe financial hardship, however, an authority must show that the expenditure incurred has substantially impaired its ability to function normally.
It is not enough to show that expenditure elsewhere has had to be curtailed.
Evidence
The law of evidence is complex and cannot be dealt with in depth in a work of this scope.
This chapter will therefore cover those aspects most relevant to child care law.
See Evidence: Law and Practice, 3rd edn (Longman Practitioner Series) for a more detailed treatment of the subject.
The rules of evidence which apply to proceedings in the High Court, county court and family proceedings court apply to proceedings under the Children Act 1989 except where the Act provides otherwise.
Thus, in the High Court and the county court the Civil Evidence Acts 1968 and 1972 will apply.
In the family proceedings court, where the provisions of Part I of the Civil Evidence Act 1968 have yet to be brought into force, the narrower provisions of the Evidence Act 1938 apply to supplement the common law rules.
The Children Act contains specific rules of evidence in relation to the following matters.
Section 96(3) gives the Lord Chancellor power by order to make hearsay evidence admissible (see 5 below).
Sections 7(4) and 41(11) allow the court to take account of relevant evidence from a guardian ad litem or welfare officer which would otherwise be inadmissible.
Section 42(2) allows the court to admit in evidence a copy of any record taken by the guardian ad litem.
Section 45(7) allows the court to waive the rules of evidence generally in any application for, or relating to, an emergency protection order (s45(7)).
1 Burden and standard of proof
It is the applicant in proceedings under the Children Act who must discharge the legal burden of proof.
He must adduce sufficient evidence to satisfy the statutory criteria for the making of a  particular order.
He must prove the facts on a balance of probabilities.
On the simplest level this means that the court must find it "more probable than not" that the facts are as stated (per Denning J in Miller v Minister of Pensions [1947]2 All ER 372).
If on the evidence the probabilities are equal the application will fail.
It has been suggested that different degrees of probability should apply depending on the nature of the allegation.
Thus in a wardship case decided before the implementation of the Children Act, Re G (No 2)(a Minor)(Child abuse: Evidence)[1988]1 FLR 314, it was held that a more stringent degree of probability was required to satisfy a court that a father, as opposed to any other person, had sexually abused his daughter.
In a more recent case it was said that the evidence called must be commensurate with the seriousness of the allegations made (per Butler-Sloss LJ in R v Birmingham CC, ex pP [1991]1 WLR 221).
2 The nature of evidence
Evidence can be defined as information which establishes or disproves a fact or a point in question.
It may be communicated to the court in the following ways:(a) Oral testimony Witnesses may be called to give oral evidence to the court.
In proceedings under the Children Act 1989 the parties must disclose the substance of any oral evidence they propose to call in advance of the hearing.
Written statements must be filed at court and served on other parties to the proceedings (see 7 below).
Except in the case of a child, oral evidence must be given on oath or affirmation.
Any person who cannot appreciate the obligation this imposes is not a competent witness.
This also applies to a person who is incapable of understanding questions or giving a proper answer by reason of mental incapacity or permanent or temporary disability.
A child who does not understand the nature of an oath may give unsworn evidence if in the opinion of the court:(i) he understands that it is his duty to speak the truth; and (ii) he has sufficient understanding to justify his evidence being heard (s96(1) and (2)).
The appearance of child witnesses is likely to be rare in proceedings under Parts IV and V of the Act.
Hearsay evidence given in connection with the upbringing, maintenance or welfare  of a child is admissible in all civil proceedings (The Children (Admissibility of Hearsay Evidence) Order 1991 (SI No 1115)).
A local authority applicant is therefore more likely to call an adult witness, often a social worker, to relay the child's words to the court.
The child as a party to the proceedings may of course choose to give evidence on his own behalf.
He may also be called as a witness by any other party.
The court will not however compel his attendance by issue of a witness summons where this would be oppressive or damaging to the child's welfare to an extent which would outweigh the legitimate interest of any other party (Butler-Sloss LJ in R v Birmingham CC, ex pP, cited above).
There is no legal requirement for a child's evidence to be corroborated in civil proceedings.
Any party to proceedings is a competent and compellable witness for any other party.
A local authority applicant may call a parent as witness and compel his or her attendance at court by issue of a witness summons, where necessary (see Chapter 5, 14(c)).
Any witness may refresh his memory from notes or records, with the leave of the court, provided that these were made by him, or made by someone else and read over to him when he had a clear recollection of the facts recorded.
A witness who refers to case records when testifying must submit them to examination by the other parties to the proceedings, if required, and runs the risk of being cross-examined on their contents.
A witness cannot be asked in examination-in-chief about any previous statement made out of court which is inconsistent with his testimony unless he has been declared a hostile witness by the court.
A hostile witness may be cross-examined by the party calling him.
Any witness may be asked about a previous inconsistent statement in cross-examination and if he denies it, evidence may be called to prove that it was made.
It is not permissible to bolster a witness's evidence by introducing previous consistent statements unless they form part of the res gestae of the case or refute a suggestion in cross-examination that a witness has recently "changed his story" .
A statement forms part of the res gestae of a case if it is made contemporaneously with or shortly after any act or occurrence in issue in the proceedings so as to form part of the same transaction.
Any witness in the family proceedings court, whether attending by summons or otherwise, who refuses to give evidence or  produce any document to the court as required may be committed to prison for a term not exceeding one month or fined an amount not exceeding £1,000, or both (Magistrates' Courts Act 1980, s97(4)).
There are similar sanctions which may be employed against a reluctant witness in the county court and High Court.
(b) Documentary evidence Evidence may be adduced in the form of a document provided that the contents do not contravene any of the rules on admissibility.
Some documents speak for themselves and need only be handed into the court by or on behalf of the party adducing them.
Others may need to be produced by a witness in the course of giving evidence.
There are specific statutory powers to admit certain types of documentary evidence particularly relevant to child care cases.
For example, a headteacher's certificate is admissible as evidence of school attendance (Education Act 1944, s95(2)).
A criminal conviction may be proved by producing a certificate of conviction from the relevant court (Criminal Procedure Act 1865, s6; Prevention of Crimes Act 1871, s18).
A certificate of conviction may be taken as proof that an offence has been committed by the person named unless the contrary is proved (Civil Evidence Act 1971, s11).
Note that s4(1) of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 does not apply to any proceedings brought under the Children Act 1989 (Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974, s7(2) (cc)).
Evidence may therefore be adduced of a conviction which would otherwise be spent.
Any party intending to adduce a private document in evidence should be prepared to prove its authenticity.
This is usually accomplished by calling the maker to identify his signature, handwriting or confirm in some other way that he created the document.
As a general rule, documents which are more than 20 years old are deemed to be "ancient" and are presumed to be authentic unless proved otherwise (Evidence Act 1938, s4).
There is no need to prove authenticity if this is admitted by the other parties to the proceedings.
Where a party adducing documentary evidence has access to the original document it should be produced.
The court can accept a copy if satisfied that the original document has been lost or destroyed.
If the original is in the possession of one party to the proceedings who refuses to produce it at the request of another party, a copy will be admissible.
If the original document  is in the possession of a third party he may be compelled to produce it by issue of a witness summons.
If he is able to claim privilege for the document, a copy may be admitted instead of the original.
A party intending to rely on documentary evidence in proceedings under the Children Act must disclose this in advance.
Copies of the relevant documents must be filed at court and served on the other parties to the proceedings (FPCR, r17; FPR, r4.17 and see 7 below).]
(c) Real evidence Real evidence is anything which the court is asked to observe for itself.
It may take the form of a material object.
A parent who denies an allegation of non-accidental injury may, for example, produce in court a piece of furniture or nursery equipment said to have caused the injury accidentally.
A person's appearance may constitute real evidence.
The court may be asked to observe a person's size and build as this may be relevant to their ability to cause injury in the manner alleged.
The court could be asked to observe injuries or scars on the child's body.
It could be asked to view the site where a particular incident occurred although the expense of leaving the courtroom is unlikely to be justified where a photograph or a detailed description would suffice.
(d) Photographs, tape recordings and video recordings Photographs are admissible in evidence provided that their authenticity can be proved.
This may mean calling the photographer to give evidence that the prints were produced from untouched negatives (R v Maqsud Ali (1966) 1 QB 688).
Where photographs are to be produced it is usual to ask the other parties to admit their authenticity.
A tape recording properly authenticated can be admissible.
A social worker or police officer may, for example, produce a tape recording of an interview with a parent or child.
In these circumstances the tape is not real evidence but analogous to a documentary record of the interview.
The court must be satisfied that the tape has not been tampered with and that the voices recorded are properly identified.
Video recordings are used more frequently than audio tape in the investigation of child abuse.
A video recording can constitute real evidence where, for example, an incident involving a parent and child has been filmed.
More often, however, the video  recording will record an interview with a child, or perhaps a parent, in which incidents of abuse, sexual or otherwise, are disclosed.
The person conducting the interview may seek to produce the video recording as evidence that statements were made by the child which support a diagnosis of sexual abuse.
Even if no direct admissions are made the court may be asked to observe the child's reactions and demeanour during the interview and these may be interpreted by an expert.
Judicial opinion has varied as to the evidential standing and value of video recordings of this nature.
In Re E (a Minor)(Child Abuse: Evidence)[1987]1 FLR 269 Ewbank J doubted their value but he was more concerned with the evidential value of the interview itself.
In Re M (a Minor)(Child Abuse: Evidence)[1986]1 FLR 293 Latey J expressed the view that all such interviews should be recorded on video tape and that such evidence should then be available to the court in the interests of justice.
Since these comments were made there have been two significant developments.
First, The Report of the Inquiry into Child Abuse in Cleveland, published in 1987 (HMSO Cm 412) has addressed the problems encountered in interviewing children particularly in sexual abuse cases.
The Report establishes the following principles to be observed in conducting such interviews (para 12.34) and these principles apply equally to abuse of any nature.
1.
The term "disclosure" interview should not be used as this precludes the notion that [sexual]abuse has not occurred.
2.
Interviews should only be undertaken by those with some training, experience and aptitude for talking with children.
3.
Each interview must be approached with an open mind.
4.
The interview should comprise of open-ended questions to support and encourage the child in free recall.
5.
There should be where possible only one and not more than two interviews for the purposes of evaluation, and the interview should not be too long.
6.
The interview should go at the pace of the adult and not the child.
7.
The setting for the interview must be suitable and sympathetic.
8.
It must be accepted that at the end of the interview the child may have given no information to support the suspicion of [sexual]abuse and the position will remain unclear.
9.
There must be careful recording of the interview and what the child says, whether or not there is a video recording.
10.
It must be recognised that the use of facilitative techniques (eg anatomically correct dolls, special play materials and other visual aids) may create difficulties in subsequent court proceedings.
11.
Adequate training is of great importance for all those engaged in this work.
12.
The facilitated interview may be appropriate in certain circumstances but should be treated as a second stage.
The interviewer must be conscious of the limitations and strengths of the techniques employed and the interview should only be conducted by those with special skills and specific training.
These principles were endorsed by Douglas Brown J in Rochdale Borough Council v B W, A K and Others (1991) 155 LG Rev 843, a wardship case involving allegations of ritual abuse.
He stressed the need for adequate training for those engaged in interviewing children where ritual or sexual abuse is suspected and the importance of recording all interviews with the child on video tape, particularly the first.
Where the Cleveland guidelines have not been followed the courts have refused to rely on statements made by children during the course of interviews (Re E (a Minor)(Child Abuse: Evidence)[1990]1 FLR 420).
Following upon the Cleveland Report which was concerned with civil proceedings the Criminal Justice Act 1991 has now made it possible for video recordings of interviews with children to be used as evidence in criminal proceedings.
The Home Office is to produce a Code of Practice on the use of video recordings for this purpose.
While this will only apply to criminal proceedings, child protection agencies using video recordings in their work with children will be expected to adopt the standards set in the Code of Practice where appropriate.
This should ensure at the very least that video taping is efficiently done using equipment which produces a clear picture and clear sound; a requirement stressed by Douglas Brown J in the Rochdale case cited above.
Adherence to the Cleveland principles on interviewing and the Home Office guidance on the use of video technology should enhance the evidential value of the video recorded interview in proceedings under the Children Act 1989.
3 Relevance
Evidence, in whatever form, must be relevant to be admissible.
It must relate directly to the facts in issue in a case or be relevant to those facts in that it tends to prove or disprove them in some  way.
Thus, in R v Lincoln (Kesteven) County Justices, ex p M (a Minor)[1976]1 All ER 490, evidence that a father was having incestuous relations with the two older sisters of a child before the court was held to be relevant and admissible.
The case was brought under the old law and it was alleged that the child in question was exposed to moral danger.
Similar fact evidence, that is evidence that a person has acted in a similar way in the past or that a similar situation has arisen previously, is admissible in certain circumstances.
Thus, in R v P (a Father)[1991]3 All ER 337, HL a criminal case, the House of Lords held that a court was allowed to hear evidence of a father's sexual abuse of one child to support an allegation of sexual abuse against another.
The probative value of the evidence was said to outweigh its prejudicial effect.
In civil proceedings similar fact evidence has been held to be admissible where logically relevant provided that this will not be oppressive or unfair to the party concerned (Mood Music Publishing v De Wolfe Ltd [1976]1 Ch 119).
Proceedings under the Children Act 1989 are civil but may involve allegations of very serious misconduct.
In view of this it would seem that both the civil and criminal criteria for the admission of similar fact evidence may be relevant.
Character evidence is admissible only where relevant to the issues to be decided.
In child protection cases the character of a parent, guardian or anyone else caring for a child is nearly always relevant.
In these circumstances, therefore, character evidence, including evidence of previous convictions, is usually admissible.
4 Expert opinion
Only an expert may give an opinion in evidence, although a witness as to fact, who is also an expert in the relevant field, may be asked to express an opinion.
In cases of doubt it is for the court to decide whether a witness is an expert or not after considering his qualifications and experience.
Expert witnesses may only express opinions on matters properly within their field of expertise.
Thus in Re S and B (Minors)(Evidence)[1991]FCR 175 a psychiatric social worker was allowed to express an opinion on another witness's mental condition and propensity to fantasise or invent but not on her credibility.
Once proceedings have been commenced a child cannot be  medically or psychiatrically examined or otherwise assessed for the purpose of preparing expert evidence without the leave of the court (FPCR, r18(1); FPR, r4.18(1)).
In sexual abuse cases where leave is sought for the child to be interviewed by an expert the court may stipulate that all interviews be recorded on video tape as advocated by Douglas Brown J in Rochdale Borough Council v B W, A K and others (1991) cited above, a wardship case involving allegations of ritual abuse.
An application for leave must be made on notice to all parties to the proceedings and the guardian ad litem, unless the court directs otherwise.
In the family proceedings court leave may be granted by a clerk.
A party may not adduce evidence arising out of an examination or assessment carried out without leave unless the court specifically permits this (FPCR, r18(3); FPR, r4.18(3)).
The court has power to give directions on medical or psychiatric examination or other assessment when making an interim care or supervision order or an emergency protection order.
In giving directions the court will be concerned to ensure that the child is not subjected to repeated and unnecessary examinations.
In the Guidance (vol 1, para 4.63) it is suggested that assessments be undertaken by professionals agreed between the parties or selected by the guardian ad litem.
Where this is not feasible, it may at least be possible to arrange for the experts to see the child together.
Whatever arrangements are made for assessment, experts who disagree should be given an opportunity to discuss their opinions prior to any hearing (Re J (Child Abuse: Expert Evidence)[1991]FCR 193).
While an expert is often required to give an opinion based on examinations or interviews he has actually carried out, he may also be asked to express an opinion on evidence before the court within his particular area of expertise.
In R v Hove Juvenile Court, ex pW [1989]FCR 286, for example, the expert opinion of a child psychiatrist was admitted in evidence although she had not seen the child.
Her evidence was based upon interviews conducted jointly by a social worker and a police officer.
A party wishing to obtain an expert opinion on the evidence to be adduced by another party must obtain the leave of the court before disclosing any of the documents filed in the proceedings (FPCR, r23(1); FPR, r4.23(1)).
The role of the expert witness in child care cases was considered in Re J (cited above) and some guidance given.
It was said, for example, that an expert's report should provide an  opinion which is straightforward and not misleading.
It should not omit factors which do not support the opinion and should be properly researched.
Expert witnesses may refer to tables, charts and reference works.
Solicitors requiring an expert opinion may find it useful to consult the Register of Expert Witnesses maintained by the Law Society (see Appendix 6 for address).
Most fields of expertise are covered.
5 Hearsay
The Children (Admissibility of Hearsay Evidence) Order 1991 (SI No 1115) makes hearsay evidence given in connection with the upbringing, maintenance and welfare of a child admissible in civil proceedings in the High Court and the county court and family proceedings in the magistrates' court.
There is no need therefore to resort to the more restrictive provisions of Part I of the Civil Evidence Act 1968 to admit hearsay evidence in the county court and High Court.
The relevant provisions of the 1968 Act have never applied in the magistrates' court and, apart from those proceedings covered by the 1991 Order, hearsay evidence is only admissible on very limited grounds.
In its simplest form hearsay is evidence of facts which are not within the knowledge of a witness but have been communicated to him by another.
A social worker may, for example, repeat to the court a child's account of sexual abuse by a parent.
If the account was given to the social worker by the child this will be first-hand hearsay.
If the account was given to a neighbour who then repeats it to the social worker it will be multiple hearsay.
If the child gives a written statement to the social worker, the statement itself is first-hand hearsay as it is one stage removed from the child who could give direct evidence of the abuse.
A video recording of an interview with a child is also a form of hearsay.
The 1991 Order is drafted in very wide terms.
It does not distinguish between different types of hearsay or impose any procedural requirements for its admission.
It must be remembered, however, that the Order only permits the court to admit hearsay evidence.
It is for the court to decide the weight which should be given to statements which are not made on oath and cannot be tested by cross-examination.
For this reason it may be unwise to rely on hearsay evidence, particularly in contested proceedings, where it is possible to call a witness to give direct evidence of the facts in issue.
If that witness would be the child, however, reliance on hearsay evidence may be justified to avoid putting the child through the trauma of giving evidence.
There are other specific provisions of the Children Act which allow the court to take into account certain written statements or evidence regardless of any enactment or rule of law which would otherwise prevent this.
Thus s7(4) permits the court to take into account any statement in a welfare report or evidence given in respect of matters referred to in the report provided they are relevant to the question in hand.
Section 41(11) makes similar provision in relation to the guardian ad litem 's report.
Section 45(7) allows the court to take into account any statement in any report made to the court and any evidence given during the hearing of an application for, or relating to, an emergency protection order.
The admission of hearsay evidence is just one effect of these specific provisions.
6 Privilege
(a) Legal privilege Certain information is by its nature privileged and protected from disclosure in legal proceedings.
Communications between a person and his legal advisor have absolute privilege which can only be waived by the client.
This also applies to communications between a legal advisor and a third party for the purposes of litigation.
Communications between other professional groups and their clients are not similarly privileged.
(b) Public interest privilege Certain information has been held to be privileged because there is a public interest in maintaining its confidentiality.
A local authority or child care agency will not be compelled to disclose the identity of a person giving information about child abuse (D v NSPCC [1978]AC 171).
In these circumstances the public interest in encouraging people to report cases of child abuse has been held to outweigh other interests.
Social work and analogous records are prima facie privileged but there is no absolute immunity from disclosure.
Thus in Re M (Social Work Records: Disclosure)[1990]FCR 485 the Court of Appeal decided that there was power in wardship to order disclosure of all or any part of a social work record.
However it was for  the party seeking disclosure to justify it.
There is a public interest in protecting the confidentiality of social work records.
In deciding whether to order disclosure a court must consider whether this outweighs the competing public interest that a party to proceedings should have access to relevant information in order to obtain legal redress.
Re M is important as it clarifies the law on privilege and social work records but it is important to consider it within the wider context of access to information generally.
Under the Access to Personal Files Act 1987 any individual has a right of access to personal information about himself in local authority social work records subject to certain exemptions.
Where files are computerised a corresponding right of access exists under the Data Protection Act 1984.
Any party to proceedings therefore has a general right to see social work records in so far as they relate to him but not otherwise (see Chapter 3, 5).
Certain information is exempt from disclosure under the statutory code on access to information.
Where this is the case it is interesting to note that the Access to Personal Files (Social Services) Regulations 1989 require local authorities to disclose as much information as they can by omitting names and sensitive information or by other means.
The same principle may be applied in legal proceedings where privilege is claimed.
If the evidential value of any social work record would not be compromised by the omission of certain names or sensitive information, the matter may be resolved by such action.
In practice, social work records where relevant are likely to be introduced into the proceedings via the guardian ad litem.
Section 42 of the Children Act gives the guardian ad litem a right to examine and take copies of social work records of a local authority or the NSPCC (see Chapter 5, 8(c)).
This right extends to all social work records in so far as they relate to the child and any records compiled in connection with the making or proposed making of an application under the Children Act.
The guardian may produce any copy he takes in his report or when he gives evidence and it will be admissible regardless of any enactment or rule of law to the contrary (s42(2) (3)).
The rules of court require the guardian to bring to the court's attention all social work records and documents which may in his opinion assist the court (FPCR, r11(9) (b); FPR, r4.11(9) (b)).
The court may then direct that these records or documents be brought to the attention of other persons including presumably  the parties to the proceedings and any experts they intend to instruct.
A local authority may still claim privilege against disclosure in these circumstances and the court will then have to balance the two competing public interests as in Re M. (c) Privilege against incrimination Another form of privilege which may be claimed by a witness is the privilege against incrimination of self or spouse.
A witness may not be required to answer a question or produce a document which might expose him or a spouse to a criminal charge.
In proceedings under Parts IV and V of the Children Act this privilege is waived and no person is excused from giving evidence or answering a question put to him in the course of his evidence on the ground that it will incriminate him or his spouse (s98(1)).
As a quid pro quo for the loss of this privilege any statement or admission made will not be admissible in evidence against the maker or his spouse in criminal proceedings except for perjury (s98(2)).
This is not general immunity against prosecution for child abusers.
If the witness can be persuaded to repeat the admission outside the court it may be admissible in criminal proceedings.
7 Advance disclosure of evidence
Evidence must be disclosed in advance in proceedings under the Children Act whether conducted in the High Court, county court or family proceedings court.
Each party must file written statements of the substance of the oral evidence he intends to call at any hearing or directions appointment and copies of any documents on which he intends to rely, including expert reports (FPCR, r17(1); FPR, r4.17(1)).
The term document is not defined in the court rules but under Part II of the Civil Evidence Act 1968 it includes video tapes and audio tapes.
Each statement must be dated and signed by the maker and must contain a declaration that the maker believes the statement to be true and understands that it may be placed before the court.
Note that these rules do not apply to the guardian ad litem 's report which must be filed at least seven days before the final hearing unless the court directs otherwise (FPCR, r11(7); FPR, 4.11(7)).
Copy statements and documents must be served on the other parties to the proceedings and on any guardian ad litem appointed.
The court will usually fix a time limit for service when making directions and this must be complied with.
If no time limit is imposed statements must be served before the hearing or appointment.
The usual rules apply as to mode of service (see Chapter 5, 5).
Supplementary statements may be filed without leave subject to any direction the court may have made as to timing (FPCR, r17(2); FPR, r4.17(2)).
This presumably means that leave must be sought to file a supplementary statement where any time limit for filing evidence has expired.
A supplementary statement may be necessary, for example, where further relevant events have occurred since the original statement was made.
A supplementary statement cannot be used to amend the evidence recorded in an earlier statement.
If the original statement requires correction it is presumably necessary to seek leave to amend although the rules are silent on this.
Although in the normal course the maker of any written statement filed at court will be called to give oral testimony this may not always be the case.
The written statement is itself admissible as hearsay evidence under the Children Act (Admissibility of Hearsay Evidence) Order 1991 (see 5 above).
If the contents of the statement are not contested therefore it may be put in as evidence without the witness being called to give oral testimony.
Where the evidence is not agreed the court may admit the statement as evidence-in-chief and allow the witness to be tendered for cross-examination.
If a witness is not available to attend the hearing after a written statement has been filed and served the court may nevertheless admit the statement as evidence although the lack of opportunity for cross-examination will affect the weight attached to it.
Great care must be taken in complying with the requirements for advance disclosure.
A party cannot, without the leave of the court, adduce evidence or rely on any document which has not been disclosed in accordance with the rules at a hearing or directions appointment (FPCR, r17(3); FPR, r4.17(3)).
The rules for advance disclosure do not, of course, apply to ex parte applications.
They do apply to applications for interim orders in care proceedings.
This means that an applicant seeking a first interim order in care proceedings, whether or not it follows upon an emergency protection order, should file and serve on all respondents before the hearing statements of the evidence to be relied upon.
Statements and documents filed at court are confidential and may not be disclosed to anyone other than the parties, their legal representatives, the guardian ad litem, the Legal Aid Board or a welfare officer without the leave of the court (FPCR, r23(1); FPR, r4.23(1)).
A party must seek leave before disclosing any documents to an expert witness.
In R v Sunderland JC, ex pG [1988]2 FLR 40, a case decided under the old law, the Court of Appeal held that the guardian ad litem 's report should not be disclosed to an independent social worker instructed by a parent unless it could be shown that the evidence of the independent social worker would assist the court.
Appeals
There is a right of appeal in most public law proceedings under the Children Act except those relating to emergency protection orders.
In the case of the family proceedings court appeal lies to the Family Division of the High Court.
In the county court appeal lies to the Court of Appeal although an appeal against the decision of a district judge will be heard by a designated family judge or a nominated care judge of the same court.
1 Appeal from the family proceedings court
Any party to proceedings may appeal to the High Court against a magistrates' court decision to make or refuse to make an order under the Children Act (s94(1)).
This does not apply where a magistrates' court declines to hear a case because it could be dealt with more conveniently in another court (s94(2)).
In these circumstances there is no right of appeal.
There is also no right of appeal against:(i) the making of or refusal to make an emergency protection order; or (ii) the extension or refusal to extend such an order; or (iii) the discharge or refusal to discharge such an order; or (iv) the giving of or refusal to give any direction in connection with such an order (s45(10) as amended by CLSA 1990).
This applies whether an application for an emergency protection order is heard in a magistrates' court, county court or High Court.
(a) Procedure Procedure is governed by FPR, r4.22.
The applicant must file and serve the following documents on all parties and any guardian ad litem:(i) notice of appeal in writing, setting out grounds;(ii) a certified copy of the summons or application, the order appealed against and any order staying its execution;(iii) a copy of any notes of evidence; and (iv) a copy of any reasons given for the decision.
Notice of appeal must be filed and served within 14 days of the order being made, or seven days in the case of an appeal against an interim care or supervision order.
Other documents must be filed and served as soon as practicable, subject to any direction of the appellate court.
For general provisions relating to service see Chapter 5, 5.
The period for filing notice of appeal may be extended by the High Court.
An appeal cannot be withdrawn or the grounds amended without the leave of the court.
A district judge may grant leave and may also dismiss an appeal with the consent of all parties.
(b) Cross-appeal A respondent who wishes to contend:(i) that the decision of the court below should be varied either in any event or in the event of the appeal being allowed in whole or in part; or (ii) that the decision of the court below should be affirmed but on different grounds; or (iii) that the decision was wrong in whole or part must file and serve on all parties, within 14 days of receiving notice of appeal, a written notice setting out the grounds on which he relies.
There is no right to "cross-appeal" where the original appeal is against an interim care or supervision order made under s38. (c) Powers on appeal The appeal will be heard by a single judge, unless the President of the Family Division directs otherwise.
The High Court has extensive powers on appeal.
It can direct that the application be re-heard by a magistrates' court or it can make an order itself which will then be treated as an order of the magistrates' court for the purposes of enforcement and variation (s94(9)).
The court can make such orders as are necessary to give effect to its determination and may also make such incidental and consequential orders as appear just (s94(4) (5)).
2 Appeal from the county court
An appeal from a decision of a district judge in the county lies to a judge in the same court.
Procedure is governed by FPR, r4.22 as with appeals from the magistrates' court to the High Court.
Appeals from the county court to the Court of Appeal are governed by RSC Order 59.
Leave is not required and notice of appeal must be filed and served on all parties within four weeks of the date on which the order was made.
For detailed guidance on procedure thereafter see RSC Order 59 and Appeals: Practice and Procedure,(Longman Practitioner Series).
3 Orders pending appeal
The court has power to maintain the status quo by granting orders pending appeal when dismissing an application for a care order or supervision order (s40).
Thus, a care order may be made for the "appeal period" where a child is the subject of an interim care order at the time the application is dismissed.
A supervision order may be made pending appeal if the child is the subject of an interim supervision order at the time of dismissal.
The court may include such directions as it sees fit in an order pending appeal.
There is a similar power to maintain the status quo when a court grants an application to discharge a care order or supervision order.
It may order that the decision shall not have effect pending appeal or that the care or supervision order shall remain in force for the appeal period but subject to the court's directions (s40(3)).
The court may determine the length of an order pending appeal but it cannot exceed the appeal period.
Where an appeal is actually lodged this means the period between the decision and the final determination of the appeal.
In other cases it means the period during which an appeal can be lodged.
An appeal may be made against a court's decision to make or refuse to make an order pending appeal.
The appellate court may then make the order if it thinks fit.
It also has power to extend the duration of any order pending appeal made by a lower court but not beyond the appeal period as defined in s40.
Legal aid
Civil legal aid is available for all proceedings under the Children Act 1989 but not to local authorities, the NSPCC, guardians ad litem or anyone acting in a representative, fiduciary or official capacity.
The Legal Aid Act 1988 as amended by the Legal Aid Act 1988 (Children Act 1989) Order 1991 (SI No 1924) provides a uniform scheme for the grant of legal aid at all levels within the court system.
Different criteria apply depending on the status of the applicant and the nature of the proceedings.
 "Free legal aid" is available for children, parents and those with parental responsibility in proceedings brought under s31 (care and supervision orders); s43 (child assessment orders); s44 (emergency protection orders) and s45 (extension or discharge of emergency protection orders)(Legal Aid Act 1988, s15(3C)).
For the purposes of legal aid these are known collectively as "special Children Act proceedings" .
The child only is entitled to free legal aid in proceedings under s25 of the Act regarding the use of secure accommodation (Legal Aid Act 1988, s15(3B)).
Free legal aid is available to those entitled without any test of means or merit.
Other parties and those applying for party status in special Children Act proceedings must satisfy the usual civil legal aid means test only (Legal Aid Act 1988, s15(3E)).
The application will not be judged on merit.
The usual civil legal aid test on means and merits will apply to all other proceedings under the Act including applications for:(a) a s8 order;(b) the discharge of a care order;(c) the variation or discharge of a supervision order;(d) contact with a child in care;(e) the variation or discharge of a contact order;(f) an education supervision order.
1 How to apply
(a) Free legal aid Applicants entitled to free legal aid are not required to complete an application form.
Instead their solicitor must certify their entitlement by completing form CLA 5A and submitting this immediately to the appropriate legal aid area office.
Provided that the form is received in the area office within three working days of the receipt of instructions, a legal aid certificate will be granted to cover work done prior to the date of issue.
If the three-day time limit is not complied with the certificate will only cover costs incurred after the date of issue.
It is therefore extremely important to submit form CLA 5A without delay where a client is entitled to free legal aid.
The area office has a discretion to extend the time limit but cannot be relied upon to exercise this other than in the most extenuating circumstances.
If form CLA 5A is wrongly completed it will be returned and any certificate subsequently issued will not be backdated.
If the solicitor submitting form CLA 5A acts for several children in the same family a separate form must be submitted for each child.
Where the application is made on behalf of a parent or person with parental responsibility one form is sufficient.
The self-certification procedure may also be used to seek legal aid for related proceedings which do not qualify for free legal aid.
A parent may, for example, wish to be represented in care proceedings and apply for a s8 order.
In these circumstances the certificate when issued can cover both matters retrospectively provided that the three-day time limit is complied with.
It is for the area office to decide whether additional proceedings are related to the principal application.
Where they are not a separate legal aid application must be submitted and any costs already incurred by the solicitor will not be paid by the legal aid fund.
Solicitors are therefore advised to await confirmation of cover before taking any action with regard to related proceedings.
(b) Means tested legal aid Those entitled to legal aid subject to a means test only must apply on form CLA 5 but are not required to complete page 5 of  the form which requires a full statement of their case.
This must be submitted to the local legal aid area office together with the appropriate means form.
Applicants receiving income support should use form CLA 4B.
Others should complete form CLA 4A plus form L17.
The self-certifying procedure does not apply to means tested applications but most area offices have set up systems for "fast-tracking" Children Act applications.
In urgent cases an emergency application can be made on form CLA 3 when submitting form CLA 5.
Emergency applications can also be made by telephone.
(c) Means and merit tested legal aid Those entitled to legal aid subject to means and merit must also apply on form CLA 5 accompanied by the appropriate means form.
Page 5 of the form requires applicants to give a statement of case.
Where the applicant is a respondent in proceedings it is sufficient to attach a copy of the court application form to form CLA 5 with a supplementary statement containing any required information not included in the court form.
2 Legal aid on appeal
Anyone entitled to free legal aid who is then a party to an appeal against a care or supervision order will qualify for non-means tested legal aid in respect of the appeal subject to a merits test.
In all other cases legal aid in relation to appeals is subject to a test on means and merits whatever the status of the applicant.
It is not necessary to submit a fresh legal aid application to cover an appeal.
An existing certificate may be amended for this purpose.
3 Remuneration
Rates of pay for care proceedings are laid down in Schedule 1 to the Legal Aid in Family Proceedings (Remuneration) Regulations 1991.
These are usually revised annually.
Care proceedings in this context include any proceedings for an order under Parts IV or V of the Children Act.
These rates may be exceeded if it is reasonable to do so due to the exceptional competence or expedition with which the work has been carried out or for any other  exceptional circumstances (reg 3(4) (c)).
Membership of the Law Society's Children Panel is a factor to be taken into account when assessing entitlement to enhanced rates of remuneration.
In the magistrates' court, claims for costs should be sent to the Legal Aid Board for assessment.
In the county court and High Court, claims for costs must be assessed if they do not exceed £500 and a solicitor may opt for assessment where costs do not exceed £1,000 (Civil Legal Aid (General) Regulations 1989).
Above this limit, bills must be taxed in the usual way.
Claims for costs should be made on form CLA 16 to be accompanied by form CLA 17 if costs are to be assessed.
4 Green form scheme
Legal advice and assistance on child care matters is available under the green form scheme but cannot extend to representation in court although it may cover the cost of a solicitor attending court with a client as an advisor (Legal Advice and Assistance Regulations 1989, reg 21).
Those entitled to free legal aid in special Children Act proceedings will not need to use the scheme.
Others may need to rely on it pending the grant of legal aid.
Anyone may seek advice under the scheme provided that they satisfy the criteria for financial eligibility.
A parent, guardian or person caring for a child may seek advice and assistance on his behalf (Legal Advice and Assistance (No 2) Regulations 1980 (SI No 1898), reg 8(2) and reg 14(2) (a)).
A solicitor may only give advice and assistance to a child in relation to civil proceedings with the prior authority of the Legal Aid Area Director (reg 14(1)).
Note that child in this context means a person under the age of 16.
Under the scheme, a solicitor may incur costs and disbursements to the value of £84 (or £89 in London) without prior approval.
Application must be made to the legal aid area office for authority to exceed this limit.
Eligibility is determined by a means test administered by the solicitor and based upon assessment of disposable income and capital.
A person in receipt of income support or family credit will always be entitled to assistance under the scheme without paying a contribution unless his capital exceeds the statutory limit.
The financial limits for eligibility are revised annually.
Care and supervision orders
Children may only be placed in care or under the supervision of a local authority in civil proceedings if an order is made under Part IV of the Children Act 1989.
Supervision orders, but not care orders, may also be made in criminal proceedings and are then subject to different legal requirements.
There is no power to make a care or supervision order in respect of a child who is over the age of 17 years, or 16 years if married.
It is important for lawyers to know not only the statutory provisions and procedural rules of child care law but also the principles of good social work practice if they are to be effective in care proceedings.
The Children Act 1989 Guidance and Regulations, Volume 1 Court Orders (HMSO) is vital reading.
The guidance is part of a series issued by the Secretary of State for Social Services covering all aspects of the Children Act 1989.
While its primary purpose is to advise local authorities, the guidance adds flesh to the statutory bones of the Children Act and is likely to be quoted in court proceedings.
Lawyers may also find it helpful to refer to another Department of Health publication The Care of Children Principles and Practice in Regulations and Guidance (HMSO).
This sets out the fundamental principles which should inform good social work practice and explains how local authorities should translate legal requirements into practice.
1 Who can apply?
Only a local authority or an authorised person can apply for a care order or a supervision order (s31(1)).
An authorised person in this context means the NSPCC and any other body authorised  to bring proceedings under s31 of the Act.
At present no other organisations have been given this status.
The NSPCC must consult the local authority in whose area the child ordinarily resides before making an application if it is reasonably practicable to do so (s31(6)).
Whether it does so or not, the court will not entertain the application if the child is already the subject of a care or supervision order or earlier care proceedings are not yet concluded (s31(7)).
Application must be made on form CHA 19 and a separate form must be completed for each child within the same family.
Form CHA 19 is lengthy and detailed.
The applicant must specify the order sought, summarise the evidence in support and state the future plans for the child if a final order is made including arrangements for contact.
The form also incorporates an application for an interim order.
See Chapter 5 for procedure on application generally.
Before commencing proceedings and as a matter of good practice local authorities are expected:(a) to consult other child care agencies;(b) to discuss options with the family and also the child, unless he is very young;(c) to take legal advice.
Multi-agency case conferences should be convened and parents should be invited to attend and permitted to participate in the decision-making process.
Where possible, legal advice should also be on hand (the Guidance para 3.12).
The Guidance states: no decision to initiate proceedings should be taken without clear evidence that provision of services for the child and his family (which may include an accommodation placement voluntarily arranged under s20) has failed or would be likely to fail to meet the child's needs adequately and that there is no suitable person prepared to apply to take over care of the child under a residence order (para 3.10).
Even where there is a case for legal action on these criteria the local authority should consider what the use of compulsory powers will add in safeguarding the child and whether the gain is sufficient to justify the use of compulsion and the trauma that may result.
Failure to follow this guidance will not invalidate any subsequent proceedings but may clearly influence the court when it applies the principle in s1(5) of the Act and considers whether an order would be better for the child than no order at all.
2 Which court?
Care proceedings must be commenced in the family proceedings court unless they arise from a s37 investigation made in the course of family proceedings in a High Court or county court or there are other proceedings under Parts IV or V of the Act pending in the higher courts (APO, art 3).
Cases may be transferred from one family proceedings court to another and also to a county court care centre and ultimately the High Court in certain circumstances.
The criteria for transfer are discussed in Chapter 4.
3 Parties and those entitled to notice
Certain individuals must be named as respondents to the proceedings.
Others are entitled to be notified of the date, time and place of the first hearing or directions appointment but are not automatically parties.
Any person may apply to the court for party status (see Chapter 5, 4(c) for procedure).
The parties to an application for a care or supervision order are:(a) the applicant;(b) the child;(c) every person whom the applicant believes to have parental responsibility for the child.
Those entitled to notice of the application are:(a) any person caring for the child at the time the proceedings are commenced;(b) every person whom the applicant believes to be a parent without parental responsibility, ie an unmarried father without the benefit of a parental responsibility agreement or order;(c) every person whom the applicant believes to be a party to pending relevant proceedings in respect of the same child;(d) any local authority providing accommodation for the child;(e) where proceedings are brought in respect of a child alleged to be staying in a certified refuge, the person providing the refuge.
Relevant proceedings as defined by s93(3) means any application made or proceedings brought under the Children Act, any statutory instrument made under the Act or any amendment which the Act may make to any other statute.
Relevant proceedings  are pending if they are in progress at the date the application for a care or supervision order is filed.
The following example illustrates how the party rules operate in practice.
Example Jane is the child of Richard and Mary now divorced.
Mary is now cohabiting with Paul and Jane lives with them.
Mary will not allow Richard's mother Flora to see her grand-daughter.
Flora has been granted leave to apply for a contact order.
Caremore Council believe that Paul has been sexually abusing Jane and they intend to apply for a care order.
Richard and Mary will have party status in the proceedings as they each have parental responsibility for Jane.
Jane will have party status.
Paul is entitled to notice of the proceedings as he was caring for Jane when the proceedings were commenced.
Flora is also entitled to notice as she is a party to pending relevant proceedings.
Flora and Paul may apply for party status.
4 Procedure and evidence
Procedure is governed by the FPCR in the family proceedings court and the FPR in the county court and High Court.
The procedural rules common to all applications under the Children Act 1989 are discussed in Chapter 5.
The rules of evidence which apply are discussed in Chapter 6.
There is a duty to appoint a guardian ad litem unless satisfied that this is not necessary to safeguard the child's interests (s41 and FPCR, r2(2) (d); FPR, r4.2(2) (d)).
As a consequence a guardian will be appointed in most cases.
The role and function of the guardian is discussed at Chapter 5, 8.
5 The threshold grounds
A court can only make a care or supervision order if satisfied:(a) that the child concerned is suffering, or is likely to suffer significant harm; and (b) that the harm, or likelihood of harm is attributable to:(i) the care given to the child, or likely to be given to him if the order were not made, not being what it would be reasonable to expect a parent to give to him; or (ii) the child being beyond parental control (s31).
These conditions are sometimes referred to as the threshold grounds or criteria.
If satisfied they indicate that an appropriate level of concern exists to justify legal intervention but an order will not automatically follow.
The court must then go on to apply the fundamental principles in s1 of the Act before deciding whether or not to make a care or supervision order.
There are two distinct conditions to be satisfied in s31.
First, the applicant must show that the child is actually suffering or likely to suffer harm which is significant.
Secondly, the harm must be attributable to a lack of care or control.
The term "is suffering" in this context refers to the present time.
If the child has already been removed from home under an emergency protection order it may be construed to refer to the period immediately before the emergency order was sought (see D (a Minor) v Berkshire County Council [1987]1 All ER 120, a case decided under the old law on a similar point of interpretation).
(a) Significant harm The term "harm" is defined in s31(9) of the Act to mean "ill-treatment or the impairment of health or development" .
Ill-treatment will amount to harm whether or not there is damage to the child's health or development.
It includes both physical and non-physical ill-treatment and sexual abuse.
 "Development" means physical, intellectual, emotional, social and behavioural development and "health" means physical or mental health.
The term "significant" is not defined in the Act but some guidance is given.
According to s31(10) where the question of whether harm suffered by a child is significant turns on his health or development, this must be compared with the standard of health or development which could reasonably be expected of a similar child (s31(10)).
It is not entirely clear what factors the court must take into account when creating the hypothetical similar child.
Age is clearly relevant.
Social, environmental and cultural factors may be.
Any handicaps or special characteristics which obviously affect health and development cannot be ignored.
The health of an eight year old diabetic child must, for example, be judged by reference to the standard one might reasonably expect of a child of that age with diabetes and not a healthy eight year old.
The courts will clearly require expert evidence in setting the appropriate standard.
This must be a level of health or development which it is reasonable to expect.
It is not necessarily the best  standard that could possibly be achieved for the child.
The Act does not allow children to be removed from home simply because other arrangements may cater better for their needs.
Once the standard has been set the court must decide whether the child's health or development falls significantly short of this.
The Guidance tells us that "minor shortcomings in health care or minor deficits in physical, psychological or social development" should not justify proceedings unless they are having, or are likely to have, "serious and lasting effects on the child" (para 3.21).
Where ill-treatment is alleged the similar child test is not appropriate and the court must simply decide on the facts whether the harm is significant.
In ordinary use significant can mean considerable, noteworthy or important.
An act of ill-treatment may be significant because it has a serious effect upon the child.
On the other hand it may have no apparent effect on the child but may still have serious implications.
A young baby who is hit on the head deliberately may sustain no serious injury.
He has still been ill-treated, however, and the ill-treatment may be viewed as significant because of his age, vulnerability and the location of the blow.
An application may be based on actual or likely harm to the child.
A local authority may therefore bring proceedings:(i) to prevent parents from removing a child accommodated by the local authority under voluntary arrangements where a return home is likely to harm the child significantly;(ii) to protect a child who has been significantly harmed in the past where this is likely to happen again because, for example, a parent is known to abuse in certain recurring circumstances;(iii) to protect a child who has never been harmed where the family history clearly places him at risk, eg a new born or a child reaching an age at which other children in the family have been harmed.
(b) Reasonable standard of parental care The court must be satisfied that any harm or likelihood of harm is attributable to poor parenting or the child being beyond parental control.
If this causal link is not present the application will fail.
If a third party has harmed the child, therefore, the statutory criteria will only be met if a reasonable parent would have acted to prevent the harm or was unable to do so because of his lack of control over the child.
The court has to decide what standard of care it would be reasonable to expect a parent to give to the child.
The test is both objective and subjective.
The standard must be fixed by reference to the hypothetical reasonable parent and how he or she would act in certain circumstances but must also be related to the needs of the child in question.
Children with health or developmental problems may need a higher standard of parental care and a reasonable parent would be expected to provide this.
In these circumstances the court is likely to require professional evidence on what will constitute a reasonable standard of parental care.
 "Care" is not defined in the Act but according to the Guidance it "must mean providing for the child's health and total development (physical, intellectual, emotional, social and behavioural) and not just having physical charge of him" (para 3.23).
Having fixed a reasonable standard the court must then consider how those caring for the child, usually the parents, actually measure up to this.
Does the care they are offering or are likely to offer the child meet the required standard?
If it does not the second limb of s31 will be satisfied.
The fact that the parents are doing their very best will be immaterial if a reasonable parent might be expected to do more.
Where parents fail to provide a reasonable standard of care it will be relevant to consider whether they could do so with the provision of appropriate support services (see Chapter 2).
Under s20 of the Act, local authorities have a general duty to provide a range of services to safeguard and promote the welfare of children in need and, in particular, to promote their upbringing within their own families.
Where a child has particularly complex needs a reasonable standard of care within the family may necessarily involve the provision of support services by the local authority.
A local authority would be expected to offer these services before seeking an order unless it had clear evidence that the parents would be unwilling or incapable of making use of them.
A reasonable parent would be expected to accept services offered for the child's benefit.
Where parents are not actually caring for the child at the time of the application the court must consider whether they would be likely to offer a reasonable standard of care if the child were returned to them.
Their past and present behaviour will clearly be relevant together with any change in their circumstances since they last cared for the child.
(c) Beyond parental control A child who is beyond parental control is unable to benefit from the care his parents may offer.
In these circumstances the court is not asked to allocate blame.
The applicant must simply show that the parent is unable to exercise appropriate control and that the child has suffered or is likely to suffer significant harm for this reason.
6 Section 1 principles
Once the threshold criteria in s31 are satisfied the court has power to make a care or supervision order but it is not obliged to do so.
Before making a decision it must apply the fundamental principles set out in s1 of the Act.
(a) The welfare principle Under s1(1) of the Act the child's welfare must be the court's paramount consideration when it determines any question relating to a child's upbringing.
The welfare principle in the Children Act replaces a similar provision contained in previous legislation now repealed.
It is helpful therefore to look at the pre-1991 case law to understand how the welfare principle operates in practice.
In J v C [1970]AC 668 Lord Macdermott described it as:…a process whereby, when all the relevant facts, relationships, claims and wishes of parents, risks, choices and other circumstances are taken into account and weighed, the course to be followed will be that which is most in the interests of the child's welfare as that term has now to be understood.
What the court must do therefore is take into account all the relevant factors and consider how they affect or are likely to affect the child.
Each case must be judged individually but the court will necessarily draw on current theories of child development and the views which prevail within society at any given time.
(b) The checklist The court must have particular regard to the factors listed in the checklist in s1(3) of the Act when considering whether to make, vary or discharge a care or supervision order.
These are:(i) the ascertainable wishes and feelings of the child concerned (considered in the light of his age and understanding);(ii) his physical, emotional and educational needs;(iii) the likely effect on him of any change in his circumstances;(iv) his age, sex, background and any characteristics of his which the court considers relevant;(v) any harm which he has suffered or is at risk of suffering;(vi) how capable each of his parents, and any other person in relation to whom the court considers the question to be relevant, is of meeting his needs;(vii) the range of powers available to the court under the Act.
The content and format of the checklist will usually feature prominently in the proceedings.
The issues it raises are likely to be addressed in evidence and also in reports provided to the court by the guardian ad litem and others.
(c) Presumption of no order The court cannot make an order under the Act unless it considers that this would be better for the child than making no order at all(s1(5)).
This is sometimes referred to as the principle of minimum intervention or the presumption of no order.
What it means in practice is that the court may decide not to make an order, even if the requirements of s31 are satisfied, if it is not convinced that the order will positively benefit the child.
The court will obviously need to refer to the checklist in s1(3) when deciding whether an order will be better for the child than no order.
It will need to consider all available options and must have a clear idea of the applicant's future plans and why these cannot be achieved without a care or supervision order.
The applicant should therefore come to court with a future treatment plan and be prepared to explain why any other type of order under the Act, or indeed no order at all, would be inappropriate.
Given these requirements it is proper to question a local authority on its practice and policy with regard to placement, contact and other related matters.
If, for example, the local authority is unable to find a suitable placement for the child because of a shortage of foster parents the court may decide that a care order is not to the child's benefit despite the shortcomings of his own parents.
This will depend on the circumstances of the case.
Where a child has been seriously and deliberately injured by his parents the court may consider that a care order would still be in his best interests although a suitable placement cannot be found immediately.
It may be useful to refer to another Department of Health publication Patterns & Outcomes in Child Placement (HMSO, 1991) when considering the local authority's proposals for the future.
This uses research data to highlight the problems encountered by children in care and the risks inherent in such arrangements.
Whatever plans the local authority may have the court will have in mind the underlying philosophy of the Act that "children are best looked after within the family with both parents playing a full part and without resort to legal proceedings" (Guidance, vol 1, para 1.5).
The application of this principle to care cases, where the legal process has been put in motion, is still likely to militate against a care order where there is a possibility of placing the child safely with a relative under a residence order.
Where the choice is between a care order or allowing the child to return home the court is often required to balance the risk of physical harm if the child is returned against the equally damaging risk of emotional harm which separation may cause.
This dilemma is particularly acute in sexual abuse cases where the evidence is often inconclusive.
In a recent wardship case decided under the old law, Re H (Minors)(Wardship: Sexual Abuse)[1991]FLR 416 the Court of Appeal had to carry out just such a balancing exercise when deciding whether to make an interim care order in respect of four children alleged to be at risk of sexual abuse.
This posed no problem with regard to three of the children as there was no evidence whatsoever that sexual abuse had actually occurred.
The evidence in respect of the fourth child pointed to possible abuse but was not conclusive.
The Court of Appeal supported the decision at first instance to leave all four children at home but recognised that the local authority had been acting quite properly in bringing the case to court.
(d) Avoidance of delay Section 1(2) requires the court to have regard to the general principle that any delay in determining any question relating to a child's upbringing is likely to prejudice the child's welfare.
This principle is reflected in the rules which govern procedural matters.
Cases may be transferred from one court to another to avoid delay (see Chapter 4).
Where transfer is indicated on other grounds it may be denied if this would cause undue delay which would be prejudicial to the child.
The court must draw up a timetable "with a view to disposing of the application without  delay" and must give directions to ensure that it is adhered to (s33(1)).
The rules of court impose strict time limits on the parties and these may only be varied with leave (see Chapter 5).
The court must consider the need to avoid delay when an adjournment is sought for any reason but particularly where there are concurrent care and criminal proceedings arising from the same facts.
At one time it was usual practice for the care case to be adjourned pending the outcome of the criminal trial so as not to prejudice the defendant's position.
A series of cases in 1988 shifted the balance.
In R v Inner London Juvenile Court, ex pG [1988]FCR 316, Bush J held that the child's welfare was a matter to be considered by the court and balanced against the risk of prejudice to the accused.
In R v Exeter Juvenile Court, ex pH and R v Waltham Forest Juvenile Court, ex pB [1988]FCR 474, the President of the Family Division held that the welfare of the child was paramount and was the principle which must guide a court in deciding whether to adjourn: it was vital for care proceedings to proceed with great dispatch as any delay involved risk to the child.
This principle now has statutory approval in s1(2) and it is unlikely that courts will agree to adjourn care proceedings unless there are particularly compelling arguments for allowing the criminal trial to proceed first.
In these circumstances a decision not to adjourn may be challenged by judicial review.
Section 1(2) does not only apply to procedural matters.
The need to determine substantive issues without delay must also be taken into account when the court is considering what final order it should make.
Temporary solutions which leave important issues unresolved and the child's future uncertain may well prejudice his welfare.
This is not to say, however, that all delay is prejudicial.
There may be circumstances in which delay in reaching a final decision may be beneficial to the child in the long term and it is open to the parties to argue this where appropriate.
7 Interim orders
An application for a care or supervision order will frequently follow upon an emergency protection order.
In such cases it may be necessary to maintain the status quo until the court is in a position to make a final order.
In other cases the child may require the protection of a court order in the interim although no  emergency order has been made.
In these circumstances the court has the choice of making an interim care or supervision order.
It also has power to make a s8 order as an interim measure.
(a) Interim care and supervision orders Under s38(1) (2) the court can make an interim care or supervision order whenever the proceedings are adjourned provided it is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the child's circumstances fall within the ambit of s31(2).
The applicant must therefore produce sufficient evidence to justify a reasonable belief that the grounds for a full order may exist whether or not the application is opposed.
Findings of fact should not be binding on the court at the final hearing and should not be regarded as prejudicial to any of the parties to the proceedings (Guidance, vol 1, para 3.37).
Grounds
The presumption of no order in s1(5) applies to interim orders and the court should not make one unless satisfied that the order would be better for the child than no order.
The Guidance tells us that interim orders represent a substantial, if temporary, intervention in the child's life and "should not be regarded as routine parts of an application for a full care or supervision order" (vol 1, para 3.38).
The court must have regard to the welfare principle in s1(1) and the checklist in s1(3) when considering whether to make an order.
The court must be satisfied that the statutory criteria are still met when making a second or subsequent interim order.
The Guidance, para 3.44 suggests that this requirement may be met "by considering any change in circumstances, any new evidence that may have come to light and any other relevant matter that may cast doubt on the benefit of a new order" .
Certainly this is envisaged in the procedural rules which allow a single justice or a justices' clerk to grant repeat applications for interim orders where all parties consent and the terms of the order are unchanged (FPCR, r28).
The usual rules of procedure and evidence apply to applications for interim orders (see Chapters 5 and 6).
In particular note the requirement for evidence to be disclosed in advance (FPCR, r17; FPR, r4.17 and see Chapter 6, 7).
A first interim care or supervision order made in the proceedings may last up to eight weeks beginning on the date on which it was made.
A second or subsequent order may last up to four weeks.
If the first order is made for less than eight weeks however the balance of this period may be taken up by the second or subsequent orders.
The following examples illustrate how this operates in practice: Example 1 The court makes a first interim care order for two weeks only.
The second interim order may last for six weeks.
Any subsequent orders may last for up to four weeks.
Example 2 The court makes a first interim order for one week followed by a second interim order also for one week.
The third interim order may last for up to six weeks.
Any subsequent orders may last for up to four weeks.
Example 3 The court makes a first interim order for seven weeks.
The second and any subsequent interim orders may last for up to four weeks.
Duration
When fixing the duration of an order the court should consider whether any party who was, or might have been, opposed to the order was in a position to argue his case properly (s38(10)).
A short order may be made, for example, to give a parent the opportunity to return to court with legal representation.
If care proceedings arise from a s37 investigation (see Chapter 3, 1(b)) it should be remembered that the court may have already made a first interim order when making the direction.
Any further orders must therefore be treated as second or subsequent orders for timing purposes.
All interim orders come to an end on the disposal of the application if they have not otherwise expired.
It is also possible to appeal against an interim order under s94(1) (see Chapter 7) or apply for discharge under s39 as discussed at 8 below.
There is no limit to the number of interim orders which the court can make.
Nevertheless s32(1) requires the court to draw up a timetable for disposing of the case without delay and s1(2) requires it to have regard to the general principle that any delay is likely to prejudice the child.
These provisions are likely to  militate against repeat applications and unduly long orders except where strictly necessary.
The court can give directions relating to medical or psychiatric examination or any other kind of assessment when making an interim order or at any time while an order is in force (s38(6)).
See Chapter 11, 5 for discussion of the various types of child assessment which may be carried out.
Note that this power relates to the child only.
The court has no power to order a medical or psychiatric examination of a parent no matter how relevant this may be to the proceedings.
Directions for examination and assessment
Very often an examination or assessment will be necessary for evidential purposes.
In these circumstances it is essential that a direction is sought as the child cannot be medically or psychiatrically examined or otherwise assessed for the purpose of providing expert evidence without the leave of the court (FPCR, r18(1); FPR, r4.18(1)).
Evidence obtained in breach of this requirement will be inadmissible unless the court rules otherwise (see Chapter 6, 4).
When making directions the court's aim is to avoid repeated examinations or assessments.
This may be achieved by allowing parents to nominate their own expert to observe or jointly conduct any examination or assessment.
Where an assessment involves interviewing the child about matters which are central to the case the court may stipulate that all interviews be recorded on video tape.
In Rochdale Borough Council v B W, A K and Others (1991) 155 LG Rev 843 Douglas Brown J advocated this course in cases of ritual abuse.
The court should take into account the views of all parties including the child before making a direction.
The guardian ad litem is expected to convey the child's views to the court.
Where there is a conflict of views it is for the court to decide on the nature of the examination or assessment governed as always by the need to give paramount consideration to the child's welfare.
Where appropriate the court can expressly prohibit examination or assessment or state that it shall not take place unless the court directs otherwise (s38(7)).
This power may be used, for example, to prevent a parent seeking a second or third opinion when this would be contrary to the child's best interests.
Notwithstanding any direction the court may make, a child of sufficient understanding to make an informed decision may refuse  to submit to an examination or other assessment (s38(6)).
This is a difficult area in practice as the legislation specifies no age at which children may be considered to have the requisite degree of understanding.
Certainly a child over the age of 16 may give valid consent to medical treatment (Family Law Reform Act 1969, s8) and may be presumed to have the capacity to withhold consent to treatment and examination unless mentally incapacitated in some way.
Below that age, a child may have the competence to consent or withhold consent but it is a matter of judgement to be exercised in each case by the person responsible for carrying out the examination or assessment (Gillick v West Norfolk and Wisbech Area Health Authority [1986]AC 112).
While age is clearly a highly relevant factor it does not always accurately reflect ability to understand.
In practice the court will usually want to hear the guardian ad litem 's views on the child's capacity to understand before making a direction.
Where the child has sufficient understanding the court may want to know his or her likely response to the proposed direction.
If the child is of sufficient understanding his views should not simply be disregarded because it is difficult to ascertain them.
Where ordinary communication is not possible it may be necessary to use interpreters or employ alternative techniques such as sign language, braille etc.
Where a child's mental condition renders her competent on some days but irrational on others she will lack the ability to make an informed decision (Re R (a Minor)(Wardship: Medical Treatment)(1991) The Times, 31 July).
Once a direction has been made it is the responsibility of the person conducting the examination or assessment to ensure that a child of sufficient understanding does in fact consent.
The child must be fully aware of what he is consenting to and what the possible consequences may be.
No pressure must be placed upon him.
If consent is withheld the doctor (or assessor) is advised to report the matter back to the court, via the guardian ad litem, so that the court may reconsider the position (Guidance, vol 1, para 3.51).
Any party to the proceedings and any person named in the direction may apply for variation (s38(8) (b) and FPCR, r2(1)).
This will include any doctor, psychiatrist or other expert directed to carry out an examination or assessment.
Application for variation must be made on form CHA 55 which must be served on all  parties at least three days before the date fixed for hearing.
The table in Appendix 3 specifies those who must be named as respondents to the application and those entitled to notice.
When making an interim care order a court has the same duty to consider arrangements for contact as it does when making a final care order.
The local authority has the same duty to allow contact between the child and his parents and certain other individuals who have cared for him and the court has the same power to make contact orders under s34.
Contact orders are discussed in greater detail in 8(b) below.
A local authority has the same powers and duties under an interim care order as it does under a final order subject only to the court's power to limit the duration of the order and make directions for examination and assessment.
According to the Guidance: "The temporary nature of the interim order should be allowed for in the exercise of these responsibilities, but it is not a reason for not taking them seriously." 
(para 3.52).
Contact
Effect of orders
Thus, the local authority will have parental responsibility for the child, a duty to review the case in accordance with the regulations, a duty to allow reasonable contact as specified in s34 (see 8(b) below) and a duty to comply with s23 and the relevant regulations when placing the child.
In particular, this means that the placement with a parent, relative, friend or person connected with the child should be considered as a first option unless this would not be reasonably practicable or consistent with the child's welfare (s23(6)).
A local authority does not acquire parental responsibility under an interim supervision order but the order may require the child or the person responsible for him to comply with the supervisor's directions.
The supervisor may direct, for example, that the child be produced for routine health checks at stated intervals.
The power to include a requirement for psychiatric or medical examination or treatment in a final supervision order (Sched 3, paras 4 and 5) does not apply to interim orders.
This is because a treatment requirement would be inappropriate in a short-term order and the court has power to order an examination or assessment under s38(6).
In other respects an interim supervision order  is very like a full order (see 8(c) below) and the supervisor has a duty to advise, assist and befriend the child.
If the court wishes to regulate the child's contact with anyone while a supervision order is in force it must make a contact order under s8.
Section 34 relates only to contact with children in care.
Care orders and supervision orders are discussed in greater detail at 8 below.
Local authority powers and duties in relation to children in care are discussed in Part Four.
(b) "Interim" s8 order The court can make a s8 order where appropriate as an interim measure in care proceedings (ss10(1) and 11(3)).
A s8 order may regulate the child's residence, contact with any named individual and any other matters which a parent would normally decide (see 8(d) below).
If the court makes a residence order it must also make an interim supervision order unless satisfied that the child's welfare will be satisfactorily safeguarded without a supervision order (s38(3)).
An "interim" residence order may be a satisfactory alternative to care where a relative or friend is able to offer the child a home for the duration of the proceedings.
The person named in the order will have parental responsibility for the child while the order is in force.
The local authority can and should provide services under Part III to support the placement where appropriate (see Chapter 2).
Contact between the child and any named person may be regulated by a s8 contact order.
Other issues such as education may be resolved by a specific issue or prohibited steps order also made under s8.
Directions for medical examination or other assessment may be made under s38(6) if an interim supervision order is also made.
For these reasons the Guidance describes the interim residence order as "an attractive alternative to the interim care order" and urges local authorities to "weigh carefully the pros and cons of such an arrangement" (para 3.42).
The court can make a s8 order on the application of any person entitled to apply or granted leave to do so.
Section 10(4) and (5) list those entitled to apply as of right (see p122.
Anyone who does not fall within the listed categories must first seek leave (see Chapter 5 for procedure).
The court also has power to make a s8 order of its own volition even though no application has been made (s10(1) (b)).
A s8 order may contain directions about how it is to be carried into effect and impose conditions on a parent, a non-parent with parental responsibility and anyone with whom the child is living.
The court can specify the period the order will last (s11(7) (c)) and there are no limits on its duration although the court cannot make an order which will last beyond a child's sixteenth birthday unless there are exceptional circumstances (s9(6)).
The court can, for example, make a residence order that will last until the final hearing but the usual time limits will apply to any interim supervision order made at the same time.
Section 8 orders in care proceedings are discussed in greater detail at 8(d) below.
8 Final orders
The court now has a range of options when it comes to disposal.
It can make a care order, a supervision order, a s8 order and a family assistance order.
When making a care order it can also make a contact order under s34. (a) Care orders A care order places a child in the care of a designated local authority which must then receive the child and keep him in care while the order remains in force (s33(1)).
The local authority named must be the authority in whose area the child is ordinarily resident.
Where the child does not reside in the area of a local authority the order must name the authority in whose area any circumstances arose in consequence of which the order is made (s31(8)).
Where a child has moved around a great deal it may be difficult to determine where he ordinarily resides.
In R v Manchester Justices, ex pBannister [1983]4 FLR 1977, a case decided under the old law where residence had to be "habitual" rather than ordinary, the court held that a child resides where it eats, drinks and sleeps.
Thus, a young baby made the subject of an emergency order shortly after birth took the residence of its foster mother and not its natural mother with whom it had never lived.
If an authorised person obtains a care order without first notifying the local authority the child may be kept in the care of the authorised person until he can be received by the local authority but the need for this should seldom arise.
A care order other than an interim order will continue in force until the child's eighteenth birthday unless it is brought to an end sooner (s91(11)).
An order is automatically discharged if the child is adopted or a court makes a residence order under s8.
An order may also be discharged on appeal (s94 and see Chapter 7) or on the application of the local authority, the child or any person with parental responsibility for him (s39 and see below).
The making of a care order will automatically discharge any supervision order, school attendance order or s8 order which may be in force at the time (s91(2) (3)(5)).
If the child is a ward of court the wardship will come to an end (s91(4)).
Duration
Effect
While a care order is in force the local authority will have parental responsibility for the child.
Parental responsibility is defined in s3(1) to mean "all the rights, duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which by law a parent of a child has in relation to the child and his property" .
In the local authority's case the exercise of parental responsibility is subject to certain limitations (s33(3)).
A local authority may not cause the child to be brought up in any religious persuasion other than the one in which he would have been brought up if the order had not been made (s33(6) (a)).
It may not appoint a legal guardian for the child or consent to an adoption order or an order freeing the child for adoption or providing for his adoption abroad (s33(6) (b)).
While the child is in care no-one may cause him to be known by a new surname or remove him from the United Kingdom without either the written consent of every person who has parental responsibility or the leave of the court (s33(7)).
This restriction does not apply to foreign trips of less than one month or arrangements for the child to live permanently outside England and Wales which are governed by Sched 2, para 19 (see p215).
A child in care may therefore go on a family holiday abroad with his foster parents but he may not be known by their surname however long-standing the placement.
It is important to understand that parents do not lose the parental responsibility they have for their child when a care order is made although they may not be entirely free to exercise it as they wish.
Parents and local authorities are expected to act in partnership motivated by the child's best interests.
They may each  act alone and without the agreement of the other but not in a way which is incompatible with the order (s2(7) (8)).
In addition, the local authority has the power to determine the extent to which a parent may exercise his or her parental responsibility but may only exercise this power where necessary to safeguard or promote the child's welfare (s33(3) (b)(4)).
Local authorities are expected to pay more than lip service to this requirement.
The Guidance says that where they intend "to limit the way in which a parent meets his responsibility this should be discussed with the parent and incorporated in the plan of arrangements for the child whilst in care so that it may be subject to periodic review" (para 3.68).
No matter what limitations are imposed on parents they may still do whatever is reasonable in the circumstances to safeguard and promote the child's welfare while he is in their care (s33(5)).
A useful analogy is to imagine the local authority in the driving seat.
The parents have a place in the car and should be consulted on the destination and route.
They may even drive on occasions but must not deviate from the agreed route except where reasonable to protect the child.
Other rights, duties, powers and responsibilities which a parent may have in relation to the child and his property under other legislation are also preserved while a care order is in force (s33(9)).
A parent may, for example, give or withhold consent to the adoption or marriage of a child in care although in the case of marriage, the local authority's consent is also required.
A parent will retain his rights under the Education Act 1981 in relation to any assessment of the child's special educational needs.
He or she will continue to have a duty to maintain the child notwithstanding the care order (see p192).
Local authorities must comply with the duties and obligations imposed in Part III of the Act when looking after children in care.
These duties are discussed in detail in Part Four of this book.
The court may discharge a care order on the application of the child, the local authority named in the order or any person with parental responsibility for the child (s39(1)).
Discharge
Application must be made on form CHA 28 to the court which made the original order.
The table in Appendix 3 specifies those who must be named as respondents and those entitled to notice of the application.
The application must be served on all respondents  at least seven days before the first directions appointment or hearing.
There is a duty to appoint a guardian ad litem unless satisfied that this is not necessary to safeguard the child's interests (s41 and FPCR, r2(2) (d); FPR, r4.2(2) (d)).
When making an appointment the court must consider appointing any guardian who has acted for the child previously (FPCR, r10(8); FPR, r4.10(8)).
In practice this should mean the guardian who acted when the original order was made.
Procedure is governed generally by the FPCR in the family proceedings court and the FPR in the county court and High Court (see Chapter 5).
For rules of evidence which apply see Chapter 6.
A court may substitute a supervision order for a care order on an application for discharge (s39(4)).
It may also make a s8 order and/or a family assistance order (see (e) below).
If an application for the discharge of a care order, or the substitution of a supervision order for a care order is unsuccessful no further application may be made without the leave of the court for a period of six months (s91(15) (a)(d)).
This prohibition does not apply to interim orders.
(b) Contact orders A local authority must allow a child in care to have reasonable contact with:(i) his parents;(ii) any guardian;(iii) any person who had the benefit of a residence order immediately before the care order was made; and (iv) any person who had care of the child immediately before the care order was made by virtue of an order made under the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court (s34(1)).
In addition, the authority has a duty to promote contact between the child and his parents, relatives, friends and others connected with him (Sched 3, para 15(1)).
Local authorities, parents and others concerned with the child are expected to agree reasonable arrangements for contact before a care order, whether final or interim, is made.
The court must consider these arrangements before making an order and must invite the parties to comment on the arrangements (s34(11)).
The court can make a contact order when making a care order even though no application has been made (s34(5)).
It can also make an order in any family proceedings in connection with a  child in care.
If there are adoption proceedings, for example, and the court decides not to make an adoption order it can make a contact order under s34.
If a relative applies for a residence order to discharge the child from care the court can make a s34 contact order if it decides not to grant the residence order.
An order for contact with a child in care is usually referred to as a s34 contact order to distinguish it from a contact order under s8 of the Act.
Note that a s34 order cannot be made in respect of a child accommodated by a local authority under a voluntary arrangement.
In this situation contact can only be regulated by a s8 order.
Anyone entitled to contact with a child in care under s34(1) can apply for a contact order (s34(3) (a)).
This includes an unmarried father whether or not he has acquired parental responsibility for the child by court order or agreement.
Others seeking contact can only apply for an order with the leave of the court (s34(3) (b)).
An application can be made in the original care proceedings or at any time while the child remains in care although there is a prohibition on repeat applications without leave within a six-month period (s91(17) and see below).
The court can make whatever order it considers appropriate and can impose conditions.
Who can apply?
Parents are likely to seek contact orders if they cannot agree reasonable arrangements with the local authority and would like the court to define the frequency, nature or location of contact.
Note, however, that problems regarding contact may also be resolved by use of the representations procedure which local authorities are obliged to set up under s26 of the Act (see Chapter 20).
The local authority or the child can apply for an order:(i) under s34(2) specifying the contact to be allowed between the child and any named person;(ii) under s34(4) authorising the local authority to refuse to allow contact between the child and any person automatically entitled under s34(1).
A local authority must apply to the court if it seeks to deny contact to a parent or any other person entitled under s34(1) or by virtue of a court order.
In an emergency, however, it may refuse to allow contact for up to seven days if it is necessary to do so in order to safeguard or promote the child's welfare (s34(6)).
The Contact with Children Regulations 1991 (SI No 891) require local authorities to notify parents, and any others entitled  to contact under s34(1) of a decision to refuse contact as a matter of urgency.
They should also notify the child, if he is of sufficient understanding, and anyone else whose wishes and feelings they consider to be relevant.
Where appropriate, notification should include the reasons for the decision, its duration, and the remedies available in case of dissatisfaction.
The court may vary or discharge any order made under s34 on the application of the local authority, the child or the person named in the order (s34(9)).
An application can be made to vary or discharge an order refusing contact as well as an order which permits it.
Variation and discharge
It is also possible for a contact order to be "varied" without recourse to the court if the local authority and person entitled to contact agree and certain formalities are complied with (Contact with Children Regulations 1991, reg 3).
Within seven days of the agreement to vary, written notification must be given to the child if he is of sufficient understanding, his parents and anyone entitled to contact under s34(1).
Where the child is of sufficient understanding the local authority must also obtain his consent before departing from the terms of an order.
A similar duty to notify exists where a local authority varies or suspends arrangements for contact between the child and any person which are made voluntarily and not under a s34 contact order.
An application for a contact order under s34 must be made on form CHA 21.
An application for an order refusing contact must be made on form CHA 23.
An application to vary or discharge an existing order must be made on form CHA 55.
Proceedings must be commenced in the family proceedings court unless there are other relevant proceedings pending elsewhere (see Chapter 4).
An application for variation or discharge must be made to the court which made the original order.
Procedure
The table in Appendix 3 specifies those who must be named as respondents and those entitled to notice of the application.
The application must be served on all respondents at least three days before the first directions appointment or hearing.
There is a duty to appoint a guardian ad litem unless satisfied that this is not necessary to safeguard the child's interests (s41 and FPCR, r2(2) (d); FPR, r4.2(2) (d)).
When making an appointment the court must consider appointing any guardian who has acted for the child previously (FPCR, r10(8); FPR, r4.10(8)).
In applications for variation or discharge therefore the court is likely to appoint the guardian who acted when the original order was made.
Procedure is governed generally by the FPCR in the family proceedings court and the FPR in the county court and High Court (see Chapter 5).
For rules of evidence which apply see Chapter 6.
An unsuccessful applicant for an order under s34 cannot make a further application within six months unless the court grants leave (s91(17)).
This prohibition applies to all proceedings under s34 including applications to vary or discharge existing orders.
Prohibition on repeat applications
The court also has a general power to prohibit further applications without leave when disposing of any application for an order under the Act (s91(14)).
This provision may be used to prevent a vexatious litigant from making repeated applications for contact which have little chance of success.
(c) Supervision orders A supervision order places a child under the supervision of a designated local authority, or in certain circumstances a probation officer.
The court cannot designate a local authority unless the authority agrees or the child lives, or will live in its area (Sched 3, para 9(1)).
A child can only be placed under the supervision of a probation officer if the local authority request this and there is already a probation officer working with another member of the household (Sched 3, para 9(2)).
The making of a supervision order automatically terminates any earlier care order or supervision order which would otherwise continue in force (Sched 3, para 10).
Schedule 3 of the Act contains detailed provisions relating to supervision orders and all references are to paragraphs in that Schedule unless otherwise stated.
A supervision order will last for one year beginning with the date on which it was made unless the supervisor applies to the court to extend it (para 6).
An order may be extended on  more than one occasion but may not last more than three years in total and cannot be extended beyond the child's eighteenth birthday.
Duration and extension of orders
Application for extension must be made on form CHA 49 to the court which made the original order.
The table in Appendix 3 specifies those who must be named as respondents and those entitled to notice of the application.
The application must be served on all respondents at least seven days before the first directions appointment or hearing.
There is a duty to appoint a guardian ad litem unless satisfied that this is not necessary to safeguard the child's interests (s41 and FPCR, r2(2) (d); FPR, r4.2(2) (d)).
When making an appointment the court must consider appointing the guardian who acted for the child previously (FPCR, r10(8); FPR, r4.10(8)).
Procedure is governed generally by the FPCR in the family proceedings court and the FPR in the county court and High Court (see Chapter 5).
For rules of evidence which apply see Chapter 6.
There are no specific criteria for extension but the court must apply the general principles in s1 of the Act (see 6 above).
A supervision order will cease to have effect if certain steps are taken or orders made under s25(1) (a) or (b) of the Child Abduction and Custody Act 1985 which provide for the recognition and enforcement of foreign custody orders.
While a supervision order is in force the supervisor has a duty to:(i) advise, assist and befriend the supervised child;(ii) take such steps as are reasonably necessary to give effect to the order;(iii) consider whether or not to apply for discharge or variation where the order is not wholly complied with or may no longer be necessary (s35(1)).
A supervision order may include certain specific requirements which give a supervisor additional powers or require the child or person caring for him to act in a particular way.
An order may require the child to keep the supervisor informed of any change of address (para 8(1) (a)).
In addition, any person with parental responsibility for the child must, on request, inform  the supervisor of the child's address if known (para 8(2) (a)).
This also applies to any person with whom the child is living.
An order may require the child to allow the supervisor to visit him at the place where he is living (para 8(1) (b)).
In addition, the person with whom the child is living must allow the supervisor reasonable contact with the child (para 8(2) (b)).
Duties of supervisor
Specific requirements
Information
Access to the child
A supervisor denied access to a supervised child may apply for a warrant of police assistance under s102 if he has been obstructed or this is likely to be the case.
A police officer may then use reasonable force to gain entry to premises and access to the child.
Application may be made ex parte on form CHA 62 (see Chapter 5 for procedure).
An application for a warrant should be made to a magistrates' court unless there are public law proceedings pending in the county court or the High Court (APO, art 3(3)).
An order may require the child to comply with any directions given by the supervisor:(i) to live at a specified place or places for certain periods of time;(ii) to present himself to a specified person or persons at times and places as specified;(iii) to participate in specified activities at certain times (para 2).
Power to give directions to the child
It is left to the supervisor to specify how and to what extent a child shall live away from home or participate in any activities under these provisions.
The power to give directions is wide ranging but does not encompass medical or psychiatric treatment or examination which are governed by separate provisions discussed below.
A supervisor may direct that the child participate in educational or training activities.
He may be required to report to a particular individual or place at regular intervals as part of a monitoring process.
He may be required to live away from home for a period as part of the "treatment" programme devised by the supervisor.
In the case of a young child it is unrealistic to expect the child to comply with the supervisor's directions without the  co-operation and commitment of the person caring for him.
The court may therefore include a requirement that the person responsible for the child take steps to ensure that the child complies with the supervisor's directions (para 3(1)).
In this context "the responsible person" means any person who has parental responsibility for the child and any other person with whom the child is living.
A "responsible person" requirement
The court may take the view that the responsible person needs to participate in certain activities with the child or on his own.
In this case it can include a requirement in the order that he comply with the supervisor's directions to attend at a specified place to participate in specified activities either with or without the child (para 3(1) (c)(2)).
This power could be used, for example, to direct a parent to attend a therapeutic counselling group or classes in practical child care.
In addition to these requirements a responsible person may be required to keep the supervisor informed of his address if it differs from the child's (para 3(3)).
If the order includes provision for medical or psychiatric examination or treatment he may be required to ensure that the child complies (see below).
Note that the court can only impose an obligation on a responsible person with that person's consent.
A court can include a requirement for the child to be medically or psychiatrically examined on one occasion or from time to time as directed by the supervisor (para 4(2)).
The order should specify where any examination is to take place and may also name the person who is to conduct it.
Psychiatric and medical examinations
A child cannot be required to attend a hospital or mental nursing home as an in-patient for the purposes of examination unless the court is satisfied on the evidence of a registered medical practitioner, that:(i) the child may be suffering from a physical or mental condition that requires, or may be susceptible to treatment; and (ii) a period as a resident patient is necessary if the examination is to be carried out properly (para 4(3)).
Where a child has sufficient understanding to make an informed decision, a court cannot include a requirement for examination unless satisfied that he consents (para 4(4) (a)).
The court must also be satisfied that satisfactory arrangements have been, or can be made, for the examination (para 4(4) (b)).
When providing for examination the court can also, with consent, require a responsible person (see above) to take all reasonable steps to ensure that the child is examined in compliance with the order (para 3(1) (b)).
This power is extremely useful when a supervision order is made in respect of a very young child who cannot be expected to present himself for examination.
A supervision order may include a requirement that the child submit to medical treatment if:(i) it is satisfied on the evidence of a registered medical practitioner, that the child's physical condition requires, or may be susceptible to treatment; and (ii) that satisfactory arrangements have been, or can be made, for the treatment; and (iii) that the child consents to the order, where he has sufficient understanding to make an informed decision (para 5).
Psychiatric and medical treatment
The same conditions apply to a requirement for psychiatric treatment except that the doctor must be approved under s12 of the Mental Health Act 1983 and the court must be satisfied that the child's condition does not warrant detention under the mental health legislation.
The order must specify the period of treatment and whether the child is to be an in-patient or out-patient.
The treatment must be by, or under the direction of, a registered medical practitioner who may be specified in the order.
If the child is to be a resident patient the treatment must take place in a health service hospital (which includes a hospital managed by a health service trust).
If he is to be treated as an out-patient the order may specify the place of treatment.
The doctor responsible for the treatment must make a written report to the supervisor if he is unwilling to continue with the treatment or he forms the view that:(i) it should continue beyond the period specified in the order;(ii) the child needs different treatment;(iii) he is not susceptible to treatment; or (iv) he does not require further treatment.
The supervisor must then refer the matter to the court which may make an order cancelling or varying the treatment requirement.
As with medical examination, the court may include, with consent, a requirement that a responsible person take all reasonable steps to ensure that the child receives treatment in accordance with the order (para 3(1) (b)).
The court may vary or discharge a supervision order on the application of the child, the supervisor or any person with parental responsibility for the child (s39(2)).
In addition, any person with whom the child is living may apply for variation of any requirement in the order which affects him (s39(3)).
Discharge and variation
Application must be made on form CHA 28 to the court which made the original order.
The table in Appendix 3 specifies those who must be named as respondents and those entitled to notice of the application.
The application must be served on all respondents at least seven days before the first directions appointment or hearing.
There is a duty to appoint a guardian ad litem unless satisfied that this is not necessary to safeguard the child's interests (s41 and FPCR, r2(2) (d); FPR, r4.2(2) (d)).
When making an appointment the court must consider appointing any guardian who has acted for the child previously (FPCR, r10(8); FPR, r4.10(8)).
In practice this should mean the guardian who acted when the original order was made.
Procedure is governed generally by the FPCR in the family proceedings court and the FPR in the county court and High Court (see Chapter 5).
For rules of evidence which apply see Chapter 6.
A court cannot substitute a care order for a supervision order on an application for discharge.
If a local authority seeks a care order in respect of a supervised child it must apply under s31 and satisfy the relevant criteria.
Any care order then made will automatically discharge the existing supervision order (s91(3)).
A court has power to make a s8 order whether or not it varies or discharges the supervision order.
If an application for discharge of a supervision order is unsuccessful no further application may be made without the leave of the court for a period of six months (s91(15)).
This prohibition does not apply to interim orders.
(d) Section 8 orders The court can make an order under s8 of the Act as an alternative to a care order or a supervision order.
It can also make a s8  order in addition to a supervision order but not a care order.
A s8 order can be made in care proceedings whether or not the court finds the s31 criteria for a care or supervision order satisfied.
The general principles in s1 will apply (see 6 above).
In particular, the court must be satisfied that the order would be better for the child than no order at all (s1(5)).
The following orders can be made under s8: A residence orderwhich settles the arrangements to be made as to the person with whom the child is to live.
A contact orderwhich requires the person with whom the child lives, or is to live, to allow the child to visit or stay with the person named in the order or for that person and the child to otherwise have contact with each other.
A prohibited steps orderwhich provides that no step which could be taken by a parent in meeting his parental responsibility for a child, and which is of the kind specified in the order, shall be taken by any person without the consent of the court.
A specific issue orderwhich gives directions for the purpose of determining a specific question which has arisen, or which may arise, in connection with any aspect of parental responsibility for a child.
The court can make any combination of orders under s8.
It could, for example, make a residence order in favour of the child's grandmother together with a contact order regulating contact between the child and his parents and a specific issue order resolving a dispute over the child's education.
A residence order may be made in favour of two or more people who are not living together and may specify the period which the child shall spend in each household (s10(4)).
The order could, for example, provide for the child to live with his grandmother during term time and his parents during the school holidays if this was felt to be in his best interests.
A s8 order may contain various directions and conditions (s11(7)).
The court may include directions as to how the order is to be carried out.
It may impose conditions on the person in whose favour the order is made or on a parent or person with whom the child is living.
The order, or any provisions it contains, may be limited in duration.
In addition, the court has a general power to include incidental, supplemental or consequential provisions as it thinks fit (s11(7) (d)).
The court can make a s8 order of its own volition or on the application of any person who is entitled to apply or has been granted leave to do so (s10(1)).
A parent or guardian can always apply for a s8 order in the course of care proceedings.
This includes an unmarried father whether or not he has parental responsibility.
Certain other individuals are entitled to seek a residence or contact order as of right but must obtain leave to apply for a prohibited steps or specific issue order (s10(5)).
The following fall into this category:(i) step-parents;(ii) anyone with whom the child has lived for a period of three years within the last five; the relevant period of three years need not be continuous but must not have ended more than three months before the application is made;(iii) where the child is in care, anyone who has the consent of the local authority;(iv) where the child is not in care, anyone who has the consent of each person with parental responsibility for the child.
Who can apply?
Anyone else must obtain leave to make an application.
This includes the child who will only be granted leave if the court is satisfied that he has sufficient understanding to make the application (s10(9)).
Note that anyone who is or was a local authority foster parent for the child within the preceding six months cannot apply for leave to seek a s8 order unless he has the consent of the authority or he is a relative of the child or the child has lived with him for at least three years preceding the application (s9(3)).
 "Relative" in this context means a grandparent, brother, sister, uncle or aunt (of the full blood, half blood or by affinity) or a step-parent (s105).
Application for leave is governed by FPCR, r3, FPR, r4.3.
There is no prescribed application form.
Applicants must simply file a written request setting out the reasons for the application accompanied by a draft application for the s8 order sought on form CHA 10.
The court will either grant the request on written application or fix a date for hearing.
In deciding whether to grant leave the court must have regard to:(i) the nature of the proposed application;(ii) the applicant's connection with the child;(iii) the risk of harmful disruption to the child's life; and (iv) where the child is being looked after by a local authority, the authority's plans for the child's future and the wishes and feelings of the parents (s10(9)).
If leave is granted the draft application on form 10 is treated as a formal application for a s8 order.
Procedure is then governed generally by the FPCR in the family proceedings court and the FPR in the county court and High Court (see Chapter 5).
For rules of evidence which apply see Chapter 6.
Section 9 of the Act imposes certain restrictions on the making of s8 orders.
A local authority cannot apply for a residence or contact order and the court cannot make such an order in its favour (s9(2)).
If a local authority decides that a residence order in favour of a relative may be appropriate after initiating care proceedings it cannot make a formal application for a residence order but it can recommend that the court follow this course.
It can also encourage the relative in question to seek an order.
Restrictions on the making of s8 orders
The court cannot exercise its powers to make a specific issue or prohibited steps order with a view to achieving a result which could be achieved by a residence or contact order (s9(5) (a)).
Neither can it make a specific issue or prohibited steps order so as to require a child to be accommodated by a local authority as this would in effect allow the authority to take the child into care without necessarily satisfying the s31 criteria (s9(5) (b)).
A s8 order will normally come to an end when the child reaches the age of 16 although the court can extend it to the child's eighteenth birthday if the circumstances of the case are exceptional (ss9(6), 91(10) (11)).
The Act gives no indication of circumstances which might be deemed to be exceptional.
Variation and discharge The following may apply for variation or discharge of a s8 order:(i) anyone entitled to apply for an order under a s8 order without seeking leave (see above);(ii) the person who applied for the original order; or (iii) in the case of a contact order, the person named in the order.
Application must be made on form CHA 55 to the court which made the original order.
The table in Appendix 3 specifies those who must be named as respondents and those entitled to notice of the application.
Procedure is governed generally by the FPCR in the family proceedings court and the FPR in the county court and High Court (see Chapter 5).
For rules of evidence which apply see Chapter 6. (e) Family assistance orders The court has power to make a family assistance order in care proceedings (s16).
A family assistance order requires a local authority or probation officer to advise, assist and (where appropriate) befriend any person named in the order.
Those named may include the child, any parent or guardian, anyone with whom the child is living and anyone with the benefit of a contact order.
Duration
It is important to distinguish the family assistance order from a supervision order.
A family assistance order can only be made with the consent of the adults concerned.
It is designed primarily to assist families to overcome problems associated with separation or divorce (the Guidance, vol 1, para 2.50).
It may last no more than six months.
Where the court makes a residence order in care proceedings a family assistance order will not be appropriate if there is a need to protect the child and provide local authority services.
In these circumstances a supervision order will be more appropriate and can be made provided that the s31 criteria are satisfied.
There may nevertheless be a small number of cases in which a family assistance order may be appropriate and the court may make one if satisfied that the circumstances of the case are exceptional (s16(3)).
Note that it is not possible to apply for a family assistance order; the court must act of its own volition.
In most cases an order will accompany a s8 order but this is not a prerequisite.
The court can make a family assistance order alone.
Where there is a s8 order in force, however, the social worker or probation officer concerned may refer to the court the question of variation or discharge of that order.
A referral may be made, for example, where the s8 order is not working well or fulfilling its original purpose.
When making an order the court will usually name the local authority for the area in which the child lives or will live.
If, for any reason, it selects another authority it must first obtain that authority's agreement to the order (s16(7)).