

Freedom to Communicate
 "We define freedom of the press as that degree of freedom from restraint which is essential to enable proprietors, editors and journalists to advance the public interest by publishing the facts and opinions without which a democratic electorate cannot make responsible judgments." 
Third Royal Commission on the Press.
The phrase "freedom of the press" was the chant of the mob which carried courageous publishers in triumph through the streets of London after they had been acquitted by juries for seditious attacks on George III and his ministers.
It is a slogan which, for all its rhetorical flourish and historic associations, has never become a part of the law of Britain.
In the United States, by contrast, it was embodied in the First Amendment to the constitution: "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances." 
Britain has no written constitution.
Its laws are made piecemeal by Parliament and by judges, who are placed under no overriding constitutional obligation to preserve or protect the media's right to report matters of public interest.
British law comprises thousands of separate statutes and decided cases: none of them give unqualified support to freedom of expression.
By and large, Parliament and the judiciary have taken the view that free speech is a very good thing so long as it does not cause trouble.
Then, it may become expensive speech — speech visited with costly court actions, fines and damages, and occasionally imprisonment.
 "Free speech" , in fact, means no more than speech from which illegal utterances are subtracted.
If that sounds a circuitous definition compared to the sweeping prose of the First Amendment, it nonetheless reflects the pragmatic approach of British law lords: "" Free "" in itself is vague and indeterminate.
It must take its colour from the context.
Compare, for instance, its use in free speech, free love, free dinner and free trade.
Free speech does not mean free speech: it means speech hedged in by all the laws against defamation, blasphemy, sedition and so forth.
It means freedom governed by law…"
In practice, the free press is not a "free" press: it is what is left of the copy by laws and by lawyers.
Defamation, blasphemy and sedition have been with us for centuries, but in recent years new rods have been fashioned and old ones polished for editorial backs: breach of confidence, contempt of court, official secrecy, "D" notices, incitement to disaffection, prevention of terrorism, copyright — the grounds for censorship are legion.
There are many reasons for this increase.
When Wilkes and Cobbett were radical journalists, facts belonged to everyone.
But today information is property, which can be bought and sold, exploited and embargoed.
The courts can order presses to be stopped for the same reasons as they can order assets to be frozen or property to be returned.
In the days when pamphleteers demanded democracy, they were fighting a ruling class whose power and position was obvious to all.
It had few civil servants and therefore few official secrets.
But for today's public servant, secrecy is a form of power: actions and advice, of the most routine nature, must not be shared with the people.
We have become more civilised and more sensitive to the needs of individuals, and more reluctant to pander to prurience: hence our law against naming rape or blackmail victims, the limits on reporting evidence in divorce cases, and the rules against revealing old criminal convictions.
We have also become concerned — in a confused and unscientific way — about the psychological power of new forms of communication.
They need "control" and "regulation" and "licensing" , words which are sometimes used as euphemisms for censorship.
Wilkes and Cobbett wrote for a society which still shuddered at the memory of the puritans and their censors, the good people appointed by Cromwell to license and to regulate the press.
Today, that sort of licensing is accepted for much of the media.
Television, radio, cable and video are all "regulated" by boards and commissions, mostly made up of Government appointees.
The expression of facts and ideas and opinions never can be absolutely free.
Words can do damage, even if they are true — by betraying a military position, or by prejudicing a trial, or by inciting racial hatred.
Even the Americans have come to agree that Congress can, despite the First Amendment, make laws stopping people from shouting "fire" in crowded theatres.
It behoves all who wish journalists and broadcasters to enjoy "rights" to acknowledge that others have valid claims to legal protection as well— to lead a private life, to undergo a trial free from sensational prejudice, and to have false accusations corrected with the same prominence as they are made.
These "rights" are in some cases much more  poorly protected than the media rights which form the principal subject of this book.
If those who work in the media wish to enjoy the freedom desired for them by the Royal Commission — the freedom to publish facts and opinions which are in the public interest — they may have to forgo some of the comparative freedom they enjoy to publish facts and opinions which are not.
Free speech is what is left of speech after the law has had its say.
But even after that long-winded exercise, a considerable amount remains.
An amount which is still a matter for pride, if tinged with apprehension at the increasing number of unnecessary restrictions.
Despite these restrictions, there are six rules of fundamental importance in the day-to-day defence of public interest reporting.
They form the procedural pillars for freedom of expression in Britain.
The European Convention on Human Rights
The European Convention on Human Rights was drawn up in 1951.
Politically, it was the product of a desire for Western European unity, and its ideals were shaped by the need to have some legal bulwark against a resurgence of fascism, and by a wish to articulate those civil rights which seemed threatened by communist regimes in Eastern Europe.
Britain ratified the Convention in 1951 but did not accept its enforcement machinery until 1966, and its impact on English law was not apparent until the next decade, when the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg began to hand down decisions holding the United Kingdom in breach of the Convention for failures to guarantee certain basic rights to its citizens.
Any person who believes that his or her rights under the Convention have been infringed by a court ruling or an administrative act, and who has exhausted all the possibilities of redress in the British courts may complain to Strasbourg.
If the complaint is upheld, the British Government is required by the Convention to change the law which permitted the original infringement.
The Convention is not directly enforceable in UK courts.
British judges are not "bound" by the Convention — they are obliged to follow UK law.
But where local law is absent or ambiguous, and British courts have the opportunity to shape the law according to their notion of an appropriate public policy, they should give effect to the policy laid down by the Convention.
In cases involving media rights heard in British courts today, the Convention and the cases on it decided by the European Court are usually cited in argument on behalf of the media.
They are not binding on the judges, but they have a persuasive authority where judicial choice is possible.
Article 10: "Freedom of expression" 
Article 10(1) of the European Convention sets out the basic principle which the makers of common and statute law in Britain have never quite mustered the courage to adopt: "Everyone has the right to freedom of expression.
This right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public authority and regardless of frontiers."
The European Court of Human Rights has not hesitated to give prominence to Article 10.
It has observed: "Freedom of expression constitutes one of the essential foundations of a society, one of the basic conditions for its progress and for the development of every man.
Subject to paragraph 2 of Article 10, it is applicable not only to "information"  "or"  "ideas" "that are favourably received, but also to those that offend, shock or disturb the state or any sector of the population.
Such are the demands of that pluralism, tolerance and broadmindedness without which there is no democratic society."
There are, of course, exceptions.
Article 10 does not prevent States from licensing radio, television or the cinema.
Article 10(2) sets out the qualifications in detail: "The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalities as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary." 
At first blush, Article 10(2) seems to take away most of the freedom guaranteed by Article 10(1).
In fact, it marks an improvement on English law in three ways:(1) Any infringement of free speech must be "prescribed by law" .
That means that the restriction must be clear, certain and predictable.
Law, to be "prescribed" , must be adequately accessible and formulated with sufficient precision to enable citizens to regulate their conduct.
A judge who exercised some common law power in an entirely novel way would be in breach of the Convention, even if he claimed to act "in the interests" of one of the excepted values.
(2) The requirement that any infringement must be "necessary in a democratic society" is even more helpful to the media, thanks to the interpretation of that phrase by the European Court.
The court has held that it means something more than "useful" , "reasonable" or "desirable." 
Any restriction on the media, to be valid, must in the first place be justified by a "pressing social need," and then, even if the  social need is pressing, the restriction must be reasonably proportionate to the aim of responding to that need.
(3) The court has adopted a general approach to the interpretation of Article 10 which is favourable to the media.
It has said that Article 10 should not be seen as requiring a "balance" between, on the one hand, the value of freedom of expression and, on the other, the value of national security, crime prevention and the other exceptions in Article 10(2).
These are not competing principles of equal weight: the values listed in Article 10(2) are simply "a number of exceptions which must be strictly interpreted" .
The importance of Article 10
It is a sad comment that the firmest legal guarantee of freedom of expression should be found in a Convention drafted and developed in the main by lawyers of other European countries.
The importance of the Convention for the securing of media rights in Britain was first demonstrated by the decision of the European Court in The Sunday Times case.
 "The Sunday Times" proposed to publish an article about the history of the manufacture and marketing of Thalidomide, a pregnancy drug which caused birth deformities.
These issues were in dispute in long-running legal actions for negligence between parents and the drug manufacturers, and might ultimately have been tried by a judge.
The English courts ruled that the article could not be published, because it "prejudged" issues in litigation, and was therefore a contempt of court.
The newspaper and its journalists applied to the European Court, claiming that the ban was an infringement of their right to freedom of expression.
The British Government argued that the contempt law, as applied in this case, was necessary to uphold "the authority of the judiciary" and the legal rights of the drug manufacturers.
The Court held for "The Sunday Times" .
It said that the Thalidomide disaster was a matter of public concern, and the mere fact that litigation was in progress did not alter the right and indeed responsibility of the mass media to impart information of public interest.
The public had a right to be properly informed, which could only be denied them if it appeared absolutely certain that the article would have presented a threat to judicial authority.
In the circumstances, the article was moderate in tone and presented both sides of the case; it would not have impaired judicial authority or added much to the growing moral pressure on the manufacturers to settle the claim.
It followed that the interference by the English courts did not correspond to a social need sufficiently pressing to outweigh the public interest in freedom of expression.
It was both out of proportion to any social need to protect the impartiality of the courts and the rights of litigants, and it was not a restriction necessary in a democratic society to uphold these values.
The Sunday Times case had two important consequences.
Firstly, because of its treaty obligations, the British Government was obliged to  change the law on contempt of court.
This it did by the 1981 Contempt of Court Act.
No longer can investigative stories be stopped merely because they might "prejudge" a matter which may have to be decided in litigation at some future time.
Secondly, the European Court judgment provided a method of approach to media rights which can be adopted by British judges.
The extent to which they will do so, of course, depends on their personal attraction to the ideals of the Convention and the jurisprudence of its court.
Lord Scarman has been its most enthusiastic advocate, urging that English media law should be interpreted, as far as possible, in conformity with Article 10: "If the issue should ultimately be a question of legal policy, we must have regard to the country's international obligation to observe the European Convention as interpreted by the European Court of Human Rights" .
Lord Scarman's approach seems now to be accepted by the House of Lords.
Its two most recent decisions on the Government's power to restrain publications by former Crown servants — Spycatcher and the Cavendish Memoirs — were marked by references to the Convention and by an obvious desire manifested by most of the judges to ensure that both the law they were declaring and the decision they were taking in accordance with it would be seen to comply with Article 10.
Complaints to Strasbourg under the Convention can be used to force the Government to change administrative practices which shut out the media, and even to oblige it to legislate to give the media specific legal rights necessary to obtain access to information.
The leading example is Hodgson and Channel 4 v UK: Until 1989, the media had no right to challenge a gag order imposed by a judge at a criminal trial.
Newspapers and television stations had no standing to apply to the trial judge to lift the order, and there was no avenue open for them to appeal to any other court.
This situation was in blatant breach of Article 13 of the European Convention, which requires that anyone whose rights (eg to freedom of expression) are violated should have an "effective remedy" .
Channel 4 had no remedy at all when the judge at the Official Secrets trial of Clive Ponting issued an order banning the television station from using actors to read each evening from the day's transcripts of this controversial trial.
So both Channel 4 and Godfrey Hodgson (the programme's presenter) filed a complaint with the European Commission at Strasbourg, alleging that the order was in breach both of Article 10 and Article 13.
The Commission upheld the complaint under Article 13.
The UK Government accepted the ruling, and negotiated a "friendly settlement" with the complainants, which took the form of drafting a new law (now s159 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988) which gives the media a special right to appeal to the Court of Appeal against gag orders or decisions to exclude the press and public from any part of a trial (see further p264).
The Hodgson case shows how individual journalists who are aware of the Convention can use it to enhance the rights of the media generally.
The initiative in the case came from Tim Crook, an Old Bailey reporter who (with the support of his union, the NUJ) challenged a secrecy order in the Divisional Court, in a case which established that the media had no effective remedy under British law.
(It is a prerequisite of a complaint to Strasbourg that any possible domestic remedy should first be explored.)
He then filed his application with the European Commission, which was favourably settled by the UK Government after the ruling in the Hodgson case.
Both Crook and NUJ officials were able to participate in the settlement negotiations, conducted with the help of the European Commission, which led to the drafting of s159.
The UK Government, as part of the settlement, agreed to pay all their legal costs.
The practical importance of the European Convention for the British media is lessened by its odd status.
It is not binding on the courts, although it remains a treaty obligation for the Government to ensure that the law conforms with it.
The English Courts can go no further, in the absence of a Bill of Rights "incorporating" the Convention into English law, than to apply it when interpreting ambiguous statutes, on the presumption that Parliament must intend to legislate in a manner consistent with the United Kingdom's treaty obligations.
The Convention cannot be invoked in the English courts to strike down ministerial or bureaucratic actions which imperil free speech: such actions can only be attacked on the very limited "judicial review" basis offered by domestic law, ie if they are unreasonable, irrational or perverse.
In 1989 the Court of Appeal declined to apply any of these adjectives to the Home Secretary's decision to prohibit radio and television broadcasts which included statements by representatives (even democratically elected representatives) of Sinn Fein.
It refused to consider arguments on behalf of journalists that this broadcasting ban breached Article 10 of the Convention.
This case demonstrated the desirability of incorporating the Convention into British law — a step which is urged by the many authors and broadcasters who support this aim through the organisation "Charter 88" .
For the present, however, there is no alternative for the media in many cases other than to exhaust their limited remedies in local courts, and then file a complaint with the European Commission of Human Rights in Strasbourg.
Certainly, no media organisation worth its salt should supinely accept the ruling of a British court which curtails the right of the press to report matters of public interest, when there is a real prospect that the ruling might be condemned in Strasbourg.
The nature of British law is such that an adverse ruling becomes a "precedent" for later cases, and the basis for cautious legal advice in the future.
The publisher who suffers an adverse judgment is not the only victim: the decision echoes down the corridors of the common law, until shouted down by the European Court or the British Parliament.
The European Convention does have its drawbacks.
The most crippling is the delay at every stage of the appeal proceedings.
The European Commission on Human Rights (which acts as a filter for the  court) first considers applications and, unless they are hopeless, invites the Government to respond.
Extensions of time are given relatively freely.
The publisher is offered an opportunity to respond to the Government's response.
A date is then arranged when the part-time Commissioners can meet to consider whether the case is "admissible" (ie whether there is a prima facie case).
If it is admissible the parties are invited to consider friendly settlement.
If that proves impossible the Commission prepares a report for the European Court which will usually hear oral argument from the parties before considering its judgment.
All this takes far too much time.
The House of Lords gave its decision against "The Sunday Times" in July 1973, and the European Court did not declare that decision a breach of the Convention until April 1979 — a delay of almost six years.
It follows that the Convention is not a direct protection for freedom of speech in Britain: it is a persuasive and educative force which, if media interests have the patience and determination to seek rulings from Strasbourg, may slowly shape the operation of British law in favour of public interest reporting.
Trial by Jury
 "Freedom of the Press" was the chant which greeted jury acquittals of courageous publishers.
Today, jury trials are out of fashion, because censorship of the media is more easily achieved by an injunction, granted by a judge sitting in secret, or by a directive from a regulatory body like the Independent Broadcasting Authority, or by the decision of a magistrates' court.
Nonetheless, the right of journalists and broadcasters to demand trial by jury, in those areas of criminal law where it still exists, is an important security against interference with media freedoms — for reasons explained in 1885 by Dicey, the leading writer on our unwritten constitution: "Freedom of discussion is, then, in England little else than the right to write or say anything which a jury, consisting of 12 shopkeepers, think it expedient should be said or written…
Yet nothing has in reality contributed so much to free the press from any control.
If a man may publish anything which 12 of his countrymen think is not blameable, it is impossible that the Crown or the Ministry should exert any stringent control over writings in the press…
The times when persons in power wish to check the excesses of public writers are times at which a large body of opinion or sentiment is hostile to the executive.
But under these circumstances it must, from the nature of things, be at least an even chance that the jury called upon to find a publisher guilty may sympathise with his language…as fair and laudable criticism of official errors.
What is certain is, that the practical freedom of the English press arose in great measure from the trial of "press offences"  "by a jury." 
Dicey's description of jurors as shopkeepers reflected the former property owning qualification for jury service.
This was abolished in 1972 and consequently the prosecution must now convince a more representative sample of the population that a publisher ought to be punished: a sample, moreover, which has a constitutional right to acquit irrespective of the letter of the law.
As Lord Devlin puts it, "A jury can do justice, whereas the judge, who has to follow the law, may not." 
Juries have freed journalists irrespective of the evidence where the defendant has acted in the public interest or the charge was oppressive.
In the mid 1970s, for example, the police fell out with a number of crime reporters and charged them in separate proceedings with a variety of criminal offences.
The cases against them were strong in law, but juries, after hearing that the reporters had acted in accordance with a professional duty to inform the public, acquitted.
In 1987, for example, an Old Bailey jury acquitted "The Observer" of corruptly offering money to a crown servant in return for information on waste and mismanagement in the Ministry of Defence.
In the same year the artist Stephen Boggs was charged with "reproducing the currency" by painting amusing pastiches of bank notes which he then traded as an example of performance art.
There was little danger that his pictures (which were valued at hundreds of pounds) would devalue the currency or be torn out of their frames and passed off as real banknotes: his jury acquitted after retiring for only ten minutes.
Government law officers are generally reluctant to put journalists and publishers in the dock of a criminal court, for fear that a jury will play its historic role and acquit.
The law of sedition, for example, makes it a crime, punishable by imprisonment for life, to "stir up enmity between different classes of Her Majesty's subjects" — an offence committed by some newspapers in every edition.
The right of an editor to trial by jury is one reason why this law has not been invoked since 1947: no government will risk the embarrassment of an acquittal.
Thus the availability of jury trial can have an important effect in securing a liberal operation of apparently draconian press laws.
Section 2 of the Official Secrets Act 1911 was discredited by the jury acquittal of the editor of the "Sunday Telegraph" for publishing a confidential army report about the Biafran war which indicated that ministerial statements in Parliament were false.
The case was strong in law (so much so that the defendants had contemplated pleading guilty in return for a fine) but so was the public merit of the "illegal action" .
Section 2 was further discredited by the jury acquittal of Clive Ponting, and it remains to be seen whether the 1989 Official Secrets Act fares any better at the hands of twelve good men and women and true.
Jury acquittals in obscenity cases, beginning with "Lady Chatterley's Lover" , have effectively secured freedom for art and saved literature from the application of that controversial law.
Media offences with a right to trial by jury
Any journalist, confronted with a legal opinion that a story, or the conduct necessary to obtain it, might be against the law, should first establish whether that law permits trial by jury.
Criminal offences which are triable by jury include most breaches of the Official Secrets Act, the Prevention of Terrorism Act, criminal libel, obscenity, blasphemy, sedition and incitement to disaffection.
This is not a very long list of "media offences" .
There are many ways for the authorities to avoid the embarrassment and inconvenience of a jury trial when press freedom is involved.
The principal exceptions are: 1 Contempt of court.
Contempt carries a maximum penalty of two years imprisonment, and is the only serious crime in English law which is triable by judges alone.
Judges in contempt cases can be judges in their own cause; it is doubtful whether juries would have convicted Granada television for refusing to name its "mole" within British Steel, or solicitor Harriet Harman for giving a journalist access to documents read out in open court, or "The Independent" for publishing excerpts from "Spycatcher" at a time when the Government was trying to stop the British public from reading a book on open sale in other countries.
2 Breach of confidence and copyright.
These civil laws allow judges to grant an "interim injunction" to stop publication until the trial of the action — which is usually at least a year afterwards.
The Government has preferred to rely upon injunctions granted by judges, rather than prosecutions to be decided by juries, to deter "leaks" from the security services.
3 Media offences which are triable only in magistrates' courts.
Breaches of restrictions on court reporting, for example, which carry fines of up to £2,000, are not triable by jury.
In these cases, magistrates are much more likely to convict for technical breaches of highly technical rules.
4 Regulatory bodies, which can pre-censor material whenever there is a possibility that transmission might infringe the law.
The Independent Broadcasting Authority is an example of a licensing body which has on occasion used its powers to stop the broadcasting of items of borderline legality.
Those items would not in the event have been proceeded against, because prosecuting authorities would fear a jury acquittal.
The British Board of Film Classification is consistently censoring scenes from films and videos which would not disturb an average jury.
The increasing tendency of governments to avoid the right of jury trial by creating "media offences" punishable only by judges or magistrates is disturbing.
The most blatant example came in 1981 when it was made a criminal contempt punishable with two years' imprisonment for journalists, after a trial was over, to interview jurors about their deliberations.
The crime was necessary, said the lawyer-MPs who supported the legislation, to preserve the integrity of the jury system.
This integrity was  hardly preserved by stripping jurors of their right to free speech by a new criminal offence which itself carried no right to trial by jury.
At least where a right to trial by jury exists, the courts are reluctant (in cases where national security is not involved) to allow the Attorney-General to side-step it by approaching the High Court for an injunction to stop the publication or for a declaration that the publication is unlawful: The Voluntary Euthanasia Society published a booklet entitled "A Guide to Self-Deliverance" which discussed the pros and cons of committing suicide and described in detail a number of efficacious methods for so doing.
After evidence came to light that some members of the Society had committed suicide by following methods described in the booklet, the Attorney-General sought to dissuade the Society from further dissemination of the Guide by applying to the High Court for a declaration that its publication amounted to the crime of aiding and abetting suicide.
This offence carries the right to jury trial, and the judge declined to usurp the jury's role by declaring that future conduct by the Society would necessarily amount to an offence.
The Open Justice Principle
For a nation whose government workings are swathed in secrecy, British judicial processes are, by comparison, relatively open.
 "Every court in the land is open to every subject of the King" is a statement of principle which has been endorsed by the courts on countless occasions.
It is now reinforced by Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which guarantees to every defendant a "public hearing" whenever legal rights are determined.
One reason for the open justice principle is to keep the judges themselves up to the mark.
As Jeremy Bentham put it, in a passage which has been approved in leading cases: "Publicity is the very soul of justice.
It is the keenest spur to exertion and the surest of all guards against improbity.
It keeps the judge himself while trying under trial…
"
Lords Scarman and Simon have recently added a broader objective: "Whether or not judicial virtue needs such a spur, there is also another important interest involved in justice done openly, namely that the evidence and argument should be publicly known, so that society may judge for itself the quality of justice administered in its name, and whether the law requires modification…the common law by its recognition of the principle of open justice ensures that the public administration of justice will be subject to public scrutiny.
Such scrutiny serves no purpose unless it is accompanied by the rights of free speech, ie the right publicly to report, to discuss, to  comment, to criticise, to impart and to receive ideas and information on the matters subjected to scrutiny.
Justice is done in public so it may be discussed and criticised in public."
 "Open justice" has other important virtues.
The prospect of publicity deters perjury: witnesses are more likely to tell the truth if they know that any lie they tell might be reported, and provoke others to come forward to discredit them.
Press reporting of court cases enhances public knowledge and appreciation of the workings of the law, and it assists the deterrent effect of heavy sentences in criminal cases.
Above all, fidelity to the "open justice" principle keeps Britain free from the reproach that it permits "secret courts" of the kind which have been instruments of repression in so many other countries.
The case which comes closest to accepting the principle as a rule of law enforceable by journalists is R v Felixstowe Justices ex parte Leigh: David Leigh, an experienced reporter on "The Observer" was writing an article about a controversial case which had been heard in Felixstowe Magistrates Court.
The clerk of the court refused to supply him with the names of the lay justices who had decided it, pursuant to a policy which was being adopted by an increasing number of magistrates courts of declining to identify justices to the public or the press.
Leigh, with the backing of his newspaper and the NUJ, brought an action against the justices in the High Court, which granted him a declaration that the policy of anonymity was "inimical to the proper administration of justice and an unwarranted and unlawful obstruction to the right to know who sits in judgment" .
The judgment endorsed the importance of the court reporter as "the watchdog of justice" , and the vital significance of press comment and criticism of the behaviour of judges and magistrates.
Although there was no specific statutory requirement that justices should be named, the court deduced such a requirement from the fundamental nature of the open justice principle.
The importance of Leigh is that the court was prepared to treat the "open justice" principle as a rule of law which could be asserted by a journalist against a discretionary policy, rather than as a desirable state of affairs which could nonetheless give way to judicial convenience.
This was a welcome change from the approach of the House of Lords majority in Home Office v Harman, decided a few years earlier, which held that a solicitor committed contempt by showing the other side's private documents to a journalist after they had been read out in open court.
In that case, the "open justice" principle did not prevail over property rights in the documents and the rule which limited their use to the action itself.
Harriet Harman, MP, the solicitor in question, took her case to Strasbourg, where the UK Government was forced to concede that the decision against her was a breach of the "open justice" principle guaranteed by Article 6 of the Convention.
The Rules of the Supreme Court were in consequence changed to allow general use of documents read in open court — an ironic example of how the European Convention  can still be necessary to enforce a principle which derives from, and should be fundamental to, British domestic law.
There are a number of quite reasonable exceptions to the "open justice" principle, settled by Parliament after sometimes anxious debate.
Rape victims are entitled to anonymity, to mitigate their humiliation and to encourage other victims to come forward.
In juvenile courts offenders may not be identified; the public and press may be excluded from Official Secrets Act trials where the evidence relates to national security secrets, and the testimony given at committal proceedings usually cannot be published until the trial is over, to avoid prejudicing the jury.
Other restrictions are less justifiable: the routine exclusion of the media from "in chambers" hearings relating to property in divorce cases, to bail applications in Crown Courts, and to applications for injunctions and eviction orders in the Queen's Bench Division of the High Court are breaches of the "open justice" principle which may in due course be struck down by the European Court of Human Rights.
The media needs to be constantly on guard against secrecy applications made by lawyers who strive to protect clients and witnesses from the humiliation and embarrassment which frequently follows from reports of their appearances in court.
In recent years the press has had to challenge such diverse rulings as an order not to name a witness from a famous family lest publicity might interfere with her care for heroin addiction; an order not to publish the address of a former Tory MP lest his estranged wife should discover his whereabouts and harass him, and an order that reporters should leave the court so that a distressed defendant could explain in privacy the matrimonial problems which drove her to drink before she drove her car.
In all these cases, trial courts had been moved by personal plight to overlook the fundamental principle that trials must be open in every respect.
Journalists' special rights
One important application of the open justice principle which has increased the rights of the press is found in recent cases in which reporters have been accorded special status as "representatives of the public" .
They have been invited to join judges and lawyers in circumstances where it was inconvenient that the public should be admitted as well.
In one case, R v Waterfield, the trial judge had cleared the court while the jury was shown allegedly obscene films.
He feared that "gasps, giggling and comment" from the press bench and the public gallery might distract the jurors from their solemn duty.
The Court of Appeal said that the press should have been allowed to remain: "…the public generally are interested in cases of this kind, and for not unworthy reasons.
Concepts of sexual morality are changing.
Whenever a jury in this class of case returns a verdict, whether of guilty or not guilty, intelligent readers of newspapers and weekly journals may want to know what kind of film was under consideration.
Experience during the past decades has shown that every acquittal tends to lead to the greater exposure to public gaze of what previous generations thought seemly only in private, if seemly anywhere.
Members of the public have to depend on the press for information on which to base their opinions; but if allegedly indecent films are always shown in closed courtrooms the press cannot give the public the information which it may want and which is necessary for the formation of public opinion…
It follows, so it seems to us, that normally, when a film is being shown to a jury and the judge, in the exercise of his discretion, decides that it should be done in a closed courtroom or in a cinema, he should allow representatives of the press to be present.
No harm can be done by doing so: some good may result."
Parliament has given journalists the right to be present, even though the rest of the public is excluded, in the case of juvenile courts and domestic proceedings in magistrates' courts.
Similarly, the public but not the press can be kept out of an adult court while a child or young person gives evidence in relation to a sex offence.
The principle that the press may "represent the public" should be considered in all cases where the court is cleared, except perhaps when national security is being discussed.
Judges can order reporting to be postponed until the end of the trial, and should where necessary use this power rather than exclude the press.
There have been cases where matters of considerable public interest have been discussed after the press have been ordered to leave the court.
Such "secret hearings" are wrong in principle and now, with the availability of postponement orders under the Contempt of Court Act 1981, are unnecessary in practice.
Journalists should be fully conversant with their rights to appeal against any exclusion from the courtroom or any secrecy order made under the Contempt of Court Act.
These rights are contained in s159 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 and the rules made thereunder, and are set out in detail in Chapter 7 "Reporting the Courts" .
The principle of open justice has its physical symbol in almost every courtroom — the press bench.
This piece of furniture has become something of a shibboleth: both the Magistrates' Association and the National Union of Journalists have said that it should be regarded as sacrosanct.
This attitude may have the effect of blunting the critical edge of press coverage, by encouraging court reporters to perceive themselves as part and parcel of the court process, rather than as objective critics of its workings.
However, the press should jealously protect its right to sit centre-stage in the interests of audibility and accuracy.
When the  press-box at Winchester Crown Court was commandeered by barristers for one massive conspiracy case in 1974, the Lord Chancellor's Department apologised to the NUJ.
The Rule Against Prior Restraint
The British contribution to the philosophy of free speech might be summed up in the Duke of Wellington's phrase, "publish and be damned" .
The media is free to publish and be damned, so long as damnation comes after, and not before, the word gets out.
Journalists cannot claim to be above the law, but what they can claim, in every country which takes free speech seriously, is a right to publish first, and take the risk of conviction afterwards.
When that right was withdrawn by Cromwell, who set up a licensing system for books and newspapers, the poet Milton uttered his immortal cry for press freedom, the "Areopagitica" : "Promiscuous reading is necessary to the constituting of human nature.
The attempt to keep out evil doctrine by licensing is like the exploit of that gallant man who thought to keep out the crows by shutting his park gate…
Lord and Commons of England, consider what nation it is whereof ye are: a nation not slow and dull, but of a quick, ingenious and piercing spirit.
It must not be shackled or restricted.
Give me the liberty to know, to utter and to argue freely according to conscience, above all liberties."
Cromwell destroyed that liberty: he appointed twenty-seven fit and proper persons — schoolmasters, lawyers, ministers of religion, doctors (the sort of people found nowadays on the regulatory bodies for broadcasting and video) to censor public reading.
They were obliged to reject any book which was "contrary to good life or good manners" .
(Their modern counterparts are obliged to reject any television programme which is offensive to public feeling, good taste or decency.)
Milton was among the first to suffer from Cromwell's censors: one of his books was solemnly burned by the public hangman, and two lines were cut from "Paradise Lost" .
The public grew to hate the licensors, and Parliament eventually uncovered widespread corruption in their operation — fraud, extortion and intimidation had made the whole system a scandal.
In 1695 the licensing system was abolished, and in the following century the rule against prior restraint was given definitive shape by the venerated legal writer, Blackstone: "The liberty of the press is indeed essential to the nature of a free state; but this consists in laying no previous restraints on publications, and not in freedom from censure for criminal matter when published.
Every free man has an undoubted right to lay what sentiments he pleases before the public; to forbid this is to destroy the freedom of the press; but if he publishes what is improper, mischievous or illegal, he must take the consequences of his own temerity."
It was this message which went out in the eighteenth century, and became enshrined in the First Amendment to the American Constitution.
It was endorsed by the Supreme Court, in its historic "Pentagon Papers" decision.
The US Government learnt of "The New York Times" plan to publish a set of army research papers on the history of American involvement in Vietnam.
It tried to injunct the newspaper, on the ground that the papers contained military and diplomatic secrets, the disclosure of which would substantially damage the national interest.
The Supreme Court refused: "Any system of prior restraint on expression comes to this court bearing a heavy presumption against its constitutional validity.
The only effective restraint upon executive policy and power in the areas of national defence and international affairs may be an enlightened citizenry — an informed and critical public opinion which alone can here protect the values of democratic government.
For without an informed and free press there cannot be an enlightened people."
The justices accepted that publication of those documents would harm the national interest, and might even make the newspaper guilty of a criminal offence.
But it was entitled to publish and be damned.
Only when the Government could prove that disclosure would cause "grave and irreparable injury to the public interest" — details, for example, of troop deployment in wartime or information which might trigger a nuclear war — was a court entitled to stop the presses.
Contemporary position in the UK
In Britain, which lacks a written constitution, the rule against prior restraint has been badly eroded.
Almost every week, at secret hearings in the High Court, judges are asked to issue injunctions against the media.
An injunction imposes prior restraint, by stopping presses from rolling and film from running.
Most applications for injunctions are based on a complaint that the information about to be revealed has been obtained in breach of confidence.
Where that information relates to national security, all that the Government has to show is that publication might cause some injury to the national interest — a test which would ensure that the British equivalent of the Pentagon Papers would never see the light of day.
The inroad upon the rule against prior restraint made by interim injunctions granted for alleged breaches of confidence derives from the "balance of convenience" test which is applied by the courts.
All that the plaintiff need do to obtain a restraining order is to show a prima facie, arguable case, and that the public interest in protecting the confidence is  not, on the "balance of convenience" test, outweighed by some urgent public interest in publication.
In recent cases, the courts have virtually applied a presumption in favour of granting the injunction until trial, on the basis that if the information is allowed into the public domain the plaintiff will be unable to repair the damage.
Although in every case the judge must balance the commercial or property rights of the plaintiff in controlling the information against the value of the defendant's right of free speech, for many judges brought up in a world which accords pre-eminent value to rights of property, this may seem like balancing hard cash against hot air.
One example of "prior restraint" was the injunction which stopped the scheduled screening of a Thames Television documentary on the pregnancy drug, Primodos.
Lord Denning thought it should be shown: "…the public interest in receiving information about the drug Primodos and its effects far outweighs the private interest of the makers in preventing discussion of it." 
He was out-voted by his brethren.
One said: "The law of England is indeed, as Blackstone declared, a law of liberty; but the freedoms it recognises do not include a licence for the mercenary betrayal of business confidences." 
This misses Blackstone's point.
The rule against prior restraint is designed to allow publishers to publish even if this means betraying a confidence — a betrayal which, as Lord Denning points out, may be very much in the public interest — so long as they pay any damages that may be appropriate.
In this case, the majority decision was criticised as being wrong in law by the Law Commission, and would almost certainly have been found contrary to the European Convention had Thames Television possessed the spirit to appeal to Strasbourg.
Nonetheless, the decision reflects a dangerous tendency among many judges to give property values more weight than media freedom.
This tendency reached a quite ludicrous result in the course of the Spycatcher litigation, when the House of Lords at one point narrowly upheld an interim injunction on newspapers publishing details from a book which was on open sale throughout the rest of the world, and numerous copies of which were circulating in Britain.
This decision was plainly absurd: all confidentiality in the information had evaporated with overseas publication, and no additional damage to the national interest could possibly have been done by re-publication of the contents of the book in the British press.
The House of Lords in two subsequent cases has retreated from the position it adopted in the original litigation, by making plain that the Government must prove some damage to the national interest and that no such damage can be established where  the information has already been placed in the public domain by being published abroad.
The most enduring damage done by the Spycatcher litigation to the rule against prior restraint was the emergence of a legal doctrine that once a secrecy injunction has been granted against one newspaper, every other section of the media becomes effectively bound by its terms, on pain of punishment for contempt: "The Guardian" ran a news story which briefly referred to certain allegations made by Peter Wright in "Spycatcher" .
The Government sued for breach of confidence, and obtained an "interim injunction" against it repeating the story prior to the trial.
Before this trial took place, "The Independent" came into possession of the manuscript of "spycatcher" and published a much more detailed account of the books's contents.
Instead of proceeding against "The Independent" for breach of confidence, the Government prosecuted it for contempt of court, committed by flouting the spirit of the injunction imposed on "The Guardian" .
 "The Independent" argued that it could not in natural justice be bound by an order made against another newspaper, on different facts, and which it had been given no opportunity to oppose.
The Court of Appeal, however, ruled that every newspaper which had notice of the original injunction against "The Guardian" was under an obligation to comply with its terms until it was discharged.
In later proceedings, "The Independent" and several other newspapers were held to have been in contempt of the court which had made the order against "The Guardian" and were fined, notwithstanding that by this time the Government had lost its original action against "The Guardian." 
The doctrine that an injunction against one publication binds all who know (or should know) of it is seriously subversive of the rule against prior restraint.
It means that a plaintiff with no more than an arguable case for suppressing a story on breach of confidence grounds can obtain, at a secret High Court hearing, an injunction against one defendant (perhaps a journal whose financial position does not permit a legal contest) and thereafter enforce it against every media outlet in the country.
Although the doctrine was created in the course of a somewhat panicked reaction by the courts to bogus claims of national security peril asserted by the Government, it has subsequently been exploited by private corporations wishing to keep their secrets under wraps.
It requires newspapers who wish to publish stories about a matter some aspect of which is affected by an injunction against another publication to apply to the court for guidance on whether their story trespasses upon the order in existence — a procedure calculated to give High Court judges a good deal of experience in editing newspapers.
The erosion of the rule against prior restraint by judges in granting "interim injunctions" to restrain alleged breaches of confidence and copyright is the most noticeable example of the law's failure to develop a coherent and principled approach to media freedom.
The absurdity of the  "Spycatcher" ban was the result of a dogged insistence on viewing the memoirs of a former MI5 employee as the "property" of government, and conducting the litigation as if he had stolen the office furniture.
The "balance of convenience" approach in such cases is not a test which applies in libel actions, where the rule against prior restraint still operates.
No injunction will be granted to restrain the repetition of an allegedly libellous statement if the publishers indicate an intention to call evidence at the trial to prove the truth of their statement, or to defend it as honest comment.
This is a firm rule, and it means that the courts will not force publishers to withdraw or recall books and magazines from distribution if they are prepared to swear an affidavit verifying their intention to justify the allegation which is the subject matter of the libel.
Another example of the rule against prior restraint is the Voluntary Euthanasia Society case (see p11 above) where the Attorney-General was refused an injunction against a publication whose authors were entitled to have the legality of their actions decided at a trial before a jury.
On this principle, it has been authoritatively stated that no injunction should be granted by the civil courts to restrain the dissemination of allegedly obscene books, as such a step would pre-empt the ultimate decision of a jury.
A third example is Cambridge Nutrition Ltd v BBC.
The company marketing the "Cambridge Diet" was refused an injunction to stop a BBC programme in advance of a government report on the subject.
No breach of confidence was alleged but there was said to be a contract not to publish before the report.
Two judges found the evidence of a contract too thin to grant an injunction on "balance of convenience" principles; the third, Lord Justice Kerr, said that in principle an injunction should not be granted to stop a programme which depended on topicality and timing.
In deciding whether to grant an injunction in "balance of convenience" cases, the court must at least weigh in the balance the claim that free speech should not be restrained before trial of the action.
Exactly how much weight it is given will depend on the personal values of the judge and the interest value of the story.
However, this balance should only be attempted in cases where there is the clearest precedent for the court to contemplate the exercise of a restraining power.
No matter how damaging to individuals may be the consequences of a publication, the right to free speech must prevail unless the individuals possess an established legal right that the publication would infringe: In the case of Re X (a minor) the mother and stepfather of a sensitive fourteen year old girl sought to stop publication of a book which ascribed depraved and immoral behaviour to her deceased father.
There was evidence that the book, if published, would almost certainly come to her attention, and would cause her gross psychological damage.
The judge at first instance invoked the wardship powers of the court to protect the girl: he weighed her interests against that of the publishers, and concluded that the balance came down in favour of restraining publication, since the book could be rendered harmless  by excising a few paragraphs.
The Court of Appeal held that this was an incorrect approach.
Even if there were no public interest in publication, the right to free speech could not in principle be subordinated to the welfare of an individual whose established legal rights were not infringed.
The court had a duty to protect the liberty to publish, by ensuring that the existing ambit of restraints was not extended.
Freedom from Government Interference
The Cromwellian licensors were the last government controllers of the press in peacetime.
Today, newspapers are entirely free from direct government control over what they can print.
If ministers wish to stop a news story, they must ask the courts for an injunction — they have no power to make a direct order.
They can, of course, exert political pressure in other ways — by manipulating the lobby system, and by withholding information, or simply by threatening legal action.
During the Falklands War, for example, the Ministry of Defence quite blatantly manipulated press coverage in what it regarded as the national interest.
When the MoD was the sole source of information, the press could only speculate as to the veracity of its statements.
Reporters with the Task Force had their stories heavily censored: the army relied, not on the law, but on its control of transmission facilities.
In more normal times the Government may exert pressure behind the scenes through the operation of the "D" notice committee.
A "D" notice has no legal force: it is merely "advice" to the media, drawn up by a joint committee of representatives of the press and the armed forces.
It is not a crime to break a "D" notice — many newspapers have done so without prosecution.
It is difficult to understand why so many media interests voluntarily accept "D" notices: the system would not work without their support.
Broadcasting Bans
In extreme circumstances the Government does have certain direct legal powers over radio and television.
In the case of the BBC, these are contained in the Licence Agreement which forms part of the Corporation's charter.
Section 19 enables the Home Secretary, when in his opinion there is an emergency and it is "expedient" so to act, to send troops in to "take possession of the BBC in the name and on behalf of Her Majesty" .
This clause was framed during the General Strike, when Winston Churchill and other members of the Government wanted to commandeer the Corporation.
It has never been used for that purpose, although Sir Anthony Eden contemplated invoking it for government propaganda during the Suez crisis, and during the Falklands recapture it provided the legal basis for the Government's use of BBC transmitters on Ascension Island to beam propaganda broadcasts at Argentina.
A more dangerous power is contained in s13(4) of the Licence  Agreement, which gives the Home Secretary the right to prohibit the BBC from transmitting any item or programme, at any time.
The power is not limited, like s19, to periods of emergency.
The only safeguard against political censorship is that the BBC "may" (not "must" ) tell the public that it has received a s13(4) order from the Home Secretary.
This safeguard was invoked in 1972 by the Director-General, Lord Hill, when Home Secretary Reginald Maudling threatened a s13(4) order to stop transmission of a debate about government actions in Ulster.
Lord Hill called his bluff by threatening to make public the reason why the programme could not be shown.
Of course, a less courageous Director-General could simply cancel the programme without revealing the existence of a government order.
A parallel power in s29 of the 1981 Broadcasting Act entitles the Home Secretary to order the Independent Broadcasting Authority to "refrain from broadcasting any matter or classes of matter" on commercial television.
The exercise of these powers cannot be successfully challenged in the courts unless it can be shown that the Home Secretary has acted unreasonably or perversely.
These powers were invoked in 1988 for the purpose of direct political censorship when the BBC and the IBA were ordered not to transmit any interviews with representatives of Sinn Fein, the Ulster Defence Association, the IRA or certain other extremist groups, or to broadcast any statement which incited support for such groups.
The ban is a serious infringement on the right to receive and impart information: it prevents representatives of lawful political organisations (Sinn Fein has an MP as well as dozens of local councillors) from stating their case on matters which have no connection with terrorism, and it denies to the public the opportunity to see and hear those who support violent action being questioned and exposed.
The Government believes that terrorists survive by "the oxygen of publicity" , but television confrontations generally demonstrate the moral unattractiveness of those who believe that the end justifies the means.
The ban prevents the re-screening of such excellent programmes as Robert Kee's Ireland: a Television History or Thames Television's The Troubles, which contain interviews with IRA veterans.
The BBC and IBA meekly complied with the ban, which further underlines the lack of constitutional protection for freedom of speech in British law.
In theory, the Home Secretary's unrestricted powers under s29(3) and clause 13(4) could permit a directive against transmitting attacks on the Government made by members of the opposition party.
It may be that the ban will in due course be struck down, or at least restricted in its scope by the European Court: a total prohibition on television and radio appearances by representatives of a lawful political organisation, for example where they are elected local councillors speaking about domestic issues, can hardly be justified on the grounds of national security or the prevention of public disorder.
One of the first casualties of the ban was a song recorded by an Irish pop group with lyrics claiming that the "Guildford 4" were innocent.
The Home Secretary, shortly afterwards accepted that the "Guildford 4" were innocent and released them, but the IBA still refused to allow the record to be played on radio or television.
Patronage
The 1988 broadcasting bans are the only examples of direct political censorship of a section of the media by government ministers.
A more subtle form of political influence on the content of television programmes is provided by the Government's power of appointment to controlling bodies (the BBC Board of Governors and the Independent Broadcasting Authority) and to statutory commissions set up to supervise complaints about unfair treatment (the Broadcasting Complaints Committee) and programme standards (The Broadcasting Standards Council).
Both Harold Wilson and Margaret Thatcher have appointed BBC chairmen for personal reasons rather than suitable qualifications, and in 1988 the Conservative Government was strongly condemned for appointing its political partisans Lord Rees-Mogg (to the Chairmanship of the BSC) and Lord Chalfont (to the Deputy-Chairmanship of the IBA).
The make-up of these bodies can be particularly important when governments exert pressure over a particular programme, as happened to the BBC in the case of Real Lives (an examination of the life of an IRA sympathiser in Belfast) and to the IBA in the case of Death on the Rock (a This Week programme about the SAS shooting of three IRA members in Gibraltar).
The Real Lives episode in 1985 severely damaged the BBC's reputation for independence when its Board of Governors (at the especial urging of its then Deputy Chairman, Lord Rees-Mogg) cravenly banned the scheduled programme after Mrs Thatcher had condemned it, unseen, as likely to encourage support for terrorists.
BBC journalists took strike action in protest, and the programme was eventually screened with a few face-saving deletions, but the episode called into question the Board of Governor's commitment to freedom of expression.
The IBA was made of sterner stuff when the Foreign Secretary called for the banning of Death on the Rock.
It supported Thames Television's decision to screen the programme, which gave viewers a much fuller appreciation of the shootings than had been possible from government statements and MoD briefings.
The public importance of the issue, and the high journalistic standards deployed in putting the programme together, were subsequently emphasised by an independent enquiry chaired by Lord Windlesham, which conclusively refuted the Government's allegations that the programme had been deliberately biased and had prejudiced the inquest in Gibraltar.
The IBA and ITC
The Independent Broadcasting Authority has wide powers to interfere with the content of commercial radio and television programmes.
These  powers date from 1954, and reflect the exaggerated fears of that period about untried and untrusted commercial exploitation of the medium.
Lord Reith described the introduction of commercial television as"a betrayal and a surrender…somebody introduced smallpox, bubonic plague and the Black Death.
Somebody is minded now to introduce sponsored broadcasting in this country".
One eminent law lord confessed to a "sense of sacrilege" at the very prospect of an advertisement broadcast on the Sabbath.
In this atmosphere, it was understandable that commercial television should be placed under the close scrutiny of a licensing body, empowered by what is now s4(1) of the Broadcasting Act 1981 to ensure:(a) that nothing is included in the programmes which offends against good taste or decency or is likely to encourage or incite to crime or to lead to disorder or to be offensive to public feeling…(b) that due impartiality is preserved on the part of persons providing the programmes as respects matters of political or industrial controversy or relating to current public policy.
There are fourteen commercial television companies, and a host of commercial radio stations.
They owe their commercial existence to a contract with the IBA, which must be renewed every eight (or in the case of local radio, every ten) years.
The IBA comprises a Board of eighteen government appointees, with a staff of several hundred and one subsidiary company responsible for running Channel 4.
Under these contracts, the IBA has the right — and indeed the duty — to vet programmes to ensure that they are neither offensive nor biased.
Programme-makers often criticise IBA pre-censorship, which is, after all, a direct interference with freedom of expression by way of prior restraint, imposed by government appointees.
The IBA has been particularly active in relation to programmes about Northern Ireland, and its interference has ranged from banning an entire programme (eg a This Week report about RUC brutality) to cutting provocative scenes lasting a few seconds (such as pictures of flowers on an IRA grave).
On two occasions, the IBA has delayed transmission of programmes involving former security service personnel, fearing that the Authority might be joined in a prosecution under the Official Secrets Act.
Its worst loss of nerve was over a Channel 4 programme MI5's Official Secrets in which Cathy Massiter, a former MI5 case officer responsible for surveillance of the peace movement, alleged that her investigations into CND had been passed on to government ministers for party-political use.
Only after the transcript of the programme had been widely published, and Virgin Records had issued a copy for public sale on video-cassette, did the IBA agree to allow the programme to be transmitted on Channel 4.
It is much more satisfactory, as the Annan Committee on the Future of Television pointed out, for the IBA to leave television stations to make  their own decisions about transmission, and to criticise them subsequently if their decisions are mistaken.
A further level of pre-censorship, imposed by a bureaucracy headed by government appointees, is an unnecessary institutional restriction on programme-makers.
Nonetheless, the terms of the 1981 Broadcasting Act do place duties on the IBA to ensure that this medium, unlike the press, is free from bias and public offence.
For many years, this duty was thought to require the appointed members of the authority to approve personally the transmission of programmes which might contravene the duties set out in s4.
However, in 1986 the Court of Appeal gave its approval to a much less interventionist approach: "Scum" was a powerful drama about the treatment of young offenders, which depicted the Borstal system as encouraging rather than deterring violent behaviour.
It had originally been made by the BBC, which declined to show it after pressure from the Home Office.
Subsequently the play was made into a film, which was screened on Channel 4 late at night with the approval of the Director-General of the IBA.
Only three viewers complained — two to Channel 4 and one (Mrs Mary Whitehouse) to the courts.
She argued that the history of "scum" should have alerted the IBA to its controversial nature, and that any decision to screen it should have been made by the appointed members of the Authority, and not by their executive staff.
The Court of Appeal rejected her arguments, pointing out that the statutory duties to ensure "good taste" and "due impartiality" are imprecise, and that the Broadcasting Act requires only that the IBA should approve a satisfactory system for monitoring standards and public reactions.
There was no need for Authority members to preview controversial programmes themselves: the court would only interfere if no reasonable person could believe that the system established by the IBA would maintain programme standards at the general level required by the Act.
In 1993, the IBA will be abolished and replaced by the Independent Television Commission (ITC) which will inherit the IBA's duties to ensure due impartiality and decency in the medium.
Unlike the IBA, however, the ITC will not be responsible for broadcasting television programmes, and it will be expected to enforce the statutory duties by financial penalties imposed on offending television companies.
In some respects, this change (which is part of the "deregulation" of television provided for in the 1990 Broadcasting Act) will be welcome: no longer will television companies be obliged to submit their controversial programmes to an outside body for preview and pre-censorship.
Nor will plans to tackle controversial subjects such as terrorism have to be notified to the licensing body in advance of filming.
Whether this change in the law will effect much liberalisation, however, will depend on how the ITC  wields its powers to impose sanctions.
These range from a power to force a television company to broadcast an apology for lapses in taste or impartiality, to a power to revoke a license in the case of a persistent offender.
The financial penalties include a power to fine a company a maximum three per cent of its advertising revenue for a first offence, and five per cent of advertising revenue for further offences — a formula which allows the ITC to impose penalties of millions of pounds.
Television companies may to prefer to err on the safe side rather than to put their profits at risk by incurring sanctions of this order.
It remains to be seen how the ITC will go about monitoring compliance with the statutory duties — it will certainly come under pressure to punish television stations which infringe the more detailed codes issued by the Broadcasting Standards Council and which suffer regular adverse adjudications from the Broadcasting Complaints Commission.
Although the 1990 legislation was promoted as regulation with "a lighter touch" , it provides a panolpy of new punishments which may lead to regulation with an even heavier hand.
The best antidote to censorship is publicity.
Reporters and producers have a public duty to speak out if their vision of truth is suppressed by government appointees.
When the IBA banned a programme about RUC brutality, the producers protested by making a copy available to the BBC, which had no hesitation in showing it as part of a news feature about the IBA decision.
Most censorship decisions appear faintly ridiculous in the light of day.
None more so than the BBC's heavy-handed interference with "Willie — the Legion Hall Bombing" , a play by Caryl Churchill.
The prologue criticised Ulster non-jury courts in a manner which BBC executives found unacceptable.
So they re-wrote and re-recorded the text.
In protest, both Ms Churchill and her director succeeded in legal action to have their names removed from the credits.
Then they held a press conference to release the original text, which most newspapers juxtaposed with the sanitised version prepared by the Corporation, in major news stories on the day of transmission.
This ensured the play — and its intended message — a very much wider audience than it would otherwise have obtained.
Theatre and film censorship
The theatre has been free from political censorship since 1967, when the Lord Chamberlain's power to license stage plays was abolished.
The cinema, however, is subject to the British Board of Film Classification, a private body which nonetheless exercises considerable influence over the way the law is enforced.
It is financed by the film industry, and will only grant certificates to movies which it considers are within the limits of public acceptability.
In practice, the Director of Public Prosecutions does not prosecute films with BBFC certificates for cinema showing, so distributors prepared to pay the certification fee and to carry out the "cuts" insisted upon by the Board are in effect guaranteed freedom from police harassment.
This arrangement secures a quiet legal life for the film  industry in general, although it is resented by some film-makers who are obliged to tailor their product to BBFC standards in order to secure distribution outlets.
The Video Recordings Act gives the BBFC statutory recognition as the body charged with licensing films for sale or rent on video cassettes — a development which may legally oblige distributors to censor cinema films before transferring them to cassettes for home viewing.
In relation to videos, the BBFC has become a fully fledged State censorship Board, charged by law with determining whether material on video is "suitable for viewing in the home" and with determining whether particular cassettes can be sold or hired to children.
Its decisions are enforced by police and by trading standards officers, and heavy fines are imposed for non-compliance with its directives.
Prosecution Policy and the Public Interest
The last general safeguard for press freedom is the Attorney-General's "public interest" discretion.
Many of the criminal laws which affect the media — official secrets and prevention of terrorism, and most of the laws relating to contempt, reporting restrictions and obscenity — cannot be invoked in the criminal courts by anyone except the Attorney-General or the Director of Public Prosecutions (who works under the Attorney's superintendence).
Likewise the Attorney alone may enforce the IBA's statutory duties in cases where no individual can show that a breach will involve a personal injury.
In all these cases, the Attorney-General is not bound to take legal action, even if the law has clearly been broken.
He has a discretion — to prosecute, or not to prosecute — depending on his view of the public interest.
In exercising his discretion, he is entitled to take into account any consideration of public policy which bears on the issue — and the public policy in favour of free speech is important in deciding whether to launch official secrets or contempt or obscenity prosecutions.
Actions which appear to compromise free speech are sure to be criticised in Parliament, where the Attorney must answer for both his and the DPP's prosecution policy.
There have been cases where the Attorney has refused to act even after judges have called for prosecution.
Sometimes his decisions are made on grounds of convenience: after most newspapers in Britain committed contempt of court over the arrest of "Yorkshire Ripper" Peter Sutcliffe, the Attorney decided against prosecuting on the ground that he would have to put dozens of editors in the dock.
On other occasions, the public interest of an "illegal" revelation has tipped the balance against invoking legal discipline against the journalist who revealed it.
For example, it is usually contempt to publish a story which causes the discharge of a jury in mid-trial.
This consequence was caused by London Weekend Television when it revealed that a juror in an official secrets case was a former member of the SAS, and by "The Guardian" when it published details of  information discovered by police when they "vetted" a jury which was trying some anarchists.
In both cases, the trial judges complained to the Attorney-General, who decided that prosecution would not be in the public interest.
No doubt the decision was heavily influenced by the fact that both stories were correct, and had revealed controversial practices in the administration of justice.
There is a danger in placing over-much reliance on the Attorney's discretion.
He is, after all, a government minister, as well as the leader of the legal profession.
In deciding "public policy" , he will obviously be influenced by the outlook of the political party of which he is a member, and by the values of the profession which he leads.
These influences will not always incline him to the view that revelation of particular legal or political material is necessarily in the public interest.
There are, of course, cases where a newspaper wishes to publish material which is unlawful as the law at present stands, although there is some prospect that if the Attorney-General takes action an appeal court will overturn an earlier decision and decide in the newspaper's favour.
There may be value in provoking a test case, in a way which avoids the danger of a heavy fine if the newspaper is mistaken.
The solution sometimes adopted is to send the article to the Attorney-General a few days prior to its intended publication.
If he takes no action, well and good; if he seeks an injunction, the issue can be litigated and appealed as a matter of principle, without the danger of suffering a heavy penalty for an offence — eg of contempt of court — which has already been committed.
More common, of course, is the situation where the media is in possession of material which it knows the Attorney-General would be able to injunct (normally on grounds of breach of confidence) but would be unlikely to pursue once it had been published.
The problem then becomes one of keeping the intention to publish secret, so that the Attorney-General has no forewarning.
The "Sunday Times" went to the extreme of publishing a "dummy" first edition to mislead the authorities on the night it broke the "spycatcher" revelations in Britain, but such devices are unavailable to television and radio programmes, the advance publicity for which will generally put the Attorney-General's office on notice of a potentially embarrassing "leak" .
The Attorney-General has no statutory right to preview programmes or to see transcripts or articles in draft, and if the rule against prior restraint were honoured in breach of confidence cases he would have to await publication before deciding whether the public interest required action.
Regrettably, the courts have been prepared to allow their procedures to be exploited by governments keen to obtain a glimpse of potentially embarrassing material prior to publication.
In 1987 BBC Radio 4 made a somewhat academic series about the security services entitled "My Country Right or Wrong," and advertised it in the "Radio Times" .
On the strength of this advertisement, the Government persuaded a High Court judge to grant an "interim injunction" against the broadcast, because it feared that ex-employees of the security services might  have breached confidence in the course of their interviews.
It had no evidence of this: the BBC had on principle refused an invitation to submit the programme to the Government for "vetting" in advance, and its own lawyers were satisfied that no breach of confidence had taken place.
The interim injunction stopped the broadcast until the matter could be tried, and in due course the court ordered the BBC to "give discovery" to the plantiff, ie to disclose the tapes of the programmes to the Attorney-General who brought the action on behalf of the Government.
After hearing the tapes, and being satisfied that they contained no breach of confidence, the Government discontinued the action and the BBC was finally able to broadcast "My Country Right or Wrong" , six months after it had originally been scheduled, and after being forced in this fashion to submit it for State "vetting" .
The High Court had allowed its interlocutory procedures to be used as devices for enabling the Government to postpone and to preview an entirely innocuous public-interest programme, in the absence of any concrete evidence that the broadcast would contravene the civil or criminal law.
There is another danger.
The decision to publish often hinges on the question: "Will the Attorney prosecute if we do?" 
There is a natural temptation to seek an answer from the horse's mouth, so to speak, by submitting the controversial material to the Attorney for an indication of his attitude.
This has been done by both the BBC and the "Sunday Times" .
It comes perilously close to making the Attorney, in effect, a political censor, an official to whom the media can go, cap in hand, with the question "please Sir, may we publish this?" 
The danger, of course, is that if the Attorney's answer is "no" , the material will then not be published.
This would be a pity if the Attorney were bluffing.
The prospect of scaring off awkward media revelations will always provide a great temptation for Attorneys to bluff.
Conclusion
The European Convention, trial by jury, the openness of courts, the remnants of the rule against prior restraint, the absence of laws permitting direct government interference, and the "public interest" role of the Attorney-General, at least ensure that the British media enjoy relative freedom from censorship by comparison with third world countries.
When British media law is compared with the jurisprudence of America, Canada, France, Scandinavia and Australia, however, it is seen to lack a number of features which are regarded as fundamental to press freedom in a democracy.
When Richard Crossman described secrecy as the British disease, he was not merely referring to the terms of the Official Secrets Act.
He was condemning the reluctance of government, national and local, and public employees throughout the civil service, to share information with the public.
International studies confirm Crossman's criticism: they place Britain no higher than sixteenth in the league table of countries which most enjoy freedom to publish.
The revolutions in  Eastern Europe in 1989 have secured freedom of speech and may cause the UK to slip further down the league table.
Britain's low rating is mainly due to the refusal of successive governments to contemplate a Freedom of Information Act, which would give journalists and others a legal right of access to documents prepared by state officials.
 "Freedom of the press" is still, of course, a potent phrase.
But the fact that it is protected by unwritten convention rather than by a legal constitution means that there is no external brake upon Parliament or the courts moving to restrict it in particular ways, as the mood of the times takes them.
Britain may still be a country where "everything is permitted which is not specifically prohibited" , but the specific prohibitions have become more numerous, without having to justify themselves against the overriding principle of public interest suggested by the Royal Commission on the Press.
However, those who operate the law are well aware that it will only be respected to the extent that it conforms with public opinion: the reason why journalists and broadcasters are not prosecuted much more often for undoubted infringements of the letter of the laws of contempt and official secrecy is simply that the authorities are well aware that up-to-the-hilt enforcement of these vague laws would bring the law into further disrepute, and precipitate precisely the sort of clash between government and the press that it has been the British genius to avoid, whenever possible, by cosy arrangements.
Moreover, the law is only one method of control over what is placed in the public arena.
Communicators are restrained by other forces: by shared ethical assumptions, by non-legal rules which find favour with the Press Council and the Broadcasting Complaints Commission, by pressure from advertisers, by the political predilections of proprietors, and by the host of subjective considerations which go to make up "editorial discretion" .
Press monopolies inhibit those with different views from launching out on their own.
The law is often invoked by editors, executives or lawyers to support decisions to censor which are taken on other grounds, or instinctively: legal advice of this sort is usually convenient rather than correct.
The decision to publish will involve a calculation of many risks — it is only when the apparition of a successful legal action tips the balance against publishing a story of genuine public interest that "freedom of expression" has been meaningfully curtailed by law.
That happens often enough to be a matter for public concern.
Whether it should happen as often as it does is open to doubt.
If editors and programme-makers and journalists were more aware of their legal rights, and more courageous in calling the lawyers' bluff, they might find that the law is not quite the ass it sometimes appears.
Those journalists who recklessly write false stories deserve to be made to grovel in apology.
Those prepared to fight for the principle that stories which advance the public interest should be published are usually vindicated.
At every stage, the media must insist upon its right to investigate and to print public interest stories; if it is right in its identification of the public interest, it is unlikely to come to harm in the long run.
Defamation*
 "A man who wants to talk at large about smoke may have to pick his words very carefully if he wants to exclude the suggestion that there is also a fire: but it can be done." 
Lord Devlin, Lewis v Daily Telegraph.
London is the libel capital of the world.
The tax-free damages awarded in reported cases are the tip of a legal iceberg which deep-freezes large chunks of interesting news and comment.
There is nothing objectionable in the principle that a person's reputation should be protected from falsehoods: problems arise because the practices and procedures of the libel law can also work to prevent the exposure of wrongdoing.
In newsrooms libel is the greatest inhibition upon freedom of speech, although it also serves as a spur to accuracy and professionalism.
The task for the journalist and broadcaster is to recognise and conform to the valuable discipline of the law, while at the same time understanding it sufficiently to be able to call the bluff of those who seek to exploit it to suppress important truths.
That the bluff succeeds more often than it should may be the fault of the unconscionably heavy legal costs which can attend even a successful defence, or the business caution of insurance companies which increasingly influence how, or whether, libel writs should be resisted.
Journalists can do little about legal costs and insurance, but they should be well versed in the legal defences which give them more latitude than is commonly thought.
When the destination is important, the writer's craft can often steer around the libel minefield.
For all its dangers, there are three features of the present libel law which protect careless or incompetent journalists.
Absence of legal aid
A libel action is the only important civil right for which legal aid is not available.
Writers can excoriate poor persons secure in the knowledge that, unless a trade union or well-wisher finances the action, it is unlikely to be pursued: even a journalist as senior as Adam Raphael has quailed when told that the legal cost of suing another newspaper to vindicate his reputation could be as high as £250,000 if the case went to trial.
He was turned down by the "Goldsmith Libel Fund" , an eccentric exercise in philanthropy which bankrolls plaintiffs of conservative persuasion (notably Tory MPs) who bring libel actions against media organisations perceived as left-wing (eg the BBC).
The very existence of such a fund serves to emphasise the inequity of the present law.
There is the possibility of a complaint being upheld by the Press Council, which functions in such cases as a poor person's libel court.
But an adverse ruling from a private body is much less daunting and much less publicised than a heavy award of damages by judge or jury.
The unavailability of legal aid for libel has been defended on the basis that it would bring "over the fence" disputes to court (the poor being assumed to quarrel in crowded tenements rather more often than the rich accuse one another of cheating at cards) but the inequity is so glaring that the argument for extending legal aid to defamation actions is difficult to resist.
If libel is too much of a threat to press freedom already, the answer is to reform the law, not to deny its benefits to disadvantaged sections of society.
False statements not necessarily libellous
The law of libel will not correct all or even most false statements.
It can only be activated when a false statement actually damages a reputation.
An assertion is not defamatory simply because it is untrue — it must lower the victim in the eyes of right-thinking citizens.
However irksome it may be to have inaccuracies published about one's life or behaviour — dates mis-stated, non-existent meetings described, and qualifications mis-attributed — there must be a "sting" in the falsehood which reflects discredit in the eyes of society.
To publish falsely, of an Irish priest, that he informed on members of the IRA is not defamatory: it may cause him to be executed by terrorists, but the law offers him no way of securing a correction.
"The very circumstances which will make a person be regarded with disfavour by the criminal classes will raise his character in the estimation of right-thinking men.
We can only regard the estimation in which a man is held by society generally."
Truth: an absolute defence
The third debatable advantage enjoyed by the British press is that truth is an absolute defence to libel, no matter how unnecessary or unfair its revelation.
The publication of intimate details of private lives without the slightest public interest justification cannot be the subject of legal action, unless they have stemmed from a breach of confidence or some other legal wrong.
There is no substantive protection for privacy in British law.
Truth, however tawdry or trivial, may be told without let or hindrance from libel laws.
In practice, then, journalists have the "power" — in the sense that they are unlikely to be stopped — to defame the poor, to publish falsehoods which do not injure reputations, and to invade personal privacy.
But there is no doubt that libel law does in other respects impinge upon the justifiable freedom of the press.
Its very basis has an anachronistic flavour.
The idea that large sums of money must be awarded to compensate people for words which "tend to lower them in the estimation of right-thinking members of society" smacks of an age when social and political life was lived in gentlemen's clubs, when escutcheons could be blotted and society scandals resolved by writs for slander.
Libel damages call for a metaphysical evaluation of dignity, a compensation, in many cases, for loss of amour propre which may be higher than the courts would award for the loss of an arm or a leg.
An ideal law would ensure both the speedy correction of false statements and the protection of the expression of honest opinion.
There are cases where British law secures neither goal.
For the media, the present law of libel induces a number of major headaches.
Burden of proof on media defendant
A published allegation may be true, but the defendant carries in law the burden of proving its truth, upon evidence admissible in court.
Statements made out of court, and assurances recorded by reporters at the time are likely to be inadmissible or of less value because they are "hearsay" : real witnesses must be enticed or subpoenaed to give evidence before the jury.
Where the "source" for a story dies, or is out of the country, or has been promised confidentiality, or goes back on what he said, the difficulties of proving the truth of a true statement may be too great.
Technicality
Libel law has been allowed to become extremely complex.
One straight-forward case — involving a "Police 5" message about a confidence trickster who had used a name belonging to an innocent plaintiff — had consequences devastatingly described by Lord Diplock: "This is an ordinary simple case of libel.
It took fifteen days to try: the summing-up lasted for a day: the jury returned thirteen special verdicts.
The notice of appeal sets out seven separate grounds why the appeal should be allowed and ten more why a new trial should be granted, the latter being split up into over forty sub-grounds.
The respondents' notice contained fifteen separate grounds.
The costs must be enormous.
Lawyers should be ashamed that they have allowed the law of defamation to have become bogged down in such a mass of technicalities that this should be possible."
That case was heard in 1966, since when the "mass of technicalities" has been piled much higher.
In the late 1980s a number of libel cases were taken to the Court of Appeal on pre-trial issues concerning technical points of pleading, and much criticism was levelled at the complexity, expense and delay which have become associated with libel actions.
A plaintiff can sue within three years of the date of publication of the libel, and actions normally take two years to come to trial after the writ has been issued.
Such delays do not help the plaintiff who wants to set the record straight, but they are equally unpleasant for defendants, who face escalating costs and witness difficulties.
Costs and damages
Libel actions launched by wealthy and determined plaintiffs can be enormously expensive to combat.
Even if successful, the defendant is unlikely to recoup more than 70 per cent of the costs.
When the "Daily Mail" was sued by the head of the "Moonies" over allegations that the sect brainwashed converts and broke up families, the editor was warned by his lawyers that an adverse verdict might cost him £1,000,000.
The case lasted 100 days, required the attendance of many witnesses from abroad, and the defendant's legal costs alone amounted to some £400,000.
Damages for libel are notoriously unpredictable.
Women who are raped receive about £5,000 compensation and, in one recent case, a man whose brain was badly damaged by another's negligence received £22,000 for the pain and suffering.
But when film star Telly Savalas sued over a gossip columnist's unjustifiable remarks about hang-overs interfering with his work, he was awarded £34,000.
The foreman of his jury wrote a letter to "The Times" : "Where a jury has to decide, as men and women of the world," how much "" , the degree of uncertainty is so great that a random answer, consistent only with a total lack of any sort of yardstick, can be expected.
Their lordships would do as well to use an Electronic Random Number Indicating Machine."
Those who throw sticks and stones which break bones can be better off in law than those who project hurtful words which leave no permanent mark.
In 1987, libel damages of £450,000 were awarded against a Greek newspaper, although only fifty copies of it were circulated in Britain.
This was followed by a £500,000 award to Jeffrey Archer against a newspaper which wrongly suggested (albeit on considerable circumstantial evidence) that he had sex with a prostitute, and by an award of £300,000 against a small trade journal.
Koo Stark was awarded £300,000 by a jury the following year, and Elton John set a short-lived record with his £1  million settlement against "The Sun" .
In 1989, the wife of the "Yorkshire Ripper" was awarded £600,000 by a jury to compensate her for a false story in "Private Eye" , published eight years previously, to the effect that she had been prepared to sell her story to newspapers.
This last award was too much even for the Court of Appeal (which has an aversion to interfering with jury awards) to countenance.
It was a sum "so unreasonable as to be divorced from reality" .
Regrettably, the Court of Appeal has no power in such cases to substitute its own award of damages, and the parties were sent away to face the expensive prospect of a fresh trial, which they avoided by agreeing that the damages should be £60,000.
The Court of Appeal expressed hope that judges might give some help to juries in future about the real value of money.
In the first case in which such guidance was received, the jury returned with a new British and Commonwealth record of £1.5 million, against an author who had attacked Lord Aldington as a "war criminal" over his role in the forcible repatriation of Cossacks to their deaths at the end of the second World War.
The judge had warned the jury not to award "Mickey Mouse money" , by which he apparently intended to refer to a sum so large as to be unrealistic (such as 1.5 million).
The jury may have understood the phrase to refer to small or trifling amounts, and followed his direction by awarding the sort of sum they imagined in the coffers of Scrooge McDuck.
The episode further emphasised the unsatisfactory state of the libel law, and how the prospect of massive awards of damages may serve as a real threat to freedom of expression.
Each case which goes to trial is an elaborate gamble.
How much should be paid into court, and when?
If the defendant makes a payment into court, the plaintiff may seize it and call quits.
If the plaintiff presses on and wins, but is awarded no more in damages than the amount of the "payment in" the plaintiff must foot the entire legal bill incurred by both the sides since the day of the payment.
In one celebrated case in 1975, a colonel with a penchant for spanking unsuspecting women sued the "Sunday People" for exposing his activities; he was awarded a derisory halfpenny.
But the newspaper was saddled with the legal costs of the trial, which it could have avoided by "paying in" the lowest denomination coin of the realm before the trial began.
The publishers of "Exodus" had greater foresight.
When sued for libel by Dr Dering, an Auschwitz prison doctor criticised in the book, they "paid in" the derisory sum of £2 before the trial.
Dr Dering declined this contemptible compensation, and risked crippling legal costs on a trial which he hoped would win him heavy damages.
The jury awarded him the libel raspberry — a halfpenny — so he was forced to pay for the whole action.
In circumstances like these, the temple of law becomes a casino.
Given the expense and uncertainty of defending libel actions, it is not surprising that media organisations, in consultation with their libel insurers, often prefer to pay up and apologise.
But these difficulties should not be exaggerated: most of them are, after all, suffered by the plaintiff as well.
A newspaper or television station which gains the reputation, amongst the legal fraternity who specialise in libel, of being a  "soft touch" , will soon find itself being touched very often for damages and apologies.
The "Daily Mail" may have lost money in taking on the "Moonies" but it gained both in reputation and by discouraging similar actions against itself.
Defamation Defined
The test
Whether a statement is capable of bearing a defamatory meaning is a question of law, to be decided by the judge at the outset of a trial.
A defamatory meaning is one which, in the circumstances of publication, would be likely to make reasonable and respectable people think less of the plaintiff.
The test is variously described as "lowering the plaintiff in the estimation of right-thinking people generally" ; "injuring the plaintiff's reputation by exposing him to hatred, contempt or ridicule" and "tending to make the plaintiff be shunned and avoided" .
It is all a question of respect and reputation — not just of the plaintiff as a human being, but as a worker — a public official, business executive, professional or performer.
To allege incompetence at playing the tuba would not lower most people in the eyes of their fellow citizens — unless they happened to be professional tubists.
To say that someone votes Conservative is not a libel — unless it be said of a Labour MP, and in consequence, would be defamatory in its implication of personal and political hypocrisy.
Malicious falsehood and conspiracy to injure
A statement may be entirely false, and deeply upsetting to the person about whom it is made.
But unless it tends to lessen respect for that person, it will not be defamatory.
The victim may have an action for malicious falsehood, however, if it can be proved that the untrue statement was made spitefully, dishonestly or recklessly, and that it has in fact caused financial loss.
Stephane Grappelli, the renowned jazz violinist, employed English agents who booked him for certain concerts.
Grappelli claimed they acted without reference to him, and the concerts had to be cancelled.
The reason given by the agents for the cancellation was: "Stephane Grappelli is very seriously ill in Paris and is unlikely ever to tour again." 
This was an entirely false statement, obviously damaging to a thriving professional musician.
However, the statement was not defamatory: to say that someone is seriously ill might excite pity, but not ridicule or disrespect.
Grappelli had to be content with an action for malicious falsehood.
The action for malicious falsehood is much less favourable to plaintiffs than defamation.
They have no right to jury trial, and they have to prove  that the words were false (in libel, the burden of proving that the words are true is on the defendant), that the words were published maliciously and that they were likely to cause financial loss.
 "Conspiracy to injure" is another civil wrong which can be invoked against media falsehoods although it requires proof of an agreement where the sole or dominant purpose is to injure the plaintiff.
Although actions against the media for these civil wrongs have been rare in the past, they have two practical advantages for plaintiffs.
Firstly, legal aid is not available for libel, but it may be granted for malicious falsehood.
Secondly, plaintiffs cannot obtain an injunction against a libellous publication, where the defendant indicates an intention to justify or to plead fair comment.
In either civil cases, however, injunctions may be granted on the "balance of convenience" test, which is usually unfavourable to the media.
The following case provides a recent example of a "malicious falsehood" injunction where a libel injunction could not have been granted: Gordon Kaye, star of the television company Allo Allo, was taken to hospital after sustaining serious head injuries.
As he was coming out of the anaesthetic following brain surgery, a reporter from "The Sunday Sport" gained access to his hospital room and purported to interview him.
The newspaper planned to publish the story as a "world exclusive" voluntary interview.
The Court of Appeal granted a limited injunction against the newspaper on the basis that Mr Kaye had an arguable case that it amounted to "malicious falsehood" to claim that he had voluntarily surrendered a valuable property right (ie in his "exclusive" story) in these circumstances.
Importance of context
Whether statements are capable in law of being defamatory depends on the content and context of the whole article or programme, and the impression it would convey to the average viewer.
It is not helpful to lay down hard and fast rules: judges and juries place themselves (without very much difficulty) in the position of "right-thinking members of society" , and ask themselves whether they think the statement would injure the plaintiff's reputation.
A statement that the plaintiff has supplied information to the police about crime would not, as we have seen, be defamatory.
Nor would a suggestion that plaintiffs are poor — unless they are in business, and the implication is that they are unable to pay their debts.
The court must bear contemporary social standards in mind in making what will in some cases necessarily be a value judgment.
The values of judges in the deep south of the United States of America, who have held it defamatory to suggest that a white person has coloured blood, would not be shared in England.
Not, one hopes, for the reason  given in 1848 by the Chief Justice, who argued that being black was "a great misfortune, but no crime" .
Clearly, there is an element of political value judgment in such decisions: in 1921 a judge held that reasonable citizens would not think less of a trade unionist if it were claimed that he had worked during a strike: some juries might reach a different decision today.
Ideas about immorality and what constitutes dishonourable conduct change over time, but the views of judges change more slowly than most.
It might still be defamatory to describe a heterosexual as "gay" .
Damages of £8,000 were awarded by a jury against the "Daily Mirror" for that very imputation about Liberace in 1959.
It is not defamatory to predict, incorrectly, take-over or cessations of business, which might have the effect of injuring trade but which do not reduce esteem for the trader.
It is possible to criticise a merchant's goods without reflecting on the competence or the probity of their producer.
The question, always, is whether the words, in their published context, would be likely to lower the plaintiff in the minds of ordinary, decent readers.
That depends, of course, on how the ordinary decent reader interprets the words, "reading between the lines in the light of his general knowledge and experience of worldly affairs" .
The "ordinary reader" test
In deciding what words mean for the purpose of defamation, the intention of the writer or speaker is largely irrelevant.
The test is the effect on the ordinary reader, who is endowed for this purpose with considerable wisdom and knowledge of the way of the world.
The literal meaning is not conclusive: the ordinary reader knows all about irony.
To say of John Smith "His name is certainly not George Washington" is capable of being defamatory of Smith: the ordinary reader knows that George Washington could never tell a lie, and is likely to infer that Smith is therefore untruthful.
The ordinary reader is impressed by the tone and manner of publication, and the words chosen to headline a story.
In a popular paper, the headline "False profit return charge against Investment Society" suggests fraud, and not an arguable error by accountants in attributing profit to capital rather than income.
The courts accept that ordinary readers are not literal-minded simpletons.
They are capable of divining the real thrust of a comment, and able to respond to a joke, even a joke in bad taste, in the spirit intended by the commentator.
In this sense, the author's intention does play an indirect part in determining the meaning of the words in question, because that meaning is decided by the ordinary reader's response to the  question: "What on earth is the author getting at?" 
An example is provided by Schild v Express Newspapers: The plaintiff, a leading businessman, and his family were kidnapped in Sardinia by bandits who demanded a £3 million ransom.
This incident was the cue for an unkind comment in a column by Sir John Junor: "Isn" t it an extraordinary coincidence that the reported ransom of £3 million…is exactly the amount, including interest, which Mr Schild is said to owe the London merchant bank of Keyser Ullman?
It could not possibly be, could it, that the man responsible for taking on the loan, the then chairman of Keyser Ullman, Mr Edward du Cann MP, is spending the parliamentary recess leading a debt-collecting bandit gang in Sardinia?"
Schild claimed that these words meant that the kidnapping was a sham arranged by him to avoid his debts, and implied that he was a dishonest hypocrite prepared to exploit his family.
Had the words been capable of bearing this defamatory meaning, Schild might have been awarded enormous damages.
But the Court of Appeal ruled that no reasonable reader, asking "what on earth was Sir John Junor getting at?" could have thought he was seriously accusing Schild.
The comment was pointed at du Cann.
How the minds of ordinary readers receive and interpret newspaper stories is an interesting question of psychology: in law, the answer depends upon the assumptions of lawyers.
What do ordinary readers think, when their eyes catch the fact that someone they know is concerned with a police inquiry into crime?
In Lewis v Daily Telegraph, the newspaper announced: INQUIRY ON FIRM BY CITY POLICE.
"Officers of the City of London Fraud Squad are enquiring into the affairs of Rubber Improvement Ltd.
The investigation was requested after criticisms of the chairman's statement and the accounts by a shareholder at a recent company meeting.
The chairman is Mr John Lewis, former Socialist MP."
The inquiry subsequently exonerated Lewis and his company.
They sued, claiming that the news story implied, to the ordinary reader, that they were involved in fraud.
The newspaper argued that the ordinary reader, possessed of a fairer and less suspicious mind, would presume innocence.
The jury awarded £100,000 damages against the paper.
But the House of Lords held that the statement was not capable of meaning that the plaintiffs were guilty of fraud.
 "The ordinary man, not avid for scandal" , would not infer guilt merely because an inquiry was underway.
So suspects, innocent until proven guilty, may be described as "assisting police with their enquiries" and have no remedy in libel.
Unless, of course, the story is written in a way which suggests that police have every reason to suspect them.
Much — very much, in financial terms — depends upon the care with which the story is written, as the same newspaper once again discovered in Hayward v Thompson.
During preliminary police investigations into Norman Scott's allegations that he had been the victim of a conspiracy to murder in order to protect a former lover, Liberal leader Jeremy Thorpe MP, the "Daily Telegraph" obtained a scoop from a police source.
It published:
TWO MORE IN SCOTT AFFAIR.
"The names of two more people connected with the Norman Scott affair have been given to the police.
One is a wealthy benefactor of the Liberal Party…
Both men, police have been told, arranged for a leading Liberal supporter to be "reimbursed"  "£5,000, the same amount Mr Andrew Newton alleges he was paid to murder Mr Scott." 
Mr Jack Hayward, the wealthy benefactor, claimed that the article meant that he was guilty of participating in or condoning a murder plot.
The newspaper, relying on the Lewis case, said that the words would mean to the ordinary reader no more than that an inquiry was underway, and that Hayward would be able to assist it.
The jury awarded Hayward £50,000, and the Court of Appeal upheld the verdict because the article was capable of implying guilt.
Its headline put the wealthy benefactor "in" the Scott affair, and the copy never got him out of it.
 "IN" means "in" , and that implication of involvement with a conspiracy was reinforced by the phrase "connected with" and the inverted commas around "reimbursed" .
These stylistic features of the story as published would give the ordinary reader the impression that Hayward was an accomplice in the plot — "the paymaster of blood money" , as his counsel put it.
The Hayward case underlines the importance of the way in which the story is presented to the public.
The art is to put across important information without using a language or style that carries a defamatory implication.
That art was demonstrated wth conspicuously different talents by British editors and journalists in the aftermath of the revelation that Jeffrey Archer, best-selling novelist and deputy chairman of the Conservative party, had paid a Shepherds Market street-walker £2,000 to leave the country.
Certain newspapers which jumped to the conclusion that he had engaged in sex with the woman were sued for libel, but were unable to discharge the burden of proving a case which hinged upon the word of a prostitute against the word of the plaintiff and his "fragrant" wife.
 "The Star" was ordered to pay £500,000 damages after a trial which amassed an estimated £750,000 in legal costs.
Newspapers which confined themselves to demonstrable facts, and left readers to draw their own conclusions, were not sued.
However, there is a distinction between their own conclusions, and inviting them to draw a particular conclusion by inflaming their suspicions.
The author who is anxious to wound but fearful to strike too obviously will not escape.
If the reader is invited to be suspicious, and is nudged towards a defamatory explanation which the writer "did not care or did not dare to express in direct terms" the publication will be capable of carrying a defamatory imputation.
The "ordinary reader" may vary in discernment according to the newspaper which he reads and the way in which the article is presented: Ten of the 12 CID officers stationed at Banbury sued the "News of the World" .
At a time when a deranged man was holding hostages at gunpoint, the newspaper splashed on its front page:
EXCLUSIVE.
SIEGE MAN TELLS US WHY HE DID IT.
The story contained an edited version of a letter the man had written to the newspaper accusing Banbury CID officers of raping and beating his wife.
There was nothing in the presentation of the story to suggest that the allegations were untrue.
The jury rejected the newspaper's defence that the ordinary reasonable reader of the "News of the World" would not take the allegations of such a person seriously.
(Perhaps an ordinary reader of "The Times" would have been deemed more discerning.)
Had the newspaper been less callous and opportunistic in its presentation, it could have avoided a successful libel action by publishing its exclusive insight into the mind of the hostage-taker with sufficient background material to remove any suggestion that his allegation was other than paranoid fantasy.
Defamatory innuendo
The test of the ordinary reader is subject to qualification in the case of statements which are not defamatory on their face, but which carry discreditable implications to those with special knowledge.
To say that a man frequents a particular address has no defamatory meaning to ordinary readers — unless they know that the address is a brothel.
Here, libel is by innuendo, ie the statement is defamatory to those with knowledge of facts not stated in the article.
If it is said of a barrister that he has refused to appear for an unsavoury criminal, the ordinary reader may applaud, but his professional reputation is lowered amongst colleagues who understand the story to mean that he has betrayed his ethical duty to appear for all who seek his services.
Where the sting is not a matter of general knowledge, its defamatory capacity is judged by its impact upon ordinary readers who have such knowledge — if the plaintiff can first prove that such persons were amongst the actual readership.
Libel and Slander Distinguished
There are irritating, complicated and unnecessary distinctions in law between two types of defamation — libel, and slander.
Libel is a defamatory statement made in writing, or — in the case of films and video-tapes — at least in some permanent form.
Slander is a defamatory statement made by word of mouth or by gesture.
Plaintiffs may sue for libel even though they have suffered no financial loss but for slander (with certain exceptions) they must be able to prove actual damage and not mere injury to feelings.
Historically, the distinction is explained by the view that writing was a premeditated and calculated act, which affected reputation much more drastically and permanently than off-the-cuff comments.
With the advent of radio, television and satellite broadcasting, this reasoning is anachronistic, and Parliament has enacted that words spoken in theatres, and in broadcasts for general reception, shall be  deemed libels and not slanders.
The same provision is made for words spoken on a cable programme.
However, the distinction still remains in certain areas, notably criminal libel (see p77), ex tempore statements at public meetings and noises of disapproval.
Dramatists or actors whose work is maliciously booed or hissed off the stage would sue their tormentors for slander rather than libel.
The importance of the distinction is that there can be no action for slander unless the plantiff has suffered damage that can be calculated in monetary terms.
Victims of verbal assaults who suffer hurt feelings, sleepless nights, physical illness, or ostracism by friends and neighbours cannot bring an action.
There are only five exceptions: accusations of a crime punishable by imprisonment, suggestions that the plaintiff carries a contagious disease; adverse reflections on a person's ability to carry out an office, business or profession; slanders on the reputation or credit of tradespeople; and words imputing unchastity or adultery to a woman or girl.
Only in these five cases may the plaintiff sue for slander without having to prove financial loss.
Who Can Sue?
Any living individual, if made the identifiable subject of a defamatory attack, may take legal action.
This includes infants (who sue "by their next friend" ), lunatics, bankrupts and foreigners.
Animals, however, are fair game.
The question of who can sue is less important than the question of who will sue.
The enormous cost of contested libel actions means that most plaintiffs will need financial support from unions or employers.
Some organisations find that supporting libel actions on behalf of their members is politically convenient because it assures them a better or more polite press: the Police Federation is one example.
There is nothing to stop such organisations offering to pay the costs of libel actions, and editors deciding whether to settle will bear in mind the strength of the organisation behind the plaintiff.
In recent years, the use of public funds for individual libel actions has been heavily criticised.
Local councils have voted their ratepayers' money to help executives defend their reputations, the BBC hazarded licence-money in backing Desmond Wilcox's claim against "Private Eye" , and the Foreign Office footed the legal bill for diplomats accused of "covering up" the truth about the death of nurse Helen Smith.
There is nothing to stop a private benefactor from bankrolling libel victims, and Sir James Goldsmith has sponsored a fund  to assist like-minded litigants.
However, the benefactor may have to pay the newspaper's costs if the latter is successful.
The dead
The dead cannot sue for libel.
Indeed, if a plaintiff dies on the day before the trial, the action dies as well.
Neither the trustees of the estate nor the outraged relatives have any form of legal redress.
This right to speak ill of the dead is justified in the interests of historians and biographers, and by the practical difficulties of subjecting deceased persons to cross-examination.
The freedom, has, of course, been criticised — especially after the ferocious attack on Lord Goddard made by Mr Bernard Levin in "The Times" a few days after his death.
In 1975, the Faulks committee on libel expressed great concern about stories which added to the grief of a widow — and recommended that relatives should be allowed to sue within five years of death (a cynical estimate, critics suggested, of the length of a widow's solicitude).
There may be some unseemliness about the opportunism of assassinating characters still warm in their graves, but at least they cannot feel the stings and arrows of outrageous libels.
The impossibility of shaking them in cross-examination would make such a reform grossly unfair to the media.
The Faulks Committee would have done better to concentrate on methods for speeding up libel hearings.
The delays are always measured in years, and some plaintiffs die in the interim.
When Reginald Maudling brought actions against Granada Television and "The Observer" for similar libels, "The Observer" settled for £15,000.
Granada held out, and the action was aborted by Maudling's death before it could come to trial.
Although the death of the plaintiff ends the action, it does not pay the defendant's costs.
The Faulks Committee failed to consider this unfair burden on the media, or to recommend the obvious reform that it should be borne by the plaintiff's estate.
Companies
A company may sue for defamation, but only in respect of statements which damage its business reputation.
In legal theory, a company has no feelings capable of injury, although adverse reports may lower the value of its "goodwill" asset.
Normally, individual officers or employees singled out by the criticism will additionally have an action: in Lewis v Daily Telegraph, for example, both the company and its managing director were plaintiffs.
Trade unions
Trade unions, and most other unincorporated associations cannot sue for libel.
An unincorporated association has no legal personality of its own to protect, and it cannot bring a "representative action" on behalf of all its  members.
This was decided in 1979 by EETPU v Times Newspapers, which held that the capacity of trade unions to sue had been removed by s2(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations Act 1974.
The practical significance of this change is mainly to reduce the damages by removing one possible plaintiff, rather than by removing the prospect of an action.
Most criticisms of trade unions will reflect upon individual officers, who will usually be financially supported by their union in vindicating their own reputations.
Groups
There is, in defamation law, a certain safety in numbers.
Defamatory comment may not be actionable if it refers to people by class rather than by name.
Whether an individual member of the class can sue depends upon the size of the class and the nature of the comment: there must be something in the circumstances to make the ordinary reader feel that the plaintiff personally is the target of the criticism.
To say "All barristers are thieves" does not entitle any one of 4,000 barristers to sue — the class is too large to argue that the comment singles out individuals.
But to say "all barristers in chambers at 4 Dr Johnson's Buildings are thieves" would be sufficiently specific to allow the dozen or so barristers in those chambers to take action.
In 1971 the small group of regular journalists at the Old Bailey received £150 damages each for the intolerable insult of being collectively described in "The Spectator" as "beer-sodden hacks" .
The question always is whether the defamation is of the class itself (in which case no action arises) or whether ordinary readers would believe that it reflected directly on the individual plaintiff.
In the case of the "News of the World" and Banbury CID mentioned above, the allegation was simply that unnamed CID officers from that particular police station had committed the rape.
That allegation reflected on each officer at Banbury because that CID office had only 12 members.
Had the allegation been less specific — had it referred only to "certain police officers in Oxfordshire" , for example— the Banbury officers would not have been able to prove that what was published related to them.
Identification
The test, in every case, is whether reasonable people would understand the words to point to the plaintiff personally, and the journalist cannot escape simply by widening the net of suspects.
The statement "Either A or B is the murderer" entitles both A and B to sue, over a statement which carries the defamatory meaning that there is a substantial prospect that each is guilty.
The distinction is not always easy to keep in mind: Lord Denning, Britain's most experienced judge in defamation cases, published a book in which he criticised a jury in Bristol for acquitting defendants who had been charged with rioting.
Two members of the jury  threatened to sue, because the comments (which were based upon mis-statements of fact) suggested they had been false to their oaths by acquitting black defendants because they (the jurors) were black.
The publishers withdrew all 10,000 copies of the book from sale.
A writer will not necessarily escape by criticising "some" members of a class, if other evidence serves to identify the plaintiff as a member of the criticised section.
An article stating that "some Irish factory-owners" were cruel to employees enabled one particular owner to obtain damages, because other references in the article pointed to his factory.
 "If those who look on know well who is aimed at" , the target may sue.
Where the knowledge depends upon special circumstances of which not everyone is aware, the plaintiff has to prove that the article was published to persons who were able to make the identifying connection.
In the Jack Hayward case, the "Daily Telegraph" argued that the plaintiff could not be identified from the description "a wealthy benefactor of the liberal party" .
Unfortunately for the newspaper, that party did not have many wealthy benefactors, and evidence was admitted to show that others immediately made the connection.
His friends put two and two together, and so did the media, which beseiged his home by telephone and helicopter.
In a national newspaper with a wide circulation, the inference was that some readers would know the special facts which identified him.
The moral of these cases is that journalists cannot avoid liability for defamation merely by avoiding the naming of names.
Any story which carries the imputation of discreditable conduct by somebody will be actionable by a plaintiff who can show that at least some readers would recognise him as the person being criticised, or that the facts in the story necessarily imply such an allegation against him.
An allegation that drugs are being supplied as a "liquid cash" to modify behaviour at a particular prison may point a sufficient finger at the medical officers working at that prison, even though they are not referred to by name.
When an Australian newspaper alleged that Kerry Packer had "fixed" the result of a cricket match involving the West Indian team, its captain (Clive Lloyd) was entitled to damages even though he was not named in the article and had not been playing in the particular match.
The "ordinary reader" would infer that the "fixing" had involved the team as well as Packer, and that the captain of the team would have been party to the plot even though he had not played in the match.
Those unintentionally defamed
Where a journalist intends to refer to an unnamed individual, it is reasonable that the individual should have an action for libel if others have correctly identified him or her as the target, whatever literary devices have been used as camouflage.
Asterisks, blanks, initials and general descriptions will not avail, if evidence proves that readers have solved the puzzle  correctly.
Much less satisfactory, however, is the harsh rule that holds a writer responsible for unintentional defamation, where readers have jumped to a conclusion which was never intended.
This rule is the bane of fiction writers, who must take special care to ensure that the more villainous characters in their plots cannot be mistaken for living persons.
The leading case is Hulton v Jones.
In 1909 the "sunday Chronicle" published a light-hearted sketch about a festival in Dieppe, dwelling upon the tendency of sober Englishmen to lead a "gay" life (in the 1909 sense of the word) when safely across the channel.
"Whist!
There is Artemus Jones with a woman who is not his wife, who must be, you know — the other thing…
"
Whist!
There were very heavy libel damages awarded to one Artemus Jones, a dour barrister practising on the Welsh circuit.
Five of his friends thought the article referred to him — an identification made all the more far-fetched by the fact that the fictitious character was described as a Peckham Church Warden.
The House of Lords upheld the award, ruling that the writers' intention was immaterial; what mattered was whether reasonable readers would think that the words used applied to the plaintiff.
The principle of this case lingers on, although Parliament sought to mitigate its harshness by a special provision which enables publishers of unintentional defamation to make amends without incurring heavy damages.
The provision is so cumbersome it is rarely used (see p73), and in any event it can be availed of only where "all reasonable care" had been taken to avoid such misunderstandings.
Authors who employ fictional characters with realistic status or occupations should check available sources to ensure their characters could not be confused with persons of the same name and position.
The entire print-run of one major novel had to be pulped, because the author had chosen the actual name of a noble family to describe a fictional unsavoury aristocrat.
A check with "Debrett" or "Who's Who" would have revealed the danger.
The rule which imposes liability for unintentional defamation has had absurd results.
The House of Lords has solemnly decided that "ordinary readers" do not read very carefully — at least when they are skimming through "The Sun" .
They might jump to a conclusion from certain comments in that newspaper, and ignore others which point away from the plaintiff in question.
The height of absurdity was reached in a case where the wife of a race-horse owner pictured with a woman he had described to the photographer as his fiancee, was allowed to recover damages on the basis that her neighbours would think she was living in sin.
Equally unsatisfactory is the decision that Harold Newstead, a bachelor hairdresser living in Camberwell, was libelled by a perfectly accurate court report that another Harold Newstead, also a Camberwell resident, had been gaoled for bigamy ( "I kept them both till the police interfered" ).
The Newstead case is used to warn young journalists of the importance, in court reporting, of giving occupations and addresses of  defendants and witnesses, so that confusion can be avoided.
Journalists should insist on receiving these details from the court clerk, by citing the case of R v Evesham Justices ex parte McDonagh: A former Tory MP was charged with driving without a tax disc.
He begged the court not to disclose his home address, lest his ex-wife discovered it and harass him.
The court allowed him to write the address on a piece of paper, rather than state it publicly.
The Divisional Court held that there was an unlawful departure from the "open justice" principle, which required defendant's addresses to be given publicly in court.
The well-established practice, which helped to avoid wrongful identification and risks of libel action, should not be departed from for the benefit of the comfort and feelings of defendants.
The problems of "unintentional defamation" underline the general unsuitability of libel law as a method of correcting factual errors and innocent confusion.
The wife and the bachelor in the above cases should have been entitled to insist that the confusion be cleared up by a published clarification, but they should not have been able to obtain an award of damages against a newspaper which was not at fault.
This is a problem which a "legal right of reply" — requiring a correction without compensation — could resolve more effectively.
Not all unintentional defamations come cheaply.
Damages of £20,000 were awarded against Granada Television in 1983 for unintentionally defaming a police officer in a "World in Action" programme about police corruption.
A shot of a police station was used to accompany a voice-over commentary that "some CID men take bribes" ; for two and a half seconds, the officer could be identified in the film as he walked down the station steps.
Granada's defence that the words were not intended to refer to the plaintiff and would not have been so regarded by reasonable viewers was rejected by the jury, after hearing that the officer had received "unpleasant and damaging" comments afterwards.
Who Can be Sued?
As a general rule, everyone who can sue for libel can also be sued for libel, if responsible for a defamatory publication.
There seems to be an exception in the case of trade unions which cannot sue for libel (see above) but can nevertheless be made defendants as a result of the abolition of their immunity in tort by s15 of the 1982 Employment Act.
Unincorporated associations are exempt from suit, but their officials and employees have no such immunity.
Editors and journalists employed on journals published by these organisations are therefore at great financial risk, and should ensure that their contracts of employment indemnify them against costs and damages which may accrue from libel actions, which are often brought by opponents of their employer's policies.
Every person who is responsible for a defamatory publication is a  candidate for a writ: author, editor, informant, printer, proprietor and distributor.
Avoiding responsibility
Journalists whose by-lines are on defamatory stories can exculpate themselves by proving that the defamation was added to their copy without their consent (a common occurrence where the sting emanates from clumsy sub-editing).
In such cases, they should seek independent advice, and think carefully before allowing their reputation to be sacrificed by a "tactical apology" prepared by lawyers acting in the interests of their employers.
An important case which casts helpful light on a journalist's rights in this situation is UCATT v Brain.
A trade union employed a journalist to edit its newspaper.
He was subject to the direction of the General Secretary, who sometimes insisted on the publication of articles seen as politically important for the union.
One such article, written by the General Secretary, was ordered to be printed and the editor had no option other than to deliver it to the printers.
It libelled the plaintiff who issued a writ against the editor.
The union's lawyers decided to apologise, and the editor was directed to approve the apology which was to be made in open court.
The editor, fearing that this would reflect on his credit as a journalist, declined.
He was sacked.
The Court of Appeal upheld his claim for damages for wrongful dismissal.
It pointed out that he had a good defence to the action, namely that he was not responsible for publication.
The solicitors had a conflict of interests, and should have arranged for him to receive independent legal advice.
The union acted wrongfully in dismissing him for insisting on his legal rights.
Employers have no right to bargain away journalists' reputations without their consent merely because some sacrifice of those reputations would be in the interests of management.
A public apology is a reflection on all associated with it, and journalists should take independent advice before they agree to fall on their pens.
A public apology defames the author of the article apologised for by suggesting that the author has written carelessly.
An author who has not approved the apology is entitled to sue the person who has issued it.
Unapologetic authors could not sue if the retraction was made in open court: the statement would then be privileged and so too would any report of it.
However, they can still disassociate themselves from the apology.
They will either have been named as co-defendants, along with their employers, or they can apply to the court to be joined as such.
Normally, all defendants in libel cases use the same solicitors and barristers, but where as here there is a conflict of interest, each would be entitled to separate representation and the authors who stood by their story would thus be able to disown the apology.
Alternatively, writers might approach the judge before whom the apology is to be made, and ask him to refuse to sanction it because of the reflection which it would cast on their  reputations.
However, courts are predisposed in favour of settlements, and are reluctant to prevent statements being made which dispose of libel actions, even when such statements imply criticisms of others: The historian Richard Barnet wrote a book about foreign policy which was reviewed in "The Spectator" .
The review elicited a letter from Brian Crozier, a right-wing journalist, which alleged that Barnet was associated with KGB-influenced institutions.
Barnet sued both Crozier and "The Spectator" .
The magazine found that it could not justify the Crozier allegations which it had published, and agreed to apologise, pay damages and make a statement in open court publicly retracting the libel.
Crozier sought to delay the making of the statement on the ground that it defamed him and might prejudice the jury in Barnet's action against him, which would come on for trial some six months later.
The Court of Appeal held that although "the court should be vigilant to see that the benefit of the procedure of making a statement in open court is not used to the unfair disadvantage of a third party," the public interest in allowing libel actions to be settled outweighed the damage which Crozier apprehended.
The statement would certainly have no effect on a jury trial taking place six months later, and the court was not convinced that the statement carried the defamatory implication that Crozier was dishonest or incompetent.
But had the statement been plainly defamatory of Crozier, the court would have ordered the settlement to be postponed until after his trial, and may not have allowed it to be made at all under the cloak of absolute privilege.
The "statement in open court" is a procedural device used in most libel settlements, often after the plaintiff has "taken out" money which has been paid into court by the defendant.
It is valuable as a means of helping the plaintiff to restore his reputation (at least when it is reported) but it can be exploited to present a false picture under the pressure to avoid trial.
Although judges should approve it before it is made, they normally make no enquiries and allow the parties to say whatever they like.
It seems quite wrong, for example, that they should not be required to state explicitly the amount of damages which have been paid in settlement of the action.
Judicial complaisance may change as a result of the Elton John case, where the statement was published by "The Sun" as a "world exclusive" before it had even been made in court.
The court gave a stern warning against future attempts to scoop it.
Plaintiffs should not assume that they are entitled to be "whitewashed" by a defendant who has paid them merely nominal damages, and it would be more satisfactory if judges made some enquiries of the parties before they approve statements which are made as matters of public record.
Writers and speakers cannot be held responsible unless they authorise, or at least foresee, the publication which causes complaint.
Participants in a television programme, for example, who are told that it is a "pilot" which will not be transmitted, cannot be held responsible for defamatory statements they have made if it is subsequently screened at prime time.
If the defamatory material has been supplied "off the record" by a third  party, a difficult question arises.
The informant is responsible in law (unless the information was provided solely for the journalist's background reference and not for use even on an unattributed basis) but the media, having promised confidentiality, will be under an ethical duty not to reveal the name of its informant.
The plaintiff may want, even more than damages, to discover the identity of the source.
In those defamation cases where journalists can keep the identity of informants a secret (see p153) they are likely to find that their refusal to answer such questions is a ground for increasing the sum total of damages.
It may also, of course, be the reason why the action is lost in the first place, because evidence for the truth of the statement is unavailable from the person who originally made it.
If a newspaper publishes a defamatory statement, it cannot shift all the blame to the person who uttered it in the first place.
The first trap for young reporters is to assume that responsibility for a libel can be avoided if it is made in an attributed quotation.
Every repetition of a libel gives a fresh cause of action against the persons responsible for the repetition.
For example, a defamatory placard, held in front of a television camera during a demonstration, may attract a writ against the television company which broadcasts the picture on a news programme.
When the press is sued over a reported quotation, it may obtain some relief by joining the speaker as co-defendant thereby making the real libeller liable to contribute to costs and damages.
The status and availability of the original speaker is therefore of great importance in deciding whether to publish the remark.
Where the criticism is uttered on an unprivileged occasion by the Prime Minister, the risk would be worth taking, but not when it is uttered by the likes of General Amin.
His false allegations about the promiscuous behaviour of his former Minister for Foreign Affairs, Princess Elizabeth of Toro, won that worthy woman large damages from British newspapers which published them.
By the time the case came to court, General Amin was neither available as a witness nor regarded as a person worthy of belief.
Foreign publications
Many journalists resident in Britain write for overseas publications.
Although the English law of libel has largely been adopted in Commonwealth countries, it is very different — and very much more onerous — than that which obtains in Europe and in America.
This frees journalists from some restraints when they write for foreign publications but has awkward consequences for those who distribute foreign papers in this country.
The legal rules are unsettled, and will cause some confusion with the advent of satellite television.
American law, for example, provides a special "public figure" defence: however inaccurate a speculation about the conduct of a person in the public eye, the journalists who make it will not be liable unless they have acted maliciously.
The better view is that no action can be brought in England unless the article is also actionable under the law of  the country where publication took place.
It would follow that journalists writing for American publications have considerably more latitude in criticising public figures so long as their articles are not reprinted in Britain.
However unlikely it is that American public figures would sue in Britain to vindicate reputations that they cannot protect in their own country, the risk must still be weighed.
One curious religious sect — The Process Church of Final Judgment — did just that, when an American best-seller which suggested that its teachings inspired the Manson murders was published in Britain.
The action failed, but the costs were potentially ruinous for the British publishers.
While there can be no objection in principle to allowing foreigners access to the English courts, it is doubtful whether they should be permitted to recover damages for defamatory words which may freely circulate in the country where the plaintiff's reputation would be most affected.
Indeed, British law is so notoriously favourable to plaintiffs that an increasing number are taking action in London against newspapers that circulate predominantly abroad.
In 1987 damages of £450,000 were obtained against a Greek newspaper because 50 copies were circulated in Britain, and it came as no surprise that when "Time" magazine in 1989 accused the Greek Prime Minister of corruption he issued his writ in London rather than Athens, where the real damage to his reputation had been done.
Innocent distributors
Distributors of newspapers, books and magazines have a special defence of "innocent dissemination" .
Obviously they cannot be expected to vet all the publications they sell, and it would be grossly unfair to hold them responsible for libels of which they could have no knowledge.
In such cases they will escape, unless they have been negligent, or at least ought to have known that the publication "was of such a character that it was likely to contain libellous matter" .
The strictness of the defence has unfortunate consequences for some controversial publications: distributors are prone to equate political radicalism with a propensity to libel, and are thus provided with a ready-made legal excuse for a decision not to stock them.
One way to avoid such discrimination — or at least the legal grounds for it — is to supply a lawyer's opinion to the effect each edition is libel-free.
This is an expensive expedient, but it should be sufficient in many cases to enable the distributor to raise the defence of innocent dissemination.
A plaintiff determined to damage a journal which torments him can, at least if that journal has a poor track record in libel actions, sue the distributors and settle on terms that they will not stock the publication in the future.
For most small newsagents, the prospect of defending a major libel case is frightening, and when Sir James Goldsmith threatened "Private Eye's" distributors in this fashion, many of them caved in.
The  magazine's loss of circulation was dramatic, and Lord Denning thought that Goldsmith's tactics were oppressive: "The freedom of the press" he stated "depends on the channels of distribution being kept open" .
He held that Goldsmith's flurry of "frightening writs" was an abuse of legal process.
His fellow judges, however, pointed out that Goldsmith had merely used the legal process according to his rights.
Any threat to press freedom came, not from Goldsmith, but from the law which allowed him to sue distributors of libel-prone magazines.
If the law threatened press freedom, it was for Parliament, not the courts, to change it.
In the five years since this judgment, Parliament has shown little interest, although the Labour Party has endorsed a proposal that those in the distribution business should be under a legal obligation to supply any publication requested by their customers — a reform which would require abolition of the rule that distributors can be held responsible for particular defamations of which they have no knowledge but which are nonetheless contained in libel-prone publications.
Of course a well-heeled litigant would still be able to frighten booksellers and newsagents by notifying them of the alleged libel and threatening to join them in the action unless they withdrew the offending publication from sale.
Robert Maxwell has deployed this tactic with considerable success to limit the circulation of several books about him to which he has taken exception.
This is yet another example of how the present libel law favours the very rich, and will continue to do so in this respect unless damages are restricted to those primarily responsible for publication.
The Rule Against Prior Restraint
The media have a right to publish defamatory remarks at the risk of paying heavy damages if they cannot subsequently be justified.
The courts will not stop publication of defamatory statements in any case where the person who wants to make them is prepared to defend.
Threats by angry complainants and their solicitors to stop the presses with eleventh-hour injunctions are largely bluff.
The rule has been stated often enough, because plaintiffs willing to "try it on" sometimes try it as far as the Court of Appeal.
In one leading case Lord Denning said: "The court will not restrain the publication of an article, even though it is defamatory, when the defendant says he intends to justify it or to make fair comment on a matter of public interest.
The reason sometimes given is that the defences of justification and fair comment are for the jury, which is the constitutional tribunal, and not for the judge.
But a better reason is the importance in the public interest that the truth should out…
The right of free speech is one which it is for the public interest that individuals should possess, and, indeed, that they should exercise without impediment, so long as no wrongful act is done.
There is no wrong done if it is true, or if it is fair comment on  a matter of public interest.
The court will not prejudice the issue by granting an injunction in advance of publication."
If the plaintiff can prove immediately and convincingly that the defendant is intending to publish palpable untruths, an injunction could be granted.
Otherwise, the rule against prior restraint must prevail in libel actions.
But is is surprising how often High Court judges, pressed for time and hearing only the plaintiff's side, overlook the principle and grant an "interim injunction" without inquiring whether the defendant intends to defend.
Such injunctions are normally immediately set aside on the publisher's application or lifted by the Court of Appeal.
In 1982, two experienced High Court judges were prevailed upon to grant an injunction against the circulation of information by a shipping exchange accusing the plaintiff of connection with fraud.
The Court of Appeal lifted it as a matter of principle, even though a hearing on the merits was set for the following day.
 "The only safe and correct approach is not to allow an injunction to remain, even for a single day, if it was clearly wrong for it to have been granted." 
The rule against prior restraint is secure in libel cases "because of the value the court has placed on freedom of speech and freedom of the press when balancing it against the reputation of a single individual who, if wronged, can be compensated in damages" .
It applies whenever the defendant raises the defences of justification and fair comment, and will apply if the defence is to be qualified privilege unless the evidence of malice is so overwhelming that no reasonable jury would sustain the privilege.
The Court of Appeal has on this basis refused an interim injunction against "Private Eye" when it published details of convictions which had been "spent" under the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act (see below, p60).
It has even refused to injunct a magazine which had published an allegation it could not justify, where it might succeed at trial for other reasons: Soraya Kashoggi sought an injunction to withdraw "Woman's Own" from circulation when it published a statement that she was having an extra-marital affair with a Head of State.
The magazine could not prove the truth of this statement, which it had sourced to an MI5 report, but it claimed to be able to justify the "sting" of the libel, namely that the plaintiff was a person given to extra-marital affairs, a number of which had been referred to in the article without attracting complaint.
The Court of Appeal held that the rule against prior restraint would still operate, given that this defence of justifying the "common sting" of the allegations might succeed at the trial.
If it did not, the plaintiff would be adequately compensated by damages.
One important practical benefit of this rule is that journalists can approach the subject of their investigation for a response to an article in draft, without fear that they will receive a pre-publication injunction  instead of a quote.
However, editors and their advisers must be conscious of one trap for unwary players that can be sprung by a determined litigant who seeks an interim injunction at the outset of his action.
In order to invoke the rule against prior restraint, the defendant must state on affidavit his intention to justify the allegation.
If, contrary to this sworn determination, the defence of justification is not proceeded with when the matter comes to trial, his conduct in recklessly signalling a defence which does not materialise can inflate the damages alarmingly.
This will be the case especially where the actual affidavit boasts of "highly placed sources" who can be summoned to verify the allegation.
 "Private Eye" fell into this trap when it beat off an interim injunction from Robert Maxwell by promising to prove at trial that he had financed Neil Kinnock's foreign travel in the hope of being awarded a peerage.
Its defence of justification was withdrawn at the trial when its alleged "highly-placed sources" went to ground.
It narrowly escaped being called upon to name them (see later, p155) but its conduct in promising a plea of justification and persisting in such a plea until the last moment was punished by damages of £50,000.
The jury found the libel itself to be worth only £5,000.
The difficulty encountered by plaintiffs in obtaining injunctions to stop libels has led to a growth in applications for injunctions on the grounds of breach of confidence, ie that the information has been obtained from someone who is under a duty not to reveal it.
In breach of confidence cases, the rule against prior restraint does not apply: even if the newspaper has a strong defence, the story may be injuncted until trial of the action if the "balance of convenience" so dictates.
Where freedom of speech is at stake, it is unsatisfactory to make the grant of an injunction hinge upon whether the plaintiff happens to sue for libel or breach of confidence.
When the principle of free speech collides with the principle of fair trial, the former may have to give way.
Courts may grant injunctions to stop defamatory publications which would prejudice pending criminal trials.
This jurisdiction is not often used — the normal procedure is for the Attorney-General to bring proceedings for contempt once the trial has concluded.
It may however, present a defendant in a criminal trial with a way of side-stepping the requirement that only the Attorney may bring actions for unintentional contempt.
In 1979 the Court of Appeal, at the behest of Mr Jeremy Thorpe, stopped "The Spectator" from publishing an election address by Auberon Waugh, "Dog Lovers Candidate" for North Devon, on the grounds that it contained matter which would prejudice Thorpe's impending trial for conspiracy to murder.
However, the scope for publishing a defendant's side of the story prior to trial is wider than is commonly believed.
Both John Stonehouse and Ernest Saunders published their life stories in the period between their arrest and trial, although the publishers carefully curbed their comments on the charges and the witnesses prosecution to avoid charges of contempt of court.
Defences Generally
Burden of proof
Plaintiffs must prove that the words of which they complain have a defamatory meaning, that the words refer to them, and that the defendant was responsible for publishing them.
Once these matters are established the burden shifts to the defendants.
They must convince the jury, or a judge sitting without a jury, that the words were true, or the comment was honest, or that the report was "privileged" .
The burden of proving these defences rests squarely on the media, although proof does not have to be "beyond reasonable doubt" , but rather "on the balance of probabilities" : 51 per cent proof will suffice.
This can still be a heavy burden where witnesses have died, or are overseas, or have been promised confidentiality.
A simple but far-reaching reform in libel law which would enhance freedom of expression would be to reverse this burden: to oblige the plaintiff to prove, on balance, the falsity or unfairness of the criticism.
This modest proposal was made to the Faulks Committee, which described it as "the most radical" it had received.
But the Committee was "firmly opposed" to any alteration in the "sound principle" that publishers of defamatory words must prove truth.
 "It tends to inculcate a spirit of caution in publishers of potentially actionable statements which we regard as salutary" was the response of this committee to a reasonable reform which would bring libel law into line with other civil actions.
A reform of this sort might inculcate a salutory spirit of caution in those who threaten their critics with writs over stories with a basis in truth.
The meaning of "malice" 
A number of important defences available to the media in libel cases can be defeated if the plaintiff proves that the publication was actuated by "malice" .
In ordinary language, "malice" means "spite" or "ill-will" .
But in libel law, it generally refers to dishonest writing or reporting — the publication of facts which are known to be false, or opinions which are not genuinely held.
These qualities may exist without feelings of spite or revenge, so that legal "malice" can sometimes have a wider meaning than colloquial usage suggests.
On the other hand, the mere existence of personal antagonism between writer and plaintiff will not defeat a legitimate defence if the published criticism, however intemperate, is an honest opinion.
For the careful and conscientious journalist or broadcaster, the legal meaning of "malice" provides vital protection for honest comment, the more so, because the burden of proving that malice was the dominant motive rests on the plaintiff.
Such proof is necessary before a plaintiff can succeed against unfair and exaggerated criticism (the "fair comment" defence) or against false statements made on certain public  occasions (which are protected by the defence of "qualified privilege" ).
The importance of the legal meaning of "malice" in the defence of free speech is emphasised by the House of Lords' decision in the case of Horrocks v Lowe: Lowe was a Labour councillor who launched an intemperate attack on Horrocks, a Tory councillor whose companies had engaged in land dealings with the Tory-controlled local authority.
 "His attitude was either brinkmanship, megalomania or childish petulance…he has misled the Committee, the leader of his party, and his political and club colleagues" said Lowe of Horrocks at a council meeting.
Speeches on such occasions, and reports of them, are protected by "qualified privilege" — a defence which will only fail if the plaintiff can show that the defendant was actuated by malice.
In the ordinary sense of the word, Lowe was malicious — his political antagonism had, the trial judge found, inflamed his mind into a state of "gross and unreasoning prejudice" .
Nonetheless, he genuinely believed that everything he said was true.
On that basis, the House of Lords held that he was not "malicious" in law.
A passage in Lord Diplock's speech is generally regarded as the classic exposition of the meaning of legal malice: "What is required on the part of the defamer to entitle him to the protection of the privilege is positive belief in the truth of what he published…
If he publishes untrue defamatory matter recklessly, without considering or caring whether it be true or not, he is in this, as in other branches of the law, treated as if he knew it to be false.
But indifference to the truth of what he publishes is not to be equated with carelessness, impulsiveness or irrationality in arriving at a positive belief that it is true.
The freedom of speech protected by the law of qualified privilege may be availed of by all sorts and conditions of men.
In affording to them immunity from suit if they have acted in good faith in compliance with a legal or moral duty or in protection of a legitimate interest the law must take them as it finds them.
In ordinary life it is rare indeed for people to form their beliefs by a process of logical deduction from facts ascertained by a rigorous search for all available evidence and a judicious assessment of its probative value.
In greater or less degree according to their temperaments, their training, their intelligence, they are swayed by prejudice, rely on intuition instead of reasoning, leap to conclusions on inadequate evidence and fail to recognise the cogency of material which might cast doubt on the validity of the conclusions they reach.
But despite the imperfection of the mental process by which the belief is arrived at it may still be "honest" ", that is, a positive belief that the conclusions they have reached are true.
The law demands no more."
An honest belief will always defeat an allegation of malice, unless the plaintiff can prove that the honestly mistaken defendant was activated  mainly by a desire to injure the plaintiff or to obtain an improper personal advantage.
This will rarely be the case with media reporting, although it may sometimes poison the motives of informants.
Newspapers will not normally be aware of improper motives lying behind otherwise defensible statements they report: in such cases, the better view is that they are not "infected" by the improper motivation of the accusers, unless either they ought to have known of it, or the accuser was in their employ.
Recklessness as to the truth or falsity of accusations may amount to malice, but not "carelessness, impulsiveness or irrationality." 
"Lack of care for the consequences of exuberant reporting is not malice and nor is mere inaccuracy or a failure to make inquiries or accidental or negligent mis-quotation.
The plaintiff must show that the defendant has turned a blind eye to truth in order to advance an ulterior object.
An example is provided by one Parkinson, a Victorian clean-up campaigner, whose moral objection to "public dancing" led him to allege that a ballet at the Royal Aquarium had involved a Japanese female catching a butterfly "in the most indecent place you could possibly imagine." 
Confronted with evidence that the performer in question was neither Japanese nor female, and in any event was dressed in pantaloons, Parkinson confessed that he had difficulty observing the performance, and that his object in making the allegation was to revoke the Aquarium's dancing licence.
His pursuit of moral ends did not justify his reckless disregard for truth, and his malice destroyed the privilege to which he would otherwise have been entitled.
It is sometimes argued that criticism of the plaintiff after his writ has been issued, and a failure to apologise prior to trial, is evidence of malice.
This approach is wrong in principle.
Other critical statements made about a plaintiff are irrelevant unless they shed light on the defendant's state of mind at the time he wrote the article which gave rise to the action.
It is not a sign of "malice" to refuse an apology, or to repeat the allegations prior to trial, or to persist in them at the trial: this is no more than steadfastness in the cause (although if the allegations turn out to be false, such conduct may increase the damages.)
Truth as a Defence
The defence of justification
Truth is a complete defence to any defamatory statement of fact, whatever the motives for its publication, and however much its revelation is unjustified or contrary to the public interest.
The legal title of the defence is "justification" , and it operates whenever defendants can show, by admissible evidence, that their allegation is, on balance, substantially correct.
The question of "substance" may be significant — it is not necessary to prove that every single fact stated in a criticism is accurate, so long as its "sting" ,(its defamatory impact) is substantially true.
Minor errors, such as dates or times or places will not be held against the journalist if the gist of the allegation is justified.
Even mistakes which diminish reputation will not count if they pale into minor significance beside the truth of major charges.
Section 5 of the 1952 Defamation Act provides that the defence of justification shall not founder by failure to prove every charge, "if the words not proved to be true do not materially injure the plaintiff's reputation, having regard to the truth of the remaining charges" .
Thus a detailed criticism in "The Observer" of the activities of the Workers' Revolutionary Party was justified, despite proof that some allegations were untrue: the jury found that the inaccuracies could not "materially injure" plaintiffs who had been depicted in an otherwise truthful light.
Even where baseless charges do "materially injure" a plaintiff's reputation, accurate criticisms in the same article will amount to a "partial justification" which reduces the damages by reducing the value of the reputation.
To say that someone is guilty of terrorism and drunken driving will be justifiable if he is a tee-total terrorist.
It will be gravely libellous if he is a drunken driver but not a terrorist.
There are limits, of course, to the distance that truth will stretch.
An accurate news story will not justify a headline which gives a false impression.
Nor can generalised criticism be justified if it is based on one isolated incident.
A statement that a reporter is a "libellous journalist" implies some proven propensity to defame: it is not justified by the fact that he was once in his career obliged to apologise.
Facts should normally be allowed to speak for themselves: to spell out a conclusion may spell danger.
For example, it may be a fact that a writer has used the work of others without their permission.
But to describe him as a "deliberate plagiarist" may overlook another, but unknown fact: that he was assured, at the time he used the material, that the originator's consent had been forthcoming.
It follows that although the man is a plagiarist, he is not a deliberate plagiarist.
Where there is smoke there is usually fire, but occasionally there is only a smoke machine.
Libel lawyers are nervous of the word "lie" because it implies that a person said something which he knew was untrue.
Since this is usually difficult to prove, they will often suggest changing it to "misled" , "misrepresented" or some other phrase which does not connote a particular state of mind.
The fact that a defamatory statement has been made, or the fact that a defamatory rumour exists, is no justification for publishing it.
The law requires the "truth" in such cases to be the truth of the rumour, not the truth of the fact that it is circulating.
As Lord Devlin has explained: "…you cannot escape liability for defamation by putting the libel behind a prefix such as" I have been told that… "" or "it is rumoured  that…" ", and then asserting that it was true that you had been told or that it was in fact being rumoured…
For the purpose of the law of libel a hearsay statement is the same as a direct statement, and that is all there is to it."
However, the context of the article may remove or reduce the rumour's impact on the plaintiff's reputation.
Much will depend on the reaction of the reasonable reader.
In most cases, the publication of a false statement will give it currency and credit (eg the publication by the "News of the World" of rape allegations against Banbury CID officers).
But if the gist of the article is genuinely to demolish the rumour, or to demolish the credibility of its mongers rather than its victim, the article as a whole may not bear a defamatory meaning.
In other situations a rumour or suspicion may with great care be reported if its existence (irrespective of its truth) has some significance, if its victim is allowed to reply and renounce the allegation and if the publisher is scrupulous not to indicate expressly or impliedly that the allegation is true.
In many spheres of public life justice should be seen to be done as well as be done, and officials should not only be impartial but be seen to be above reproach.
So a paper might report that a community believed that police officers had been unnecessarily violent in arresting suspects.
The report would need to include any denial by the police, but it might go on to comment that whether the allegations were true or not, their existence undermined the confidence of the community in the officers, and for this reason the officers should be transferred.
There was a week in 1986 when Fleet Street and Westminster were convulsed with a rumour that Home Sectretary Leon Brittan had been caught interferring with a small boy; no newspaper dared to print what all "in the know" were discussing until "Private Eye" published the story with the explanation that it was utterly false, and circulated to damage the Home Secretary by an anti-semitic faction in MI5.
This form of publication reproduced the rumour in order to kill it, and a relieved Home Secretary announced he would be taking no proceedings against "Private Eye" .
Practical problems
Problems with the defence of justification arise from the law's procedures, not its principles.
Although truth is a defence, proving it in court may be impossible.
There is the burden of proof — squarely on the defendant.
There is the cost of preparing a full-blooded counter-attack.
There is the difficulty of calling witnesses who may have died, or gone abroad, or who may have been promised confidentiality.
And then there is the risk of failure, which inflates the damages on the basis that the defendant is not merely a defamer, but a defamer who has persisted in the injury to the last.
There is no doubt that difficulties of this sort mean  that many true statements are not published, or else are the subject of apologies rather than defences.
Other problems stem from the ambiguities of language and the complex rules of pleading.
The plaintiff will plead the most exaggerated meanings that his counsel considers the words will conceivably bear, in order to maximise the insult and humiliation (and hence the damages).
The defence may well be able to prove the words true in some less defamatory meaning, but will fail unless that is the only meaning which the jury chooses to adopt.
There will be legal pressure to settle the case: successful defendants do not recover all of their costs, and the simplest of libel actions is likely to run up at least £15,000 in costs for each party prior to trial.
Few contested actions are nowadays decided in favour of media defendants.
On the other hand, the difficulties of proving justification should not be exaggerated.
The adage that "truth will out" is assisted by the law.
The defendant may rely on facts which emerge after publication — and in such cases, the length of time before trial may be a positive boon.
Most importantly, the defence may be helped by court rules relating to "discovery of documents" .
Plaintiffs must make available to the defence all documents in their possession which are relevant to the matters in dispute — and sometimes there will be found, amongst office memoranda and other internal documents, material which goes to justify the original allegation.
The order for discovery is often the point of no return for the plaintiff in a libel action: it is the stage at which some prefer to discontinue rather than to open their files.
Finally, there is always the prospect of cross-examining the plaintiff.
Libel plaintiffs are virtually obliged to go into the witness box, where they may be cross-examined in detail about matters relevant to their reputations.
Their answers may support the defence of justification — although rarely as dramatically as football manager Tommy Docherty, a libel plaintiff who collapsed so utterly under cross-examination that he was subsequently prosecuted for perjury.
A sympathetic jury acquitted him after his counsel had luridly described the terrors and confusions for plaintiffs of undergoing cross-examination in libel actions.
Reporting old criminal convictions
There are special rules relating to publication of past criminal convictions.
A conviction — or, for that matter, an acquittal — by a jury is no more than an expression of opinion by at least ten out of twelve people about the defendant's guilt.
One ingenious convict, Alfie Hinds, sued a police officer for stating in the "News of the World" that Hinds had been guilty as charged.
Hinds convinced the libel jury that he had been wrongfully convicted, so the newspaper's defence of justification failed.
Parliament, recognising the danger — perhaps more to respect for the law than to press freedom — changed the law, so that now the very fact of a conviction is deemed to be conclusive evidence of its correctness.
The prosecution's evidence does not have to be presented to the court all over again.
However, this rule — and indeed the basic rule that truth is a complete defence — is subject to one exception in relation to past convictions.
It is socially desirable that offenders should be able to "live down" a criminal past, and the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 is designed to assist this process.
The Act applies only to convictions which have resulted in a sentence of no more than thirty months' imprisonment, and which have been "spent" — ie a certain period of time has elapsed since the passing of sentence.
The length of that period depends on the seriousness of the punishment: where there has been any period of imprisonment between six months and thirty months, the conviction becomes "spent" after ten years have elapsed.
Seven years is the rehabilitation period for prison sentences of six months or under; five years for all other sentences which fall short of imprisonment, save for an absolute discharge which is "spent" (not that is should carry a blameworthy connotation in any event) after a bare six months.
There are short rehabilitation periods for juvenile offenders and persons subject to court orders or disqualifications.
The provisions of the Act are complex, but they have little effect on media freedom.
The press may publish details of "spent" convictions, and if sued may successfully plead justification or fair comment, unless the plaintiff can show that the publication of this particular truth has been actuated by malice.
Since there can be no dishonesty involved in stating the truth, the difficulties of proof are considerable.
An improper and dominant motive would have to be shown for revealing matters which would normally be in the public interest.
An overwhelming desire to injure the plaintiff rather than to inform the public would have to be proved.
Newspapers have routinely reported the "spent" convictions of National Front leaders, for example.
The IBA, with an over-abundance of legal caution, did cut such references from a Labour Party political broadcast, apparently on the ground that the broadcasters might be deemed "malicious" if their dominant motive was to win votes for themselves rather than to inform the public of the truth about persons standing for public office.
Journalists who may be minded to look at court or police records should bear in mind that an official persuaded to show them a spent conviction is liable to a fine, and if they make their persuasion more persuasive by a bribe, or obtain access to the record dishonestly, they themselves are liable to imprisonment for up to six months.
In practice, the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act has caused little difficulty for freedom of expression.
It does however represent an ethical standard which the press should be reluctant to infringe other than for  reasons of genuine public interest.
Shortly after the passage of the Act, the "Daily Mail" had no hesitation in plastering over its front page the "spent" conviction of a left-wing member of Hackney Labour Party active in unseating Reg Prentice MP.
Newspapers which patrol the moral perimeters of society regularly divine a public interest in reporting the "spent" convictions of those in social welfare jobs.
The "public interest" is a value judgment, and the ethical impact of the Act depends not on the law of libel, but on the values of the press.
Ironically, there is no inhibition on digging up an old acquittal.
Nor does the fact of an acquittal debar the media from alleging that the defendant was really guilty after all.
The jury's verdict is "final" only so far as punishment by the criminal court is concerned.
Naturally, such allegations will rarely be made, although the defence of "justification" requires them to be proven only on the balance of probabilities, and not on the higher criminal standard, "beyond reasonable doubt" .
Where there is strong evidence of guilt, defendants given the benefit of the doubt by a jury in a criminal trial will be reluctant to chance their luck a second time by bringing a libel action.
Criticism of a verdict which casts aspersions on the integrity of jurors may, of course, attract libel actions on that score.
Honest Comment as a Defence
This is probably the most important, and most commonly invoked, defence to actions for defamation.
It protects the honest expression of opinion, no matter how unfair or exaggerated, on any matter of public interest.
The question for the court is whether the views could honestly have been held by a fair-minded person on facts known at the time.
Whether the jury agree with it or not is irrelevant.
 "A critic is entitled to dip his pen in gall for the purpose of legitimate criticism: and no one need by mealy-mouthed in denouncing what he regards as twaddle, daub or discord" .
The defence is called "fair comment" — a misnomer, because it in fact defends unfair comment, so long as that comment is honest: "Every latitude must be given to opinion and to prejudice, and then an ordinary set of men with ordinary judgment must say [not whether they agree with it, but]whether any fair man would have made such a comment…
Mere exaggeration, or even gross exaggeration, would not make the comment unfair.
However wrong the opinion expressed may be in point of truth, or however prejudiced the writer, it may still be within the prescribed limit.
The question which the jury must consider in this — would any fair man, however prejudiced he may be, however exaggerated or obstinate his views, have said that which this criticism has said?"
Distinction between fact and opinion
The "fair comment" defence relates only to comment — to statements of opinion, and not to statements of fact.
This is the most important, and most difficult, distinction in the entire law of libel.
A defamatory statement of fact must be justified (ie proved true)— which is a much more onerous task than defending a defamatory comment on the basis that it was made honestly.
The difficulty arises when facts and opinions are jumbled together in the same article or programme.
A form of words may, in one context, be opinion (and therefore defensible as "fair comment" ) while in another context appear as a factual statement, consequently requiring proof of correctness.
There is no hard and fast rule: once again, the test is that of ordinary readers.
Would they, on reading or hearing the words complained of in context, say to themselves "that is an opinion" , or "so that is the fact of the matter?" 
Unattributed assertions in news stories and headlines are likely to be received as factual, while criticism expressed in personlised columns is more likely to be regarded as opinion, especially when it appears to be an inference drawn by the columnist from facts to which reference has been made.
Writers can help to characterise their criticisms as comment with phrases like "it seems to me" ; "in my judgment" , "in other words" etc, although such devices will not always be conclusive.
To say, without any supporting argument, "in my opinion Smith is a disgrace to human nature" is an assertion of fact.
To say "Smith murdered his father, and therefore is a disgrace to human nature" makes the characterisation a comment upon a stated fact.
Where a defamatory remark is made baldly, without reference to any fact from which the remark could be inferred, it is not likely to be defensible as comment, especially if it imputes dishonesty or dishonourable conduct.
In these latter cases, it will be difficult to defend as comment unless it clearly appears as a mere expression of opinion which a fair-minded man could honestly infer from the facts upon which the comment is said to based.
In deciding the scope of a "fair comment" plea and the degree of interpretative sophistication to bring to bear on the question of whether a passage is "comment" or "fact" , the court should have regard to the constitutional importance of the "fair comment" defence as a protection for freedom of expression.
The opinion must have some factual basis
The defence of "fair comment" will not succeed if the comment is made without any factual basis.
An opinion cannot be conjured out of thin air — it must be based on something.
And that something should either be  accurately stated in the article, or at least referred to with sufficient clarity to enable the reader to identify it.
It is not necessary to set out all the evidence for the writer's opinion: a summary of it, or a reference to where it can be found is sufficient.
Even a passing reference is sufficient, if readers will understand what is meant.
The leading case is Kemsley v Foot.
Michael Foot once launched an attack in "Tribune" on what he termed "the foulest piece of journalism perpetrated in this country in many a long year," indicating a particular article in "The Evening Standard" .
The editor of that paper and the writer could not sue for this honest, if exaggerated, appraisal of their work.
However, Foot's article was titled "Lower than Kemsley" — a proprietor whose stable of newspapers did not include the Evening Standard.
Did the headline amount to a statement of fact — ie that Lord Kemsley was a byword for publishing dishonest journalism — or an opinion about the quality of journalism in Kemsley newspapers?
The House of Lords held that the readers of "Tribune" in the context of the copy, would regard the headline as a comment on the quality of the Kemsley press, rather than as a factual statement about the character of the proprietor.
There was sufficient reference to the factual basis of the comment — namely the mass-circulation Kemsley newspapers — to enable readers to judge for themselves whether the comment was reasonable.
Given the rule that a "fair comment" must state or refer to the facts upon which it is based, to what extent might the falsity of those facts destroy the defence?
Clearly, the comment that "Smith is a disgrace to human nature" could not be defended if the stated fact, ie that Smith was a patricide, was false.
Often comments will be inferences from a number of facts — some true, some partly true, and some not true at all.
These difficulties have resolved themselves into the question: is the comment "fair" , in the sense of being one which the commentator could honestly express, on the strength of such of his facts as can be proved to be true?
Take the case of the prudish Mr Parkinson, who attended the butterfly ballet.
His opinion that it was grossly indecent was genuine to the extent that his inclination was to think every form of dance indecent.
However, his stated grounds for that opinion were a figment of his imagination: his misdescriptions of the performance were so fundamental as to vitiate any factual basis for his criticism.
The defence of honest comment would not have availed him.
The defence protects the honest views of the crank and the eccentric, but not when they are based on dishonest statements of fact.
The rule will not apply to defeat comments which are based on facts which, although untrue, have been stated on occasions protected by privilege.
Trenchant editorials are sometimes written on the strength of statements made in court or Parliament.
These will be protected as fair comment, even if the "facts" subsequently prove unfounded.
Absence of malice
The "fair comment" defence is defeated by proof that the writer or publisher was actuated by malice, in the legal sense of that term.
That sense will in most cases resolve itself into the question of whether the comment was honestly made, which is no more than a defining characteristic of "fair comment" in the first place.
Where the malice is alleged to be some improper motivation, the plaintiff will require strong evidence of impropriety in order to destroy the defence.
Defendants are entitled to give evidence of their honest state of mind, and to explain why their dominant motive, irrespective of any dislike they may feel for the plaintiff, was to comment on a matter of public interest.
The courts have repeatedly insisted that "irrationality, stupidity or obstinacy do not constitute malice though in an extreme case they may be some evidence of it." 
A failure to apologise, or to publish a retraction, will not normally be evidence of malice, but rather of consistency in holding sincere views.
But editors who refuse to retract damaging comments after clear proof that they are wildly exaggerated may lay themselves open to the inference from this conduct that they were similarly reckless at the time of the original publication.
An outright refusal to give the victim of a damaging comment a reasonable opportunity to reply — a rejection of a polite letter to the editor, for example— may similarly betray a degree of malice behind the original comment.
Hard hitting criticism and savage satire can generally be successfully defended as honest comment, so long as the exaggerations are not so extreme as to indicate malice.
Derek Jameson notably failed to prove that the writers of the BBC satirical programme "Week Ending" were dishonest in portraying him as stupid and lubricious: his record as editor of down-market newspapers allowed them to describe his editorial policy as being "all the nudes fit to print and all the news printed to fit." 
It would have been a sad day for British satire had Jameson won this presumptious action.
Former Royal Shakespeare Company actress Charlotte Cornwell had more luck when she was awarded £11,000 to compensate for a vile personal attack on her in the "News of the World" over her performance in a new television series.
The "malice" , in the sense that the virulent criticisms were not the honest belief of their writer, lay in the description of her as "a middle aged star [who]can" t sing, her bum is too big and she has the sort of stage presence that jams lavatories…[she]looks just as ugly with make-up."
The defendants knew that the actress was aged 34 and was of normal weight and appearance: the article had heaped upon her the kind of reckless insults which could not have reflected an honest opinion.
In 1990 the British public was enormously entertained by a libel action brought by the editor of the "Sunday Times" against the editor of the rival "Sunday Telegraph" over the latter's moral condemnation of his (and the  "Observer" editor's) dalliance with a woman of easy virtue.
The comparatively puny damages of £1,000 (the cost of a dozen bottles of champagne at the expensive nightclub where the affair had begun) and the public ridicule suffered by all parties may serve to remind editors of the wisdom of the adage that "dog does not eat dog in Fleet Street" .
Public interest
The defence of "fair comment" may only be sustained if the comment is on a matter of public interest.
This is an easy test to satisfy: the only cases where it has failed have been criticisms of the private lives of persons who are not public figures.
The courts have held that the public is legitimately interested, not merely in the conduct of public officials and institutions, but of private companies whose activities affect individual members of the public.
The conduct of a professional person towards a client, or an employer towards a worker, are also matters which may attract legitimate public interest.
Anyone who throws a hat into a public arena must be prepared to have it mercilessly though not maliciously trampled upon.
Whose comment is it?
There is a difficult, and unresolved, question about the application of the "fair comment" defence to comment by a third party which is published in a newspaper.
The editor may not agree with sentiments in a "letter to the editor" : if sued for libel, does he lose the defence of "fair comment" because it cannot be said that the opinion is honestly his?
It is clear that publishers may rely upon the defence of fair comment to the same extent as the person whose comment it was, so if the author of the letter is also sued, or is prepared to testify, the honesty of his views will afford the newspaper a defence.
If the author does not come forward, however, the position is more difficult.
The better view (both for the logic of the law and for press freedom) is that the expression of opinion may still be defended as "fair comment" if it can be shown to satisfy the test of whether a hypothetical fair-minded man could honestly express the opinion on the proven facts.
The public interest is better served by encouraging newspapers to publish unorthodox points of view in letters columns — an objective which is not helped by depriving them of a "fair comment" defence when they publish letters with which they do not agree.
Absolute Privilege
Accurate reports of certain public occasions are "privileged" — which is to say that any defamatory statements arising from them cannot be made  the subject of a successful libel action.
Privilege is either "absolute" — a complete defence, or "qualified" , ie lost only if the speaker or reporter is actuated by malice.
Although it is unseemly that the law should protect the publication of malicious falsehoods, absolute privilege is justified on the practical ground that without it, persons with a public duty to speak out might be threatened with vexatious actions for slander and libel.
In other words, "absolute privilege" is a recognition of the law's potential for suppressing truth and silencing justifiable criticism.
Protection is given to the malicious and the reckless as the price of protecting from the threat of vexatious litigation all who are under a powerful duty to state facts and opinions frankly.
Thus politicians may say whatever they choose in Parliament or at the proceedings of select committees (see Chapter 9).
Judges, lawyers and witnesses may not be held responsible for any statement uttered in court.
The Ombudsman's reports are absolutely privileged, as are ministers of the Crown, officers of the armed forces and high-level government officials in their reports and conversations about matters of state.
In these cases, the absolute privilege attaches only to the maker of the statement: when it is reported or broadcast, the organisation which does so is protected by a privilege which is qualified and not absolute.
The one occasion when written and broadcast reports of statements made by persons who possess absolute privilege are themselves absolutely privileged is when they concern proceedings in the courts.
This important media privilege is explained at p276.
Court reports in newspapers and on radio and television are absolutely privileged under s3 of the Law of Libel Amendment Act 1888 so long as they are fair and accurate, and are published as soon as is reasonably practicable, having regard to the schedules of the newspaper or broadcasting organisation.
Qualified Privilege
The law recognises the importance of encouraging statements made from a social or moral duty.
It accords them a privilege from action for defamation, on the condition that they are made honestly.
However unfounded the allegations made on a protected occasion may subsequently prove, they are privileged unless made with malice.
This branch of the law is strongly impressed with considerations of public interest.
The notion which lies behind it is that where there is a moral duty to speak out, speakers should not hold their tongues for fear of writs.
The defence of qualified privilege has been developed in accordance with social needs.
The early cases were overly concerned to protect the gentry's right to communicate gossip about disloyal or dishonest servants.
The growth of commerce saw protection extended to references given by bankers and employers, and to information shared among traders.
Parliament has intervened to give special protection to press reports of statements made on significant public occasions, and there are hints — no more — that in certain cases the courts may be prepared to  extend protection of qualified privilege to media investigations of major public scandals.
Communications between people who share a common interest in the subject matter of the communication will attract qualified privilege.
The communication may be made out of social or moral duty — references between employers, for example, or allegations about criminal conduct made to the police.
A communication is protected if it is made to further a common interest — a circular published to shareholders in a company, or to fellow members of a trade union, or an inter-office memorandum.
A communication is protected if it is made to a person who has a duty to receive and act upon it: thus complaints to "higher authority" are privileged, whenever the authority complained to is in a position to investigate or discipline or supervise.
Journalists who observe what they regard as improper behaviour by judges or lawyers could provide information to the Lord Chancellor's Department without running any risk of a libel action.
A general privilege for investigative journalists?
But to what extent will these common-law principles protect the media when it publishes allegations of misconduct to the world?
So far, the courts have been reluctant to hold that the press has a "moral duty" to inform an interested public.
It may have a duty to inform the public about the misconduct of a candidate for election, but only in newspapers which circulate in the candidate's constituency.
A "moral duty" may similarly exist in the case of a specialist journal circulating only, say, to members of a profession, who would have a shared interest in receiving information about discreditable conduct of a fellow member.
It may be that the privilege will be held to exist where the only possible mode of communication is via the media, for example if the appropriate authority had arbitrarily refused to consider the information.
There are some tantalising references to a defence of "fair information on a matter of public interest" , notably in the case of Webb v Times Publishing Co: Donald Hume murdered Stanley Setty, cut up his body and threw it out of an aircraft over the Essex marshes.
He was tried for murder, and acquitted.
Ten years later, he committed another murder in Switzerland.
At his Swiss trial he admitted murdering Setty, whom he claimed was the father of his wife's child.
 "The Times" reported this evidence — which, having been given in a foreign court, was not protected by absolute privilege.
Hume's wife sued, claiming that she had never met Setty, let alone had an affair with or a child by him.
Mr Justice Pearson held that the report was protected by qualified privilege, as it was fair information on a subject of public interest.
Importance was attached to the legitimate interest which the English public would have in information which could throw light on a major "unsolved" crime.
On the strength of this case, Lord Denning has argued, extra-judicially, that"if newspapers or television receive or obtain information fairly from a reliable and responsible source, which it is in the public interest that the public should know, then there is a qualified privilege to publish it.
They should not be liable in the absence of malice".
This is a statement of law as it should be, rather than as it is, but there is nothing to stop the courts developing it in this direction.
However, it will only be developed in cases where the public advantage in receiving the information clearly outweighs the private injury which may be suffered.
For the present it would be advisable not to report such allegations without giving the person defamed an opportunity to refute them in the same report.
Lord Denning's view of the law of qualified privilege was rejected by the Court of Appeal in Blackshaw v Lord.
It declared that "No privilege attaches yet to a statement on a matter of public interest believed by the publisher to be true and in relation to which he has exercised reasonable care." 
The defence of "fair information on a matter of public interest" was not enough to attract privilege unless the newspaper had a duty to publish the information to the public at large, whose members had a corresponding interest in receiving it.
The "Daily Telegraph" had no "duty" , in this sense, to publish mere rumours and suspicions that a public servant had been responsible for losing millions of pounds of public money.
However, the court did concede that: "There may be extreme cases where the urgency of communicating a warning is so great, or the source of the information so reliable, that publication of suspicion or speculation is justified; for example, where there is danger to the public from a suspected terrorist or from the distribution of contaminated food or drugs…" 
This leaves the door ever so slightly open for the media to claim a public interest privilege based on a duty to communicate vital information to the public.
The Canadian courts have taken the first step, by accepting that the media has a qualified privilege to publish information (which later turns out to be false) about a possible public health hazard.
It may seem a contradiction in terms to assert a public interest in publishing untruths, but there may come a point at which the reliability of the source and the potential danger to the public cohere to impose a duty on those possessed of the information to alert the public.
The most interesting developments in the law relating to qualified privilege may come as a result of Article 10 of the European Convention of Human Rights (see p3).
Restrictions on press freedom, such as libel laws, must respond to a "pressing social need" and must be no wider than is "necessary in a democratic society" .
In 1986, the European Court of  Human Rights decided in Lingens v Austria that the Convention requires such restrictions to be relaxed in relation to criticism of public figures during political controversies: Lingens, a seasoned political commentator, published attacks on Bruno Kreisky, the President of the Austrian Socialist Party, accusing him of "immorality" and "the basest opportunism" for contemplating a political alliance with ex-Nazis.
Lingens was privately prosecuted by Kreisky, and convicted and fined for defamation.
The court held that this was a breach of the Convention guarantee of free speech, because it would deter journalists from contributing to public discussions of issues affecting the life of the community: "The limits of acceptable criticism are wider as regards a politician as such than as regards a private individual…the former inevitably and knowingly lays himself open to close scrutiny of his every word and deed by both journalists and the public at large, and he must consequently display a greater degree of tolerance." 
The decision in Lingens edges Europe closer to the US "public figure" doctrine, in which journalists are free to publish what they honestly believe about important persons.
However, the European Court carefully distinguished between the publication of value judgments about such persons rather than factual allegations, and it is likely that Lingens (who was expressing his genuine opinion of Kreisky) would have had a "fair comment" defence in English law.
Nevertheless, it could be argued that the common law doctrine of qualified privilege can be extended, under the public policy spur of the European Convention, to protect assertions about public figures made in good faith as part of public political discussion.
In this context, there is an important distinction to be drawn between imputations which are derogatory and imputations which are defamatory.
Greater latitude can be permitted to disparagement of politicians and self-promoting celebrities: the sting is less likely to pierce when the hide is thick.
Reply to an attack
The "right of reply privilege" is often overlooked, but its constitutional significance for the protection of freedom of expression deserves to be recognised.
It is based on the simple proposition of self-defence: if you are verbally attacked, you are entitled to strike back with some vehemence to defend your reputation.
The media which carry your response share your privilege, so long as the publicity given to your condemnation of your attacker is reasonably commensurate with the publicity given to the original attack.
The "right of reply" privilege was established by the House of Lords in the case of Adam v Ward: The plaintiff, an officer but not a gentleman, used his position as an MP to make a vindictive attack upon a General in his former regiment.
The defendant, Secretary to the Army Council, issued a statement in support of the General, which defamed the MP and was published in newspapers throughout the Empire.
The Law Lords held that this publication was protected by qualified privilege: the Council had a duty to leap to the General's defence, and the privilege was not lost by the fact of world-wide publication, because "a man who makes a statement on the floor of the House of Commons makes it to all the world…it was only plain justice to the General that the ambit of contradiction should be spread so wide as, if possible, to meet the false accusation wherever it went." 
The rule in Adam v Ward offers consolation to victims of attacks made under the "coward's cloak" of Parliamentary privilege: they may reply in kind, through newspapers which will only be liable for the defamatory content of their reply if it is irrelevant to the subject-matter of the attack, or if it defames other persons who bear no responsibility for the attack.
The right of reply privilege does not merely protect responses to criticisms made in Parliament, of course: it is a privilege of general application, arising from the legitimate interest of individuals in protecting their reputations, and it is shared by the media when it facilitates that interest.
The rule that qualified privilege protects bona fide responses to criticism assists newspapers which offer a right of reply.
Editors sometimes justify their refusal to publish letters by victims of attacks in their newspapers, on the grounds that they contain passages libellous of their journalists.
Such refusals are disingenuous.
A person whose reputation is criticised in the press is privileged to make honest, if defamatory, replies to those criticisms, and this privilege will shield the newspaper which publishes the defamatory response.
Parliamentary and court reports
At common law, all fair and accurate reports of Parliament and the courts are protected by qualified privilege.
This is a safety net for press coverage which falls outside statutory protection — because, for example, it is not published as soon as practicable after the event.
The application of qualified privilege is considered in detail in Chapter 7 (Reporting the Courts) and Chapter 9 (Reporting Parliament).
Other public occasions
Section 7 of the 1952 Defamation Act grants qualified privilege for newspapers and broadcast programmes in reporting a wide range of public occasions.
 "Newspapers" , under the 1952 Act, are defined as periodicals "printed for sale" at intervals not exceeding thirty-six days (thereby including monthly magazines, but excluding free sheets); "broadcasts" must be by wireless telegraphy and for general reception, but  the Cable and Broadcasting Act expands this to include cable stations.
Prestel and video cassettes are excluded and are protected, if at all, by common law.
The writers of books and producers of films for cinema release are also outside the statutory privilege.
Section 7 is in two parts.
The first accords qualified privilege unconditionally; the second grants it subject to the condition that a reasonable right of reply must have been afforded to victims of privileged defamations.
Part I privilege extends to fair and accurate reports of: Commonwealth Parliaments Conferences of International Organisations, of which Britain is a member or is represented Proceedings of international courts Proceedings of British courts-martial held outside Britain, and of any Commonwealth courts Public inquiries set up by Commonwealth Governments Extracts from public registers Notices published by judges or court officers.
Part II privilege extends, subject to affording the victim a reasonable right of reply, to fair and accurate reports of: Findings or decisions (not necessarily the evidence on which they are based) of any association (or committees of associations) formed in the United Kingdom, and empowered by its constitution to exercise control over, or adjudicate on matters relating to:(a) art, science, religion or learning (b) any trade, business, industry or profession (c) persons connected with games, sports or pastimes and who are contractually subject to the Association.
Proceedings at any lawful public meeting,(whether or not admission is restricted) which is called to discuss any matter of public concern.
Proceedings of any meeting open to the public within the UK of (a) a local authority or its committees (b) justices of the peace acting in non-judicial capacities (c) committees of inquiry appointed by Act of Parliament or by the Government (d) local authority inquiries (e) bodies constituted under Acts of Parliament (f) general meetings of public companies and associations "Any notices or other matter" issued for the information of the public by or on behalf of any government department, officer of state, local authority or chief constable.
This does not include information which has been leaked from such sources, nor does it include unauthorised and off-the-cuff comments made by junior officials.
To be protected, the information must be issued or approved by  some person in authority.
Journalistic speculation and inference about official statements are not protected.
These Part II privileges are "subject to explanation and contradiction" — which means that they will not apply where an editor or programme controller has refused the plaintiff's request to publish a reasonable statement in reply, or has done so in an inadequate manner.
Plaintiffs must supply their own set of words — a bare demand for a retraction is insufficient to defeat the privilege.
So long as it is reasonable in tone and length, it must be published with a prominence appropriate to the original report.
These privileges attach to reports of public statements and public documents.
They do not extend to the contents of documents (such as pleadings or affidavits) which have not been read in open court or to reports of evidence given in closed court, or to confidential reports which are available to councillors but not specifically read in open debate.
The privilege would not stretch to reports of fresh statements made by speakers after the protected meeting has been closed, although it has been held that it does extend far enough to allow those who have spoken in the course of the meeting to repeat their privileged statements to reporters afterwards so that the latter may check the accuracy of their notes.
Other Defences
Consent
People can — and often do for large sums of money — agree to be defamed.
Should they then turn around to bite the hand that takes down their volunteered confessions, they will fail.
Consent to publication is a complete defence.
The consent must, however, relate to the actual libel published, and not merely to the grant of an interview in which the libellous subject was not specifically canvassed.
A person who agreed to participate in a discussion programme in order to refute allegations could not complain about their public repetition, unless they included matters which the interviewee had specifically refused to discuss before the programme was recorded.
Apology
In other cases, liability for libel may be avoided or reduced by timely apologies and offers of amends.
In cases of "innocent publication" , where the defendant has not intended to criticise the plaintiff (either because the defendant did not realise that the words would be understood to refer to  the plaintiff or the defendant is unaware of special circumstances which make them defamatory) liability may be avoided by making an "offer of amends" under s4 of the 1952 Defamation Act.
An "offer of amends" entails an offer to publish a suitable correction, together with an apology, and to pay any legal costs incurred by the complainant.
The procedure is designed to give a "right of reply" instead of an action for damages in cases where the media have behaved responsibly: the plaintiff cannot succeed if the defendant proves that an "offer of amends" was made in good time, and is still open at the time of the trial.
However, in order to maintain this defence, it must be shown that the publisher exercised "all reasonable care in relation to the publication" — which means that the publisher took steps to avoid obvious confusion, ensured that sources were checked and that familiar reference works were consulted.
In Ross v Hopkinson, an actress sued the publisher of a novel in which a character bore her stage name.
The defence that an "offer of amends" had been made failed on two counts: it had not been made "as soon as practicable" (seven weeks had elapsed since publication) and "reasonable care" had not been exercised, because a check with current stage directories would have revealed that the name chosen for the fictitious actress was the same as that used by a leading West End lady.
The "offer of amends" would be a valuable protection for the media in cases of unintentional defamation, were it not encumbered by what the Faulks Committee described as "expensive rigmarole" — a procedure which requires the swearing of a detailed affidavit about how the confusion arose, which must be served at the same time as the offer of amends.
This is the reason why it is little used, and will fail to fulfil its valuable purpose until the reforms recommended by the Committee are implemented.
A prompt correction and apology for an indefensible defamation serves two purposes besides setting the record straight.
In many cases it satisfies the complainants — and, where it is accompanied by payment of costs, it will satisfy their lawyers as well.
If the complainant is still determined to become a plaintiff, the fact that a prompt apology has been made can be relied upon by the defendant to lower the amount of damages.
It is obviously prudent, however, for the potential media defendant to seek a disclaimer of further legal action as a condition of publishing the apology.
Once an apology is given, the defendant will be hard put to contest liability later.
Limitation
Plaintiffs must normally start their action by issuing a writ within three years of the libel's publication.
This does not apply to repeated publications (each starts the clock running again), or to children or other  people under a legal disability.
If a person remains in ignorance of a publication until after the three year period has expired, he or she can start proceedings within a year of learning of it but the court's permission is necessary.
Damages
Damages in libel actions are difficult to predict.
Personal injury cases are almost always tried by judges alone, and receive recompense on a scale which can be predicted with some accuracy by reference to recent cases.
Damage to reputation is a concept which has no equivalent in money or money's worth.
It is inflated by the feeling that it should be large enough to "vindicate" plaintiffs by showing the world that their names deserve respect, and perhaps even larger to "console" them for the insult and injury of having their names taken in vain by circulation-grabbing newspapers.
A refusal to correct or apologise for an obvious mistake will enlarge the damages, as will the seriousness of the libel and the degree to which it is repeated.
By the same token, the promptness of the apology, the honesty of the mistake, and pre-existing flaws in the plaintiff's reputation, are matters which go to reduce the final sum.
Where journalists who give evidence in libel cases do not answer questions which identify their source of information, the Court of Appeal has recently held that they are in peril of suffering much heavier damages if they lose the case.
The extent of circulation and the prominence given to defamatory remarks are factors which will influence the final award: a libel in the national press comes more expensive than the same libel in a small local newspaper.
Damages are awarded to compensate the plaintiff for the injury to his reputation and the hurt to his feelings.
If "malice" is proved against a sole defendant or against all defendants it may aggravate the hurt and hence the final award.
The plaintiff's feelings may be wounded if he is subjected to aggressive cross-examination, especially if it is designed to support what transpires to be an unsuccessful plea of justification, so this forensic factor may be brought into account.
On the other hand, the jury can be asked to take the plaintiff's own conduct into account in reducing damages — if he has taken steps to refute the allegations publicly, or has been cleared of them after a publicised enquiry, or has obtained retractions and damages from other publications, his wounds may be considered to have partially healed.
Similarly, if he has used his day in court to make wild or unjustified attacks on the defendant, this conduct may be taken into account in reducing the damages.
Damages in libel cases are intended generally to compensate the plaintiff for loss of face, and specifically for any loss of work or earnings which can be proved to have been suffered as a result of the libel.
They are not meant to punish the press, but when a publisher deliberately or recklessly sets out to defame another, with the object of making a profit  out of that defamation (ie by increasing circulation) the law permits "punitive" damages to be awarded, as in Cassell & Co v Broome: David Irving wrote a book about the fate of a wartime convoy, blaming it upon the negligence of a particular captain, Broome.
Cassell & Co published the book.
The jury awarded punitive damages of £40,000 against Irving, and a further £40,000 against Cassell.
The House of Lords upheld the award as a punishment to both author and publisher, as there was evidence that both were reckless about the truth of the defamatory statements in the book, and indeed hoped that they would cause a sensation so that the book's sales would increase.
A move to restrict the use of juries in libel actions was defeated in 1981, largely as a result of public satisfaction at the performance of the jury which sat for six months to hear the claim for libel brought by the head of the "Moonies" in England against the "Daily Mail" .
The jury not only upheld the newspaper's defence of justification, but added a rider suggesting that the "Moonies" should be stripped of their charitable status.
But unless the plaintiff is unpopular or unpleasant, the media will normally be advised to avoid jury trials, because of the danger of heavier damages.
For that very reason, of course, the plaintiff will normally insist on a jury.
Punitive damages in libel cases are a legal anomaly.
They amount to a fine for misbehaviour, but have no upper limit.
They are generally awarded by juries, who have neither the power nor the proficiency to impose a sentence in any other area of law.
They do not, like other fines, go into the public purse but into the pocket of victims who have already been compensated by the same jury for damage to their reputation.
They are, indeed, difficult to distinguish from the "aggravated damages" to which a plaintiff is entitled by virtue of the suffering caused by the newspaper's high-handed or insulting conduct.
They are not awarded in Scotland, and both the Faulks Committee and the Court of Appeal have recommended their abolition.
There is urgent need to reform the law relating to damages in libel actions.
In the hands of juries, without meaningful guidance from judges, they have become entirely unpredictable.
Most lawyers expected that the wife of the "Yorkshire Ripper" would receive no more than £20,000 for a relatively mild libel in "Private Eye" : instead, she was awarded £600,000.
The Court of Appeal overturned the award but no clear guidance emerged from its judgment (see p.34).
In 1984 "Union Jack" Hayward received £50,000 to console him for the untrue allegation that he was involved in a murder plot.
A few years later, that sum was awarded to Robert Maxwell for the false suggestion that he was angling for a peerage, while ten times that amount was lavished on Jeffrey Archer in revenge for the suggestion that he had received a sexual favour from a prostitute he  had admitted to paying to leave the country.
Reform might come from Parliament simply taking the calculation of damages out of the hands of juries, and allowing judges to develop reasonably predictable scales for assessment after the jury has indicated whether damages in the particular case should be substantial, moderate, nominal or contemptuous.
In the absence of legislation, it may be that the Court of Appeal will prove more willing to strike down unreasonably high awards, or better still authorise trial judges to suggest appropriate financial parameters in their summings-up.
Failing such developments, it is possible that the European Court will find the unprincipled and unpredictable system of libel awards to be a breach of Article 10 of the European Convention, under which all restrictions on freedom of expression must be "prescribed by law" .
The prospect of heavy damages has a chilling effect on freedom of speech, and the blank cheque which juries are allowed at present to write does not constitute the sort of precise and predictable rule which the Convention requires.
Following a government amendment to the Courts and Legal Services Bill, the Court of Appeal will have greater power to substitute its own award of damages.
There will be some delay though before this change is implemented.
Trial by Jury
Section 69 of the Supreme Court Act 1981 entitles any party to a defamation action to require a trial by jury, "unless the court is of the opinion that the trial requires any prolonged examination of documents or accounts or any scientific or local investigation which cannot conveniently be made by a jury" .
Even in these cases the court has a discretion to order jury trial, although it will apply a presumption in favour of trial by judge alone if satisfied that otherwise the trial would be so complicated, costly and lengthy that the administration of justice would be likely to suffer.
The Court of Appeal has in such cases refused a jury even though the allegation accuses the plaintiff of committing criminal offences, although where the trial affects national interests or the honour and integrity of national personalities it may decide otherwise.
This was the case in Lord Rothermere v Bernard Levin & Times Newspapers, where the defendants had published an attack ( "Profit and dishonour in Fleet Street" ) on Rothermere's integrity in closing down a newspaper.
Although the trial would involve a prolonged examination of financial documents, the Court of Appeal was moved by the personal plea of the editor of "The Times" that free speech issues should be decided by a jury.
That was in 1973: the escalation of jury awards in more recent libel  cases makes it unlikely that such a plea will be repeated by a defending editor.
Criminal Libel
If a libel is extremely serious, to the extent that a court is prepared to hold that it cannot be compensated by money and deserves to be punished as a crime, its publisher may be made the target of a prosecution.
Criminal libel is an ancient offence which is now unlikely to be invoked against the media by prosecuting authorities: the Law Commission has recommended its abolition, and one Law Lord has further pointed out that its scope conflicts with the European Convention on Human Rights.
However, there have been two modern instances in which it has been invoked by private individuals as part of a vendetta against their journalist-tormentors.
In 1977 Sir James Goldsmith was granted leave to prosecute the editor of "Private Eye" .
The following year a London magistrate, struck by the notion that there should not be one law for the rich unavailable to the poor, permitted a man named Gleaves to bring proceedings against the authors and publishers of a book entitled "Johnny Go Home" , based on a Yorkshire television documentary which had exposed his insalubrious hospitality to feckless youths.
Neither case was an edifying example of law enforcement.
Goldsmith was allowed to withdraw his prosecution after a settlement with "Private Eye" , and an Old Bailey jury took little time to acquit the authors of "Johnny Go Home" after a two-week trial.
These precedents do not hold out great hope for private prosecutors determined to teach their critics a lesson in the criminal courts.
The arcane offence of scandalum magnatum was created by a statute of 1275 designed to protect "the great men of the realm" against discomfiture from stories which might arouse the people against them.
The purpose of criminal libel was to prevent loss of confidence in Government.
It was, essentially, a public order offence, and since true stories were more likely to result in breaches of the peace, it spawned the aphorism "The greater the truth, the greater the libel." 
Overtly political prosecutions were brought in its name, against the likes of John Wilkes, Tom Paine and the Dean of St Asaph.
Most of its historical anomalies survive in the present offence.
Truth is not a defence, unless the defendant can convince a jury that publication is for the public benefit.
The burden of proof lies on the  defendant, who may be convicted even though he or she honestly believed, on reasonable grounds, that what was published was true and a matter of public interest.
Breach of the peace is no longer an essential element: all that is required is a defamatory statement of some seriousness, and "seriousness" may be inferred from the public position of the person about whom it is made.
The victim, of course, is permitted to seek rehabilitation through damages in a civil action at the same time as the libeller faces retribution in the criminal courts.
In certain circumstances the offence extends to defamation of the dead, and may even be brought where the attack has been published about a class of persons rather than an individual.
For all its theoretical scope, there are several safeguards.
Leave must be obtained from a High Court judge before any prosecution can be brought in relation to an article in a newspaper or periodical.
The judge must be satisfied that there is an exceptionally strong prima facie case, that the libel is extremely serious, and that the public interest requires the institution of criminal proceedings.
In deciding whether these tests are satisfied the judge must look not just at the prosecution's case, but must take into account the likelihood of the newspaper successfully raising a defence.
In one 1982 case, Mr Justice Taylor refused to allow a man who had been described by the "Sunday People" as a violent and drunken bully to bring a prosecution for criminal libel.
He heard evidence from the newspaper which undermined the applicant's evidence, and decided that there was not "a case so clear as to be beyond argument a case to answer" .
He further held that in any event the public interest did not require the institution of criminal proceedings.
These same tests should be satisfied before a magistrate commits anyone for trial in relation to a libel which has not appeared in a newspaper or periodical.
There is no offence of "criminal slander" , with the result that radio and television commentators appear immune, at least in relation to unscripted remarks.
Had the editor of "Private Eye" made impromptu allegations against Goldsmith on prime-time television, the long arm of the criminal law could not have felt his collar.
Criminal libel corresponds to no "pressing social need" of the sort which the European Court insists should justify restraints on free expression, and its continuing existence is difficult to reconcile with the decision in Lingens v Austria (see p69).
Very few cases are brought and those which are generally relate to nuisances who can be dealt with in other ways.
Defamations which endanger the peace by being couched in threatening, abusive or insulting language may be prosecuted under the Public Order Act, and most poison-pen letters can give rise to charges under the provisions of the Post Office Act 1953 or the Malicious Communication  Act 1988.
Private squabbles which motivate one party to advertise the defects of an opponent in handbills, hoardings or on subway walls can always be dealt with by bind-over orders, and sometimes by prosecutions for criminal damage or indecent displays.
The law of criminal libel is an unnecessary relic of the past which is now generally agreed to have no place in modern jurisprudence.
There have been suggestions that is should be replaced by a new law of criminal defamation, which would make it an offence deliberately to publish a serious falsehood.
The difficulties of definition and of trial procedure, however, make such suggestions impracticable.
Conclusion
A plaintiff once brought a defamation action over the allegation that he was a highwaym.
The evidence at the trial proved that he was in fact a highwayman.
The plaintiff was arrested in the courtroom, committed to prison and then executed.
Few defamation actions end so satisfactorily for the defence.
The media constantly complain about defamation law, with some justice.
At the same time they have been reluctant to support the extension of legal aid in libel cases, or to put their own house in order by strengthening the Press Council (see Chapter 13).
The alarming escalation of damages in recent cases is best explained as the response of ordinary people to falling standards in the popular press.
No civilised society can permit a privately-owned press to run vendettas against individuals powerless to arrest the spread of falsehoods and innuendoes.
In the United States, the Supreme Court held in the great case of The New York Times v Sullivan that no libel action could succeed if the plaintiff was a public figure and the allegation was honestly and diligently made.
This ruling has freed the American media to probe Watergate and Irangate in a depth and a detail which could not be attempted in equivalent circumstances in Britain, where the merest hint of impropriety in public life calls forth a libel writ.
But the "public figure" doctrine denies virtually any protection to persons who are prominent in public affairs, simply because of that fact.
True, public figures voluntarily step into a fish-tank which entails close public scrutiny of their every move, and they ordinarily enjoy greater access to channels of communication which provide an opportunity to counter false statements.
But that opportunity is circumscribed, nonetheless, and in a country where Rupert Murdoch, Robert Maxwell and Lord Rothermere, with their powerful and partisan views, control 80 per cent of national newspapers, there is an understandable reluctance to give their newspapers a blank cheque to attack political enemies.
Two essential freedoms — the right to communicate and the right to reputation — must in some way be reconciled by law.
British libel law errs by inhibiting free speech and failing to provide a system for correcting factual errors which is speedy and available to all victims of press distortion.
US libel law gives no protection at all to the reputation of people in the public eye.
Some European countries have opted for a more acceptable solution in the form of "right to reply" legislation, which allows judges or "ombudsmen" to direct newspapers to publish corrections and counter-statements from those who claim to have been misrepresented.
In 1989 a "Right of Reply" bill made progress in the House of Commons, attracting all party support.
But it proposed no changes in the law of libel, other than to provide redress to victims of untrue statements which were not defamatory.
What is required is a speedy and effective legal procedure which secures corrections and counter-statements by way of an alternative procedure to libel litigation.
In 1989 the Government set up a Committee to investigate reform of the law relating to media mis-statements and invasion of privacy: its report may provide further impetus for reform.
Media freedom would be enhanced by legislation of the reforms proposed by the Faulks Committee, and even the statutory right of reply advocated by many media critics would be liberating if the exercise of that right were made contingent upon abandoning claims for libel damages.
When journalists receive libel writs, they will generally be well advised to seek expert assistance, although there are times where a robust extra-legal response will be more effective.
The much celebrated correspondence in the matter of Arkell v Pressdram involved only two letters: the first, from the solicitors Goodman Derrick & Co, to the editor of "Private Eye" , ended with the familiar legal demand: "Mr Arkell's first concern is that there should be a full retraction at the earliest possible date in" Private Eye"and he will also want his costs paid.
His attitude to damages will be governed by the nature of your reply."
To this the magazine responded: "We note that Mr Arkell's attitude to damages will be governed by the nature of our reply and would therefore be grateful if you could inform us what his attitude to damages would be, were he to learn that the nature of our reply is as follows: fuck off" .
Obscenity, Blasphemy and Race Hatred
Censorship of writing, drama and film on grounds of morality is achieved by laws which apply two sets of standards.
One prohibits "obscene" articles likely to deprave and corrupt readers and viewers, while the other allows authorities to act, in certain circumstances, against "indecent" material which merely embarrasses the sexual modesty of ordinary people.
Obscenity, the more serious crime, is punished by the Obscene Publications Act 1959, either after a trial by judge or jury or by "forfeiture proceedings" under a law which authorises local justices to destroy obscene books and films discovered within their jurisidiction.
Disseminators of "indecent" material which lacks the potency to corrupt are generally within the law so long as they do not despatch it by post, or seek to import it from overseas, or flaunt it openly in public places.
Both "obscenity" and "indecency" are defined by reference to vague and elastic formulae, permitting forensic debates over morality which fit uneasily into the format of a criminal trial.
These periodic moral flashpoints may edify or entertain, but they provide scant control over the booming business of sexual delectation.
Occasional forfeiture orders, based upon the same loose definitions, are subject to the inconsistent priorities and prejudices of constabularies in different parts of the country, and offer no effective deterrent.
The deep division in society over the proper limits of sexual permissiveness is mirrored by an inconsistent and ineffective censorship of publications which may offend or entertain, corrupt or enlighten, according to the taste and character of individual readers.
The problem of drawing a legal line between moral outrage and individual freedom has become intractable at a time when one person's obscenity is another person's bedtime reading.
Bedtime viewing, however, is subject to more stringent controls.
Reliance is placed upon the statutory duty of the Independent Broadcasting Authority to ensure that nothing is transmitted on the commercial airwaves which is in bad taste or is likely to prove offensive to public feeling.
Although no similar legal duty has been imposed upon the BBC, the Corporation has undertaken to ensure that its broadcasters also bow to the dictates of public decency.
Television was subjected to the Obscene Publications Act in 1990, although it is difficult to imagine how obscene material could slip through these controls.
Films screened in public  cinemas are subject to the test of obscenity, although the film industry, in order to obtain additional insurance against prosecution, has voluntarily bound itself to comply with the censorship requirements of the British Board of Film Classification, a private body established and funded by the industry itself.
The importance of the BBFC has been enhanced in recent years by local licensing requirements for sex cinemas, which generally require that all films screened shall have been approved by the BBFC in its "adult" category, and by the rule that cable television companies and video shops shall only carry films which have been granted an appropriate BBFC certificate.
Licensed sex shops are also obliged to sell only videos which have been certified by the Board.
In this way, a form of pre-censorship is imposed on feature films which is not inflicted upon books or magazines or theatre.
The obscenity and indecency laws, and the arrangements for film censorship, are generally directed against sexual explicitness.
However the tests applied are sufficiently broad to catch material which encourages the use of dangerous drugs or which advocates criminal violence.
Distributors of horror movies on video cassettes have been convicted on the basis that explicitly violent scenes are likely to corrupt a significant proportion of home viewers.
In this chapter, the scope and general principles of laws relating to obscenity, indecency, blasphemy, conspiracy and incitement to racial hatred are examined in some detail.
In Chapters 14 and 15, the extent to which their principles are applied to the relatively new media of television, film and video will be considered separately along with the statutory duties and voluntary censorship systems which work in these media to regulate the treatment of controversial subjects.
Obscenity
History The history of obscenity provides a rich and comic tapestry on the futility of legal attempts to control sexual imagination.
The subject-matter of pornography was settled by 1650: writers in subsequent centuries added new words and novel settings, but discovered no fundamental variation on the finite methods of coupling.
The scarlet woman, pornography's picaresque and picturesque prop, gained one dimension with the development of photography and another with the abolition of stage censorship, but the modern exploits of Linda Lovelace were old hat to Fanny Hill.
The Society for the Suppression of Vice was born again in the Festival of Light, but its modern victims were to prove as incorrigible as those jailed and vilified by moral guardians of the past.
The central irony of the courtroom crusade — what might be termed "the Spycatcher effect" — is always present: seek to suppress a book by legal  action because it tends to corrupt, and the publicity attendant upon its trial will spread that assumed corruption far more effectively than its quiet distribution.
 "Lady Chatterley's Lover" sold three million copies in the three months following after its prosecution in 1961.
The last work of literature to be prosecuted for obscenity in a full-blooded Old Bailey trial was an undistinguished paperback entitled "Inside Linda Lovelace" .
It had sold a few thousand copies in the years before the 1976 court case: within three weeks of its acquittal 600,000 copies were purchased by an avid public.
That trial seems finally to have convinced the DPP of the unwisdom of using obscenity laws against books with any claim to literary or sociological merit.
The courts first began to take obscenity seriously as a result of private prosecutions brought in the early nineteenth century by the Society for the Suppression of Vice, dubbed by Sydney Smith "a society for suppressing the vices of those whose incomes do not exceed £500 per annum" .
A law against obscene libel was created by the judges, although Parliament gave some assistance in 1857 with an Obscene Publications Act which permitted magistrates to destroy immoral books found within their jurisdiction.
The Act did not, however, define obscenity.
Lord Chief Justice Cockburn, in the 1868 case of R v Hicklin, obliged with a formula which has influenced the subject ever since: "I think the test of obscenity is this, whether the tendency of the matter charged as obscenity is to deprave and corrupt those whose minds are open to such immoral influences, and into whose hands a publication of this sort may fall." 
Armed at last with a definition of obscenity, Victorian prosecutors proceeded to destroy many examples of fine literature and scientific speculation.
Under the law of obscene libel, almost any work dealing with sexual passion could be successfully prosecuted.
The Hicklin test focused upon the effect of the book on the most vulnerable members of society, whether or not they were likely to read it.
One "purple passage" could consign a novel to condemnation, and there was no defence of literary merit.
DH Lawrence's "The Rainbow" was destroyed in 1915, and "The Well of Loneliness" suffered the same fate in 1928 at the hands of a magistrate who felt that a passage which implied that two women had been to bed ( "And that night they were not divided" ) would induce "thoughts of a most impure character" and "glorify a horrible tendency" .
The operation of the obscenity law depended to some extent upon the crusading zeal of current law officers.
There was a brief respite in the 1930s, after a banned copy of "Ulysses" was found among the papers of a deceased Lord Chanceller.
But  in 1953 the authorities solemnly sought to destroy copies of "The Kinsey Report" , and in 1956 a number of respectable publishers — Secker and Warburg, Heinemann and Hutchinsons — were all tried at the Old Bailey for "horrible tendencies" discovered in their current fiction lists.
The Society of Authors set up a powerful lobby, which convinced a Parliamentary Committee that the common law of obscene libel should be replaced by a modern statute which afforded some protection to meritorious literature.
The Obscene Publications Act of 1959 was the result.
The measure was described in its preamble as "an Act to amend the law relating to the publication of obscene matter; to provide for the protection of literature; and to strengthen the law concerning pornography." 
The 1959 Obscene Publications Act emerged from a simplistic notion that sexual material could be divided into two classes, "literature" and "pornography" , and the function of the new statutory definition of obscenity was to enable juries and magistrates to make the distinction between them.
The tendency of a work to deprave or corrupt its readers was henceforth to be judged in the light of its total impact, rather than by the arousing potential of "purple passages" .
The readership to be considered was the actual or at least predictable reading public rather than the precocious fourteen-year-old schoolgirl into whose hands it might perchance fall — unless it were in fact aimed at or distributed to fourteen-year-old schoolgirls, by whose vulnerability to corruption it should then be judged.
It was recognized that a work of literature might employ, to advance its serious purpose, a style which resembled, or had the same effect as, the pornographer's: here the jury was to be assisted to draw the line by experts who would offer judgments as to the degree of importance the article represented in its particular discipline.
Works of art or literature might be obscene (ie depraving or corrupting) but their great significance might outweigh the harm they could do, and take them out of the prima facie criminal category established by s1 of the Act.
In fact, the 1959 Act has worked to secure a very large measure of freedom in Britain for the written word.
It took two decades and a number of celebrated trials for the revolutionary implications of the legislation to be fully appreciated and applied.
The credit for securing this freedom belongs not so much to the legislators (many of whom now profess themselves appalled at developments) but to a few courageous publishers who risked jail by inviting juries to take a stand against censorship, and to the ineptitude and corruption of police enforcement.
The first major test case — over DH Lawrence's "Lady Chatterley's Lover" — enabled the full force of the reformed law to be exploited on behalf of recognised literature.
The book fell to be judged, not on the strength of its four-letter words of purple passages, but on its overall impact, as described by leading authorities on English literature.
In 1968 the appeal proceedings over "Last Exit to Brooklyn" established the right of authors to explore depravity and corruption without encouraging it: writers were entitled to  turn their readers' stomachs for the purpose of arousing concern or condemning the corruption explicitly described.
The trials of the underground press in the early seventies discredited obscenity law in the eyes of a new generation of jurors, and acquittals of hard-core pornography soon followed.
These came in the wake of apparently scientific evidence that pornography had a therapeutic rather than a harmful effect.
Popular permissiveness was reflected in jury verdicts, and the repeal of obscenity laws in several European countries made it impossible for the authorities to police the incoming tide of eroticism.
And if pornography did not corrupt its readers, it certainly corrupted many of those charged with enforcing the law against it.
Public cynicism about obscenity control was confirmed when twelve members of Scotland Yard's "dirty squad" were jailed after conviction for involvement in what their judge described as "an evil conspiracy which turned the Obscene Publications Act into a vast protection racket" .
After the acquittal of "Inside Linda Lovelace" in 1976, the authorities largely abandoned the attempt to prosecute books for which any claim of literary merit could be made.
The Williams Committee, which reported on the Obscenity laws in 1979, recommended that all restraints on the written word should be lifted — a position which they thought had already been achieved de facto.
Since the Williams Report, the only books which have been prosecuted have either glorified illegal activities, such as the taking of dangerous drugs, or have been hard-core pornography lacking any literary pretension or sociological interest.
In the late 1980s, the need for education about the dangers of transmitting the AIDS virus justified a degree of public explicitness which would have been unthinkable in previous decades.
However, the boast of British literary artistic freedom cannot be made with confidence, given a vague law and a swinging moral pendulum.
The forces of feminism have done more than the cohorts of Mrs Whitehouse to challenge public acceptance of erotica: there can be no guarantee that some future legal onslaught against sexually explicit art and literature would not succeed.
In 1988, a complaint from a Hampshire clergyman had the DPP re-reading the works of Henry Miller, and seriously contemplating a test-case prosecution.
The test of obscenity
The complete statutory definition of obscenity is contained in s1 of the Obscene Publications Act: For the purposes of this Act an article shall be deemed to be obscene if its effect or (where the article comprises two or more distinct items) the effect of any one of its items is, if taken as a whole, such as to tend to deprave and corrupt persons who are likely, in all the circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter contained or embodied in it.
In any trial, the prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt that the material is obscene.
Its task is complicated by the following interpretations of the statutory definition:
The tendency to deprave and corrupt
 "Deprave" means "to make morally bad, to pervert, to debase or corrupt morally" and corrupt means "to render morally unsound or rotten, or destroy the moral purity or chastity of, to pervert or ruin a good quality, to debase, to defile" .
The definition implies that the tendency must go much further than merely shocking or disgusting readers.
Thus "obscene" , in law, has a very different, and very much stronger, meaning than it possesses in colloquial usage.
The convictions of the editors of "Oz" magazine were quashed because their trial judge had suggested that "obscene" might include what is "repulsive, filthy, loathsome, indecent or lewd" .
To widen its legal meaning in this way was "a very substantial and serious misdirection" .
In Knuller v DPP the Law Lords considered that the word "corrupt" implied a powerful and corrosive effect, which went further than one suggested definition, "to lead morally astray" .
Lord Simon warned: "Corrupt is a strong word.
The Book of Common Prayer, following the Gospel, has "where rust and moth doth corrupt" .
The words "corrupt public morals" suggest conduct which a jury might find to be destructive of the very fabric of society."
Lord Reid agreed that"corrupt is a strong word and the jury ought to be reminded of that…
The Obscene Publications Act appears to use the words "deprave"  "and" corrupt "" as synonymous, as I think they are.
We may regret we live in a permissive society but I doubt whether even the most staunch defender of a better age would maintain that all or even most of those who have at one time or in one way or another been led astray morally have thereby become depraved or corrupt".
These dicta in Knuller emphasize that the effect of publication must go beyond immoral suggestion or persuasion, and constitute a serious menace.
The aversion defence
One important corollary of the decision that obscene material must have more serious effects than arousing feelings of revulsion is the doctrine that material which in fact shocks and disgusts may not be obscene, because its effect is to discourage readers from indulgence in the immorality so unseductively portrayed.
Readers whose stomachs are turned will not partake of any food for thought.
The argument, however paradoxical it sounds, has frequently found favour as a means of exculpating literature of merit: "Last Exit to Brooklyn" presented horrific pictures of homosexuality and drug-taking in New York.
Defence counsel contended that its only effect on any but a minute lunatic fringe of readers would be horror, revulsion and pity.
It made the readers share in the horror it described and thereby so disgusted, shocked and outraged them that instead of tending to encourage anyone to homosexuality, drug-taking or brutal violence it would have precisely the reverse effect.
The failure of the trial judge to put this defence before the jury in his summing up was the major ground for upsetting the conviction.
The aversion argument was extracted from its literary context and elevated into a full-blown defence of crudity in the Oz case: "One of the arguments was that many of the illustrations in Oz were so grossly lewd and unpleasant that they would shock in the first instance and then would tend to repel.
In other words, it was said that they had an aversive effect and that, far from tempting those who had not experienced the acts to take part in them, they would put off those who might be tempted so to conduct themselves…"
The most valuable aspect of the aversion defence is its emphasis on the context and purpose of publication.
Writing which sets out to seduce, to exhort and pressurize the reader to indulge in immorality, is to be distinguished from that which presents a balanced picture, and does not overlook the pains which may attend new pleasures.
For over a century prosecutors thought it sufficient to point to explicitness in the treatment of sex, on the assumption that exposure to such material would automatically arouse the libidinous desires associated with a state of depravity.
Now they must consider the overall impact, and the truthfulness of the total picture.
Books which present a fair account of corruption have a defence denied to glossy propaganda.
In deciding whether material depraves and corrupts, the jury must lift its eyes from mere details and consider the tone and overall presentation.
Does the material glamorise sex, or does it "tell it like it is" ?
The target audience
An article is only obscene if it is likely to corrupt "persons who are likely, having regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter contained or embodied in it." 
Thus the Act adopts a relative definition of obscenity — relative, that is, to the "likely" rather than the "conceivably possible" readership.
This is further emphasised by s2(6) of the Act, which provides that in any prosecution for publishing an obscene article, "the question whether an article is obscene shall be determined without regard to any publication by another person, unless it could reasonably have been expected that the publication by the other person would follow from the publication by the person charged." 
These statutory provisions ensure that the publication in question is judged by its impact on its primary audience — those people who, the  evidence suggests, would be likely to seek it out and to pay the asking-price to read it.
They reject the "most vulnerable person" standard of Hicklin, with its preoccupation with those members of society of the lowest level of intellectual or moral discernment.
They also reject another standard employed frequently in the law, that of the "average" or "reasonable" man, and focus on "likely" readers and proven circumstances of publication.
A work of literature is to be judged by its effect on serious-minded purchasers, a comic book by its effect on children, a sexually explicit magazine sold in an "adults only" bookstore by its effect on adult patrons of that particular shop.
The House of Lords has confirmed that "in every case, the magistrates or the jury are called on to ascertain who are the likely readers and then to consider whether the article is likely to deprave and corrupt them" .
In R v Clayton & Halsey, the proprietors of a Soho bookshop were charged with selling obscene material to two experienced members of Scotland Yard's Obscene Publications Squad.
These officers conceded that pornography had ceased to arouse any feelings in them whatsoever.
The prosecution argument that the pictures were "inherently obscene" , and tended of their very nature to corrupt all viewers, was rejected.
Although judges sometimes loosely talk of material which is "inherently obscene" or "obscene per se" , it is clear that this concept is irreconcilable with the legislative definition of obscenity.
The quality of obscenity inheres whenever the article would tend to corrupt its actual or potential audience; the degree of that corruption becomes relevant when it is necessary to balance it against the public interest, if a "public good" defence has been raised under s4 of the Act.
The "significant proportion" test
The 1959 Act requires a tendency to deprave and corrupt "persons" likely in the cirumstances to read or hear the offensive material.
But how many persons must have their morals affected before the test is made out?
The answer was given by the Court of Appeal in the "Last Exit to Brooklyn" case.
The jury must be satisfied that a significant proportion of the likely readership would be guided along the path of corruption: "Clearly s2 cannot mean all persons; nor can it mean any one person, for there are individuals who may be corrupted by almost anything.
On the other hand, it is difficult to construe "" persons "" as meaning the majority of persons or the average reader.
This court is of the opinion that the jury should have been directed to consider whether the effect of the book was to tend to deprave and corrupt a significant proportion of those persons likely to read it.
What is a significant proportion is a matter entirely for the jury to decide."
The "significant proportion" test has been applied at obscenity trials ever since.
It protects the defendant in that it prevents the jury from  speculating on the possible effect of adult literature on a young person who may just happen to see it, although it does not put the prosecution to proof that a majority, or even a substantial number, of readers would be adversely affected.
This was emphasized by the House of Lords in Whyte's case, where local justices had mistakenly interpreted "significant proportion" to mean "the great majority" .
Lord Cross accepted that the "significant proportion" test was the standard which the justices were required to apply, but stressed that "a significant proportion of a class means a part which is not numerically negligible but which may be much less than half." 
If the jury feels that a considerable number of children would read or see the article in question, and would be corrupted by the experience, it may decide that this number constitutes a significant proportion of the class which comprises the likely audience.
The dominant effect principle
In obscenity trials before the 1959 legislation it was unnecessary for juries to consider the overall impact of the subject matter on its likely readers.
Prosecuting counsel could secure conviction merely by drawing attention to isolated "purple passages" taken out of context.
The Select Committee on the Obscene Publications Act had stressed the importance of considering the "dominant effect" of the whole work: The contrary view, under which a work could be judged obscene by reference to isolated passages without considering the total effect, would, if taken to its logical conclusion, deprive the reading public of the works of Shakespeare, Chaucer, Fielding and Smollett, except in expurgated editions.
We therefore recommend that regard should be paid in any legislation to the effect of a work as a whole.
This recommendation was duly embodied in the 1959 statute, which provided that"an article shall be deemed to be obscene if its effect or (where the article comprises two or more distinct items) the effect of any one of its items is, if taken as a whole, such as to tend to deprave and corrupt…
".
In the "Lady Chatterley" case Mr Justice Byrne instructed his jury to consider the total effect of the work after reading it from cover to cover.
 "You will read this book just as though you had bought it at a bookstall and you were reading it in the ordinary way as a whole." 
The effect of the "dominant impact" test is to enable the courts to take account of the psychological realities of reading and film viewing, in so far as the audience is affected by theme and style and message, so that isolated incidents of an offensive nature are placed in context.
The injunction that an article must be "taken as a whole" will apply to books and plays and films: in the case of magazines, however, which are made up of separate articles, advertisements and photographs, the "dominant impact" principle  has less force.
In such cases the publication is considered on an "item by item" basis: the prosecution may argue that obscenity attaches only to one article or photograph, and that the other contents are irrelevant.
The publisher's intentions
The Obscene Publications Act is an exception to the general rule that criminal offences require an intention to offend.
It does not matter whether the purpose is to educate or edify, to corrupt or simply to make money.
The effect of the work on a significant proportion of the likely audience is all that matters in deciding whether it is obscene under s1.
However, the publisher's intentions may be very important when a "public good" defence is raised under s4 of the Act, namely that although the work is obscene, its publication is nonetheless justified in the public interest.
In the "Lady Chatterley" case, Mr Justice Byrne directed that "as far as literary merit or other matters which can be considered under s4 are concerned, I think one has to have regard to what the author was trying to do, what his message may have been, and what his general scope was" .
A limited defence is provided by the Obscene Publications Act for those defendants who act merely as innocent disseminators of obscene material.
Section 2(5) of the 1959 Act reads: "A person shall not be convicted of an offence against this section (ie the offence of publishing obscene material) if he proves that he had not examined the article in respect of which he is charged and had no reasonable cause to suspect that it was such that his publication of it would make him liable to be convicted of an offence against this section." 
The onus of proof is placed on the defendant under this section.
He must show, on the balance of probabilities, both that he did not examine the article and that he entertained no suspicions about the nature of its contents.
It is often possible to judge pornographic books by their covers and a bookseller would probably fail if he admitted to catching sight of a provocative cover-picture or suggestive title.
In R v Love the Court of Appeal quashed the conviction of a director of a printing company who had been absent at the time a print order for obscene books was accepted, and who had no personal knowledge of the contents of those books.
Even though he had accepted general responsibility for his company's operations, and would probably have agreed to print the books had the decision been referred to him, he could not be convicted unless he had been given specific notice of the offensive material.
The defendant who had not "examined" , in the sense of personally inspected, the offending items might nonetheless be given reasonable cause to suspect obscenity by clandestine or unorthodox behaviour on the part of his supplier.
Any evidence that, for example, a printer has specially increased his profit margin to cover a risk factor, would be fatal to a s2(5) claim.
Conversely, if  the accused can show that the material came to him in the normal course of business from a reputable supplier, he may have a defence.
Cases on the liability of distributors for libels in newspapers emphasise the importance for this defence of establishing that the business — of printing, distributing or retailing — was carried on carefully and properly.
The test is whether the unwitting distributor ought to have known that the material would offend.
The "contemporary standards" test
Although the Act does not make reference to the current climate of opinion about sexual explicitness, juries in obscenity trials are enjoined to keep in mind the current standards of ordinary decent people.
They "must set the standards of what is acceptable, of what is for the public good in the age in which we live" .
The collective experience of twelve arbitrarily chosen people is assumed to provide a degree of familiarity with popular reading trends, with what is deemed acceptable on television and at cinemas, and with the degree of explicitness which can be found in publications on sale at local newsagents.
A publisher is not, however, permitted to argue that he should be acquitted because his publication is less obscene than others which are freely circulated.
The 1959 Act does, however, provide for two situations in which comparisons are both permissible and highly relevant.
Under s2(5), it may be that a defendant has "no reasonable cause to suspect" the obscenity of a book which he has not personally examined because books with similar or identical titles or themes have been acquitted, to his knowledge, in previous proceedings.
And under the "public good" defence it may be relevant to the jury's task of evaluating the merit of a particular book to compare it with other books of the same kind, and to hear expert evidence about the current climate of permissiveness in relation to this kind of literature.
This exception was recognized by Mr Justice Byrne in the "Lady Chatterley" case when he permitted expert witnesses to compare the novel with other works by Lawrence and various twentieth-century writers, and to discuss the standards for describing sexual matters reflected in modern literature.
At one point in the trial he agreed that"other books may be considered, for two reasons, firstly, upon the question of the literary merit of a book which is the subject matter of the indictment…(where) it is necessary to compare that book with other books upon the question of literary merit.
Secondly…other books are relevant to the climate of literature".
Where a "public good" defence is raised, juries may be asked to make comparisons in order to evaluate the real worth of the publication at stake, and they may be told by experts about the state of informed contemporary opinion on subjects dealt with in those publications.