

Introduction
1.
Conveyancing—a commercial art
Conveyancing, like any other aspect of legal service provided on behalf of the public, requires a relationship of trust as between the conveyancer and the client.
The client must have confidence in the conveyancer and the conveyancer must maintain that confidence by undertaking each step in each transaction competently and carefully, and above all, must understand at all times the importance of communicating regularly and effectively with a client.
The Law Society have now introduced the Client Care Scheme, which goes a long way to bonding this relationship at the outset.
Practice Rule 15 puts certain obligations upon practitioners and the Legal Practice Directorate of the Law Society issued a very useful Client Care Guide for solicitors in the spring of 1991.
It is a wise precaution to meet new clients, rather than to deal with them over the telephone or by correspondence.
Other forms of communication may well be appropriate after an initial meeting.
Particular care should be exercised when instructions are offered by a third party on behalf of either, for example, an aged parent, or where a husband offers instructions on behalf of himself and his wife.
Here, difficulties can be experienced, and although it should not pose a problem with clients with whom the conveyancer is familiar, it can cause potential difficulty with new clients, particularly those who may be unknown and live some distance from the practising address.
Many large firms of solicitors now print their own explanatory leaflets dealing with the stages in conveyancing, and it is both useful and impressive to be able to hand over a printed leaflet or pamphlet at the time of the first meeting, so as to indicate to a client each of the detailed steps you will be taking on his or her behalf.
The Law Society does, of course, offer the Exchange Contracts magazine, which can be handed to new conveyancing clients free of charge from the outset.
Again, this all helps with cementing the initial relationship and if the first impression is a good one, the practitioner is off to a flying start, which could help if there are difficulties at a later stage with the transaction.
At the time of the first interview, it is vital to make careful notes, and details relating to the taking of instructions appear later in the text.
A conveyancer is just as much dependent upon being well organised and having a methodical mind as upon his or her knowledge of the law.
Good practical administrative abilities must be secured in order to make a successful career out of conveyancing.
It is not difficult to be a good conveyancer.
It does, however, require careful diary notes of deadlines for exchanging contracts and of completion dates.
It requires good personal organisation so that mortgage monies are available for completion.
And above all, from a commercial point of view, it requires the practitioner to return a telephone call within the period defined by his "client care conduct" and to write a letter if one has been promised or answer a letter if that too has been promised.
It reverts to the earlier point made about confidence on the part of clients.
If clients are confident in the conveyancer, they will be satisfied with the job, even if the result may be difficult to achieve.
A happy client is a client who will publicise your services.
Publicity by word of mouth is the cheapest and quickest form of publicity available to the conveyancer, and will lead to the building of a secure conveyancing practice.
One of the purposes of this publication is to demonstrate that conveyancing is not simply a job to be done as cheaply as possible.
A conveyancing business can be built on many other bases apart from price, and it is time for conveyancers to start to market these bases in order to secure the future success of their businesses.
2.
Registered and unregistered land compared
The text clearly describes the detailed procedure relating to conveyancing, depending on whether the land is registered or unregistered.
If instructed on behalf of a seller, the first task is always to obtain  the deeds and documents of title.
From the moment they arrive, it will become clear whether the land is registered or not.
If the land is unregistered, then the contract will have to be prepared by the seller's conveyancer in order to reflect this fact.
An epitome of the seller's title must be provided instead of office copy entries of the Register.
The remainder of the Law Society's National Protocol (otherwise known as TransAction) documentation is the same for the practical attributes of the property, and the Local and Commons Registration and, where appropriate, Mining Searches, are unaffected by land registration.
The Protocol documentation, as is seen later, requires the seller's conveyancer to prepare absolutely everything at the outset, so that a complete package is sent to the buyer's conveyancer for consideration.
It is permissible to raise additional enquiries, and indeed, the buyer's conveyancer has a professional duty to do so if there appear to be material omissions.
However, the Protocol system does not encourage additional enquiries on detailed and pernickety points.
It was these detailed enquiries that were often not particularly relevant in a practical sense to the clients themselves, which caused considerable delay in conveyancing performed under the traditional scheme.
However, that scheme does still apply to commercial transactions, and in these circumstances, the text does deal with both.
A new conveyancer would be well advised to have a typed-out schedule of steps clipped into the side of his file, so that each requirement can be ticked off as the transaction proceeds.
Such an aide-mémoire may not be necessary after six or 12 months of practice, but initially, it could be vital, for serious consequences can flow if a search is forgotten, or mortgage money is not applied for on time.
Land registration is performed by a series of District Land Registries located throughout the country.
Each Land Registry deals with a certain number of counties, and readers are referred to the current edition of Longman's Directory of Local Authorities in order to ensure that their applications for First Registration or for a dealing arrive at the right place.
The computerisation of land registration is more or less completed, and this means that many of the delays formerly experienced are no longer so acute.
Previously, an additional requirement of having land registered potentially caused problems where there was immediate or quick resale.
3.
How to approach a new transaction
In so far as the approach to a new transaction has not been covered by the general comments made above, much depends on whether the conveyancer is acting for a seller or a buyer.
At the commencement, the burden is on the seller to start quickly in order to produce the package of Protocol documents without delay.
Some conveyancers encourage local estate agents to forward details of a new transaction before a sale is negotiated.
This can be particularly helpful if a local search result is likely to take two or three weeks to arrive, or even longer.
However, this practice is not universally popular, particularly at a time when the housing market is poor.
It potentially means that sellers can face a legal bill, and indeed the disbursement for a search, without being able to sell their properties.
In practice, therefore, sellers do not instruct a conveyancer until they know they have sold their property.
The details on how the transaction should proceed are set out in the text, and these deal with the situation from the moment new instructions are given: the ticking of the relevant boxes on the "fixtures, fittings and contents" form and "property information" form; dealing with any additional enquiries; signing the contract in readiness for exchange of contracts; proceeding to sign the transfer in order to conclude the transaction, and redeeming any outstanding mortgage.
A new transaction on behalf of a buyer is rather different.
When one is selling, one's duty is basically to obtain the money agreed, and to relieve one's client of any obligations relating to the property sold, and the mortgage redeemed.
When buying, the client is concerned with the minutiae of the detail relating to the property itself, and this means that the conduct of instructions is different.
A buyer needs to be kept informed about each and every detail that crops up during the course of the transaction and, immediately prior to exchange of contracts, it is good practice to supply a written report to the buyer, explaining precisely what the property entails in a legal sense.
A buyer will be concerned to know details about whether gas is connected; whether he or she has responsibility for all or any fences or ditches; whether the property has mains drainage; whether there is liability to maintain a road at the front of the property; or whether application for planning permission has been refused in the past.
This practical data must be successfully communicated to clients before they are invited to sign a contract, thereby committing them to purchase the new property.
If a conveyancing transaction is being conducted by a legal executive or clerk, then it is important the client knows that there is a professionally qualified and more senior person behind them, should the need arise.
This is covered by the Client Care Scheme, but again the staffing structure in the office must be made very clear to the client from the outset in order to keep the client's confidence in the ability of the conveyancer's business to fulfil the service required successfully.
4.
Professional standards and conveyancing
Emphasis has been laid before on the commercial environment in which we operate, and also of the good, practical, commonsense business efficacy that any conveyancer ought to possess before entering into private practice.
However, the practice of conveyancing is a professional practice and it is important not to lose sight of good professional standards in one's conduct.
Probably the first piece of advice that could be given to any new practitioner is that whilst a friend may be a client, a client should never become a friend, for an easy transition from a client to a friend can often lead to serious problems and difficulties.
A conveyancer must be acutely conscious of the problems a conflict of interest might impose.
Generally, it is not possible to act for both a buyer and a seller, for their interests vary.
The Law Society's rules of professional conduct do provide exemptions for this, but even so, a conveyancer should not be too quick to use those exemptions if acting for both sides might conceivably lead to a compromise or a difficult situation.
Difficult situations often arise where a conveyancer is acting for seller and buyer (eg they are both long-established clients of your firm) where either one of the parties instructs you then to renegotiate the price of the transaction.
Clearly, it would put the practitioner in an impossible situation.
In these days of broadening the base of those who are authorised to undertake conveyancing, it is fundamentally important that solicitors should follow the Law Society's guide on how to deal with unadmitted persons.
It is vital to check the credentials of any purported legal representative on the other side.
This is because that representative may not be an authorised practitioner, and could be putting clients' money at risk, since an unauthorised practitioner would not be covered by the usual indemnity arrangements that are a requirement of properly authorised practitioners.
It is not always possible to answer post by return, or to return  telephone calls within the next few minutes.
However, it is advisable and commercially expedient for each firm to adopt its own client care commitments and it is therefore important to conduct conveyancing business within the parameters of the commitments offered to the client upon acceptance of instructions.
For example, letters to be answered within four days and telephone calls to be returned within 24 hours.
If you can improve on this, so be it, but it is vital not to allow correspondence to build up and arrears to accrue.
As soon as a practitioner loses control of the conduct of his business on a day-to-day basis, troubles begin, and the end of a practising career is in sight.
No practitioner is infallible, and most members of the public understand this fact.
If a mistake is made, it is best policy to admit it quickly and to work with the client and one's colleagues to resolve it as soon as possible.
Never conceal a mistake, for mistakes kept in the dark tend to grow out of all proportion.
Conveyancing is an area of legal practice where there is traditionally some degree of co-operation between practitioners.
This is particularly so within a given area.
Conveyancing is not litigation, and it is often in the interests of clients to assist the seller's solicitor in trying to perfect an imperfect title.
Buyers who desperately want to move into their new home will not thank a conveyancer who makes life difficult for a seller's conveyancer who does not have a perfect title.
It is very important to ensure that all clients understand those documents you invite them to sign.
If the documents in question are not sent out with a letter, but are signed at the conveyancer's office, then it is important to set out a memorandum recording the date and time at which the document was signed and also how the document was explained to the client.
The use of memoranda on conveyancing files is not universal, but the writer recommends the practice as entirely appropriate today.
New conveyancers should not allow themselves to be bullied by more senior members of the profession who have had years of experience.
A junior conveyancer is equally obliged to his or her own client, and if it takes that member of the profession a little longer, or if they need to consult with senior colleagues before agreeing to a particular course of action, then so be it.
There are some very strong characters undertaking conveyancing and a young person starting out needs to be pretty tough in order to withstand the pressures.
Never allow frenzied phone calls from estate agents or other practitioners to compromise professional standards.
The  consequences of that compromise could live with you forever and destroy your career.
One mistake could be the fatal mistake, and therefore conduct your conveyancing at your own pace, given of course the commercial constraints described above.
5.
How to use this book
The book deals progressively with the how, the why and the when of every stage of a simple conveyancing matter.
In addition, there are chapters on such relevant subjects as searches, mortgages and leases.
You will find a table of each conventional stage (see Appendix I), which lists every step, every letter, at each stage of a simple conveyancing matter.
Against each step is the page reference to its consideration in the text; in many cases, there is a specimen of the letter (in Appendix II) you might write (also page referenced throughout the book).
When in doubt, refer to the text.
Experienced readers will know already what to do.
It is then simply a question of using the tables to avoid oversight.
Throughout the text, other works are cross-referenced for more detailed or specific assistance to a practitioner who may be looking into one particular area in more detail.
This book aims to help the conveyancer make a business success of the proper professional conduct of the commercial art of conveyancing.
Taking instructions
1.
Estimating costs and providing quotations
The first question that most new clients will now ask is "what will it cost?" 
Every firm has a different means of calculating its own costs' structure, but it is important to be able to provide a definitive response; indeed it is recommended practice.
To some extent, the conveyancer takes a risk in providing a fixed quotation, because it is impossible to predict how much work will be necessary in order to complete the transaction.
However, most practitioners consider that this risk is commercially necessary in order to be able to undertake the work, and generally speaking more work than predicted on one job is balanced out by less work than predicted on another.
Lack of precision in being able to provide a quotation can often confuse a client and therefore takes the commercial edge away from your particular firm.
Thus it is essential to separate your firm's profit costs from the disbursements.
It is equally vital that both should be mentioned, otherwise a client, particularly a buyer, could be seriously misled.
An oral quote given over the telephone or at a personal meeting should be followed up in writing.
The first time you speak to a potentially new client is the most crucial, because the impact of a first meeting is of vital significance.
Some firms may provide training on how to present yourself, and how most appropriately to provide quotations.
It is an art.
2.
Instructions from the seller
The taking of instructions is of cardinal importance, both for the economic running of a matter and for the client_conveyancer relationship.
Its conduct is not to be treated lightly.
The main object of a meeting, having agreed a quotation, is to obtain as much information as possible to make up the initial Protocol package for the seller or buyer.
To that end, a check list is essential in order to avoid any oversights and the information obtained should be recorded on a sheet or on separate sheets.
The items below are included in the check list that appears at the end of this book.
(a) Client name/address and phone numbers This is self-explanatory, but it is vital to get the spellings correct.
There are sometimes curious variations such as "Freddy" , "Freddie" , "Fredrick" , "Frederick" , etc.
It is essential to get full names of the client, including any middle names.
Such detail will not be volunteered as a general rule.
(b) Identity of estate agent The estate agent will forward full particulars of the sale that has been negotiated, and in these circumstances, it is important to know his or her identity.
It will also put you on notice to expect a commission account after contracts are exchanged.
(c) Agreed price It is necessary to find out the precise price negotiated between the parties.
Sometimes, there will be additional monies agreed in respect of fixtures and fittings, or even in respect of items of household and garden furniture.
Should this be the case, the price may need to be apportioned.
The significance of apportioning the price is particularly acute when it is on the stamp duty threshold, which at the time of writing remains at £30,000.
Sometimes, clients make various private agreements between themselves concerning part of the money being paid at a later date, or in cash.
A conveyancer cannot afford to become involved in any such scheme and must attempt to dissuade the parties from proceeding in this way.
It is part of your professional obligations to ensure that the full price is properly recorded on the conveyancing documentation, and if any part of it is to remain outstanding, it could always be secured by a loan agreement or indeed by a mortgage back to the seller.
(d) Location of deeds Generally, these will be with a building society or bank or in a  solicitor's strongroom.
It is important to obtain full particulars from the client as to the whereabouts of the deeds, because until these are located, nothing can happen.
If the property is in mortgage, then obtain the account number, as this may be needed when it comes to redemption.
The basic rule is that the title deeds—registered or unregistered—together with information from the client equals enough information to prepare a draft contract.
However, one without the other is of little assistance in the preparation of this initial document.
(e) Deposit payment Sometimes, estate agents collect a token deposit from an intending purchaser as a sign of good faith.
Estate agents are obliged to inform the conveyancer whether they are holding any money as stakeholder.
Make a careful note.
It needs to be taken into account when preparing the completion statement at completion.
Otherwise, the significance of a deposit is that it needs to be paid when contracts are exchanged.
This must be explained to a client at this early stage, because many do not understand the requirement for a deposit, and many do not have the full 10% available.
A draft contract will provide for a 10% deposit, and if it then transpires that the buyer cannot afford to pay this, it is customary to negotiate it down to 5%, but not usually below.
It is important to explain to the client the effect of default after exchange of contracts.
The deposit will be forfeited, and if less than 10% has been paid, there will usually be a clause in the contract providing for forfeiture of the full 10%.
It is now common practice, and indeed included as part of the conditions of sale, that a deposit may be used by the seller as the deposit on another purchase, although the deposit would need to be held in that transaction as stakeholder until completion.
If the passage of the deposit is not prohibited, then it could be lost by being passed to an individual or a company that goes bankrupt or becomes insolvent before completion.
The buyer could then be without any deposit money and without any property.
It is therefore important for the deposit to be held by a professional conveyancer as a stakeholder at some stage in any given conveyancing chain.
(f) Fixtures and fittings Check the sale particulars as well as asking the client.
It is important to be as specific and detailed as possible.
This process is now considerably simplified, because the sellers should simply tick  the appropriate box in TransAction's fixtures, fittings and contents questionnaire.
If this is always used in all residential transactions as a standard document, then misunderstandings that often characterised transactions in the past should no longer crop up.
The seller must be asked whether any of the fixtures and fittings are subject to hire purchase or loan agreements.
It is also important to ascertain that if fixtures and fittings are to be removed from the property, that no damage will be done to the fabric of the walls, floors, ceilings, etc. (g) Home improvements Ask the client whether any additions or alterations have been made requiring planning consent in recent years.
If so, ask for the planning permission.
Also ask for any official notices received by that client.
Explain to sellers that under the new National Protocol, it is their obligation (or rather your obligation on their behalf) to undertake a local authority search.
If the transaction exchanges contracts, then the cost of the local search will be borne by the buyer.
If exchange of contracts does not take place, then the seller will have to pay you.
Search fees now vary very widely, and it is important to check with the appropriate local authority what they will charge.
The client will almost definitely ask you this.
Of course, there are other disbursements that you may incur in addition to a local search, and these are dealt with elsewhere in the text.
(h) Outstanding borrowing If there is a mortgage, it is important to write to the mortgagee to give notice of the client's intention to redeem.
Certain smaller building societies have minimum periods for notice or a penal charge of interest for a shorter period.
It is wise to check this at the outset.
Clients who have only had a mortgage for a year or two, may find they have to pay three months' penalty interest in any event.
Practice varies, and it is good practice to find out from the beginning in order to avoid unpleasant surprises at a later date.
(i) Related purchase Most transactions proceed side by side, and in such a case, it is important to treat them quite separately, using separate instruction sheets, separate files, etc.
Most clients who require the sale and purchase to run side by side, will be worried about ending up with no  house at all, or two houses.
You should explain to them that it is your responsibility to ensure that contracts are exchanged in such a way that this scenario does not arise.
Sometimes, a client does not insist on simultaneity.
Here, you should point out the extra costs involved in putting furniture into storage and moving into temporary accommodation, although these may be offset by the interest yielded from the temporary investment of the proceeds of sale.
Sometimes, a client will be prepared to proceed with the purchase on the basis of bridging finance.
This can prove extremely expensive.
The wisdom of not proceeding simultaneously very much depends on the condition of the property market at the time and is inevitably going to be a gamble.
(j) Completion of TransAction forms The property information form, which is part of the Protocol scheme, should be completed by the seller at the outset.
This simply requires the seller to tick the appropriate box, and provides the range of practical information that was previously contained on the preliminary enquiries forms as produced by various law stationers.
If the property being sold is the same as that which was purchased, then a suitable plan should be contained with the deeds and documents of title and it should prove no problem.
However, in some unregistered titles, there is no suitable plan available and where there is a sale of part only, there will obviously be no plan with the deeds and documents of title.
In some of the above circumstances, it may be necessary to ask the seller to provide a plan, either personally or through a surveyor or agent.
Nothing is more fundamental than to work on a precisely accurate plan from the outset.
It will be needed for search purposes, and it will also be called for by the buyers.
It is curious how agents only rarely think of providing you with a plan on a voluntary basis.
There are some pretty horrendous examples of defective plans dotted amongst the law reports, and they are a major cause of delays in registration of title.
It may be that you have an Ordnance Survey plan in your office that you can work with the seller in order to produce an accurate plan, at least one for identification purposes only.
Precise boundary measurements may be the counsel of perfection, and a large-scale Ordnance Survey may well suffice.
On the question of day-to-day outgoings attaching to a property, such as water rates, it is no longer necessary to hand over receipts to the buyers on completion.
However, it is necessary to produce receipts when dealing with leasehold property.
In the event of  dealing with leasehold property, the seller should be asked to complete an "additional property information" form, which does in fact contain a series of questions peculiar to leasehold premises such as management accounts, service charges, etc, and you should ask the seller both for evidence that the rent has been paid up to date and for evidence of current insurance cover.
An up-to-date schedule should be supplied by the landlord to the tenant each year where it is the landlord's responsibility to insure.
Where this is the case, it invariably follows that landlords will cover the cost of doing so from their tenants.
Again, details of payment will be called for by the buyer.
The buyer will customarily ask for accounts ranging back for three years in respect of the activities of the management company.
A management company is particularly common where there is a large block of flats but it is now increasingly common in smaller developments, such as converted Victorian houses.
The point made above concerning the production of a good plan is crucial for leasehold property.
Here, the detail of how the premises is divided is vital.
3.
Instructions from the buyer
(a) Client name/address and phone numbers The points made above concerning the client's name apply equally here.
If the buyer is a limited company, it is important to check that you are obtaining instructions from the appropriately authorised personnel.
It is also important to check that the limited company has already been incorporated and that it does actually have the power to own the property.
This means you should check its Memorandum and Articles of Association.
If you are accepting instructions on behalf of a partnership, it is again a good idea to check that the person who approaches you has authority to act on their behalf.
The question of joint purchase is dealt with below.
It is good practice to make a note of the client's telephone number on the file.
You need a daytime and an evening number.
Much time is often lost in transactions when looking for telephone numbers.
Keep them on the file from the beginning.
(b) Identity of estate agent It is essential to ask buyers whether they have negotiated  transactions through an estate agent and if so, whom.
You might then telephone the agent and find out who is acting for the seller.
You should also ask clients whether they have paid a deposit to the estate agent.
If so, make a note on your file accordingly, as it is easily overlooked and your buyer client could end up being asked to pay that particular figure twice unless it is taken into account either at exchange of contracts or on completion.
(c) Use It is vital to ensure that the use that the buyer intends is authorised for planning purposes.
The agents' particulars may give some indication with regard to this.
Whether this is the case or not, it is critical to obtain copy planning permissions from the seller's solicitors prior to exchange of contracts.
Sometimes the use may be authorised by virtue of the fact that it started before 1948, and it might be prudent to seek a statutory declaration with regard to the long-established use, particularly where that use is of a commercial nature.
If client buyers will require planning permission, it is important to spell out to them that they are running a potential risk by exchanging contracts prior to the grant of that permission.
Sometimes, the seller's solicitors will accept a condition being inserted in the contract, which makes the contract conditional upon a successful planning application.
Such conditions must be worded extremely carefully in order to ensure that they are effective.
(d) Agreed price As mentioned previously, it is essential to ensure that this is properly and finally negotiated at the commencement of the transaction.
Conveyancers are not normally expected to act as negotiators and, if estate agents are involved, it is important to make certain that they have fully and finally settled the price, both for the legal estate in the property and for any extras, such as fixtures and fittings, or even any chattels that might be left at the property.
It is not uncommon to seek a renegotiation of the price, after a survey report has been received that lists certain works that require attention.
The likelihood of the success of this practice depends very much on the current state of the property market, and how badly the seller wishes to move.
(e) Fixtures and fittings It is very important that the clients clearly understand what is  included and what is excluded.
Legal practice in this area has been greatly enhanced by the fixtures, fittings and contents questionnaire.
Sometimes, the estate agent's particulars are not very explicit about what is included and what is not, and in any event, sellers may change their minds, or may throw in certain items such as carpets and curtains in the course of the negotiations to settle a price.
In non-residential transactions, the National Protocol will not be used, but it nevertheless remains important to obtain a clear schedule of fixtures and fittings included and excluded.
(f) Deposit arrangements If possible, you should work out with your client buyer how much money will be available for the payment of a deposit at the outset of the transaction.
It is now common practice for the deposit to be passed along the chain as previously described.
If, less than 24 hours before expected exchange of contracts, someone announces they have only got £500 instead of £5,000, this can stall the chain for some while, whilst everyone renegotiates the terms of the contract they each have.
The payment of the deposit may seem simple to the conveyancer, but it regularly confuses the client.
The client thinks of the deposit as the difference between the mortgage advance and the price.
The client will not necessarily understand, particularly a first-time buyer, that the deposit has to be paid on exchange of contracts, which is some time before the mortgage advance becomes available.
From day one, it is important to explain to the buyer that the usual arrangement is to pay 10% on exchange of contracts and that if this is not available, then a lesser figure will have to be negotiated.
There are, of course, one or two insurance companies who offer an insurance scheme that avoids the need to make the payment of any deposit, but that, upon payment of a premium, provides a guarantee to the seller's conveyancer that should the transaction not proceed, then the appropriate 10% will be made available in the course of forfeiture becoming a legal possibility under the terms of the contract.
This insurance arrangement is very rarely used by practitioners, but readers should know that it does exist, and might provide some help to a buyer who is basically raising 100% of the price from the mortgage company.
(g) Survey arrangements Every buyer should have a survey of the property he or she proposes to buy.
It is now possible to rely on the survey that the  mortgage company will arrange.
Basically, there are three categories that will be offered:(1) There will be a basic valuation, which is not a survey at all, but merely to assist the mortgage company to ensure it has adequate security for its loan.
(2) There is alternatively a "House Buyers Report" , which is not a comprehensive survey, but is certainly more than a valuation.
Generally, this is adequate for most buyers, particularly those purchasing a modern property.
The report comes on a pre-printed form, which sets out the various exclusions and caveats in the margin of each page.
There will be a note of those jobs that require to be done to the property and also a valuation.
(3) Finally, there is a "full survey" , which literally involves the surveyor in scouring the house from top to bottom to include lifting floorboards and examining the timbers in the attic.
Not every seller welcomes such a detailed investigation of their home, but it is imperative when you are acting for a client who is proposing to purchase an old farmhouse, for example.
Some clients will not want a survey.
It is important to record the fact on your file that you have advised them strongly to have one.
(h) Mortgage arrangements Large chains of estate agents now organise a mortgage for their buyers, and smaller firms of estate agents will have several contacts in the market, either directly with mortgage companies, or via brokers.
If your client buyers do not fall into this category, for example if they have negotiated direct, then it may well be that your firm has its own financial services department.
Financial services is a lucrative business when one actually succeeds in organising the finance, endowment policies, term policies and so on.
The difficulty for conveyancers is that they are not generally "the first port of call" and therefore, lose out to those who are more immediately associated by the general public as dealing in this area.
Whether or not your firm has been directly instructed to organise the mortgage, it is important to check the arrangements, and also to scan the mortgage instructions very carefully.
Some mortgage companies send pages and pages of instructions to solicitors, and the inclination is generally to scan them very briefly.
There may be important conditions to be observed (eg to ensure that the road has been adopted by the local authority), and if it is not possible to comply with these, the mortgage may not go through.
It is also  important to explain the content of the mortgage offer to many clients, as they may not understand the offer that they receive directly through the post.
When dealing with bank loans, there may be particular difficulties where the house occupied by husband and wife is used to secure a business loan.
There is now, generally, a separate bank mortgage form to deal with a floating overdraft but again, when dealing with a bank, it is vital to check which mortgage form is sent to you.
If the bank mortgage form does not set out the precise amount of the home loan and the terms under which it is to be repaid, then it is important to ensure that the client receives a letter from the bank manager spelling out in precise terms the nature of the loan, the interest rate applicable to it and the regularity of the instalment payments.
The final point of caution is that as the conveyancer for the buyer, you should check that any endowment mortgage arrangements are suitable.
Endowment policies are not always appropriately matched to the client and sometimes a low-cost endowment would suffice instead of a full endowment policy, or a term insurance policy would be more appropriate than an endowment.
It is very necessary to ensure that you do not give financial advice unless your firm is appropriately registered under the Financial Services Act 1986.
Again, most large firms now have well-established arrangements to which a conveyancer should defer in these increasingly complicated times.
(i) Joint purchase?
It is important for the buyer's conveyancer to explain the difference between the significance of joint tenants holding in trust for themselves either as tenants in common or as joint tenants.
Walker v Hall (1984) 5 FLR 126 established that failure to give such guidance can amount to negligence and is a clear breach of professional duty.
Basically, the way you should explain it to your buyer client is that the share of a joint tenant passes automatically to the survivor on death, whereas the share of a tenant in common passes under the terms of their will to whomsoever their beneficiaries may be.
They will exclude the other tenant in common.
You may well be asked for your advice.
Point out that in the case of a married couple or a permanent relationship (especially between a man and woman living together and with the possibility of children, planned or unexpected), the joint tenancy is the surest  guarantee that on the death of either there will at least be a roof over the heads of the surviving family, particularly if there is to be a mortgage supported by a life endowment policy.
Explain too, how easily a joint tenancy can be converted to a tenancy in common by, for example, simple notice in writing by one party of his or her intention given to the other.
A tenancy in common is usual in a business situation such as a solicitors' partnership.
(j) Insurance arrangements Condition 5.1 of the new standard conditions of sale states that the seller is not under a duty to maintain an insurance policy but that the risk in the property does stay with the seller until completion.
This is a very significant change.
However, despite this condition, some buyers may wish to insure after contracts are exchanged in order to be doubly certain about their investment, but this is a practice that should now no longer be strictly necessary.
(k) Related sale As noted above most clients will be very worried about whether they will end up with two properties or none.
It is of course your duty as a conveyancer to ensure that this does not happen.
Clearly, the only time it becomes a matter of skill to ensure the two move side by side is when contracts are actually exchanged.
However, it is good practice to make sure that both your sale and your purchase file are kept at roughly the same level.
Some firms will need chasing, and others will push you.
You ought to try and synchronise these two extremes, so that the transaction proceeds smoothly.
The key piece of advice throughout every conveyancing transaction is to keep in touch with the client.
In some ways it is better to communicate with the client and say that nothing has happened, than not to communicate with the client because nothing has happened.
It would be wise in this modern day and age, to set up a system within your office whereby you monitor every file, so that your daily work is not simply a question of responding to incoming post and phone calls, but also a task of initiating approaches to clients and to other firms and to estate agents.
A pro-active approach to the job is commercially good sense if you are in the business of building up your client base.
(l) Applicability of TransAction Throughout the above, we have deliberately emphasised the new TransAction scheme.
It is of course acknowledged that the new TransAction scheme (or the National Protocol as it is more commonly known) does not apply to commercial transactions, or indeed to transactions involving building or farmland.
Sometimes, firms will not wish to apply the National TransAction scheme, and will refuse to conduct business on that footing.
In the experience of the author, the idea of the scheme is catching on very widely, and the theories running through it are rubbing off on traditional conveyancing practice in the commercial area.
The idea of a complete package of documentation is not an entirely new one in any event.
It was the standard system of dealing with new homes on a building estate long before the scheme was introduced.
It is also a procedure that is beginning to catch on in other areas of a solicitor's work.
In any event, at the time of writing, TransAction applies to residential conveyancing, and not to other forms of conveyancing.
It is therefore important to keep stocks of the old stationery for dealing with preliminary enquiries in your office.
Steps up to exchange of contracts
1.
TransAction—the seller's package
It is helpful to prepare the package of documents necessary on behalf of a seller, even before a sale is negotiated.
Some estate agents are now in the habit of advising seller's conveyancers before a transaction is actually negotiated.
On learning of a prospective sale, the conveyancer should call the client on the telephone, or to the office (this is better where the client is unknown to you) and ask the seller for details of the whereabouts of the title deeds.
The seller should also be asked to fill in the fixtures, fittings and contents questionnaire and the property information form.
The additional property information form is appropriate for leasehold property.
The answers may require copy documents that the seller may have at home.
Assemble these in your file in due course.
At this initial stage, it is important to undertake a local authority search, a commons registration search and a public index map search where the land is not registered.
All of these will require the payment of a fee, and some conveyancers are now adopting the practice of asking the client for this money to be paid in advance.
It is a question of your firm's policy.
You may also take this early opportunity of preparing an epitome of title if the land is unregistered.
When a sale is negotiated, there should then be the minimum of delay before you are able to dispatch the following:(1) A draft contract in duplicate, incorporating the first edition of the standard conditions of sale.
(2) A local authority search result.
(3) A commons registration search result.
(4) A public index map search result where appropriate.
(5) Office copy entries or an epitome of title as appropriate.
(6) The fixtures, fittings and contents questionnaire duly answered, signed and dated.
(7) The property information questionnaire duly completed and signed and dated.
(8) Any enclosures referred to in the above documents.
Some conveyancers have been loath to prepare the package of documentation set out above because of market conditions.
If the property does not sell at all, or if it takes a long time to sell, the local authority search result may become dated.
Work may be done that may be to no avail.
In a good property market, the problem does not arise.
The problem with delaying is that the Protocol documents are sent through to the buyer's conveyancers in dribs and drabs and this can take as many weeks as did the old system of going through preliminary enquiries, etc.
—The buyer's response
Upon receipt of the Protocol documentation, the buyer's conveyancer will closely examine all the papers submitted.
The raising of additional enquiries is not encouraged, but may be necessary in order to fulfil the conveyancer's professional duty to his or her buyer client.
If there are problems with the answers given to the questions on the property information form or if the contract or the title appears to be unacceptable, then these questions should be raised.
The old rule was that requisitions on title were dealt with after contracts had been exchanged, and that prior to that time the questions were to be of a practical nature, as per the form of preliminary enquiries.
The standard condition (Condition 4) deals with time limits for the raising of requisitions and it is now becoming increasingly common practice to mix in requisitions with any additional enquiries under the vague heading of "Observations" .
Most conveyancers do not now object to dealing with requisitions on the title before exchange of contracts, although time limits are imposed for raising of requisitions after contracts have been exchanged.
Contracts should be able to be approved by the buyer's conveyancer as soon as a satisfactory survey has been concluded, a satisfactory set of responses received from the seller's conveyancer concerning the Protocol documentation, and a loan has been agreed where applicable.
2.
The traditional style—the seller's package
The seller's conveyancer will send a draft contract in duplicate, probably referring to the old National conditions of sale or Law Society's conditions of sale.
The contract will accompany a suitable letter of introduction.
The contract should contain a plan to enable the buyer's conveyancer to undertake a local authority search.
Upon receipt of preliminary enquiries and any additional enquiries, the seller's conveyancers should answer those that they can from the deeds and documents of title and the balance from information given to them by their client.
When the buyer's conveyancer receives a local authority search result and a loan offer, and a satisfactory survey report, he or she will proceed to approve the contract, and subject to any related transaction, move towards exchange of contracts.
Under the traditional style, it was common practice for the seller's conveyancer to supply office copy entries on the title with the contract, but not to supply an epitome of title for unregistered property until after contracts had been exchanged.
This practice was only varied if there was some known defect in the title, and if that was so, one could expect to find a special condition on the contract, indicating that the buyer would take the title as it stood, and would not raise requisitions after contracts were exchanged.
—The buyer's response
Apart from noting omissions in the documents provided, it may be that the buyer requires the draft contract to be amended.
There may be certain special conditions that are unacceptable.
For example, the stipulated interest rate that applies, should there be delay in completion, may be too high.
The property may not be very precisely described, or the description of the property may omit to refer to necessary rights of way and easements for the enjoyment of services.
It is important to consider the content of the contract very carefully, and it is particularly important to examine the special conditions.
If there are a lot of special conditions, they are generally there for a reason, and one has to try to work out why.
Under both the TransAction scheme and the traditional style, the preparation of a transfer is usually undertaken by the buyer's conveyancer.
This is not always the case, but is usually so.
Since all areas of England and Wales are now compulsorily registrable, the need to prepare a  conveyance deed is rare, because Rule 72 transfers are used instead.
This is dealt with later in the text (p72).
3.
Initial letters
For economy of every kind—time, energy, money—the "one bite at the cherry" principle can't be over-emphasised.
On this principle write all initial letters together on the day you receive instructions, or at the latest the following day.
You'll find specimens of most of the kind of letters you will need to write at every stage of a simple conveyancing matter in Appendix II.
These will normally be as follows:(1) To your client, to acknowledge his instructions.
You should confirm your costs quotation and draw attention to your client care arrangements.
Record the salient terms of the sale (eg the purchase price, whether the property is freehold or leasehold, desired date of completion, etc; in the case of a buyer, that the purchase is subject to selling the buyer's own house or seeking a mortgage and to keep you informed as to his or her success).
At the same time remind a seller or buyer of anything you still need (eg last receipts, or particulars of a seller's building society whose loan is to be repaid and who can give you particulars of your client's title).
(2) If you know who they are, write to the conveyancers for the seller or buyer, as the case may be, confirming that you are acting for your client, and if your client is the buyer asking for the draft contract documentation, or if you act for the seller, either sending or promising to send the draft agreement for sale.
(3) Call the seller's conveyancer and ask if he or she intends to adopt the National Protocol.
(4) If you haven"t already heard, write to the selling agent for full particulars of the sale and parties, etc. (5) If you act for a seller whose unregistered title deeds are with a bank, building society, etc, write for the deeds, or (if they are not clients of yours) for the name and address of the conveyancers to whom they will be sent, and from whom an abstract can be obtained.
A bank will usually be willing to send deeds to you upon your giving its undertaking on its standard forms.
If the title is registered, telephone or write to the mortgagee for the title number and bespeak copy entries and filed plan.
The Law Society insists that a solicitor's undertaking is near absolute, and must be honoured.
If need be, don't hesitate to amend any undertaking put before you by a bank, etc, to terms you are confident you can fulfil.
For example, ensure that the undertaking provides for payment to the bank out of monies coming to your hands; then if, for some reason beyond your control, you don't receive the purchase monies this condition won't have been fulfilled, and you will be exempt from the obligation to pay.
When writing to a building society, never omit the mortgage reference number, or there may be some delay in receiving a reply, and if you act for your client's bank, building society, etc, you will of course normally ask them to send the deeds direct to you; in such a case include in your letter, if there is an existing mortgage to be discharged on completion (as there will be in the case of a building society and may be in the case of a bank), an undertaking to hold the deeds on behalf of the bank or society, to return them on demand, not to part with the same except on completion of the sale, and to discharge the society's mortgage.
(6) This is the time, if you have not before acted for your client, to send a polite note of thanks to the person who introduced your client to you.
4.
Preparing a draft contract—seller
Before you do this you'll need to peruse the title (see Chapter 5) to ensure that all easements, rights and liabilities on the title are disclosed to the buyer, and that any defects or difficulties are disclosed and the buyer shut off from objecting to them after exchange.
Be brief.
With an unregistered title don't stick slavishly to the description in old deeds.
A typical clause on the sale of a registered title is as follows: All that property known as the title to which is registered as Absolute at HM Land Registry under Title No Together with the rights and Except and Reserved and Subject as mentioned in the Entries on the Register of the said Title.
A typical clause on the sale of an unregistered title is as follows: All that property known as Together with the rights and Except and Reserved and Subject as mentioned in a Conveyance (hereinafter called "the  Conveyance" ) dated and made between of the one part and of the other part.
It's common practice to supply, in addition to the top copy, an extra copy of the draft contract and of the transfer.
Send the epitome or abstract of an unregistered title, or Office Copy Entries and filed plan with the draft contract.
This gives notice to the other side of all they should know.
A seller's conveyancer must be alert not only to supply copies of all known restrictions, but to guard against the absence of copies of old restrictions, as sometimes occurs.
In Faruqi v English Real Estates Ltd [1979]1 WLR 963, a property was registered with absolute title.
An entry in the charges register disclosed that it was subject to restrictive covenants imposed by a deed of 1883 but did not reveal what those covenants were, because on first registration neither the deed nor a copy or abstract of it had been produced.
Although the contract for sale was 'subject to the entries on the register of title", it did not disclose that there was a defect in the title.
The buyer asked for a copy of the restrictions; they were not forthcoming, the seller having no copy.
On a seller and buyer summons the court declared that the seller had not made a good title, and ordered the return to the buyer of the buyer's deposit on the equitable principle that it is a seller's duty to disclose fully and frankly in the contract any title defect.
Talking of restrictions, it often happens that your client wants to develop a property that is subject to old restrictive covenants in a manner that would be a breach of covenant.
The Law of Property Act 1925 s84 makes provision for application to the court in such a case to modify or discharge the restrictions, and now, under the Law of Property Act 1969, similar powers are given to the Lands Tribunal on grounds that the restriction impedes a use of the land that would be reasonable.
For a discussion of such applications see [1985]Gazette 6 March, 658.
A more common method today, however (because it is much quicker, often cheaper and one which can give certain security even before contracts to sell are exchanged), is the insurance indemnity policy issued on payment of a single premium.
To obtain a quotation for such a policy you need to give the insurers full particulars of the restrictions, the proposed development (often after outline planning permission has been obtained) and the amount of indemnity required.
Reference to such a policy when this is appropriate—that the buyer is to have the benefit of a policy the seller has obtained, for example, or that the sale is conditional on such a policy being issued to one of the parties—should be made in an appropriate case.
If, on a sale of unregistered land, there is any personal obligation on the part of a seller-client to observe restrictions (as, for example, where the seller is the original covenantor or has given a personal covenant to observe these), it is desirable to provide in the contract for a similar covenant indemnifying the seller against any future breach.
But to avoid loading a title with a chain of such covenants, it is perhaps better draftsmanship, when first imposing restrictions, to provide that the owner for the time being shall be responsible only for breaches committed whilst he or she is such owner.
In cases where a covenant must be imposed to observe existing restrictions, on behalf of a buyer always insert in the covenant such words as "so far as the same affect the property hereby conveyed and are subsisting and capable of being enforced" , because for one reason or another the odds are ten to one that nobody can legally enforce them; but the case might be otherwise if you impose the restrictions afresh.
In the case of registered leasehold land the position is taken care of by s24(1) (b) of the Land Registration Act 1925, which implies a covenant by the transferee to perform and observe the covenants and conditions in the lease and to indemnify the transferor.
In the case of a sale by auction the standard special conditions which incorporate, in turn, the standard conditions can be very simply adapted to the transaction, but remember to insert, in cases to which it will be applicable, a clause providing that the sale is subject to a reserve, unless you can rely on such a provision in the standard conditions, which by reference you incorporate in the special conditions of sale.
Without such a condition the auctioneer is under an obligation to knock the property down to the highest bidder, which could be a financial tragedy for the seller (and for you, in the shape of an action for negligence) if the highest bid was below its fair market value.
Standard condition 2.3 deals with auctions.
Remember, too, when acting for a seller on a sale by auction to attend the sale itself to answer any questions that a prospective buyer may raise on the title or the special conditions—and be wary of the questioner who seeks to suggest that the title is faulty or that restrictions prohibit development, etc, in the hope of abating the bids offered.
It is sometimes useful to consider quietly, in advance of the auction, possible objections and their answers.
If you act for the seller of a building estate, even though it comprises no more than a dozen houses or flats, it will repay you to have printed as many documents as possible (drafts and  engrossments of conveyance or lease, contract, etc) and to anticipate as far as you can a buyer's preliminary requirements.
Now, of course, the word processor or computer can take over much that used to be printed.
In many cases it will also repay you, in subsequent work saved, to register the title to the property.
The preparatory work is considerable and demands the attention of an experienced conveyancer; but this preparation makes possible the delegation of much subsequent work, the smooth running of every sale, and an enormous overall saving of time.
When the purchase price includes fixtures or furniture, these should be specified in detail in the draft, and if their value is substantial it is sometimes useful to agree and state the value at which they should be taken in order to reduce the consideration, and the stamp duty payable thereon, in the ultimate conveyance or transfer of the property.
In such a case a seller will give a separate receipt, on completion of the sale, in such words as these: re…
I hereby acknowledge that I have received from the sum of £ in payment for the fixtures, fittings and chattels now in or about the above premises listed in the Schedule below AND I confirm that I am absolutely entitled to the same free of any charge, hire-purchase agreement or other incumbrance affecting the same or any of them.
Properties around the current stamp duty threshold of £30,000 may benefit significantly from an apportionment of the price between the legal estate and the contents of the property.
(a) Assembly of information to prepare a draft contract The preparation of a draft contract is the task of the seller's conveyancer and is the addition of the information acquired directly from the seller or the estate agents, together with the information contained in the deeds and documents of title.
Most draft contracts now incorporate the new standard conditions of sale (first edition).
This represents a merger of the previous Law Society and National conditions of sale, use of which is being discontinued.
The new conditions are considerably simplified and written in plain English.
The terms "buyer" and "seller" are used rather than "purchaser" and "vendor" .
Solicitors may produce their own contract on word processors and are permitted to reproduce the standard contract incorporating the standard conditions of sale by reference.
The conditions are available in a printed booklet, which solicitors  are advised to provide to their client in instances where the conditions are incorporated by reference.
The new conditions of sale have been drafted for both domestic and commercial transactions and are not restricted to transactions where the National Protocol is followed.
(b) Drafting the contract The standard conditions do not need to be expressly referred to unless an alteration is sought.
The following information needs to be put on the front page:(1) The agreement date and the name and address of the seller and the buyer.
The date is left blank until contracts are actually exchanged.
(2) The description of the property together with the interest being sold by the seller.
In the case of unregistered land this description should be by reference to an attached plan.
The description of the property will generally be similar to that contained in the conveyance to the seller but sometimes such descriptions need to be improved by updating.
The description of the property should include easements, such as rights of way that the property enjoys, rights of light across neighbouring property or support from neighbouring property.
The description will also include all exceptions and reservations in favour of the seller, the benefit of which is to be sold to the buyer.
(3) If the property is sold subject to restrictive covenants contained in the title deeds, these should be noted as burdens on the property.
Sometimes the root deed itself will refer to the restrictive covenants and sometimes new restrictive covenants will be imposed in this transaction, for example, if it is a sale of part only of the seller's property.
In any of these events, a special condition needs to be inserted in order to make it clear which restrictions the property is being sold subject to, and copies of any restrictive covenants should be supplied.
As an alternative to restrictive covenants (eg the buyer may build only one single-storey dwelling on the land hereby agreed to be sold), there may be positive covenants that the buyer is to be required to observe (eg the buyer must erect a larchlap fence on the length of the left-hand boundary of the property).
If there is a positive covenant, not only should this be referred to but also the buyer should be required to enter into an indemnity covenant in the conveyance to him or her in respect of the future observance thereof.
The reason for an indemnity is that such a covenant does not automatically pass on each transaction; the burden of it needs to be handed down expressly to each subsequent buyer.
(4) It is necessary to disclose the capacity in which the seller sells.
There are a number of alternatives:(a) Beneficial owner.
This embraces the situation where a husband and wife own property as joint tenants in equity.
A beneficial owner is therefore one who owns the legal estate for the benefit of him or herself.
(b) Mortgagee.
Sometimes it may be necessary for a mortgagee, for example a bank or building society, to exercise its powers under the Law of Property Act 1925 as enhanced by the provisions of the relevant mortgage deed in order to take possession of a property from a defaulting borrower.
The ultimate sanction and one which is most commonly applied is for the mortgagee to sell.
(c) Personal representatives.
Where the proprietor of the legal estate has died, the sellers will be the personal representatives of the estate.
When title is deduced the sellers will be obliged to produce a grant of probate or a grant of letters of administration to show they are entitled to sell.
A certified copy or office copy of this must be handed over on completion.
(d) Trustees.
The sellers may act as trustees for sale, and sell in that capacity.
The trustees for sale would commonly include the owners of business property, and at least two individual trustees are required in order to give good receipt to a buyer of the proceeds of sale.
(e) The least common, but worthy of note is a seller acting as a tenant for life.
Tenants for life will be those who are entitled to a life interest under the provisions of a settlement and even though that interest merely confers upon them an equitable interest, they have the power to sell the legal estate.
Proceeds of sale must be paid to the trustees of the settlement, who again, must be at least two in number unless they are a trust corporation (eg a bank).
Before exercising the power of sale, the trustee for life must give one month's notice to the trustees stating the price which he has accepted and that this must be the best price available.
Upon receipt of the proceeds of sale the trustees must invest them for the tenant for life and that  person's successors in title.
(5) The completion date should be inserted when contracts are exchanged, otherwise standard Condition 6 will prevail.
(6) Interest payable if completion is delayed.
This provision may cause confusion to clients as they will not understand that it only relates to a late completion date.
The provision normally provides for the buyer to pay interest on the balance purchase money and this should now be fixed at the Law Society's Interest Rate.
The rate is published regularly in the Law Society's Gazette.
(7) The root of title or title number.
For unregistered conveyancing, the provisions of the Law of Property Act 1969 provide that a good root of title is a conveyance on sale or legal mortgage which is at least 15 years old.
If there is no such deed of that age, then one has to trace the title back further until a deed is found.
Bad roots of title include leases (when one is conveying the freehold), wills and equitable mortgages.
In certain transactions one might be requested to accept a root of title that is less than 15 years old or a document other than a mortgage, or a conveyance on sale as the root deed.
On these occasions further enquiries should be made in order to ascertain why the request is being put.
It may mean that the legal title to the property is defective, and if this is so, certain remedial steps may be necessary, such as obtaining a defective title indemnity policy from an insurance company and a statutory declaration from the seller or the seller's neighbours.
Such additional requirements may give rise to a special condition being attached to the back of the contract.
(8) The price of the property being sold and provision for a deposit.
Sometimes these are left blank until exchange of contracts is imminent.
It saves having to re-type the contract if the transaction does not proceed and the contract is required for an alternative proposed buyer.
Where a deposit is inserted the standard conditions provide for this to be 10% of the price.
However, a deposit of less than 10% may sometimes be agreed by negotiation between the parties' legal representatives, and this negotiation usually takes place immediately before contracts are exchanged.
It may necessitate a further special condition on the back of the contract.
The deposit does constitute clients' money and the seller is entitled to interest earned on the deposit money in accordance with the provisions of the Financial Services Act 1986.
The standard conditions provide that if the seller is buying another property in a related transaction, he or she may use all or part of the deposit as a deposit in that transaction, to be held in that transaction as stakeholder.
This means it may not be further used.
Any part of a deposit that is not required as described above must be held as stakeholder by the seller's solicitor until completion.
If this arrangement is to be varied a special condition is required.
(9) Sometimes the amount payable for chattels at the property may be separately set out, particularly if the price of the property is close to the current stamp duty threshold.
5.
Plans
As noted above a plan is essential to the proper description of a property, and this is especially so in the case of leases the title to which is to be registered (Chapter 12), and indeed of leases of flats in general.
A plan is commonly essential, too, on the sale of a part of a property, registered or unregistered.
While it is the responsibility of your seller-client to prepare the plan where necessary (and don't be persuaded to take on this heavy responsibility in your client's stead) you should, as the conveyancer, scrutinise what is handed to you with a critical eye coupled with your knowledge of the title and the property.
Bring to your client's attention any errors, uncertainties or omissions, which you may discover, with any suggested amendments.
Check that all necessary rights of way are shown.
Check that the whole of the property to be sold is included in the plan, no more, no less, and that the boundaries shown leave no room for doubt.
And ensure that your client prepares the plans to a reasonable scale, not too small or too large—if on a size A4 page that will not only annex conveniently to a lease or transfer of part but will also facilitate the taking of photocopies.
No architect's working drawings of wallpaper size.
Be firm.
Conveyancers are not trained or expected to prepare original plans: it is the duty of the client to supply these.
But it's the clear duty of a seller's conveyancer to recognise the nature of any plan required, and to obtain this from the seller, or, with authority, to instruct a professional draughtsman to prepare one.
And it is the equally clear duty of a buyer's conveyancer, with the buyer, to consider whether a plan correctly and adequately describes the property.
6.
Special conditions of sale
These are included for the purpose of supplementing and altering the standard conditions of sale.
It is not possible to provide the reader with a comprehensive list of these, because they vary from one transaction to another.
They do appear on many of the precedents commonly used by practitioners.
The following are examples of additional special conditions: Whether the sale is with vacant possession on completion, or subject to an existing tenancy.
In the latter case, details should be inserted.
The authorised use of the property for the purposes of current planning legislation.
An attempt to avoid liability on the part of the seller for any representations given by him/her or on his/her behalf save for replies to enquiries given by the seller's conveyancer and stating that the buyer proceeds entirely on the basis of the buyer's own survey and inspection.
Here are some further special conditions, some of which in a suitable case may be useful.
Others will be suggested by the circumstances and terms of a particular transaction.
A The property is sold subject to the [burdens and other provisions]contained in [the said conveyance][entries on the Register other than financial charges]and a copy thereof having been supplied to the buyer's conveyancers the buyer shall be deemed to purchase with full knowledge of the same and shall not raise any requisition or objection relating thereto.
B The title shall commence with the lease and the property is sold subject to the [entries on the Register other than financial charges and to the]covenants, terms and conditions contained in the lease.
[A copy][copies]thereof having been supplied to the buyer's conveyancers the buyer shall be deemed to purchase with full knowledge of the same and shall not raise any requisition or objection relating thereto.
C The property is sold on the footing that the permitted use thereof is as a private dwelling-house.
D The seller sells as beneficial owner but the seller transfer to the buyer shall contain the following proviso: "Provided Always and it is hereby agreed that the covenants which are implied by the seller transferring as beneficial owner shall not be deemed to imply or warrant that the lessee's covenants contained in the lease for decoration or repairs have been observed." 
E The seller sells as beneficial owner but the transfer to the buyer shall expressly exclude the transferor's liability under covenants for repair and decoration implied by s24(1) (a) of the Land Registration Act 1925 and contained in the registered lease.
F The lease and counterpart shall be prepared by the Lessor's solicitor and the Lessee shall contribute the sum of £ plus VAT towards the engrossing costs.
or G There are included in the sale the following fixtures and fittings:(Note: If fittings, etc, are of material value the price should be apportioned to reduce the consideration in the transfer, conveyance or assignment and therefore the stamp duty payable.)
H This Contract shall represent all the terms agreed between the parties hereto and the buyer hereby admits that no statement made by the seller or his agent has induced him to enter into this Contract except written statements, if any, made by the seller's conveyancers.
I The seller shall prior to completion of the purchase carry out and complete in a good and workmanlike manner and with good quality materials the following works to the property, namely: J AB the [wife]of the seller hereby acknowledges that she has no claim to or interest in the property hereby agreed to be sold adverse to the interest of the buyer and in consideration of the buyer entering into this agreement she hereby agrees that if so required she will join in the [conveyance][transfer][assignment][lease]for the purpose of vesting the said property in the buyer free from incumbrances.
K The buyer shall in the transfer of the property covenant with the seller by way of indemnity against any breach of the  covenants contained in [the said conveyance dated…][the said Lease][referred to in Entry No 1 on the Charges Register].
L The seller undertakes to make an irrevocable offer to enter into the form of agreement HB5 prescribed by the National House-Building Council.
M All provisions of this agreement which are not expressly or by necessary implication to merge and be extinguished in the transfer hereunder shall continue in full force and effect after completion.
When the seller of a newly built or building dwelling is registered with the NHBC N The seller undertakes to make an irrevocable offer to enter into a form of agreement HB5 (1979 edition) prescribed by the National House-Building Council.
(Note: When the seller is a public authority a variation of this clause is used).
O If the buyer pays by way of deposit a sum less than 10% of the purchase price then in the event of the seller becoming entitled to forfeit the deposit under the terms hereof the buyer shall forthwith pay to the seller or the seller's conveyancer a sum equal to the difference between the deposit already paid and 10% of the total purchase price.
P The seller shall use his or her best endeavours to procure the lessor's licence to assign and the buyer shall use his or her best endeavours to supply all references and information reasonably required by the lessor.
For all freeholds
For all leaseholds
For unregistered leasehold titles
For registered leasehold titles
Where less than 10% deposit paid
On sales of short leases and some others
7.
The property information forms
The property information questionnaire should be handed or sent to the client-seller at the commencement of the transaction.
The questionnaire is specially prefaced for the client and is directly intended for the client's use.
It has some important advice on the front page, and explains the effect of the answers given.
It underlines the importance of accuracy.
Most clients are able to cope with answering the questions since the answers will be a matter of their personal knowledge as a result of residing or using the property they are selling.
It is then your task as the seller's conveyancer to transfer the information from the questionnaire to the information form.
This form requires you to type out the answers.
The questions on both forms are broadly identical to those contained on the more traditional preliminary enquiry forms.
As mentioned above, the additional property information form deals with the more complex questions that often relate to leasehold property.
They are concerned with a management company and the details relating thereto.
There are questions concerning insurance, maintenance costs of repairing the property and problems with the landlord/tenant relationship.
All these forms, including the fixtures, fittings and contents form, need a signature.
This is particularly important if any query arises upon any of the answers given at a later date.
As mentioned above, it is sometimes important for the buyer's conveyancer to raise observations on the content of these information forms.
However, the practice of raising pages and pages of additional enquiries is now strongly discouraged, and the enquiries necessary are simply those to fulfil one's professional obligations to one's client.
8.
Preliminary enquiries and additional enquiries
Under the traditional system of conveyancing, the preliminary enquiry form remains in use.
Readers will recall that upon receipt of the draft contract in duplicate together with the accompanying plan and any copy covenants, the buyer's conveyancer will make an index map search and a local search, and also raise enquiries before contract.
Enquiries before contract are a method of ascertaining as much practical information as possible from the seller about the property to be bought.
The buyer's conveyancer will generally send a standard form to the seller's conveyancer, accompanied by a copy and also further questions, which ideally should be tailor-made for the particular transaction.
Questions that are commonly asked are as follows:(1) The ownership and maintenance responsibilities of the boundaries of the property.
Ownership of boundaries is commonly marked on deed plans with an inwardly facing "T" .
There will be occasions where there is no indication with the title deeds as to who owns the boundaries and in that case custom and practice will prevail.
(2) Disputes.
The seller will be required to supply information about any disputes with the neighbours in the recent past.
(3) Notices.
The seller will be expected to supply details of any correspondence with the local authority in respect of planning matters either relating to the property to be sold or to neighbouring property.
Sometimes an older property will have been listed as a building of special architectural or historical interest and again details should be supplied.
A notice may have been served with regard to an intention by a local authority compulsorily to purchase the property or part of it and again notices may have been received by the seller where the property is subject to occupation by a tenant.
(4) Guarantees.
The property may be sold with the benefit of certain guarantees to its conditions.
The most common of these is the "Buildmark" guarantee supplied by the National House-Building Council.
Details of this appear below in Chapter 13.
Other guarantees may be supplied by a double glazing, damp-proofing or woodworm treatment company.
Details of all these should be supplied to the buyer's conveyancer on request.
(5) Services.
The buyer will wish to know which services he or she has the benefit of, and here we refer to gas and mains water.
It may well be that the property does not have the benefit of main drainage and this will lead to the further enquiry as to arrangements for septic tank drainage, whether or not that septic tank drains onto neighbouring property and, if so, what rights are in existence for such an arrangement.
Similarly, the buyer will wish to know whether there are rights for services to pass over neighbouring land.
(6) Exclusive facilities.
This deals with those facilities enjoyed exclusively by the property to be sold over neighbouring property.
Most commonly, this might relate to a right of way across the neighbouring property, and details as to whether or not that right has been interrupted or whether charges have been made for its use will be required.
(7) Shared facilities.
This enquiry is similar to the one above, but refers to those facilities that are jointly used by neighbours over a third person's property.
Again, details of maintenance responsibilities will be required and the proportion in which the costs of upkeep have been shared by those entitled.
(8) This enquiry refers to the rights of those who do not actually  own the property but who may, for example, occupy it.
Adult occupiers should be required to sign the contract on completion in order to signify their consent to granting vacant possession in accordance with the obligations of the owners on exchange of contracts.
Details of occupiers, including their names and ages, will be required in answer to preliminary enquiries.
(9) Restrictions.
It will be necessary to confirm that all restrictions have been observed and if they have not been observed, to confirm that consent to vary or discharge them has been forthcoming.
A restrictive covenant imposed after 1925 binds future owners if registered as a land charge Class D(ii) or on the Land Register.
Earlier covenants affect buyers for value if they buy with notice.
(10) It is necessary to state current use of the property and whether that has been continuous.
Where a property is being used in breach of planning permission, an enforcement notice may be served by the local planning authority on the owner/occupier requiring the use to cease.
Failure to observe that enforcement notice can result in a prosecution in the local magistrates' court.
The existence or otherwise of an enforcement notice will be revealed by the local search result.
Once an enforcement notice has been entered against a property as a local land charge it will not be removed.
This will not materially affect the buyer unless he or she is seeking to continue with the unauthorised use.
(11) It is increasingly common practice amongst conveyancers to supply a list for completion by the seller in order to answer the question about fixtures and fittings.
(12) Unless a completion date is expressly agreed it will be fixed by the general conditions of sale.
Preliminary enquiries should be treated seriously and the seller's legal representatives should do their best to supply full answers.
When you act for a buyer, always go through the answers you receive to your preliminary enquiries, search and additional enquiries made of the local authority, marking each of these with a tick if it is satisfactory, or with a cross if it is not, or if it requires further elucidation.
Then go through the replies again if any are marked with a cross, taking whatever action may be appropriate on each (asking the seller's conveyancers to provide a copy of a planning consent that your search has revealed, and telling your  client that the drainage is combined with that of adjoining properties, or—this merely to pass on interesting information—that the house is in an area designated as one of special natural beauty or historical interest).
As you deal with each point then tick the cross, but not before.
This practice of marking searches, requisitions, etc, should be an invariable one for three reasons:(1) it compels you to consider each question and reply before marking it;(2) it will save your time in selecting answers that require further action, and will avoid your reading through the enquiries again later on to make sure that the replies to them are in order; and (3) it is a permanent record that at the time of the transaction you not only made your search, etc, but duly considered and dealt with the replies.
You can never entirely eliminate human error and oversight, but this gimmick of marking replies to searches, etc, minimises the possibility of your forgetting to pass on to your client vital information that might give time to consider whether or not to proceed with the purchase, such as the fact that redevelopment of the area within the next ten years is contemplated.
You will commonly, of course, advise your client of any facts of interest, which you have discovered by your enquiries; for example , that the road has not yet been taken over by the local authority, that plans for building on the property were submitted to and rejected by the local authority, etc.
Write the word "client" in the margin against any information that it's necessary to impart (and your client should be kept fully informed on every matter that might be of material interest), ticking this, as already mentioned, when you"ve done so.
There is one enquiry you should always make when buying a flat: otherwise the buyer may, in the next year, be confronted with a quite unacceptable bill for major repairs—repainting the block, a new roof, etc.
A similar enquiry should also be made in the case of "right to buy" purchases (see Chapter 14): Is the seller [or lessor, on the grant of a new lease]aware of any major work of repair or otherwise, anticipated in the foreseeable future towards which a purchaser [lessee]might be required to contribute?
When acting for a buyer of vacant land who intends to build on it, or for a buyer of a recently erected house, a hidden danger has recently been highlighted—the possibility that the foundations may  be at risk of subsidence or of sliding either through infilling of the site, or a dangerous geological stratum.
In the case of a building, the seller may be ignorant: if the seller knew of a risk and sold without disclosure, he or she is probably liable at law, but builders come and builders go, and those who deliberately mislead mostly go.
The local authority will have all the information that would reveal the danger, but, surprisingly, it is under no obligation to volunteer this information, either in a development permit or otherwise—it's the absence of such an obligation that has recently been the source of hardship and complaint.
So, when acting in such a case, add to your additional enquiries made of the local authority, or better in a letter, some such enquiry as this: Is the Authority aware of any infilling or any geological stratum which might result in the instability of the foundations of any building erected on the site for which planning consent has been granted?
If they say the enquiry is too wide to answer, that's nonsense—they know wherever infilling has occurred, and they have their geological maps of the area.
Press them.
(a) Examples of additional enquiries (1) Is the seller aware of any development or proposals for the development or use of property in the neighbourhood which might adversely affect the property or the amenities of persons living in it?(2) Has the property to the seller's knowledge been affected at any time by structural, building or drainage defects, flooding, dry rot, timber infestation or rising damp?(3) Please confirm that any damage caused to decorations by the removal of fixtures and fittings will be made good by the seller before completion.
(4) Are there to the seller's knowledge any adverse rights or informal arrangements or licences affecting the property not disclosed in the draft contract?(5) If the property has central heating:(a) approximately when was it installed?(b) when was it last serviced?(c) is it working satisfactorily?(6) Please confirm that all fixtures and fittings referred to in the selling agents' particulars, if any, are included in the purchase price.
(7) Have there been any disputes between the seller and the lessor and/or the owners or occupiers of adjoining or neighbouring properties?
If so, please supply particulars.
(8) Has any work to the seller's knowledge been done at the property requiring planning permission or Building Regulations consent?
If so, please supply copies.
(9)(a) When was the property last re-wired and when last tested by the electricity authority?(b) Is a current test certificate available?
If so, please supply a copy.
(10) If the property is leasehold:(a) please confirm that the seller has complied with all the covenants in the lease;(b) does the seller know whether any items of substantial expenditure for decoration, maintenance or repair have been carried out by the lessors recently but not yet charged to tenants, or are any such contemplated in the near future?(11) Is the seller aware of any overriding interest under the Land Registration Act 1925, s70(1)?(12) Please confirm:(a) that all gas and electrical installations are the seller's absolute property and are included in the purchase price;(b) that the electric light installations down to the bulb holders will be left intact;(c) that all furniture, furnishings and fittings not included in the sale and all rubbish will be removed before completion.
(13) Please notify us before exchange of contracts if you become aware of any change of circumstances which make inaccurate your replies to the foregoing enquiries.
9.
Rights of spouses and third parties
Recent cases have extended the rights of a spouse (in practice, almost always a wife) under the Matrimonial Homes Act 1967 (as amended) to frustrate the sale of the matrimonial home by registering a land charge or a notice, according to whether the title is unregistered or registered.
Such a notice or land charge can be filed after contracts have been exchanged, as was established by Roth v Tyler [1973]1 All ER 897, and in that case the seller-husband was  liable for substantial damages, not (as was urged on his behalf) only the nominal damages to which a buyer is entitled if his seller is unable to deduce a good title.
Moreover, the damages were given as at the date of the judgment, not the contract, so that a successful plaintiff would have the benefit of any inflation in values between the two dates.
And non-occupation by either spouse does not prevent an absentee wife from filing a notice so as to defeat her seller-husband, notwithstanding the fact that a court order would be required to entitle her to resume occupation of the matrimonial home (Watts v Waller [1972]3 All ER 257).
This principle was carried further by the House of Lords' decision in Williams and Glyn's Bank Ltd v Boland [1980]2 All ER 408, which found that a wife who made a financial contribution to the purchase of a house acquires more than an interest in the proceeds of sale: she acquires an interest in the land itself, which can take effect as an overriding interest, in the case of registered land, under the Land Registration Act 1925, s70(1) (g).
This decision, being one of property and not only matrimonial law, would extend to anyone acquiring such an interest—mistresses, friends, parents, children: anyone.
It follows, too (although the subject-matter of the case was registered property), that the principles enunciated in the judgment apply to unregistered as well as to registered land.
Hence the standard printed enquiry on the point.
To protect a buyer, it is best to advise making careful enquiry at the property: and include in one's requisitions on title, specific enquiry (now a standard printed requisition) as to whether any person other than the seller has any interest in the property.
Acting for a seller, who may be at risk of heavy damages payable to a disappointed buyer, the seller should be asked explicitly whether anyone else has an interest in the property: if so, that person's written consent to the sale should be obtained, or he or she should join in the contract for sale to declare and relinquish his or her interest, if any.
As in the Boland case, the person most likely to have an interest in a property, of course, is the seller's spouse.
Here's a form of declaration by a spouse or any other person who may have an interest for which, acting for a buyer, you are entitled to ask: I hereby undertake that in consideration of your entering into an agreement to purchase the above property any interest which I may have or acquire therein shall be deferred to any interest of you or any mortgagee or chargee and that I will not apply for the registration of any land charge, caution, notice or restriction in respect thereof.
Otherwise a seller's spouse may be asked to sign the contract to demonstrate that he or she submits to the sale: the spouse will then be estopped from subsequently seeking to frustrate it.
Suitable wording would be similar to that given above.
10.
Approval of draft contract
We have already noted the stage at which it will become possible for the buyer's conveyancer to approve the contract.
It is important that when contracts are approved, both parts are identical.
If any alterations are made to the contract, or conditions added to it, then such must be initialled by the parties to the contract.
Sometimes, this may be delegated to the conveyancer acting, but this delegation must clearly be with the client's authority.
After contracts are approved and signed, and the deposit money is ready at the appropriate place in the chain, the exchange process may begin.
11.
Contract races
A solicitor is sometimes instructed by a seller to deal with more than one prospective buyer at a time, sending a draft contract to each.
If the client can't be dissuaded, the Law Society has directed that the following steps by a solicitor are obligatory:(1) A solicitor must, with his clients' authority, at once disclose in writing his clients' decisions to the solicitor for each prospective buyer (or to the prospective buyer if he or she is unrepresented).
If the seller refuses to authorise disclosure, the solicitor must forthwith cease to act for him or her.
(2) Notwithstanding exceptions to the rule that a solicitor may not act for both seller and buyer, in any such case a solicitor cannot act as there is a conflict of interest between the parties.
A contract race increases the risk of such a conflict, and if, in an exceptional case, the solicitor decides to act for both seller and one of the prospective buyers, this decision must be disclosed, in writing, to both the two clients and the other prospective buyers or their solicitors.
(3) Where draft contracts are submitted to more than one prospective buyer, a solicitor must not accept instructions to act for more than one of them.
(See Council Direction published in [1977]Gazette 6 October, 834 repeated 28 November 1979, 1177.)
12.
The alternative methods of exchanging contracts
The old, traditional method of exchange of contracts for sale by the buyer's solicitors or representatives calling personally on the seller's is very rarely used.
Exchange is now effected either by post or by telephone.
If by post, the buyer's conveyancer posts or delivers to the seller's conveyancer the part of the contract signed by the buyer, together with a cheque for the deposit.
Exchange occurs when the seller's conveyancer posts their part to the buyer's conveyancer.
From that moment, there is a binding exchange of contracts.
If exchanging contracts through the post and dealing with a sale and purchase, the steps must be carefully synchronised.
On the sale, the buyers post their part to you first.
On the purchase, you then post your client's part to the other side.
You wait for the other side to post their part back to you on your client's purchase, thereby leaving you with the initiative to complete the exchange procedure on your client's sale, and this you should do immediately.
However, it is much more satisfactory to exchange by telephone, using one of the Law Society's formulae.
The Law Society has published a statement recommending the procedure to be followed in a case of exchange by telephone or telex ([1980]Gazette, 13 February, 144).
Two formulae are suggested: one (Formula A) where one solicitor holds both parts of the contract; the other (Formula B) where conveyancers hold their own client's signed part of the contract.
In practice, exchange by telephone is handled fairly informally.
(1) A completion date is agreed.
Holding solicitors confirm to the others that their client's part is signed and is identical to the part signed by the other party; they agree they will forthwith insert in both parts the agreed completion date.
(2) The solicitors agree that exchange shall take place from that moment and holding solicitors confirm that as from that moment:(a) they hold the part signed by their client to the order of the other; and (b) undertake that day to post by first-class post or to deliver their signed part of the contract to the other solicitors, together, in the case of the buyer's solicitor holding both parts, with a bank draft or a solicitor's clients' account cheque for the deposit.
(1) A completion date is agreed.
Each solicitor confirms that they hold their own client's part of the contract in the agreed form; agree forthwith to insert the agreed completion date.
(2) Each undertakes to the other thenceforth to hold the part in their hands to the other's order, and that day by first-class post or hand delivery to send their part to the other, together, in the case of the buyer, with bank draft or a solicitor's clients' account cheque for the deposit.
Under the new Law Society Formula "C" , a chain of transactions may be exchanged over the telephone more satisfactorily.
The solicitors at the end of the chain are asked to release their contract for a specified period of time to the solicitors acting for the buyer next in line.
Precise details of times, etc should be carefully recorded and each solicitor should be available to speak to the other throughout the agreed duration of the release.
Memoranda should be prepared accordingly.
The solicitors in whose favour the contract has been released, are then free to undertake a telephone exchange of contracts in accordance with Law Society Formula "A" or "B" , as appropriate, and can then return to the original solicitors at the end of the chain in order to complete the exchange of the released contract in the same way as they would if dealing with Law Society Formula "A" or "B" .
Law Society Formula "C" therefore involves two phone calls.
However, the contractual commitment stems from the first of those calls on the basis that it is followed up by the time agreed.
Under Formula A
Under Formula B
Under Formula C
The above formulae are also used by licensed conveyancers.
13.
The deposit paid on exchange
This has been referred to previously in the text, but there are two additional points to note.
Under the Solicitors Accounts (Deposit Interest) Rules 1987, solicitors have a duty to account to their clients for the interest earned by the placing of such monies in a solicitors' client account.
Standard Condition 2.2 now deals with the payment of deposits and provides for a 10% deposit to be taken.
Standard Condition 6.6.5 provides that where a deposit of less than 10% is taken on exchange, the balance of the 10% becomes payable immediately on service of a notice to complete.
The condition requires the deposit to be paid only by a banker's draft or solicitors' cheque.
In an auction contract, this will need to be  amended.
A special condition will be required if the deposit is being funded by a guarantee scheme.
The condition also allows sellers to use part of the deposit to fund their own deposit in a related transaction, and such part of the deposit as is used in this way will be held by the seller's conveyancer as agent, and the balance as stakeholder.
Finally, the condition provides that interest shall be paid on stakeholder deposits to the seller on completion.
14.
Pre-exchange check list—seller
(1) Take full instructions on instructions sheet.
(2) Obtain local search.
(3) Peruse and check title.
(4) Have seller supply replies to property information form and fixtures, fittings and contents questionnaire.
(5) Interest rate.
(6) Deposit?(7) Restrictions, covenants in leaseholds, etc. (8) Plans? adequate, correct.
Have client supply plan.
(9) Misrepresentation: safeguard against buyer relying on any representations except those made by you in writing (eg in replies on property information form etc).
(10)?
Provide for indemnity by buyer against breach of restrictions, covenants in lease, etc. (11) Vacant possession.
Check adults in occupation.
(12) Completion date—synchronise in linked sale and purchase.
(13) Completion date—new building.
(14)?
Vary standard conditions.
(15)?
Provide for NHBC agreement.
(16) Obtain client's approval of contract before exchange.
(17) Hold exchange until completion dates and readiness to exchange on sale and concurrent purchase established.
(18) Then exchange by telephone.
(19) On sale of a flat:(a) Check outgoings (rent, maintenance charge, etc).
(b) When a management company, check share position; if lessees are members, get share certificate.
(c) Check insurance position.
(d) When lessor's licence required, insert appropriate special condition.
15.
Pre-exchange check list—buyer
(1) Take full instructions on instructions sheet.
(2) In sale of leaseholds, go through lease and draft contract with client, make notes on information supplied on the Protocol forms.
(3) Peruse contract; dispatch additional observations.
(4) Insurance?
If leasehold, consider position.
(5) Peruse title.
(6) Check provisions in draft contract for interest; deposit; restrictions; plan; indemnity to seller; misrepresentation. (7) Check contract plan with buyer.
(8) Check replies to local search.
(9) Check financial arrangements with client.
(10)?
Provide for seller's spouse to renounce interest in property.
(11) Provide for vacant possession.
(12) In linked transactions synchronise completion dates.
(13) Check and provide for NHBC cover on new or recent building.
(14) Provide for completion guarantee of new building.
(15) Check agreement for fixtures and fittings, etc. (16) Check position with regard to restrictive covenants, etc.
? Consult or advise client.
(17) Obtain client's approval of contract before exchange.
(18) Leaseholds; if licence required, obtain, take up buyer's references.
(19) Leaseholds; check outgoings and past and present maintenance charge with client.
(20) Hold exchange until completion dates and readiness to exchange on concurrent sale and purchase established.
(21) Then exchange by telephone.
Searches and registrations
Searches, and the other side of the coin, the registrations that occasion them, are pivotal to modern conveyancing.
They are the shield against fraud and deception, the guardian of interests in land, which need to be published to the world lest they be overlooked or overridden.
The only serious chink in the armour of the buyer is the "overriding interest" of registered land, which is described in Chapter 5.
The subject is one of such importance to the conveyancer that readers are advised to acquire one of the books and booklets devoted to the subject, of which the following are three examples: Guide to Enquiries of Local Authorities by Trevor Aldridge (Longman Professional); Handbook of Conveyancing Searches by E O Bourne (Sweet & Maxwell); and Searches and Enquiries—A Conveyancer's Guide by Frances Silverman (Butterworths).
The last is most comprehensive and detailed.
Some books on conveyancing have a chapter on searches such as Conveyancing by I R Storey (Butterworths) geared to the Law Society's conveyancing course and examinations.
See also "Local Land Charge Searches: Guidance" , being general notes for guidance published by the Law Society and the Local Authority Associations [1987]Gazette 18 November, 3342; and "Land Registration (Official Searches) Rules 1988" [1988]Gazette 18 May.
Who cause the entries in the various registers to be made?
Broadly, those who have an interest in a parcel of land that is not otherwise apparent in the title to that land.
And who is concerned to discover what may be those interests, which, by registration, are deemed to be notified to the world?
Broadly, those who seek to acquire that piece of land, or an interest therein: prospective buyers, lessees, mortgagees.
Particulars of the principal Registers and the persons and bodies  who should register and search are given below.
Some references to the details of search procedure, where material to action at various stages of a conveyancing transaction, are also given in succeeding chapters.
1.
The Local Land Charges Register
(a) Contents of the Register Established under the Land Charges Act 1925, this is of importance to every buyer, lessee and mortgagee of any property in England and Wales, because the matters registered are not referred to in either the Registers of registered land nor in the Central Land Charges Register.
As well as the contents of the official register (use official form of request for certificate of search), search is invariably made at the same time for other information noted on the records of the local authority of which a buyer needs to be informed (two forms here; one for London boroughs and one for all other district councils).
The Register proper consists of 12 parts, as follows: Part 1 General financial charges Part 2 Specific financial charges Part 3 Planning charges Part 4 Miscellaneous charges Part 5 Fenland ways maintenance Part 6 Land compensation charges Part 7 New towns charges Part 8 Civil aviation charges Part 9 Opencast coal charges Part 10 Listed buildings charges Part 11 Light obstruction charges Part 12 Drainage scheme charges The form containing additional enquiries is in two parts: Part I contains questions of universal application, and replies are sought and paid for by one comprehensive fee; Part II entries are relevant only to particular properties and will not be answered unless indicated by the searcher, a separate fee being paid for each entry searched.
No more than headings are given below—for details, readers are referred to the forms themselves.
The forms that have long been used by conveyancers (LLC1 and Con 29A or Con 29D) are to have their format altered with effect from 1 September 1991.  (b) Who registers?
The local authority is responsible for making all the entries on its Register.
(c) Who searches?
When and how?
Every prospective seller or owner dealing with someone interested in acquiring an interest over land, such as a right of way or other easements.
Complete the application for an official search using a carbon for the duplicate copy comprised in the one form.
Complete the request for further information on form Con 29(D) for Greater London and Con 29(A) for the rest of the country in duplicate, using two forms for the purpose.
These forms are a cumbersome sheet, like a medieval scroll, although a short form is available and is accepted by most authorities.
Send the forms, together with the appropriate fee to the Registrar of Local Land Charges at the municipal offices for the authority concerned.
Longman's Directory of Local Authorities provides a list of the appropriate addresses.
Note that there is no longer a fixed national scale figure.
The amount charged varies from one authority to another, and independent enquiries should generally be made when dealing with authorities outside one's own area.
In most authorities there is some delay; in some (the metropolitan boroughs are the worst offenders) there is an inordinate delay of weeks or months.
Accordingly, to overcome this, the seller's conveyancer should make the search in advance of any sale, supplying it to the buyer, who must then pay the search fee under the Protocol procedure, once contracts have been exchanged.
The validity of a local search result only lasts for two months, and if there is delay in finding a buyer, the search may be extended under the Local Search Validation Insurance Scheme.
The idea is that the master policy indemnifies the buyer and the buyer's mortgagee for any diminution in the market value of the property arising from adverse entries between the date of the search and the date of exchange.
This insurance cover deals with replies to both form LLC1 and Con29.
The indemnity only covers market value claims as at the date of exchange.
There is no time limit for claims, and accordingly, the certificate of insurance should be kept with the title deeds.
The cost of cover is £10 for properties up to £250,000 and £20 for properties up to £500,000.
To take out the insurance, a solicitor simply completes a form from the pad supplied and sends a cheque for the premium to London & Professional Indemnity.
The  detachable remittance slip is the proof of the cover and goes with the deeds.
To speed the local search result it is possible, though expensive, to arrange a personal search in some Local Authorities by a local search agency.
(d) Action on receipt of replies First peruse each reply carefully, consider its significance; and if the reply is benign, pass on to the next, but before you do, tick the answer in the margin, or if it calls for clarification or action, put a cross in the margin, so that when you have considered every reply, you can go over them all comprehensively, and take whatever action is called for.
This procedure avoids possible oversight, and is a record that the answers have been considered, thus avoiding possible duplication of work if for any reason the matter is handed to another to deal with.
The same procedure should be followed in the case of other searches, the Schedules that may be attached to the official Certificate of Search, and also answers to your preliminary enquiries and requisitions on title made of the seller.
Not all positive replies are sinister: on the contrary, some are desirable or necessary.
If the Certificate of Search discloses that a resolution has been made adopting the provisions of the Clean Air Act, that's an advantage to a buyer as a measure of protection against pollution.
Question 1 of the additional questions will reveal whether or not the road has been adopted and all charges paid.
If not, the buyer should be alerted and his other instructions taken.
When a road is taken over by the local authority there are usually substantial charges to be paid, but often, in the case of estate roads, the developers have accepted responsibility and entered into a bond with the local authority to secure their liability.
Your enquiries should, again, yield positive information about the existence or otherwise of mains drains.
When you"ve gone through all the answers, take up with the seller any that call for clarification, for example the absence of a planning consent (suggested by your preliminary enquiries) revealed by your search.
Don't exchange contracts until you and your client are satisfied on every point and in particular about adoption of roads and drains.
A retention from the price should be negotiated if you are not satisfied on these points.
Lastly, report to the buyer every matter of significance or interest—eg that the property is in an area of outstanding natural beauty.
Remember the golden rule of legal PR—keep the client in the picture.
Note: there is a short form of additional enquiries, which refers to the detailed questions by numbers, but its use is not to be recommended—it's better to have the full questions and answers on one form.
2.
The Central Land Charges Register
(a) Contents of the Register The Central Land Charges Register, like the Local Land Charges Register, was established under the Land Charges Act 1925 for the purpose of protecting various interests of a less parochial nature than the Local Land Charges Registers.
Section 10 establishes the Register of Land Charges consisting of five classes to which has been added a sixth, Class F. They are described below and apart from the bankruptcy entries, relate to unregistered land.
Class C (i) Any legal mortgage not protected by the deposit of documents (a puisne mortgage).
(Note: usually this means a second or subsequent mortgage, the first mortgagee holding the title deeds as his security.)(ii) Any equitable charge acquired by a tenant for life or statutory owner under any Finance or other Act by reason of the discharge by him of any inheritance tax or other liabilities to which special priority is given by the statute (a "limited owner's charge" ).
(iii) Any other equitable charge not secured by a deposit of documents not arising under a trust for sale or a settlement and not included in any other land charge ( "a general equitable charge" ).
(iv) Any contract by an estate owner or by a person at the date of the contract entitled to have a legal estate conveyed to him or her, including a valid option of purchase, a right of pre-emption or any other like right (an "estate contract" ).
(Note: this is the means whereby the contractual purchaser of an unregistered property can protect his or her priority.)
Class D (i) Any charge acquired by the Commissioners of Inland Revenue for death duties.
(ii) A covenant or agreement (other than in a lease) restricting the use of land (a "restrictive covenant" ).
(iii) An easement, right or privilege affecting land and being merely an equitable interest (an "equitable easement" ).
Class A (rare) A rent, annuity or principal sum being a charge (otherwise than by deed) created pursuant to the application of an individual under the provision of certain Acts of Parliament specified in heads (i) to (vi).
Class B (rare) A charge on land (other than a local land charge) of any of the kinds described in Class A created otherwise than pursuant to the application of any person.
Class E (rare) Certain annuities created before 1920.
Class F The right of a spouse (commonly the wife) to occupy the matrimonial home though having no legal estate therein under the Matrimonial Homes Act 1967 as amended.
There is also a Register of Pending Actions affecting land or any interest in land kept by the Land Charges Registrar, but a buyer (the term includes a lessee and mortgagee) for value who does not have express notice of such an action will not be bound by it unless it is registered as a land charge.
(b) Who registers?
How and where?
In general, the persons or bodies with an interest to protect in unregistered land will effect registration.
The Receiver in Bankruptcy applies for registration of a receiving order.
The mortgagee registers a puisne mortgage.
Buyers are usually the people fearful of their contract being overreached who register an estate contract, but sometimes lessors will register, or require a lessee to register an option for renewal or for the purchase of the reversion contained in the lease, lest they be pursued under their covenant if, in the meantime, the reversion has been sold before an estate contract has been registered.
Complete Form 15 (from your law stationer) and send it with the appropriate fee, to The Registrar, Central Land Charges Registry, Burrington Way, Plymouth.
Fees are payable by cheque, postal order or through a Land Registry credit account.
Searches can also be made by telephone or facsimile transmission.
The latter only applies to credit account holders.
The service is available from 09.30 to 17.00 hours from Monday to Friday on fax No 0752 766666.
Only the front page of the printed forms should be transmitted.
The result will be posted to the applicant in the normal way.
It's easy to overlook the need to register after a sale and purchase have been completed, for example, when acting for a seller to register newly imposed restrictive covenants, or for a lessee to register an  option to buy the reversion or to renew the lease.
Hence the reminder in the post-completion agenda No7 p228. (c) Who searches?
How and where?
Every buyer, prospective lessee and mortgagee of unregistered land should search before completion—no search is necessary in the case of registered land, whose Registers contain all the protective entries a purchaser needs (except overriding interests—p73 below).
Apply on Form K 15 to the Registrar.
There is one exception to this rule of not searching the unregistered Land Charges Register in the case of registered land: prospective mortgagors who are buying a registered property have, as yet(until they complete their purchase), no title to the registered land; and therefore a bankruptcy or a receiving order made against them would not be disclosed by a title search.
Therefore, when acting for a mortgagee such as a building society or bank as well as for the buyer-borrower, always make a bankruptcy search against your client on Form K16.
There are two search forms: one for the whole Register (K15) or for bankruptcy only (K16).
The fee is currently £1 per name.
If only a bankruptcy search is required in the case of registered land use Form K16.
If on the other hand your client is buying an unregistered property, make the full search of the Register, which will include bankruptcy, and you can therefore add your client's name to the list of names searched.
Form K15 requires a period of years to be stated.
This will be the period during which the estate owners have owned the property.
The search cannot pre-date 1925.
Form K15 also requires the county to be stipulated.
It is not necessary to state the full address of the property being purchased.
On investigation of an unregistered title (Chapter 6) you'll have noted the names of owners, against whom the results of land charge searches are noted, and you'll search against any in respect of whom the seller can't give evidence of prior search.
(d) Action on receipt of replies Replies to a land charges search give the number of any land charge (eg C iv), which may relate to your land.
Replies tend to play safe, and often give names, which clearly don't refer to the land you're interested in.
Then you can disregard the reply.
But often the information will be ambiguous and may refer to the land or individual in respect of which you are searching.
Then pass the matter to the seller's conveyancer and send the certificate of search, for verification on the form that the entry does not relate to the property offered to your client.
If a reply clearly refers to the land you are interested in, consider whether you have already had particulars of this on the title you have investigated.
If not, obtain an office copy of the application that gave rise to entry, which will supply not only information as to what is the protected interest but also as to who is the individual claiming protection and his or her conveyancer.
Apply to the Registry on Form K19 and send the copy, when received, to the seller's conveyancer to give full particulars.
If you are still in any doubt, take your client's instructions.
The fee for an office copy including any plan is £1.
3.
Public index map
(a) Contents of map The map is kept at Local Land Registries of the area covered by the Registry, which is responsible for its maintenance.
A search will reveal:(a) Whether the property is in an area of compulsory registration (question 18 made of the local authority will also give you this information);(b) whether the freehold or leasehold title is registered;(c) if the title is unregistered, whether any cautions against first registration or priority notice is registered.
(b) Who registers?
Any person who has an interest in the unregistered property can apply to register a Caution against first registration (LR form 13) with a supporting statutory declaration (LR form 14).
(c) Who searches?
How and when?
Under the Protocol it is the duty of the seller to search.
A plan may be needed to accompany the application for a certificate of search.
Application is made on Form 96 and costs £6. (d) Action on receipt of reply As when considering the answer to question 18 made of the local authority, consider whether any unregistered disposition of the property for value has been made since registration of title became compulsory.
Satisfy yourself and dispose of any entry before proceeding to exchange contracts.
4.
Registered land-application for official searches
(a) What the Registers contain The three registers that make up the Entries on the Register—the Property Register, the Proprietorship Register and the Charges Register—contain the whole title of the registered proprietor including entries protective of the rights and interests of third parties by registration of notices, cautions, inhibitions and restrictions.
(One exception: sometimes a document, like a complicated estate transfer, is bound up in the certificate.)
They are the counterpart in registered land conveyancing of the protection afforded third parties in unregistered conveyancing by the Central Land Charges Register.
Notices show on the Register many matters that in unregistered conveyancing would appear in the Land Charges Register or on the title, such as restrictive covenants, a spouse's interest under the Matrimonial Homes legislation, and a special form of registering a charge over a land certificate (an equitable charge) known as a deposit of land certificate.
Caution against dealings provides that a third party claiming an interest such as the courts would enforce, shall be notified of any proposed dealing with the land so that he or she might challenge it.
Restrictions are a warning that there is some restriction on the powers of dealing with a registered property by the registered proprietor; eg by a tenant for life.
Inhibitions are rare except for a bankruptcy inhibition, which serves the same purpose as a land charge in unregistered conveyancing.
Entry of a Notice or a Restriction can (and more commonly does) procure a restraint on the uninhibited exercise of the powers of a registered proprietor.
As well as the warnings and restraints of Notices, etc, registered land is always subject to the interests known collectively as "overriding interests" —see p73 below.
(b) Who registers?
When and how?
The person or body having an interest to protect is the one to register as soon as possible after the interest is vested in them.
To register a Caution, complete and file an application (LR form 13) with supporting statutory declaration (LR form 14) in accordance with instructions on the forms.
Lodge in District Land Registry under Land Registry Cover A4 with the prescribed fee.
To register a Notice of a lease (LR form 84); Notice of deposit of land or charge certificate (LR form 85S); Notice of intended deposit on first registration of title (LR form 85B); Notice of intended deposit to accompany a dealing (LR form 85C), lodge under Land Registry Cover A4 or A5.
There is no prescribed form of application for any other form of Notice, but lodge a letter of application under A4 or A5 cover.
A Restriction such as restrictive covenants is commonly contained in a transfer or (before first registration of title) a "Rule 72 transfer" , is noted on the Charges Register on the transaction being registered.
An Inhibition as mentioned above, is rarely used.
No prescribed form of application.
Apply to the Chief Land Registrar or to the court (on counsel's advice).
Avoid if possible.
(c) Who searches?
How and when?
Every buyer, lessee, mortgagee of registered land should search shortly before completion.
Any entries will be disclosed by office copy entries supplied by the seller to the buyer.
Pre-completion search made by every buyer, etc, will reveal any entry made since office copy was issued.
(d) Action on receipt of reply to search If any adverse entry, don't complete until, as buyer's or mortgagee's conveyancer, you are satisfied as to the position.
In appropriate case take up with the seller's conveyancer for clarification or action, and if necessary advise client and take instructions before completing.
5.
The Registers of common land
(a) What the Registers contain The Registers record what the title suggests.
(b) Who registers?
All registrations have been completed.
The Common Registration Act 1965, established the Registers, and that no further registrations can be made but under the Common Land (Rectification of Registers) Act 1989, there is a procedure by which certain land may be removed from the Registers of Common Land and Town and  Village Greens.
These are kept by county councils.
Certain areas, however, are exempt from registration under the Act, including Epping Forest, the New Forest and the Forest of Dean.
For a full list of exempted areas see the Act.
(c) Who searches?
How and when?
Under the Protocol, it is the duty of the seller to search subject to reimbursement by the buyer after exchange.
Search on Form CR21; complete it and plan (the plan is a "must" in all cases) in duplicate, send with fee of £6 to Registrar of Local Land Charges in the London boroughs, or to the county council.
(d) Action on receipt of reply If the search reveals any adverse entry, advise the client accordingly.
6.
The Companies' Registry
Contains the registers of every company, public and private, which comprise their vital statistics and information.
(a) Who registers?
Each company is responsible for its annual return.
It's the obligation of the company to register with the Registrar of Companies particulars of all mortgages and charges (including debentures) and the duty of every mortgagee to ensure compliance with that obligation.
(b) Who searches?
How and when?
Every buyer, lessee and mortgagee of unregistered land from a company before exchange of contracts.
If, in an unregistered title, a company is one of the parties to a title deed, search after exchange, on investigating title; but when buying direct from a company, better to search before exchange to confirm that the company has power to sell under its articles, etc.
Mortgagees of a company should check power to borrow, possible limit on authorised amount of borrowing etc.
All mortgages by companies of registered land must be registered both at the Companies' Registry and the Land Registry.
Search can be made by post (see explanatory leaflet published by the Registrar of Companies), by personal attendance or (the preferable and more  common method) through your law agent.
Larger firms may have direct computer links enabling an instant registered office search.
(c) Action on receipt of reply The circumstances in which searches are made and the variety of information elicited are too wide for a short answer.
Confer with clients on any material information received but not in a way that confuses them.
7.
British Coal
(a) What the records contain British Coal's records show land where underground or opencast workings are (or are contemplated) except for the anomalous Forest of Dean Coalfield, Gloucestershire and area, where ancient private rights of mining are not recorded by British Coal.
(b) Who registers?
British Coal is responsible for maintaining its records.
In the Forest of Dean field local operators register with the Deputy Gaveller and Crown Receiver, Forestry Commission, Crown Offices, Coleford, Gloucestershire.
(c) Who searches?
When and how?
Every buyer, lessee and mortgagee of property in or in the vicinity of a coalmining area should search before exchanging contracts.
Although British Coal pays compensation for damage resulting from mining subsidence there can be no adequate compensation for the emotional loss of one's home or for some material loss.
British Coal can publish notices withdrawing support from specified areas.
Search by letter, or use the prescribed form and enclose a clear and exact plan, to the Survey Department, British Coal relevant area office.
The relevant address can be supplied by British Coal's London Survey Department (Mining Branch: 071_235 2020) or a list of area offices and their addresses and phone numbers is given in Bourne's Handbook of Conveyancing Searches (Sweet & Maxwell) and Silverman's Searches and Enquiries (Butterworths).
(d) Action on receipt of reply Always inform clients of result of search; if any material entry, confer with them and take their instructions before exchanging contracts.
8.
The National Rivers Authority
(a) What information the Authority has Details of all rivers, streams or brooks.
(b) Who registers?
The National Rivers Authority are responsible for maintaining records.
(c) Who searches?
When and how?
Every buyer, lessee and mortgagee of land bounded by, adjacent to or crossed by a river, stream or brook should search before exchange of contracts, to ascertain any rights exercised over the property, liability for repair and maintenance of banks, and liability to flooding.
Apply by letter, with plan, to the regional office—a list of addresses and telephone numbers and a suggested pro forma letter are given in Bourne's Handbook of Conveyancing Searches mentioned under British Coal searches above, and a list of authorities in Silverman, Searches and Enquiries.
(d) Action on receipt of reply to search Advise client in all cases of contents of reply, and if any material information is given, take instructions.
9.
The British Waterways Board
(a) What information the Board has Details of all canals.
(b) Who registers?
The Board and its local offices are responsible for maintaining the records.
(c) Who searches?
When and how?
Every buyer, lessee and mortgagee of property bounded by or adjacent to a canal should search before exchange of contracts by letter, with a plan, for information similar to that sought in the case of rivers.
A list of addresses and a suggested pro forma letter are given in Bourne's Handbook of Conveyancing Searches and in Silverman's Searches and Enquiries referred to under British Coal searches, above.
(d) Action on receipt of reply to search Advise client in all cases of the contents of the reply, and if any material information is given, take instructions.
10.
British Rail
(a) What information the Authority has All rights and obligations attaching to land adjoining a railway.
(b) Who registers?
The Board.
(c) Who searches?
When and how?
Every buyer, lessee and mortgagee of land adjoining a railway should by letter, with a plan, search before exchange of contracts for details of any rights of the Authority over the land or any liability for maintenance of boundaries attaching to it.
A list of addresses of rail offices and telephone numbers of British Rail offices and a suggested pro forma letter are given in Bourne's Handbook of Conveyancing Searches and Silverman's Searches and Enquiries referred to under British Coal searches, above.
(d) Action on receipt of reply to searches Advise client in all cases of the contents of the reply and if any material information is given, take instructions.
11.
Other searches
The following is a list of other searches of more limited application.
(a) Rent officers.
For particulars of a "fair rent" registered when a property is subject to a regulated tenancy.
(b) Rent assessment panels.
For particulars of rents registered in respect of a restricted tenancy.
(c) The Cheshire Brine Subsidence Compensation Board.
For information as to possible risk of subsidence.
(d) The English China Clay Company, Cornwall.
(e) Chancel repairs and corn rents.
No register to search, and in this ancient and complex field there can be quite substantial financial liability.
If your client's property is near an ancient (medieval or earlier) Church of England parish church, advise  him to enquire of the vicar.
Public Record Office leaflet No 61 provides a useful guide.
In any case of possible liability, confer with client.
The Law Commission has recommended that these be abolished after a run-out period of ten years (Law Commission Report No 152, published November 1985).
The Law Society is firmly of the view that this antique and uncertain liability should be abolished forthwith, without any run-out period.
For a reasoned appeal for its recommendation, see letter from the Society to the Permanent Secretary to the Lord Chancellor [1986]Gazette 2 July, 2076. (f) Cornish Chamber of Mines.
For possible old or new mine workings.
(g) Contaminated Land Registers.
Under s143 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990, district councils are obliged to maintain public registers of land that may be contaminated.
Until a standard enquiry form is ready for use, local authorities should be asked if the land is to be included in a Register of Contaminated Land.
Registered title
1.
Background
The term "registered land" is itself a misnomer, although we all use it, from law draftsmen downwards: what is registered, of course, is not land but the estates, interests and obligations of individuals in land.
But for convenience we all use and will continue to use the term.
With effect from 1 December 1990 the entirety of England and Wales became an area of compulsory registration.
Registered land conveyancing is delightfully simple, both as to deducing and investigation of title, and official forms are obtainable that, with minor adaptation, will serve in all but a few cases.
Compared with unregistered conveyancing, the reduction in responsibility and mental anguish is notable; moreover, by no more than lifting the telephone you have at your elbow, in the Land Registry Enquiry Department in Lincoln's Inn Fields and in every District Land Registry, a friendly and expert service, which can usually answer "off the cuff" any questions that perplex you.
2.
The Land Registries
On 2 July 1990 the Land Registry became an Executive Agency.
In 1990 the Government also removed the statutory requirement that the Chief Land Registrar, who will be the Agency's Chief Executive, must be a barrister or solicitor of at least ten years' standing.
An Executive Agency is a non-statutory management device aiming to ensure that the executive functions of the Government are run efficiently and effectively and within available resources.
The work of the Land Registry is carried out by a number of  District Land Registries located throughout the country.
These District Land Registries accept responsibility for the registration of dealings and for first registrations of land within their allotted geographical areas.
The areas that are the responsibility of each District Land Registry vary from time to time, although now that compulsory land registration is completed throughout the country, it may not be necessary to seek further variations in the future.
See the current Longman Directory of Local Authorities in order to know which Land Registry you should approach for the area that is the subject of your conveyancing transaction.
3.
Forms
Every office should keep a portfolio of official forms, obtainable from any law stationer, including all the basic applications for registration, transfers, charge, notice of deposit and intended deposit, applications for search and office copies, etc.
If you practise in an area where rentcharges are common you'll also need a few more forms (see your law stationer's catalogue or the Land Registry list of official forms) dealing with these.
4.
The format of a certificate
Computerisation of the Land Registries is virtually complete, and land and charge certificates have therefore taken on a slightly different style.
They are now smaller than their predecessors and are generally bound in a buff or blue cover.
Even though the certificates have taken on a different appearance, their structure remains the same.
There are three registers.
The first is the Property Register.
This describes the property, usually by reference to an address, and goes on to include any easements or other matters that the property has the benefit of and will also mention any declaration, exception or reservation.
The second register is the Proprietorship Register.
Here, the owner for the time being is recorded.
If there are two owners, there may also be a restriction recorded with regard to the ability of one of them to dispose of the property.
It will depend on the wording of the transfer deed that induces the registration.
The third and final register is the Charges Register.
This will record any restrictive covenants that may be set out in full in the body of the certificate or may more commonly be referred to in a  transfer deed, which may be sewn into the back of the certificate.
Also recorded in the Charges Register are any outstanding mortgages, and these will be listed in order of priority.
Again, the appropriate mortgage deed will be sewn into the back of the certificate.
Neither the certificate, nor any of the enclosures sewn into it, may be altered, other than by the Land Registry, and indeed it is an offence to attempt to do so.
Additional details of other entries that may be found in the certificate (eg notices) are set out later in this chapter.
5.
Types of title and their effect
Acting for the buyer of a leasehold interest, remember that nowadays one seeks to register with an absolute title, instead of the good leasehold title that some time ago was much more common and acceptable.
To obtain this the lessor's title must be strictly investigated and proved.
If the lessor's title is already registered as absolute, this is a simple matter—but remember to have in the contract for sale or your requisitions on title, a special condition that before or immediately after completion the lessor will lodge or cause to be lodged in the Registry the land or charge certificate of his title, and will furnish the buyer with the deposit reference.
If, however, the lessor's title is itself only registered as good leasehold (if, for example, the lessor is granting an underlease out of an older leasehold title) you may not be able to obtain a better title than good leasehold for the underlease; a position that a mortgagee will normally accept if there's no alternative.
Now that many good leasehold titles are quite a few years old, however, this might well be the time to apply to the Registry to convert a good leasehold to an absolute title.
See also "First Registration with Absolute Leasehold Title" , Registered Land Practice Notes, p1.
Sometimes a freehold title may be registered as "qualified" or possessory (eg a record of squatters rights only).
Whilst this occurrence is rare, it is important to keep a look-out.
6.
Office copies
Application for office copies of register and title plan are now lodged on Form 109 pursuant to Rule 2 of the Land Registration (Open Register) Rules 1990.
The form should be addressed to the appropriate District Land Registry and should contain the title number and a full description of the property by reference to the necessary elements of its address.
Persons making the application should complete their name and address and should indicate what they are applying for.
The appropriate fee should either accompany the application form, or will be debited to your firm's credit account where appropriate.
There is no longer any need to have the authority of the registered proprietor to inspect the register or indeed to obtain office copy entries, and fees are now levied pursuant to the Land Registration Fees (No 2) Order 1990 (SI1990 No 2029).
7.
Searches
The key to security: a search made by a buyer or mortgagee with priority receives 30 working days' priority against any subsequent application—that's around six weeks' priority.
But so many applications for an official search are rejected that the Registries have a printed list of four frequent reasons for rejection, as follows:(1) no plan on search of part;(2) plan lodged does not enable the property searched to be identified on the filed plan;(3) the estate plan referred to has not been approved by the Registry for use with Form 94B;(4) approval of the estate plan has been withdrawn, therefore any application for a search must be accompanied by a plan.
A new procedure (Land Registration (Official Searches) Rules 1988) provides for a search against a pending first registration, which gives priority to prospective buyers and chargees, and enables them to ascertain what other applications may be pending.
In the matter of searches the only search necessary before completion is against the title, on the appropriate Form 94A (search relating to whole of land in a title) or 94B (search relating to part).
In a search of part, the land searched against must in general be defined by a plan unless the seller has lodged an officially approved plan of his or her development in the Registry: see official form of search (Form 94B).
The form is simple and foolproof if you follow its wording and directions carefully.
The form should name the registered proprietor in full.
As mentioned above, the authority is now commonly given in a special condition in the contract itself.
No fee is payable if request for search is made by post.
Searches can be  made by telephone or by post.
Searches by telephone do not carry any priority and in practice, therefore, they should be followed by the usual postal application in order to preserve the priority period whilst undertaking subsequent formalities.
Telephone searches cost £6 payable upon quoting your firm's key number.
If you've had office copy entries, the date from which to search is that given at the foot of each page, when the office copy entries were issued; your search will then reveal any entries that may have been made since that date.
If only an ordinary copy (not an office copy) has been delivered to you, then the date to search from is that on which the land certificate was last checked with the entries on the Register, this being the date given in the land certificate which will be supplied by the seller on appropriate requisition— "What is the date on which the land certificate was last compared with the entries on the register?" 
Or if in doubt, you can search from the last date of any registration disclosed (of registration of the seller or of a mortgage, etc).
Or ask your seller to obtain and let you have office copies, which will almost certainly be an obligation under the contract.
Make your title search four or five days or a week before completion (five days if you think there may be a pending registration), to enable you to complete well within the period of priority that your search gives you—but remember that to gain full protection you must not only complete the purchase within that period, as with unregistered title, but must also within the same period lodge your application to register the transfer or mortgage.
Every District Land Registry sends its replies by first-class mail, often by return of post, to all searches received by first-class post; therefore it should be your invariable practice to send your requisition by first-class mail, too; otherwise, being delivered by second delivery (and sometimes later than that), it will only be dealt with the following day.
In response to your application you'll receive, on the back of the form you"ve sent to the Registry, an official certificate of search that will reveal whether any entry or pending entry has been made since the date from which you searched.
This official search serves two vital purposes for a buyer:(a) it gives an assurance that no adverse entry has been made since the date searched from; and (b) it gives the buyer priority for the registration of transfer (or mortgage, when a prospective mortgagee is searching) provided the buyer's own transfer or mortgage is lodged in the  Registry before 11 am on the thirtieth working day from the date of the certificate.
This gives the buyer a period of at least six weeks' priority ( "working day" don't include Saturdays, Sundays or public holidays).
The priority is only available for a buyer defined as a buyer for valuable consideration, or a mortgagee.
If the latter makes a search, the priority extends to cover the transfer, too, or the lease where there is a lease instead of a transfer; but note that the converse isn't true, so the mortgagee must always search, and shouldn't rely on any search made by the borrower, who can properly rely on the search made by his or her mortgagee.
So if you act for both, search in the name of the mortgagee; if the mortgagee is separately represented, and you are satisfied that a search has been made, you may think it unnecessary to search too, if you are confident that the mortgagee will lodge the application to register transfer and mortgage promptly.
It may be that there is some delay after completion, which makes it impossible for the buyer's conveyancers to lodge their transfer within the period of priority.
In that case make a second search before the first has expired.
When delay may result from the need to adjudicate stamp duty on a transfer, the procedure first mentioned should be followed.
The certificate of search conveniently gives both the date at which the search was made, and the date on which the period of priority will expire—and note, again, that to have the protection of that priority you must not only complete your purchase or mortgage, but also lodge the application to register the transaction (LR form A4 or A5) within the priority period—hence the virtue of the procedure for effecting registration when there is unavoidable delay mentioned above.
When buying a property on a registered building estate or other development in respect of which the layout plan has been lodged and officially approved, make your search on Form 94B, when (unlike other searches against part only of a title) reference to the approved plan avoids the need to enclose a plan with your search.
Remember, if the buyer is borrowing on the security of a mortgage of the registered property, that the buyer is not yet the registered proprietor, and accordingly a land charges search in bankruptcy on the appropriate land charges form should be made against the buyer on behalf of his or her mortgagee in the unregistered Land Charges Register.
8.
Deducing and investigating title
If in a compulsory area the title is still unregistered, deducing and investigation of the unregistered title proceeds in the normal way with only one additional requirement imposed by the system: an additional search, which you ought to make when buying property with an unregistered title, namely, against the "index map and parcels index" .
This is a map maintained by the Registry, based on the Ordnance Survey map, which shows every registered property and all land subject to cautions against first registration.
It is open to public inspection; as described above an official certificate may be obtained by application on Form 96 to confirm the land you are buying is not already registered; and to confirm there's no caution or priority notice against first registration registered against it.
In urban areas, a plan will seldom be necessary because there the local authorities are obliged to notify the Registry of all changes of streets and house numbers; in country districts the property should be described by reference to a plan.
When lodging the papers with your application for first registration of title on behalf of a buyer remember that the abstract must be marked as examined, even though it consists of an epitome of title and photo-copies of documents.
When acting for a buyer remember to make spare copies of the conveyance and any mortgage for use as certified copies on registration, as mentioned above.
If the title's already registered, then as either seller or buyer you begin to reap the benefits of the system.
As a seller, deducing title will consist in almost all cases merely of supplying the buyer's conveyancer with office copy entries on the Register and filed plan (preferably already delivered with the draft contract).
That's all: no laborious abstracting, no checking of old abstracts to see that they comprise what you"ve contracted to give, no checking of old schedules of documents against the deeds, no copying of documents.
The Land Registry has done that.
Acting for a buyer in such a case, your investigation is normally limited to perusing the copy entries, and the registered lease in the case of a leasehold title, and you will probably have done this before exchange of contracts.
Matters of town planning, of course, and all local land charges that are exempt from registration are the same as in unregistered conveyancing, and if there has been any development of the property you'll need to satisfy yourself before exchange that formal town planning and by-law permits will be handed over or  inspected on completion.
And the other matters that fall to the conveyancer to arrange will remain unchanged.
Acting for a buyer, check the filed plan with the contract plan, if any (you'll have done this before exchange, if entries and plan were delivered with the draft contract); but normally, except on the sale or lease of a part only of a property, the supply of a copy of the filed plan by the seller avoids the need for a contract plan.
Then work steadily through all the entries, noting and raising requisitions on any matters that call for this.
Any mortgages affecting the seller's title will be revealed by the Charges Register, and will give rise to some such requisition as this: The registered charge (entries nos on the Charges Register) must be discharged on or before completion —or if the mortgagee is a building society, add: or the usual undertaking in that behalf handed over on completion.
Note, as a seller's conveyancer, the danger of the common printed requirement that all charges shall be redeemed—p135.
A notice of deposit or notice of intended deposit is not dealt with by a discharge of mortgage (normally LR form 53), but by a "withdrawal" thereof.
When the whole of the charge secured by that entry is to be repaid the form of withdrawal endorsed on the back of the lender's official notice of deposit is completed and handed over; when the notice of deposit relates to other property as well as that being sold, and so will continue in respect of that other property after completion, the notice of deposit must of course be retained by the lender.
Form 86 or a quite informal letter is then sufficient—such as: We hereby consent to the property known as [shown edged red on the accompanying plan]being part of the land comprised in the above title being transferred free from the [Intended]Notice of Deposit registered on the But some banks (which favour this type of security in appropriate cases) have their own favoured form of withdrawal; acting for a seller you'll satisfy yourself on this point and obtain the necessary withdrawal in time to hand over on completion.
And there's also an official (though not compulsory) form of application to withdraw notice of deposit of which a supply could be kept in your office—Form 86.
Acting for a buyer in such a case the appropriate requisition is: Withdrawal of Notice of Deposit (entry no on the charges register) relating to the property must be handed over on completion.
Acting for a seller on the development of an estate, large or small, registered title has great advantages, particularly in respect of plans.
When the lay-out of the estate is settled send two prints to the appropriate Land Registry (no form necessary, only a covering letter).
The plan should show plot numbers, but a warning is necessary here: builders have a way of changing boundaries, plot numbers and details of plans without informing their solicitors.
Warn them that you must be notified of any changes at all, so that in such an event a revised estate plan can be lodged at the Registry in substitution for the previous one.
Not a bad idea to remind them of this more than once during the development of an estate; and remember, acting for either seller or buyer, that on the granting of a long lease of a flat a plan is essential.
Here again, builders sometimes have a way of varying the internal party walls without telling anybody, sometimes plaintively observing (as the troubles that ensue from this fall about their lawyer's ears), "But the contract said the plan was only for identification," and see head 6 above as to plans.
When such a plan has been lodged it will only be necessary for a buyer to search against the plot he is buying on the appropriate form for a search of part (Form 94B), indicating thereon the plot or flat number "as shown on the estate development plan lodged in the Registry on the" —no plan being then necessary as would be the case if no estate plan had been lodged.
Lastly, when acting for a buyer prepare your land registry cover or application form (which you'll require when lodging your application to register the transfer or for first registration of title, as the case may be) at the same time as you make your requisitions and prepare the draft conveyance or transfer and other documents preferably in that buyer's package described at p22.
9.
The transfer deed
In a simple sale of the whole of a seller's property, the title to which is registered, the form of transfer of whole will apply; it's so simple that commonly one dictates it "off the cuff" , and the top copy is made on front of Form 19 or Form 19(JP) so that it can be used for that purpose.
Remember to complete or delete, as appropriate, the certificate of value incorporated in all printed forms.
It isn't invariable practice amongst conveyancers even to keep a third copy of a simple transfer  for themselves (but always keep one if it contains restrictions, or the grant or reservation of rights, etc, or if you will require one for your mortgagee's solicitors; normally one prepares top and carbon, both of which are sent to the seller's conveyancers with a suggestion that the top copy, too, should be retained and used as the engrossment if its terms are approved.
In the case of a joint purchase it will save time if, as buyers' conveyancer, you have them execute the engrossment print before you send it to the other side.
A transfer of part of land in a registered title is a simple matter, too, but requires a plan to define the land (and see remarks already made as to the need for accuracy) and the document may also, of course, contain mutual rights and obligations such as rights of way, of support, of liability for maintenance of common parts, covenants to observe restrictions, etc.
A transfer normally requires signing only by the seller.
When should it be signed by the buyer?
Like a conveyance, in three cases:(1) When the purchase is by two or more persons, when they must sign in order to commit themselves to the terms on which they hold.
For joint buyers there's an official form of transfer (Form 19(JP)), having attestation clauses for sellers and buyers.
The form includes a declaration to be completed according to whether a survivor of the buyers can or cannot give a valid receipt for purchase monies.
This provision in joint purchases—can the survivor give a valid receipt on a subsequent sale? —is also included in land registry covers for dealings with whole or part of a registered property.
Before Form 19(JP) was introduced this was often—still is, sometimes—relied on to establish the position.
But preferable to have it stated under the buyers' own signatures, and by you on taking instructions.
(2) If the transfer contains covenants to be observed by the buyer, he or she must execute the document in order to be bound, and seen to be bound, by its terms.
(3) If the buyer is to give the seller an indemnity against breach of covenants under which the seller might have continuing liability (eg the original lessee under a lease or a seller who has previously given a personal covenant not limited to his or her period of ownership), then again, to bind the buyer to the covenant, the buyer must execute the document.
But avoid unnecessary covenants of indemnity; they should only be given if someone is truly under a continuing liability.
Acting for a buyer, look closely—don't accept a seller's facile  inclusion of such a covenant, perhaps taken from an unsuitable precedent.
Clarify the point before exchange of contracts and avoid your clients becoming liable even after they"ve parted with the property on a subsequent sale.
When your client is buying land with an unregistered title within an area of compulsory registration, you will seek a good unregistered title with a root at least 15 years old.
That's sufficient in law, although at least 20 years is desirable as validating old recitals of title, etc.
Be careful to ensure that all the original deeds, or examined copies or abstracts thereof, will be handed over, or yourself be very thorough in examining the title, because the Registry normally requires all copies or abstracts to be marked as examined against the original (including photocopies).
When, acting for a buyer, you come to draft the document that will vest the unregistered property in your client, this can be either a conveyance or a form of transfer adapted to the particular property and title.
If a "Rule 72" transfer of unregistered land is used, the Registry only requires the original document to be lodged (except when fresh restrictive covenants are imposed) without a copy; but it's still the preferred method (and recommended by the Law Society) to lodge with the original transfer a certified copy, when the copy will be returned with the new land certificate.
If you act for a mortgagee on such a purchase of unregistered land, you will again need a certified copy of the mortgage document; so be wise in time and have a spare carbon or print (if you are using a building society or other printed form) prepared when engrossing.
Remember that whenever either a conveyance, lease or transfer defines the land by reference to a plan attached to the document, the plan must be signed (sealed and attested by director and secretary in the case of a company) by all parties—except that the conveyancer for buyers can sign on their behalf if they state the capacity in which they sign it: "solicitor for the transferee." 
When, as conveyancers for a buyer, you send the engrossment of the conveyance, lease or transfer to the other side for execution, it's wise to remind them to have the plan signed (or sealed, as the case may be) by the seller—and even then it's remarkable how often the requirement can be overlooked.
But it's vital, because, as mentioned above, a seller's conveyancer (unlike a buyer's) can't sign on behalf of his or her client; and if on completion, checking the execution of a transfer on behalf of the buyer, you find this requirement has not been observed, you should refuse to complete until it has.
10.
Overriding interests
Overriding interests are the Achilles' heel of registered land conveyancing, whose "principal object…is to confer certainty" (Ruoff & Roper, The Law and Practice of Registered Conveyancing,(4th ed) Sweet & Maxwell, p43).
But not all the skills and ingenuity of law draftsmen could wholly circumvent the deviousness of ancient land law.
By the Land Registration Act 1925 (s70(1)): All registered land shall…be deemed to be subject to such of the following overriding interests as may be for the time being subsisting in reference thereto.
There follows a list of these interests, some of which are not of frequent significance for the conveyancer, or will be covered by the searches discussed in Chapter 4.
The complete list is printed inside the cover of every certificate, and the following are samples only: rights of common, customary rights, public rights, right of sheepwalk, rights of way, rights of water, liability to repair highways by reason of tenure, liability to repair the chancel of any church, liability to repair embankments and sea or river walls, rights under local land charges, rights of fishing and sporting, manorial and seignorial rights of all descriptions (until extinguished), leases for any term not exceeding 21 years granted at a rent without taking a fine, etc (s70(1) (a)—(k)).
But it's s70(1) (g) that's the nightmare of conveyancers: The rights of every person in actual occupation of the land or in receipt of the rents and profits thereof save where enquiry is made of such person and the rights are not disclosed.
So how do buyers ensure that they will not, as they walk into their new home, be saddled with an unwanted bedfellow (to mix a couple of metaphors)?
There's no other register they can search as in the case, for example, of local land charges.
Little consolation for the frustrated buyer that the seller has contracted to give vacant possession of the whole property: a successful claim to damages might not be your client's idea of a happy home.
So enquiry and inspection of a property must always be made—see specimen letter to the client.
There's really no absolute guarantee of security.
The preliminary enquiry of a seller as to what other persons occupy the property is one precaution.
It's wise, when the seller is married, to have him or (more commonly) her execute the contract (see special condition J) and this even where the other spouse is absent from the property.
And land charge Class F (unregistered title) or a notice (registered  title) give notice of a prior claim under the Matrimonial Homes Act.
With all this, and with conveyancers, if not always their clients, being professionally responsible, the chance of disaster is really extremely rare.
11.
Notices, Cautions, Restrictions
Notices may be entered on the Register of Title to protect a wide variety of interests—for example, an estate contract, a grant of easements over registered land, a lease or agreement for a lease which is not an overriding interest, and many other matters that it is desired shall come to the notice of all persons dealing with the land.
The application to register is by letter (no prescribed form for the purpose) and must be accompanied by the document creating the interest and a certified copy or examined abstract thereof; the land certificate must also be produced, or if there is a registered charge the charge certificate if the chargee is to be bound.
The consent of any cautioner must be lodged and the prescribed fee paid.
Bankruptcy of a registered proprietor, and the interests of creditors, are protected by a Bankruptcy inhibition and a creditors' notice respectively.
The liquidator of a company can have notice of his appointment entered on the Register.
The registration of a notice is a friendly proceeding carried out, in general, with the co-operation of the registered proprietor.
When that person is unwilling to be a party to the application, however, there is a hostile procedure available by the caution against dealings.
This is made on LR form 63, signed by the cautioner or his or her solicitor and accompanied by a statutory declaration (printed on the same form).
The interest protected must be such as the court would enforce against the land or charge, and the cautioner must be a person interested in any land or charge registered in the name of another person.
Examples of interests that can be so protected are the following:(1) Beneficial owner in fee simple;(2) Person beneficially entitled to the lease referred to;(3) Tenant for life within the meaning of the Settled Land Act 1925;(4) Purchaser under a contract for sale;(5) Plaintiff in an action in the Chancery Division of the High Court of Justice;(6) Equitable mortgagee under a memorandum of charge.
A further example is the registration of either a notice or a caution to give priority to a charge and bridge the gap between its creation and registration.
The effect of registering a caution against dealings is that no dealing will be registered without the cautioner's consent until the expiration of a "warning off" notice (14 working days) served on the cautioner by the Chief Land Registrar.
Within the period of the notice the cautioner must withdraw or justify the claim.
Last amongst these devices for the protection of interests in registered land, is the restriction on the powers of registered proprietors to deal with their land; for example, that partnership property shall not be disposed of after the death of one of the partners without the consent of his or her personal representatives; or that no disposition is to be registered without the consent of the proprietor of a registered charge (this last one a not uncommon precaution of building societies).
Application to register a restriction must be made on LR form 75 (fee £30) signed by the applicant or the applicant's solicitor; the land or charge certificate must (in all but exceptional circumstances) accompany the application.
As to interests not requiring protection by noting on the Register ( "overriding interests" ), see head 10 above.
12.
Minor interests
Minor interests are interests in land that can't be entered on a registered title, but which are not overriding interests such as have just been described, for they can be overridden by the registered proprietor in any disposition for value.
They are defined by the Land Registration Act 1925, s3(b) as: The interests not capable of being disposed of or created by registered dispositions and capable of being overridden (whether or not a purchaser has notice thereof) by the proprietor unless protected as provided by the Act.
The protection referred to is the protection afforded by registration of a Notice, etc (see above); minor interests are in fact mainly what would be described as equitable interests in unregistered conveyancing.
They include in the case of land held by trustees for sale, all interests and powers capable of being overridden by the trustees for sale.
In the case of settled land, all interests and powers capable of being overridden by the tenant for life or the statutory  owner.
They also include the rights of beneficiaries when any fiduciary owner is the registered proprietor; the rights and interest of a buyer who has asked for registration of title in the name of a nominee; and the right of a buyer whose contract has not been registered on the seller's title.
So acting for a buyer, if no protective entries appear on the Register you need have no qualms; if they do, you will of course question them by requisition or otherwise.
Acting for the owner of a minor interest, if protection is required this will be by registration of a Notice, caution, restriction or (rarely) inhibition.
One of the commonest and most important is a contract for the buyer of a property, protected by a Notice (the equivalent, in unregistered conveyancing, of the registration on the Central Land Charges Register of an Estate Contract).
It's not common practice to register notice of a contract in all cases, but when, for example, there's an unusually long deferred completion date, or when your buyer-client suspects the good faith of the seller, or if there is a contract by correspondence, or for any other special reason peculiar to the particular transaction, a Notice should be seriously considered and the client consulted and advised.
13.
Positive covenants
Positive covenants don't run with the land; therefore they're not registrable.
Original covenantors (the first buyers) who continue liable under their covenants should therefore be protected by a covenant of indemnity against breach from subsequent buyers.
But it's easy for a seller's conveyancer to overlook positive covenants.
If such covenants are mixed with negative covenants, which appear on the Register, or if they are contained in a document that is bound up in the certificate, they will be apparent, and a conveyancer acting for an original covenantor who is selling should peruse these covenants, providing in the contract for a covenant of indemnity against breach of any positive covenants by the buyer (see below);(see special condition K, 34).
Acting for a buyer, see warning above as to liability after a re-sale.
Another case where a covenant of indemnity by a third or subsequent buyer is appropriate, arises when the first buyer (A) has entered into positive covenants, and as the original covenantor will continue liable after selling; A therefore takes a covenant of indemnity from A's buyer (B), not limited to A's period of  ownership; B therefore takes from B's buyer (C) a covenant against liability under B's covenant with A. Very complicated, but logical.
If a seller's unregistered title on a purchase is subsequently registered, the seller's conveyancer, on a sale, should peruse the original conveyance to the seller (returned with the land or charge certificate) for positive covenants.
In the case of positive covenants contained in transfers of registered property, it's the practice of the Registry to bind up in the land or charge certificate, particulars of such covenants, because the transfer containing them is retained in the Registry, and so the registered proprietor's solicitor could otherwise easily overlook them.
Specimen covenant: The Transferee hereby covenants with the Transferor by way of indemnity only that [so long as he the Transferee is the registered proprietor of the property hereby transferred]he will observe and perform the [positive]covenants contained or referred to in Entry No 1 of the charges register of the said Title.
14.
Fees and arrangements for their payments
Some fees change from time to time: an account of fees at the time of going to press might be misleading.
Keep the latest Land Registration Fee Order in the office.
If in doubt as to a fee, telephone Land Registry Enquiries.
Credit account facilities offered to solicitors for the payment of Land Registry fees are a convenience in more than one way.
A credit account avoids errors and saves time.
Apply for facilities to the Accounts Section, HM Land Registry, Burrington Way, Plymouth, PL5 3LP.
15.
Avoiding errors
Treat the application forms, whether for a dealing or application for first registration, with the care they demand: in the end you'll thereby save yourself and Land Registry officials much time and trouble.
Year after year the annual report of the Chief Land Registrar refers to errors by solicitors in their applications, a source of delay, expense and frustration for all concerned.
The most common error by solicitors concerns the incorrect calculation of fees, and the following also appear frequently:(1) Failure to sign certified copies;(2) Failure to sign application forms;(3) Using a facsimile signature on application forms;(4) Leaving uncompleted spaces in building society and other mortgages;(5) Failure to include, on application for first registration, a land charges search against the seller;(6) Failure to lodge a probate or letters of administration, or to mark the abstract thereof as examined.
This conclusion of a conveyancing transaction demands careful and unhurried attention, free from distraction, if the matter is to be satisfactorily disposed of without unhappy aftermath.
16.
Merger of freehold and leasehold titles
Merger can be applied for when the freehold and leasehold estates become vested in the same person, whether or not both titles are registered.
Application can also be made when the freehold title is registered but not the leasehold, when the leasehold is registered but not the freehold, and when the leasehold is either registered or unregistered and application is being made for first registration of the freehold title.
A fee is payable for each title closed unless an ad valorem fee is payable on a linked transaction (such as the purchase of the freehold or leasehold title) when no fee is payable.
When you act for buyers who intend that a leasehold interest shall merge in the freehold (leaseholders buying the freehold reversion on their lease, or freeholders buying the lease to which their title is subject) it's convenient to express the intention to merge in the transfer or other instrument vesting the second estate in the owner of the first if this is intended, but beware of such an application in the case of a flat—if, for example, your client owns a leasehold flat and buys the freehold of the whole building in which it is situate.
In such a case, don't merge: a merger would create a "flying freehold" , which is anathema to a mortgagee and would prejudice your client and probably any future sale when no building society, bank or other mortgagee is likely to advance on such security.
17.
Estate conveyances
Registration of title has great advantages in simplifying conveyancing when an estate is to be developed by the sale or lease of individual plots or flats.
It's desirable to lodge at the District  Registry an approved estate plan (two copies); searches by individual buyers can then be made by reference to the plot number alone.
A leaflet on the subject of registered building estates (C 139) can be obtained free, in reasonable numbers (so that copies can be supplied to buyers' conveyancers), from any District Registry, and its terms considered at the inception of any estate development.
18.
Devolution on death
Since registration is only compulsory on a purchase for value it isn't necessary to register the devolution of unregistered property on a death.
If the title is registered it still isn't essential to register the devolution, because personal representatives can deal with a registered title without themselves being first registered as proprietors; but if the property is not to be disposed of forthwith, either on sale or by a vesting assent, it's desirable to register the devolution to the personal representatives as soon as practicable.
When personal representatives sell without first effecting registration of their title, proof thereof and of the death of the registered proprietor must of course be lodged: a copy of the grant of probate or letters of administration certified as a true copy by the seller's conveyancers (when acting for a buyer you should make this requirement the subject of one of your requisitions on title) is sufficient evidence.
Death of one or more joint owners or of a sole proprietor is proved by lodging a certificate of death, or a copy of such a certificate certified as a true copy by the seller's conveyancer, with the appropriate application.
19.
Expediting registration
By paying a fee of £25 (or more, if so directed by the Registrar) it's possible to expedite a registration; in such a case, if a survey isn't required and no Land Registry requisitions are necessary, registration normally takes place within 14 to 21 days.
Expedition is useful in the case of property being resold very shortly after the unregistered title has been purchased, when it's desired to give the new purchaser a registered title and completion is to take place before the title would normally be registered.
Include the item "Expedition fee—£25" in the fees panel; and it may facilitate the matter, as well as showing courtesy towards the Land Registrar and his staff, if a covering letter with the application cover tells briefly why expedition is required.
Land Registry officials are no  more than human.
And don't forget to charge the fee in your bill of costs.
The procedure is often of great value, but it's suggested that for two reasons it should only be used in urgent cases—both out of consideration for Land Registry staff, and to avoid the possibility of their being swamped by too many such applications, resulting in delay, which would defeat the whole purpose of the operation.
Over-use is counter-productive and prejudices the whole profession.
20.
Old title deeds
Some of these should often be preserved; use intelligent discretion, remembering that they belong to the client.
Registration of title is no guarantee of boundaries, showing general boundaries only, although the clarity and accuracy of the filed plan (based as it is on the Ordnance Survey) is commonly superior to most of the plans you'll find on the unregistered title.
Old deeds can be very useful for such a purpose, and certainly any containing plans should in general be retained.
Further, the plans may indicate the ownership of fences and so may help in solving problems in that connection.
It's also important to preserve original documents imposing restrictive covenants, granting or reserving easements, etc, since the terms of these are often not set out fully on the Register, and reference to them, and to the exact terms of a covenant, may be necessary at a later date.
You may not need to keep very old deeds, engrossed in manuscript on real parchment, often with impressive seals: but your client will often much appreciate them, so remember to send him any such documents.
The county archivist may be interested in them, too, subject to the client's rights.
But don't retain unnecessary papers such as old local searches—the only one worth having is your own recent search.
Or, without consideration of their contents, old drafts, all the litter which a slovenly conveyancer will leave with the papers.
Be careful, however, not to throw away the baby with the bath water.
The Law Society's non-contentious business committee has given guidance on this subject, referring to its careful consideration in Cordery on Solicitors (8th ed, 1988, Butterworths, p99).
The effect of the committee's pronouncement is that documents prepared for the client and paid for by him (drafts, deeds and documents, etc) belong to the client.
So do documents prepared by a third party and sent to the solicitor in the course of his retainer.
Documents prepared by the solicitor for his or her own benefit or protection belong to that solicitor; so do documents sent by the client, which are intended to pass to him or her.
Lastly, under the Value Added Tax Act 1983, Sched 7, para 7(2), as amended, records and papers relevant to VAT liability must be kept for six years.
Proceedings after exchange of contracts
The three most probable sources of delay will by now have passed: obtaining a local land charges certificate of search (unless with your client's approval you've sacrificed this sacred cow for a personal search); the buyer obtaining a mortgage advance; and the survey report, which both the buyer and the buyer's mortgagee will have required.
1.
The traditional system
Under the traditional system of conveyancing, it was common not to deal with matters that were germane to the legal title until after contracts had been exchanged.
This particularly related to unregistered land.
In the above circumstances, there would simply be a special condition attaching to the draft contract, which would recite the deed that was to be the root of title, and the matter would be left at that until after contracts were exchanged.
When contracts were exchanged, the conditions of sale would stipulate the time for the delivery of an abstract and thereafter the time for the raising of requisitions upon it.
Even before the introduction of the Law Society's Protocol, it was becoming common practice for evidence of title to be supplied before contracts were exchanged.
Indeed, it was usual practice where the land was already registered, and buyers' conveyancers would call for proof of title at the outset of a new conveyancing transaction.
Whether title is dealt with before or after exchange of contracts, the procedure for investigating title is exactly the same, and the conveyancer is recommended to proceed with the utmost caution, even in these modern commercial times.
If land is already registered, and the seller's conveyancers have supplied office copy entries on the Register, the details of the title can  be rapidly assimilated by the experienced conveyancer, and if there are any errors or omissions, these can be quickly spotted.
This may not be so where the title is unregistered.
Sometimes, the legal title can be lengthy, and where land has remained in one family for many years, as is often the case with agricultural land, the chain of title can be complex.
When dealing with unregistered agricultural land, it will take time to examine the title carefully.
This time must be set aside before proceeding to raise requisitions.
The need to deal with complicated unregistered titles will slowly disappear, but at the time of writing, it is very important to be able to read through an unregistered title and spot any errors that should form the subject-matter of requisitions on title.
2.
The TransAction system
Under the new system, delivery of the evidence of title is always necessary as part of the original package supplied by the seller's conveyancer at the commencement of the transaction.
The preparation of the title is one of those tasks that can be undertaken in advance of a transaction being negotiated, and should form part of the early work of a seller's conveyancer.
If there is a defect in the title, it is as well that it be dealt with and agreed from early on in the transaction, and if the defect cannot be put right, it may be necessary to make arrangements for a defective title indemnity policy.
Again, this would now be dealt with before contracts are exchanged.
One of the main practical impacts of the TransAction system is that almost all the conveyancing is now dealt with before exchange of contracts, and this means that the tasks that have to be undertaken in between exchange and completion are relatively minor, thereby reducing the average time between exchange and completion to two weeks or even less.
The precise timing will depend on the convenience of one's clients and the need to obtain a mortgage advance cheque.
Institutions vary in the speed with which they are able to dispatch the necessary monies.
3.
An abstract of title
Now that the entirety of England and Wales forms an area of compulsory registration, the preparation of an abstract of title is becoming less and less common.
In order to deduce title to unregistered land, you need to locate a good root of title that is at least 15 years old.
If you cannot find such a deed, you have to keep going back in time until one is located.
A good root would preferably comprise a conveyance on sale, or if not, a legal mortgage.
Wills, leases and assents are among those documents that do not form a good root of title.
Sometimes, a conveyancer may be asked to accept a vesting assent as a root of title, but this is not very satisfactory.
Having located a good root of title, you then need to form a chain of title from the date of that document right up to the present time.
Having selected the deeds and documents from the deeds packet, you then need to photocopy them, and pin them together with a front sheet, which is entitled "Epitome of Title" .
An epitome of title is basically a list of the copy documents behind it, and the columns on the epitome should be appropriately completed, with each document being numbered consecutively.
Prior to the invention of photocopying machines, the preparation of an epitome of title in the way described above was not possible, and this meant that abstracts of title had to be created by our predecessors, who were in fact charged with the duty of tracing title back over 30 or 40 years or more.
The creation of an abstract of title is an art-form in itself, and one that has now largely died out.
What happened was that each of the documents comprising the abstract were listed on large abstract sheets, and a special form of shorthand was devised in order to prevent the need for each of the deeds and documents to be set out in full.
As an aside, readers should note that if these abstracts or epitomes are marked by the seller's conveyancer as being true copies of the originals, and that marking is then signed and dated, the abstract or epitome will form an original title, and this is common practice when dealing with a sale of part.
In the case of selling part, the seller does, of course, retain the original deeds packet.
In creating the epitome of title, it is important to include land charge searches, as well as the old conveyances and mortgage deeds, and, where appropriate, it would also be necessary to include: marriage certificates to deal with apparent changes of name; death certificates to deal with the death of one of two joint tenants; a grant of probate to deal with the death of the owner and the appointment of executors; and any other document that is necessary to prove a coherent line from the root deed.
Clearly, it is not conveyancing practice to include local searches and planning permissions within an abstract of title.
4.
Office copy entries
It is important to apply for these when acting for a seller, as soon as you know your client's title number.
The fee will be £6 and the application should be made to the appropriate District Land Registry for the area in which the property is situated.
It is best to obtain a complete set of office copies, to include any transfer deed that may be filed at the Land Registry and a copy of the filed plan.
The office copy entries replace entirely the deeds and documents of title described above.
However, the old deeds and documents of title may be helpful in resolving any detailed matters that do not appear as part of the land registration process.
5.
Investigation of title
In a busy office, time is the main difficulty in perusing a possibly lengthy abstract, although the length of most has been greatly reduced since the statutory minimum length of title was reduced to 15 years.
The chief dangers are that some flaw in the title will be overlooked, or that requisitions on title will not be delivered within the stipulated time (now six working days after delivery of abstract), so that a seller's conveyancer might plead this breach of the conditions of sale as an excuse for not clearing up a genuine difficulty.
In examining an unregistered title it's a help to make "Notes on Title" , which are really an abstract of the abstract.
The virtues of this procedure, which doesn't lengthen but in fact shortens your investigation, are as follows:(a) The actual investigation is simplified, as you don't have to keep turning back an unwieldy abstract to see which documents contained restrictions, whether the seller named in one conveyance was the buyer named in the previous deed, etc.
The method is of special advantage in cases when a seller delivers an epitome of title accompanied by photographic copies of the title documents, some perhaps complicated and lengthy; in such a case it may be expedient to make your own "notes on title" on the epitome itself to save duplication of documents.
(b) It prevents the overlooking of such standard matters of enquiry as the existence of undischarged mortgages, covenants for production covering all the title deeds which will not be handed over, the proper stamping of documents, etc.  (c) It makes the dictation of requisitions on title hours or days after your examination a simple matter (although preferably this should be done at once—one bite at the cherry), and obviates the chance of missing any points you observed on investigation.
The common practice of putting pencil notes on the abstract itself is to be deprecated as defacing an important document, and it is also easy to miss these notes on an old and tattered abstract that has already been marked by previous investigators.
(d) You'll have on your file a permanent record of the title and all its principal features in a much more manageable form than that of an abstract; your notes will remain with your papers for future reference; and from them at a later date you should be able, if necessary, to answer any questions or difficulties that may arise.
(e) This record also saves time when you come to deal with the replies to your requisitions, and to decide whether or not they're satisfactory.
It's a frustrating exercise to wander backwards and forwards through a full-sized abstract, its plans and pages held together by a thread or a rusty pin, pursuing some trivial and tedious point.
Your notes on title will save you some, at least, of this sort of irritation.
(f) If, perhaps years later, your client sells the property now being bought, you'll still find your notes on title helpful in deciding on the root of title, in preparing the draft contract, and in dealing with your buyer's requisitions on title.
To this end it's sometimes useful, when an abstract is unduly long, to mark on your notes on title the document that might become a future root.
(g) The notes are also useful for the preparation of any report on title that may be required for your client's bank, building society or other mortgagee, the form of which sometimes requires you to state the last purchase price, etc. (h) Your notes on title will help you deal with any possible requisitions by the Land Registry and will also indicate at a glance deeds containing restrictive covenants, easements or plans, which should be retained after registration as giving fuller information and exact wording on matters of possible dispute.
In preparing notes on title points to observe are as follows:(1) Year, date and stamp duty go in the left-hand margin.
(2) Give a simple description of the document: eg conveyance  instead of indenture for old deeds, etc. (3) Give the names of the parties in the first abstracted deed, but where these recur (as, for example, where a buyer becomes a seller, or where personal representatives become sellers) give initials only, so that after the first deed the seller, etc, of an abstracted document will commonly be shown by initials and so indicate that there is an unbroken chain of title.
(4) Make a note of the purchase price, and then, if it is correct, tick the stamp duty to show you have checked this.
If there is any discrepancy between the two, mark it (see (6)) for a requisition.
(5) Make a note of any major point in the parcels: eg the name of a house, or that the land is coloured pink on a plan.
By doing this you simplify your final consideration of whether or not the identity of the property with that described in the abstracted documents is satisfactory.
(6) Mark any point that at the time of perusing the abstracted deed does not appear clear to you by scoring the margin heavily against your note, or in any other manner that will catch your attention.
If, later in the abstract, you find that the point is cleared up, you can then put a tick through your marking with or without a note of how it's disposed of.
For example, if a deed includes restrictive covenants, enter "restrictions" on your notes, but then check with the contract whether or not these are disclosed, and if they are, tick it and mark "disclosed by contract" .
You may find an apparent discrepancy in the parcels, and mark this in the same way, although later deeds may clear it up.
If they don't, your own conveyance may do so.
In general, your attitude whilst investigating a title should be thoroughly suspicious.
(7) Whenever you come across a mortgage or a charge put "M" prominently in the margin; tick this as you come to any subsequent statutory receipt or other discharge.
(8) When an abstracted deed includes a covenant for production of documents, put a "P" in your margin against each of the abstracted documents included in the covenant and the date of the deed containing the covenant.
When, at the end of your investigation, you run through your notes to see that there are covenants for the production of all documents not likely to be handed over, you can pick out at once those already covered by some existing covenant for production.
Remember that if on completion you obtain either a  document or a covenant for the production of a document, which itself contains a covenant for the production and an undertaking for the safe custody of earlier documents, the benefit of that covenant and undertaking will enure for the benefit of your client, the buyer.
This procedure is also a help when you come to check the reply to your standard requisition: "Which of the abstracted documents will be handed over on completion?" 
Remember that when a probate or letters of administration constitute one of the title documents it's unlikely in any event to be handed over, so look for a covenant for its production and if one isn't abstracted, make a requisition on the point, although you should note covenants for production are not necessary in deeds giving rise to first registration.
Look, too, for a memorandum of a subsequent conveyance, etc, endorsed on a probate or letters of administration; if there's none, but there ought to be one, make a requisition on the point, such as: The abstract does not reveal a memorandum of the conveyance of endorsed on the probate dated.
Please confirm the position, and if not endorsed that a suitable memorandum will be endorsed on or before completion.
If it transpires from the answer to this requisition that such a memorandum should and will be endorsed, make a note there and then on your completion agenda to obtain a copy of it.
And when your client is buying from executors or administrators, remember, as you make your notes on title, to include a reminder to make a requisition asking for a memorandum of the conveyance to your client to be endorsed on the probate or letters of administration on completion, and to be furnished with a copy.
(9) If there are two or more abstracts, mark where each supplemental abstract commences.
It will save time in finding the abstract of a particular deed should you later need to refer to this.
(10) Entries in the Land Charges Register (not local land charges) being matters of title (although certificates of search are not "documents of title" ) that should be abstracted, note these, too, on your notes; when considering these comprehensively (see (11)), note for requisitions (see (6)) any which may be missing: if necessary make a search yourself before completion  when searching against your seller.
You may find it convenient, as enabling you to decide quickly when the time comes to make your searches shortly before completion, to write "LC" against the name of every party to a document against whom a prior land charges search has been made, using your own search to supply any missing searches.
(11) When you've finished your investigation and your notes on title are complete, it's useful at the foot of your notes to make a table of the major matters you must commonly consider, and mark them as satisfactory or otherwise.
The virtue of this procedure is that you will then consider and decide finally whether you should make any requisitions upon, for example, the absence of a covenant for production of one of the title documents, an outstanding mortgage that should be discharged, restrictions that were not disclosed by the contract, etc.
The headings that I tabulate in this way (but you may like to include others) are as follows: identity; outstanding mortgages; restrictive covenants; covenants for production; land charge searches; registrations with freeholders (for sales of leaseholds); endorse memorandum (when there's been a probate or letters of administration, or a sale of a part only of the land comprised in a prior conveyance); and stamping of documents.
A rubber stamp of these headings, which you can impress on the last sheet of your notes on title and each of which you then tick or mark appropriately, saves undue strain on your memory.
6.
Requisitions on title
As soon as you've concluded your investigation of title, and whilst, with the help of your notes on title, it's still fresh in your mind, prepare your requisitions on title (with, of course, an additional print or carbon copy for the use of the seller's conveyancer).
For the standard enquiries always use one of the printed forms of requisitions, which all law stationers sell, being careful to delete irrelevant questions, such as those that relate to leaseholds when you are buying a freehold; and as you add your own special requisitions arising on the particular title, tick your marking against each point on your notes on title.
The current form of requisitions incorporates by reference the practical enquiries, which will have preceded exchange of contracts, thereby shortening the requisitions themselves.
The usual reply to the requisition incorporating practical enquiries is: Confirmed, except as they may have been varied or added to by subsequent correspondence between us.
7.
Replies to requisitions
When, as a buyer's conveyancer, you receive the seller's replies to your requisitions, you should go through these carefully, as in the case of your property information forms and local search, ticking each one the reply to which is satisfactory.
Where any action needs to be taken, make a note in the margin; eg when the replies contain information that should be passed on to your client, put a marginal note "Buyer" ; when the reply indicates that there is an error in the abstract supplied to you, mark it "Abstract" ; and tick these marginal notes as you take the necessary action, for example, when you write to the buyer, or amend your abstract.
Any matters referred to in the replies, which will need to be taken into account on completion—eg details of the title deeds that will be handed over, the standard requisition as to production of last receipts, a requirement that an outstanding mortgage should be discharged on or before completion, an undertaking of some sort to be given on completion—should be marked "Completion" so that when you come to prepare your completion agenda, these matters can at once be picked out, and no further lengthy perusal of the replies will be needed.
Better ( "one bite at the cherry" ) complete and mark your completion and post-completion agendas now.
When you receive the buyer's requisitions on title, try to be more helpful than "cagey" in your answers and don't fall into the easy habit of giving stereotyped and evasive replies if you could be more helpful.
Don't get "tough" with a buyer and refuse to answer reasonable enquiries; you are only likely to make the buyer get "tough" with you, and your unreasonable reticence will delay the matter unnecessarily.
On the contrary, when requisitions raise a difficulty that you can't answer easily, it's your job to take immediate steps to find the answer or to rectify the position, if possible.
Most of the routine questions will already have been asked, of course, in the buyer's practical enquiries; the remaining ones will be those suggested to your buyer by the title itself.
With the object of saving both delay and waste of time spent on unnecessary letters, in cases where buyers send the draft transfer with their requisitions (the buyer's package) this should be approved  and returned with your replies.
In going through this document, look at it from the viewpoint of the buyer as well as your own client, and if the buyer's conveyancer has made any slip or omission, put it right; you may yourself one day be grateful for a similar courtesy.
8.
Preparation of transfer
Almost every transaction can now be completed by the use of a transfer deed, and this means that the use and the art of preparing a conveyance deed will slowly become obsolete over the next few years.
(See pp70-71.)
The most simple and straightforward situation is where land is already registered, and in nine times out of ten, a simple pro forma transfer deed can be used to effect the transfer of the interest, whether it be freehold or leasehold.
The standard form of transfer simply requires the conveyancer to insert the county and district, the title number, the address of the property, the date, the consideration, the parties to the transaction and any special provisions that might be appropriate should new restrictive covenants be proposed, or should the purchase be a joint purchase.
It is no longer necessary for a deed to be sealed.
Quite simply, the parties to a deed should sign it in the presence of a witness, who must be present at the time it is signed, and who must then put his own name, address and occupation.
If the land is unregistered, then it is now common practice to use what is called a "Rule 72 Transfer" .
Clearly, you will not be able to insert the details of the title, but the address of the property, the date, the consideration, the parties and any special provisions as mentioned above can be included in exactly the same way as if the land were registered.
Again, a Rule 72 Transfer is equally applicable as between a leasehold or freehold property.
If the transaction is complicated—eg it involves the sale of part of a farm—and there are lots of easements, declarations, covenants, stipulations, etc, then it may still be more appropriate to use a conveyance, notwithstanding the fact of first registration.
In such a case, a draft conveyance would probably need to be tailor made, and any precedents held on your firm's word processor may not very precisely fit the particular situation.
In view of the fact that the need to prepare a conveyance is reducing all the time, we will not go into this in detail in this text.
There are just two additional points that should be made.
The first is that when a property is subject to restrictive covenants, it is bad  practice to burden the title with a fresh covenant to observe them, unless it is really necessary to protect a seller, who will remain personally responsible for their observance.
It should not be necessary to take a new and separate covenant.
The second point concerns the acquisition of a lease.
The seller may seek to make the buyer liable to indemnify him or her in perpetuity, thereby placing the buyer in the same invidious position of the original lessee, who remains liable for the whole of the term of the lease to whomever it may have passed.
Therefore, it is appropriate to insert such safeguarding words as: So long as the buyer shall remain in possession of the lease and shall not have assigned the same.
In the case of a simple transfer, the document is still produced in duplicate and submitted to the seller's conveyancer for approval.
However, it has become common practice to say that if the terms of the draft are approved, then the top copy should be retained and used as an engrossment for the purposes of signature.
Since the Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989 and the introduction of compulsory first land registration throughout the country, there is not so much emphasis placed upon smart engrossments.
After all, the purpose of thick engrossment paper was to make it last.
Nowadays, most transfer deeds are not required for very long, because the information contained on them is simply transferred onto the Register at HM Land Registry, and the deed then becomes superfluous to requirements.
It is acknowledged that this does not apply to the transfer of a new home on a building estate, but then a copy of that document is simply incorporated into the land or charge certificate.
The buyers should sign the transfer deed before the sellers, but if this is not achieved because of shortage of time, it is again becoming increasingly common practice for the buyers to sign after completion.
It has to be acknowledged that there is some potential risk attaching to this, particularly where the buyers are covenanting with the sellers, but such risk appears to be part of the price that conveyancers are prepared to pay for working within the commercial pressures in the modern conveyancing market.
If you are acting for a mortgagee as well as for a buyer or borrower, then you prepare the mortgage deed at the same time as the transfer deed.
In preparing a transfer deed, it is important to check whether the buyers are to hold the property in trust for themselves as joint  tenants or as tenants in common.
There is an official form of transfer known as Form 19(JP), and this caters for a joint purchase.
This means that it is only necessary to strike out in the declaration at the top of the second page to the effect that the survivor can (for joint tenancy) or cannot (tenancy in common) give a valid receipt for capital money.
If, by an oversight, a transfer is obtained in the simple form of a transfer of whole (Form 19) or of part, all is not lost—the Land Registry cover under which, after completion, you will lodge the transfer and other papers in the appropriate District Land Registry for registration, contains (top of page 2) a declaration as to the right of the survivor to give a valid receipt, similar to that in Form 19(JP).
The position is a little more complicated in the case of the parties holding as tenants in common.
A very short separate "Declaration of Trust" (because such matters cannot be referred to in the entries on the Register) to the effect that the parties hold the property and the proceeds thereof in trust for themselves as tenants in common in whatever proportions may have been agreed between them.
The declaration should be prepared in duplicate, so that both parts can be signed by both parties, so that each may hold one part, or leave them with you to hold.
Record this in a letter to them.
As mentioned earlier in the text, it is important to proceed with caution when acting for joint buyers.
Make sure they are both instructing you, and in all correspondence and communications, contact them both.
9.
Licence to assign a lease
Short-term leases, if they don't contain an absolute bar to assignment, commonly contain a covenant by the lessee not to assign the lease without the lessor's licence, and usually provide that such licence shall not be unreasonably withheld—if such proviso is omitted, then acting for a prospective lessee you should always insert it in the draft.
Long leases, on the other hand, rarely have any such clog on the right to assign, mortgage, etc, and in general ought not to; in the event of a draft lease (when acting for the original lessee) you should always delete the offending provision should it occur, and always have it in mind when perusing the draft.
If the conveyancer for the lessor refuses to delete it, or if you act for a purchase of an existing lease that includes such a provision, you should always explain to your client the nature of the provision, its unusual nature and its  disadvantages (putting off a subsequent prospective buyer or mortgagee, delay and expense in taking up references and obtaining the licence).
If despite your gloomy forebodings your client nevertheless instructs you to proceed, confirm your advice and his instructions by letter, and advise your client's mortgagees, if you act for them, or if not, advise their solicitors of the provision and don't agree the draft until you know that the term is acceptable to them, too.
There's one case, however, where a buyer can be told at the inception of a matter that the lease will provide that it can't be assigned without the lessor's licence: the Ecclesiastical Commissioners and one or two other bodies insist on such a covenant in all their leases.
The client should be advised of this, and at the same time that it is an undesirable feature of a leasehold estate: then it's for the client to decide whether to proceed.
10.
Report on title
As soon as you receive replies to requisitions, you should be in a position to prepare a report on title for any mortgagee for whom you act, as is commonly required by any but a private mortgagee; you can't usually do so before, because until you have had satisfactory replies you can't certify that the title is good.
In such a case your report should be prepared at once, and the original instructions and any other documents sent to you by your mortgagee client, as well as your notes on title and the replies to requisitions, should be carefully perused.
Building societies and banks all have their own forms of report, but in case you need to prepare your own form base this on the printed forms of such bodies.
Or sometimes you can report informally by letter: "we have investigated the title to the above property, which we find good and marketable." 
Preparing for completion—seller
As with all other stages of the conveyancing exercise, deal with as many as you can of the listed headings.
For example, one interview with the client—head 3.
You ought to see the client anyway, for the signing of documents and final instructions as to keys, etc.
Whichever side of the transaction you represent, as soon as you've dispatched or received replies to requisitions (you can't do so before, because you won't know what the other side wants or is able to give on completion), complete the three agendas "before completion" , "completion" and "after completion" .
These include standard items applicable to both a sale and a purchase, and those that are inapplicable to your side of a particular transaction should, of course, be deleted; if you run quickly through the agendas this will be enough in most cases to remind you which items should stand and, which should be deleted.
Run through the papers in your file, including the subfile of any mortgage a buyer-client may be obtaining, to ensure you haven"t missed anything.
From the moment you prepare your agendas the conduct of the matter pivots on them.
Take your time preparing them, free from telephone calls and interruptions, so that you can look at the whole matter thoughtfully.
You'll find that in a simple case no more than a few minutes are required.
A systematic method of conveyancing, time and labour-saving as well as relatively foolproof, can be built on the framework of these three agendas: "before completion" , "completion" and "after completion" .
The "before completion" agenda (Appendix III, Form 2) is divided into two sections, one for a seller, mortgagor or lessor and the other for a buyer, mortgagee or lessee; you can thus strike out whichever section doesn"t apply without wasting time on it.
Here are some points on this agenda when you act for a seller, mortgagor or lessor.
1.
Preparing a completion statement
(a) Deposit(s) paid This comes first on the agenda as a precaution against overlooking it on exchange of contracts, and as a reminder, when it's paid to the selling estate agent, perhaps to get a release of deposit on completion.
Not that you're likely to need it: they're usually only too willing to release it on hearing of completion because then, with the balance of their commission, it can be used by them.
(b) Last receipts, etc This is a reminder to obtain from your client (if you haven"t already done so) the last receipts for ground rent and any unusual outgoings, which you will require in preparing the completion statement.
(c) Discharge of mortgages A reminder, when your seller-client is subject to a mortgage, to arrange for this to be discharged on completion.
Immediately contracts have been exchanged the exact redemption figure should be obtained from the mortgagee.
In the case of a building society mortgage, it may be useful to ask for a "daily interest rate" in case there's some slight delay in completion; this will save writing another letter, and will enable you in such a case to disburse and account for the completion monies as soon as you receive them.
This won't be necessary in the case of societies that give you one redemption figure applicable whenever the mortgage is redeemed during the month for which the figure is given.
(d) Agent's fees Immediately contracts are exchanged on behalf of a seller, telephone the estate agent and ask for an account.
Upon receipt, check that it is acceptable to your client and if so, include it in the arithmetic on the completion statement that you must prepare for your client and dispatch to him or her for agreement prior to completion.
(e) Bill of costs It is also appropriate to prepare your own bill immediately after contracts are exchanged, and within that bill you should incorporate those disbursements that have been expended from your firm's office  account.
Those that have not yet been spent should be included on the completion statement, but not on the bill.
The information contained above should enable a completion statement to be prepared, and if there is a simultaneous sale and purchase, one completion statement should suffice for both, indicating whether there is a balance required from the client in order to complete, or whether there is a balance returnable to the client upon completion.
Generally, much will depend on whether the client is buying up-market or going down-market and also whether the client is raising a mortgage.
2.
Completion documents
This lists the documents that you'll need on or shortly before completion, acting for a seller or mortgagor.
As you go through your papers preparing your agendas, add any other documents that may be needed.
(a) Unregistered title When the title's unregistered, a schedule of documents will be a standard requirement and can be prepared now, unless the title deeds are in the hands of the seller's mortgagee for whom you don't act, in which case his or her solicitor will prepare the schedule, not you, and you can strike it out of your own agenda.
(b) Registered title Clearly, upon the completion of the purchase of a registered title, the main task is to collect the charge or land certificate of the seller, together with a signed transfer deed.
There will commonly be ancillary documents, such as NHBC documentation, but otherwise the completion procedure is very simple.
The receipted Form 53 is likely to follow a little while later, and the undertaking in respect thereof will have been given in replies to requisitions on title.
(c) Undertakings When giving an undertaking, remember that unless you make the contrary very clear you will be personally responsible for carrying out its terms if your client fails to do so—see the pronouncements of the Law Society published in the Law Society's Gazette at various times over the years.
This isn't to say that you ought not to give such personal undertakings; on the contrary, unless you have reason to distrust your client, you should be prepared to take this very small  risk to facilitate completion.
But don't commit yourself unwittingly to any liability exceeding a few pounds.
And see the warning in Chapter 11 (Mortgages) p135 on undertakings to discharge mortgages.
Most building societies refuse to execute a discharge of their mortgage until they have actually received the redemption monies; ie after completion has taken place.
In such a case when you act for a building society-mortgagee, therefore, you will hand over an undertaking to the buyer's conveyancer, undertaking forthwith to redeem the mortgage and to send the redeemed mortgage or (as the case may be) LR form 53 to the other side.
The following, recommended by the Law Society, is now widely used: In consideration of you today completing the purchase of we hereby undertake forthwith to pay over to Building Society the money required to redeem the mortgage/legal charge dated and to forward the redeemed mortgage/legal charge to you as soon as it is received by us from the Building Society.
(Law Society's Gazette, January 1971, p12.)
For a somewhat abridged form suggested by D S Wellhamser see [1984]Gazette 14 November, 3140.
In the case of a registered title, of course, you would undertake to forward LR form 53, the charge certificate having commonly been handed over on completion.
And see below as to the new practice whereby a Form 53 duly executed by a building society may be available on completion.
Recently a number of societies have adopted the practice of sending their solicitor a sealed Form 53, in the case of registered property, in anticipation of redemption, in which case no undertaking is required, the form being handed over on completion.
If you are acting for a builder-seller selling a new dwelling and the builder is on the National House-Building Council's register (Chapter 13), you may not, unless the property is completed some time before completion of the sale, have received the standard notice of insurance cover to hand over, in which case you will give an undertaking to do so as soon as it comes to hand.
Lastly, if any other undertaking is required from a seller on completion, make a note of it here and prepare it now.
(d) Receipts for outgoings It is no longer common practice to hand over receipts for the payment of rates and other outgoings relating to the seller's  occupation of the property.
In practice, most sellers of a freehold will make arrangements directly with the authority concerned, and arrange to pay their bills up to the date of completion.
After all, such bills are personal to the seller, and they are not a charge on the property.
It is, however, necessary to hand over a receipt for the last rental instalment in respect of the assignment of leasehold property.
Such a receipt, if clear, indicates that there is no outstanding breach by the tenant of any covenant contained in the lease.
When dealing with leasehold property, it is also necessary to deal with the apportionments of any service charge liability.
Sometimes service charges will have been paid on account in advance, and sometimes the 'service charge year"will be only halfway through and a balance will remain payable by the seller to the landlord or management company and the precise amount will not be ascertainable as at the date of completion.
In these cases, it is necessary to prepare apportionments, but for freeholds apportionment of the outgoings has been discontinued.
(e) Receipted mortgages Unless the mortgagee has his or her own solicitor, it's for the seller's conveyancer to prepare and obtain the discharge of any mortgage over the property, and this is a reminder to prepare, in the case of a registered title, the Discharge of Registered Charge (LR form 53), or in the case of an unregistered title the usual statutory receipt endorsed on the original mortgage.
If you don't act for the mortgagee, you should now write to the mortgagee or the mortgagee's solicitor, asking for a redemption figure as at completion date.
Most banks have their own printed form of discharge on Form 53.
In the case of a registered title, a charge may have been secured by the less formal method of giving notice to the Land Registry of "Notice of Deposit" (or "Intended Deposit" ) of the land certificate, and in such a case the appropriate document is the "Withdrawal of Notice" , which is endorsed on the back of the official receipt of notice of deposit.
If the sale is of part only of the land affected by the notice of deposit, a simple letter of consent to the transaction from the bank or other person protected by the notice, addressed to the Chief Land Registrar, is sufficient; but some banks have their own form, which they like to use in such cases.
Your client's bank manager will tell you the bank's favoured procedure.
(f) Special notices relating to leasehold property When a property is sold subject to tenancies, the seller's solicitors should prepare and hand over on completion an authority to each tenant to pay future rent to the buyer; without such authority the tenant cannot be expected to recognise the change of landlord.
The form of your letter to a tenant (left undated until completion) could be: re Blackacre The above property has today been sold by our client, Mr Jones, to Mr John Smith of Whiteacre, to whom all future payments of rent should be made.
Yours faithfully Solicitors for Mr Jones.
Acting for a seller of leasehold property, it may be that your client, as lessee, for instance, of a flat in a large block, holds a share in a management company that looks after the maintenance of the building, etc (see Chapter 12 on leases).
Since you will hold the seller's share certificate until you hand it over to the buyer on completion together with a transfer of it to the buyer, it's for you to prepare the transfer, unless you send the certificate to the buyer's conveyancers for them to prepare the transfer.
Either way, this is a reminder to attend to it now.
(g) Company form number 395 On the completion of a new mortgage, the above form must be sent to the Companies' Registry within 21 days of completion.
The Companies' Registry will require sight of the legal charge to which the form relates.
The Companies' Registry will also require a resolution completed by both the mortgagee and the mortgagor.
The above procedure is pursuant to s395 of the Companies Act 1985, and where a mortgage is taken against a company, it is vital that the above steps are followed.
(h) Special arrangements for a mortgagee company This is a reminder when you are acting for a mortgagor as well as for the buyer-borrower.
Your mortgagee is likely to have a number of requirements that you must comply with, some of which have been dealt with above.
These may include, for example, getting certain undertakings signed by the borrower (eg as to replies) within six months, giving banker's orders for future payment of instalments of interest and capital, etc.
There may also have been certain  conditions of the advance (eg that a woodworm infestation shall be treated before completion, that certain repairs shall have been carried out or a deduction made from the mortgage loan until they have been).
This is a reminder to go through your papers, particularly the offer of advance by a building society if this is on your file and requisitions on title, to check that by the time you go to completion you can satisfy the mortgagee on every point he, she or it has raised.
Remember to search in the Land Charges Department against the borrower, whether or not the title is registered, for possible bankruptcy, and also, for the same purpose, against any guarantor of the loan: a bankrupt surety wouldn't be much help to anyone.
3.
Signing of documents by client
In due course the transfer (or in the case of a mortgagor, the mortgage), and possibly other documents as well, must be signed by the seller.
They can all be signed by the client on one visit to your office.
Some of the documents are those listed above for preparation by the seller's conveyancer; some will be those received from the buyer's conveyancer.
If necessary you can, of course, send the transfer or the documents by post to your client for signing, and if you do, you can enclose the printed directions, which can be bought from your law stationers as to how to do this, or describe this yourself.
But as already stressed, you really should see the client yourself for what is to your client an all-important ceremony.
Note that when you are acting for a seller of registered land (unlike unregistered), the plan attached to the transfer must be signed by the seller alone, and not by the seller's agent—not even by the seller's conveyancer as you can for a buyer.
So unless your client lives and works a considerable distance from your office, or is unwell, it's best for your client to come to you to execute the documents.
It's surprising how many mistakes an otherwise intelligent person can make when left to execute a document unaided.
As stipulated above, if a property is being sold subject to and with the benefit of existing tenancies, instead of vacant possession of the whole property being given, the buyer will require an authority addressed to each tenant signed either by the seller-landlord or by his or her solicitor notifying the tenant of the sale and authorising the tenant to pay future rent to the buyer (see Chapter 9, head 7).
Remember that under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1987 the lessee  is entitled to notice of the full name and address of the lessor, so ensure that this is given in your notice.
In the case of a sale of leasehold property where the lessor's licence to assign is required, the form of licence sometimes requires signing of a counterpart licence by the seller, and frequently by the buyer too, whereby the latter explicitly becomes responsible for the tenant's covenants in the lease; this is a reminder in case the seller must execute the document.
4.
Completion
Lastly, arrange with the buyer's conveyancer the manner of completion—whether by post or by credit transfer or by CHAPS.
Make final arrangements in good time with your client.
As soon as you've completed your pre-completion agenda you should proceed to prepare all the documents listed under head 2 above.
Don't be tempted to put off dealing with any items because of pressure of time; in the long run of the whole transaction you will save time, and possible error too, by preparing all the documents at once, whilst the matter is fresh in your mind.
Chapter 8
Preparing for completion—buyer
Reminders of all the matters to be dealt with on behalf of a buyer before completion are itemised on the pre-completion agenda (p226) with any items added that are peculiar to a particular transaction.
The following observations follow those on the agenda, and of course will be dealt with together at the same time so far as possible.
1.
Searches prior to completion and replies
Obtain from the seller the preliminary search and enquiries of the local authority.
It isn't enough to make searches; you must deal intelligently and adequately with the replies you receive.
It's important to establish the invariable habit of going through replies to all your searches (the same principle applies to the practical enquiries and requisitions on title), ticking each one after you have considered it and found it satisfactory; if the contrary is the case, or if, for example, some information is disclosed that ought to be passed on to your client, mark it accordingly, and thereafter tick it when you"ve dealt suitably with the item.
2.
Check formalities correctly negotiated to date
(a) Exchange of contracts Exchange by telephone is becoming more and more common in all cases, and is essential in cases of a chain of such transactions.
This is a reminder to arrange for such exchange with the solicitors for both your seller and buyer.
When acting on such a double transaction it's more efficient, and saves time and confusion, to keep two separate files, one for the sale and one for the purchase—never keep both on the same file.
(b) Take up references This applies to a purchase of leasehold property where the landlord's licence to the transaction is required, and reminds you to obtain from your buyer-client names and addresses of persons who from their personal knowledge of your client can give assurance that he or she is likely to prove a satisfactory tenant.
Remember, when taking up a bank reference, that you'll not write direct to the banker named, but only through your own.
Here is the kind of letter you will write for a reference: re Mr John Smith The above is proposing to take a lease of certain residential premises at an annual rent of £ and maintenance charges at present £, and he has supplied your name as a reference.
Would you be kind enough, therefore, to let us know in confidence whether you consider that Mr Smith is likely to prove a respectable and responsible tenant, and well able to pay the rent etc mentioned?
We enclose a stamped, addressed envelope for the courtesy of your reply.
Or in the case of a bank reference, write to the manager of your own bank on similar lines: re Mr John Smith The above has supplied his bank, Messrs Bank plc, of, as a reference.
Would you be kind enough, therefore, to apply to that bank on our behalf for the customary reference for a residential tenancy at an annual rent of £ and maintenance charges at present £.
(c) Examination of deeds and requisitions A reminder, in appropriate cases, to examine and mark your abstract of title against the deeds in the case of an unregistered title.
In a simple case, where your seller's solicitor is at a considerable distance, or where there is perhaps already an examined abstract or epitome of the greater part of the title, you may postpone this examination until immediately before completion, in which case strike this item out of your pre-completion agenda and rely on the first item of your completion agenda.
This postponement of examination until completion has become normal practice and the use of epitomes of title when photocopies are supplied has reduced the procedure, in most cases, to a matter of minutes.
Remember to get requisitions off in good time after your investigation.
Include them, if possible, in the buyer's package.
(d) Transfer A reminder to prepare and send to the other side for approval the  draft transfer in duplicate.
Prepare it with your requisitions, whilst the title is still fresh in your mind and remember to make a third copy when you don't act for your client's mortgagee.
In a simple case of the sale of registered land (such as transfer of whole) it's common now to assume that your draft will be acceptable without alteration, and therefore to type the top copy on an engrossment print, and to invite the buyer to use this as the engrossment.
In such a case you'll commonly dispense with making a copy for your file.
In due course the original will be registered, and after that the entries on the Register will replace it.
But make a full copy if the transfer isn't in the simplest form—if, for example, it contains restrictions or a grant or reservation of easements.
Remember that a transfer to joint tenants, such as a man and his wife, on the form of transfer appropriate to such a transaction (19(JP)), requires execution by the transferees as well as by the transferor, because it contains a declaration that the survivor can (or cannot) give a valid receipt for capital money arising on a disposition of the land.
In the case of a simple transfer have the engrossment executed by the purchasers before sending it off.
(e) Insurance A property is not now at the risk of a buyer until completion has taken place.
In the case of leaseholds, of course, the property may be insured by the lessor under the terms of the lease.
In that case you must obtain particulars of the insurance (additional property information form), transmit the information to your client's mortgagee and satisfy yourself that the property is adequately insured.
3.
Obtaining the mortgage advance—mortgagee's's requirements
If you are acting for a building society in the transaction, it will have its own form of report on title, which you must complete and submit before the advance can be made to you.
The report on title must indicate the details of the property to be used as security and generally, details of any endowment policies that will support the mortgage borrowing.
The report on title must be signed and dated and must indicate the completion date.
Sometimes, the mortgage advance will be sent by cheque and on other occasions it may be sent by telegraphic transfer.
The latter is more common when the mortgagee is a bank.
Before you submit your report on title, it is important to check that all the requirements made by the mortgagee have been satisfied.
In the case of a building society for which you act, you will probably receive a number of forms, which might include instructions to yourself, a copy of the surveyor's report, a copy of the offer to the borrower and a set of schedules for the return of the deeds to the society.
It is helpful to keep these together in a folder on your file.
It is important to go through these documents in order to check what you have got, so that you will know at which stage they should be completed.
In addition to the above forms, you will of course be required to obtain the borrower's signature to the mortgage form and possibly a deed of assignment in respect of any endowment policies.
It is important to treat the mortgage instructions seriously, and not to take them as standard.
Sometimes experienced practitioners do not read the conditions sufficiently carefully, and assume that they are simply a standard pro forma.
Although produced by computer, the conditions are not always in a set standard form.
Sometimes, it may be wise to arrange for the mortgage advance to come a day or two before completion is scheduled.
This will afford the opportunity to clear the cheque, and indeed to make sure that there are no problems caused by postal delays.
The only difficulty with arranging for the mortgage advance to come a day or two early is that interest will be charged to the client-borrower a day or two before completion is actually scheduled.
Some clients will query this.
4.
Preparing a completion statement
Apart from the mortgage monies, it may be necessary to obtain the balance from the client in person.
You will not know the precise balance until you have prepared a completion statement, and you cannot prepare a completion statement until you have worked out your own firm's costs and disbursements; and indeed until you have taken into account the costs and additional fees or charges that may be relevant to the particular transaction.
(a) Bill of costs Your firm's bill of costs should be prepared in accordance with the quotation that you will almost undoubtedly have given at the commencement of the transaction.
The professional charges will, of course, attract VAT at the current rate, and you should also insert those disbursements that you have spent from your office account  during the course of the transaction.
The total of your bill is one of the expenditures that will then appear on the completion statement that you are about to prepare for your client-buyer. (b) Disbursements Disbursements include your expenditures for any searches that you may have done, or planning permissions that you may have had to obtain.
Future disbursements that you must take into account (although they should not be put onto your bill) will include stamp duty and a land registration fee.
These latter two are incurred after completion has taken place, and should feature on the completion statement.
(c) Linked transactions Where there is a sale and a purchase these can be adequately dealt with on the same completion statement, thereby working out in the relevant income and expenditure columns the balance that will either be due from the client or payable to the client.
(d) Balance required for completion Simple addition of your income and expenditure columns will lead to a balance on either column, which will indicate the ultimate result.
It is important to let the client have this information as quickly as possible after contracts are exchanged.
Sometimes, you will be waiting to receive an estate agent's account before you can prepare your final completion statement.
It may be a good idea to telephone the agent to find out how much they propose to charge.
It is important that you obtain your client's approval of the estate agent's fees before you effect payment of them.
Sometimes, disputes can arise and you will seriously compromise your client's position if you pay the estate agent before formal approval to do so has been received by you.
It is also good practice to ask your client to let you have the balance required (if applicable) a few days before completion, because you will need to clear the client's cheque before you use the relevant monies represented by it.
If the client's cheque is dishonoured, you can cause a serious shortfall in your firm's office account (it is this account that will have to bear the consequences of any dishonoured cheque against which you have already drawn).
Money is at the hub of every transaction, and you must proceed with the utmost care and skill when dealing with it.
Most transactions involve substantial numbers of tens of thousands of  pounds and whether it is your firm or your employer's firm, you must respect the large sums of money which any conveyancer is called upon to handle in every week of his working life.
5.
Documents for completion
This item lists the documents that, as conveyancer for the buyer, you'll need to prepare before completion takes place.
As when you act for a seller or mortgagor, add any other documents which suggest themselves as the matter proceeds.
(a) Unregistered land Collect the deeds and documents of title, or in a purchase of part, a marked abstract.
In either case collect the transfer deed duly executed by the seller.
In most cases, make sure that you hold an undertaking in respect of any outstanding borrowing, so that you know that you will receive a receipted mortgage deed as soon as possible.
(b) Registered land You will be expected to collect the land or charge certificate together with the duly signed transfer.
There may be additional documents as mentioned above.
(c) Undertakings A variety of undertakings are possible in order to facilitate a completion taking place on the agreed date.
The most common undertaking relates to outstanding borrowing on the part of the seller.
However, sometimes buyers can be required to give an undertaking to their building society to effect repairs as mentioned above and otherwise undertakings are used as a device to fulfil a commitment that it was not possible to fulfil before the completion date.
(d) Receipts Again, these have been mentioned in general terms above, particularly in relation to leasehold property.
Traditionally, another form of receipt is possible, although rare.
If part of the price is attributed to chattels such as a lawn mower or curtains, or carpets, then the seller may be asked to sign a separate  form of receipt to indicate the sum of money received in order to transfer ownership of the items concerned.
(e) Leasehold property When your client is buying a leasehold property in a case where the lessor's licence to assign is required, the licence (which is always prepared by the lessor's solicitor, who should submit the draft to you for your approval) may require your client's execution of a counterpart of the licence.
Further, when acting for the buyer of a leasehold property there will probably be a covenant in the lease to register all transfers, mortgages and other dispositions with the lessor's solicitors and to pay them a fee prescribed for such registration.
Notice is commonly given by a printed form obtainable from law stationers in duplicate (the duplicate for receipting and return to you by the lessor's solicitors as evidence that the covenant has been complied with).
Generally, a letter will suffice.
Finally, again as mentioned above, a lessee sometimes holds a share in the management company responsible for the maintenance of the building and grounds, which is an advantage to him or her in giving him or her a say in these important matters.
In such a case, either you, or the seller's conveyancer will need to prepare a transfer of the share.
Both the transfer and the original share certificate should be handed over on completion, and subsequently registered with the secretary of the company.
(f) Notice to insurance society When an endowment insurance policy on the life of a buyer-borrower is to be assigned to that person's mortgagee (commonly building society or bank) notice of the assignment must be given to the insurance society when the policy has been assigned.
Most, but not all, building societies have their own printed form of notice, which is always served in duplicate, so that one copy can be receipted and returned to you and lodged with the title deeds, which are ultimately sent back to the lender.
Generally, you will be supplied with a third copy for your file.
In the absence of a printed form, a letter giving details of the charge is sufficient.
However, always send a copy for receipting and return.
It is increasingly common to dispense with deeds of assignment in respect of endowment insurance policies and simply to have a notice of deposit.
The procedure for sending the notice of deposit to the insurance society is exactly the same as that described above.
Some mortgagees are dispensing with the involvement of conveyancers with endowment policies altogether.
The policies are simply left with the clients, and if the policy is not maintained, the mortgage will automatically revert to a repayment system.
The practice is increasingly variable, hence the importance of reading the instructions very carefully indeed.
(g) Special arrangements for companies The company form 395 has already been mentioned in the context of acting for a mortgagor above.
Remember how important it is to register the new mortgage at the Companies' Registry within 21 days of completion.
Keep a supply of the relevant forms in your office.
Also recall the importance of a company resolution.
(h) Declaration of trust If you act for joint buyers, prepare now the declaration of trust mentioned on taking instructions (p17 above).
Any clear written evidence of the parties' intentions is sufficient for the courts, but a formal declaration is the conventional and clearer document.
It can be quite short; this, for example: This Declaration of Trust dated is made by A B and C D (hereinafter together called "the parties hereto" .
Whereas by a Transfer/Lease bearing even date herewith the property known as Seedy Towers was vested in the parties hereto as joint tenants for [an estate in fee simple][[the residue of]]a term of [99 years from the]Now it is hereby declared that the parties hereto hold the said property in trust for themselves [as joint tenants in equal shares][as tenants in common[in equal shares][in the proportion of one-third share for A B and two-third shares for C D]]Engross in duplicate for both parties to execute both parts, each to hold one part after completion.
No stamp duty now payable.
See p17 as to the importance of obtaining such a declaration.
6.
Signing of documents by client
The buyer as well as the seller will often have documents to sign; for example, if the transfer or other document contains covenants by the buyer (to observe restrictions or to erect a fence, or on a joint purchase) the document vesting the property in him, her or them will require execution.
In that case have it signed before sending it to the seller's conveyancer, otherwise you'll be required to give your undertaking to have it executed after completion, and to supply a copy of the execution to the seller's conveyancer.
Even when there  are no covenants by a buyer, if the purchase is in joint names execution by the buyers is necessary to commit them to the terms on which they hold the property as set out in the transfer.
When your client is buying leasehold property on the creation of the lease (as with a new flat or maisonette) and is also the original lessee, the counterpart will of course always require your client's execution; so will the mortgage if your client's borrowing part of the purchase monies.
Lastly, there's space for listing any undertakings that require signature by your client.
When the buyer calls to sign the transfer or lease, see that any mortgage or other document requiring a signature (such as an undertaking to a building society to carry out specified repairs) is engrossed and ready for execution at the same time, to avoid unnecessary attendances; and if you wish, you can let your client sign any undertakings as to outgoings instead of doing so on your client's behalf (Chapter 7, head 2(c)).
See that your client initials all alterations to any document executed, and that he or she signs any plan attached to it—this being unnecessary, however, if the plan is drawn on the actual document.
In the case of a transfer of registered land the plan is rarely drawn on it and must be signed by the buyer or by the buyer's conveyancer.
Best to have the buyer sign it, however, to ensure that he or she really does approve the plan.
Remember that some mortgagee societies require their security to be witnessed by a solicitor.
In an appropriate case a bank will require a mortgage to be explained by a solicitor to the borrower.
7.
Final searches
See Chapter 4 as to searches generally.
From the date your application for a title search is received at the local Land Registry, you have 30 working days (ie not less than six weeks) within which period your client has priority over any other person who searches or seeks to register a dealing.
So get this search off about a week before completion—you'll still have plenty of time to stamp and register your transfer within the period of priority.
The one search will serve if you act also for a mortgagee, in which case name the mortgagee rather than the buyer, because the priority given to the mortgagee extends to the buyer, but not vice versa.
Always search by first-class post, not second.
Results of searches are normally dispatched by first-class mail the day they are received if the application is received by first post.
Second-class post may lose a day.
With a registered title, this is normally the only final search you make except when you act for a mortgagee: then a bankruptcy search must be made against the borrower because your title search will not, of course, reveal anything about him or her.
If for any reason you fail to register the transfer, etc, within the period of priority, you may apply for one (no more) fresh certificate.
Apply before the first priority period has expired.
Then your client's transaction will take priority over any other event (such as the bankruptcy of the seller) or transaction (such as a mortgage of the property) of which the official certificate of search did not give you notice.
Note that to retain protection, the transfer, etc, must be lodged for registration within the period of protection; in the case of unregistered land the transaction need only be completed within the period of priority given by your search in the Land Charges Register.
The date to which the period of priority extends is conveniently given on the official stamp on the certificate of search, which will be on Form 94A or 94B, depending on whether you are searching part or all of the land comprised in a title.
In the case of a registered title there's one occasion, as mentioned above, when you make a land charges search, and that's when you act for a mortgagee.
Then you search to establish that the borrower is not bankrupt, so make your search on the special form limited to bankruptcy; thereby you will help the Registry and speed the reply.
In the case of an unregistered title you will of course make a full land charges search, and you can include in it the name of any buyer-borrower.
You should include in this search all names of past owners of the property against whom no search is revealed by the abstract or epitome.
The period of priority given by your search is 15 working days for both the bankruptcy and the full land charges search.
In the case of property in Greater London, where property is described in early title deeds as being in the now defunct counties of Middlesex or parts of Surrey, give the old as well as the present description; otherwise entries relating to the land may be overlooked (Practice Direction of the Chief Land Registrar dated 28 January 1970).
In very urgent cases the result of either a full land charges search or bankruptcy search can, for a fee of £2 a name be telephoned.
A search can also be made by fax as described above.
There's one further search that should be made on a purchase or mortgage of unregistered land: if the seller or mortgagor is a limited company, which acquired the land before 1 January 1970, search the  Companies Register to ascertain whether any puisne mortgage (ie a mortgage not protected by the deposit with the lender of the title deeds, such as a second mortgage) is noted in its register of charges.
The reason: before that date registration on a company's file of such a mortgage had effect as if registered as a land charge, thus giving notice to the world.
Since 1 January 1970 a puisne mortgage must be registered as a land charge under the Law of Property Act 1969, s26.
There's no machinery whereby an official certificate of search will be issued: you must make your own personal search.
Simplest procedure is often to employ law agents for the purpose, writing to them some such letter as this: Messrs Scrivener & Tipstaff, Law Agents.
Dear Sirs, re Ltd Property: We act for the buyer of the above property, and we should be grateful if you would search the register of the above company to ascertain whether any charges or incumbrances or the appointment of a receiver or other matter adverse to the company's title prior to 1 January 1970 are registered against the said property.
Yours faithfully, Such a method is now a little laborious and larger firms will be able to obtain a search result by telephone within 24 hours.
Lastly, whenever you make any search, whether against registered or unregistered land, make a note of the date and nature of every search on your instructions sheet, then you need be in no doubt later, if the reply to a search doesn't arrive in a day or so, as to whether and when you made your search.