

Introduction
1 The restraint of trade doctrine
The essence of the restraint of trade doctrine is still contained in the famous speech of Lord MacNaghten in Nordenfelt v Maxim Nordenfelt Guns and Ammunition Co [1894]AC 535: The public have an interest in every person's carrying on his trade freely: so has the individual.
All interference with individual liberty of action in trading, and all restraints of trade of themselves, if there is nothing more, are contrary to public policy…
A more recent re-statement is given in the judgment of Lord Morris of Borth-y-gest in Esso Petroleum Co Ltd v Harper's Garage (Stourport) Ltd [1968]AC 269: In general, the law recognises that there is freedom to enter into any contract that can lawfully be made.
The law lends its weight to uphold and enforce contracts freely entered into.
The law does not allow a man to derogate from his grant.
If someone has sold the goodwill of his business, some restraint to enable the purchaser to have that which he has bought may be recognised as reasonable.
Some restraints to ensure the protection of confidential information may be similarly regarded.
The law recognises that if business contracts are fairly made by parties who are on equal terms such parties should know their business best.
If there has been no irregularity, the law does not mend or amend contracts merely for the relief of those for whom things have not turned out well.
But when all this is fully recognised yet the law, in some circumstances, reserves a right to say that a contract is in restraint of trade and that to be enforceable it must pass a test of reasonableness.
In the competition between varying possible principles applicable, that which makes certain covenants and in restraint of trade unenforceable will in some circumstances be strong enough to prevail.
Public policy will give it priority.
The restraint of trade doctrine is, therefore, an aspect of public policy and before relying on older authorities it must be remembered that the perception of what constitutes public policy may change.
2 Purpose of restraint of trade clauses The usual purpose of most restraint of trade clauses is to limit competition.
But public policy leans against the achievement of such an aim.
In Morris (Herbert) Ltd v Saxelby [1916]1 AC 688, Lord Atkinson said "…no person has an abstract right to be protected against competition per se in his trade or business" .
The most important words there are "per se" : for a person can legitimately prevent competition indirectly if the restraint is reasonable and is attached to a proper interest which merits protection.
Usually the restraint must protect either business goodwill or business secrets.
Accordingly the law insists that a former employee cannot be prevented from turning to his own account his professional skill and knowledge even though it may have been acquired whilst in employment and at the employer's expense.
On the other hand, where circumstances are such that the employee has been put in a position of acquiring special intimate knowledge of the clients of his employer or the means of influence over them there exists subject matter which is entitled to the court's protection.
Otherwise, as Evershed J said in Routh v Jones [1947]1 All ER 179 "…the master would be exposed to unfair competition on the part of his former servant—competition flowing not so much from the personal skill of the assistant as from the intimacies and knowledge of the master's business acquired by the servant from the circumstances of his employment" .
Restraint of Trade Doctrine
CHAPTER 2: THE ISSUES
CHAPTER 3: RESTRAINT OF TRADE
The Issues
There are four issues which must be considered in any case in which it is thought a restraint of trade problem exists.
These are, in logical order of application:(a) Does a restraint of trade exist in this case/does the restraint of trade doctrine apply to this class of case?(b) Is there an interest meriting protection?(c) Is the restraint reasonable as between the parties?(d) Is the restraint reasonable in the public interest?
Each question is now examined in turn.
1 Does a restraint of trade exist in this case/does the restraint of trade doctrine apply to this class of case?
It is necessary before undertaking an analysis of whether a restraint in a particular case is reasonable to decide whether in the first place the doctrine has any part to play.
If it does not, then quite clearly questions of reasonableness are irrelevant.
First, in many cases the doctrine will, on a common sense view, be irrelevant and no court will permit a defendant to raise it.
For example, if there is a simple contract for the sale of a chattel it would be impractical to say that the restraint of trade doctrine applied.
On the other hand the doctrine clearly applies to contractual terms by which the covenantee, an employer or a purchaser of a business, seeks to forbid the covenantor (the employee or seller) from carrying on his trade or restricts the way in which he may carry it on after the purchase and sale of labour or the business, has been completed.
In recent years there have been several judicial attempts to define the scope of the doctrine.
1.1 Modern judicial views on the ambit of the doctrine In Petrofina (Great Britain) Ltd v Martin [1966]Ch 146 two members of the Court of Appeal attempted to define what amounts to a restraint of trade.
Lord Denning MR said: Every member of the community is entitled to carry on any trade or business he chooses and in such manner as he thinks most desirable in his own interests, so long as he does nothing unlawful: with the consequence that any contract which interferes with the free exercise of his trade or business, by restricting him in the work he may do for others, or the arrangements which he may make with others, is a contract in restraint of trade.
It is invalid unless it is reasonable as between the parties and not injurious to the public interest.
Diplock LJ said "A contract in restraint of trade is one in which a party (the covenantor) agrees with any other party (the covenantee) to restrict his liberty in the future to carry on trade with other persons not parties to the contract in such manner as he chooses" .
As Lord Morris said in the Esso case these are helpful expositions provided that they are not used too literally.
Two years after Petrofina the House of Lords laid down guidelines as to what did and what did not, fall within the doctrine in Esso Petroleum Co Ltd v Harper's Garage (Stourport) Ltd [1968]AC 269.
The appellants, suppliers of petrol to garage owners, entered into two agreements with the respondents in relation to two garages, M and C. The agreements were on the appellants' standard forms.
In respect of garage M the appellants agreed to sell and the respondents agreed to buy from the appellants for a period of four years and five months their total requirements of petrol for resale.
The respondents agreed, inter alia, to keep the garage open at all reasonable hours and if they sold the garage, to ensure that the buyer entered into a similar agreement with the appellants.
In respect of garage C the agreement was identical except that the period was 21 years.
In addition, garage C was subject to a mortgage whereby the appellants advanced, under a loan agreement, £7,000 to the respondents who covenanted to repay it by instalments over a period of 21 years.
In the mortgage deed the respondents further covenanted that they would purchase all their requirements from the appellants exclusively.
Each agreement also contained a resale price maintenance clause.
Subsequently, because low priced petrol came onto the market the appellants wrote to all of their dealers, including the respondents saying that they would not insist on the implementation of the resale price maintenance clause.
In answer to this the respondents who were in favour of this clause and its enforcement said that they now deemed that the sale agreements were null and void and they began to sell another brand of petrol at both garages.
They also announced their intention of redeeming the mortgage.
The appellants considered the mortgage could not be redeemed without their consent unless in accordance with the covenant for repayment over a period of 21 years.
The appellants sought injunctions restraining the respondents from buying or selling petrol other than that supplied by them at the two garages during the subsistence of the agreements and in respect of garage C during the period of the mortgage.
It was argued on behalf of the appellants that there were two distinct categories of restraint.
Firstly, there were contracts restraining a person from carrying on some trade or business; these were clearly subject to the doctrine.
Secondly, there were restrictive covenants affecting land and so imposing a burden on the land rather than on any person.
It was argued that such  covenants are often contained in conveyances, leases and mortgages, and that they had never been subject to the doctrine of restraint of trade and consequently the test of reasonableness.
The present case fell into the second category and not the first as far as garage C was concerned.
It was argued on behalf of the respondents that the doctrine applied to a covenant which was imposed for the benefit of the trade of the covenantee and which either forbids the covenantor to carry on his trade or restricts the way in which he may carry it on.
Further, when a covenant is taken for the benefit of property, the doctrine does not apply, but when it is taken to protect both property and a business, or solely a business, the doctrine applies and therefore the question of reasonableness arises.
A variety of tests were proposed.
The first was stated by Lord Reid who said: Restraint of trade appears to me to imply that a man contracts to give up some freedom which otherwise he would have had.
A person buying or leasing land had no previous right to be there at all, let alone to trade there, and when he takes possession of that land subject to a negative restrictive covenant he gives up no right or freedom which he previously had.
As the respondents were already in possession when they entered into the solus agreements, he concluded that the agreements were within the doctrine of restraint of trade.
Lord Reid's view that the restraint of trade doctrine only applies if the convenantor has given up a freedom which he previously possessed was supported by Lords Morris and Hodson.
An attempt was made in Lobb (Alec)(Garages) Ltd v Total Oil (Great Britain) Ltd [1985]1 All ER 303, to take advantage of this view.
The oil company granted a lease-back with a tie to the individual shareholders of a company; the company itself having granted the lease.
It was argued that the doctrine could not apply as the shareholders had given up nothing, only the company had.
However this was described by the Court of Appeal as a device and the doctrine was applied.
See also Amoco Australia Pty Ltd v Rocca Bros Motor Engineering Co Pty Ltd [1975]AC 561, Sadler v Imperial Life Assurance Co of Canada Ltd [1988]IRLR 388 and the discussion at pp163-6 below.
The second test is also contained in Lord Reid's judgment.
He concluded that not only had the respondents agreed negatively not to sell other petrol but that they had agreed positively to keep their garage open for the sale of the appellant's petrol at all reasonable hours throughout the period of the tie.
It had been argued that this merely regulated the respondent's trading and tended towards the promotion rather than the restraint of his trade.
To this Lord Reid said that to regulate a person's existing trade may be a greater restraint than prohibiting him from engaging in a new trade.
He seemed to imply in this that even if the covenantor had not previously enjoyed a certain freedom then the restraint of trade doctrine might still apply if he is, as a result of the restraint, under a positive duty to do something which restricts his current freedom.
The third test appears first in Lord Pearce's judgment but is most clearly stated by Lord Wilberforce: No exhaustive test can be stated—probably no precise non-exhaustive test.
But the development of the law does seem to show that judges have been able to dispense from the necessity of justification under a public  policy test of reasonableness such contracts or provisions of contracts as, under contemporary conditions, may be found to have passed into the accepted and normal currency of commercial or contractual or conveyancing relations.
That such contracts have done so may be taken to show with at least strong prima facie force that, moulded under the pressures of negotiation, competition and public opinion, they have assumed a form which satisfies the test of public policy as understood by the courts at the time, or, regarding the matter from the point of view of the trade, that the trade in question has assumed such a form that for its health or expansion it requires a degree of regulation.
Absolute exemption from restriction or regulation is never obtained: circumstances, social or economic, may have altered, since they obtained acceptance, in such a way as to call for a fresh examination; there may be some exorbitance or special feature in the individual contract which takes it out of the accepted category: but the court however must be persuaded of this before it calls upon the relevant party to justify a contract of this kind.
He expanded this view by referring to a number of authorities, which could only be truly explained by saying that certain contracts have become part of "the accepted machinery of a type of transaction which is generally found acceptable and necessary; so that instead of being regarded as restrictive they are accepted as part of the structure of a trading society" .
Thus sole agency contracts had become part of the accepted pattern or structure of trade.
They therefore encouraged or strengthened the trade rather than limited it.
Applying these notions to the particular contracts in question he decided that the solus system was both too recent and too variable for it to have become part of the "accepted machinery" .
Part of Lord Wilberforce's test is extremely difficult for the practitioner to apply.
It would have been tempting for an adviser to have thought in 1968 that a solus agreement involving the exclusive purchase of petrol was of sufficiently established commercial importance to fall within that class of cases to which Lord Wilberforce said the restraint of trade doctrine would not apply.
Indeed, it was found as a fact in the case that out of 36,000 petrol stations in the United Kingdom nearly 35,000 were subject to solus agreements.
Of the 35,000 over 6,600 were solus agreements with Esso.
Moreover, the provisos and developments which Lord Wilberforce admitted might make an accepted commercial agreement subject to the doctrine in any event make this test difficult to apply.
This test was considered in Schroeder (A) Music Publishing Co Ltd v Macaulay [1974]1 WLR 1308 where Lord Reid, by way of answer to the argument that a standard form of publishing agreement which had stood the test of time was the very same agreement about which the defendant was then complaining, said that this test could only be satisfied when the contracts were "made freely by parties bargaining on equal terms" or "moulded under the pressures of negotiation, competition and public opinion" .
These requirements were not satisfied in Schroeder because the contract was imposed on the plaintiff by a defendant who had greater bargaining power which he used oppressively.
A fourth test proposed in Esso Petroleum Co Ltd v Harper's Garage (Stourport) Ltd [1968]AC 269 was the second test stated by Lord Wilberforce.
In concluding his judgment, Lord Wilberforce examined the claim that the designation of the transaction as a mortgage in itself protected the entire contents of the mortgage deed from the scrutiny of the restraint of trade doctrine.
He said, referring to the contents of a mortgage deed: "If their purpose and nature is found not to be ancillary to the lending of money upon security, as, for example, to make the lending more profitable or safer, but some quite independent purpose, they may and should be independently scrutinised" (ie subject to the restraint of trade doctrine).
What Lord Wilberforce was saying was that one examines the content and not the form of a restraint and if there appears 'some quite independent purpose"behind the restraint, ie a purpose outside the essence of the agreement, then the doctrine applies.
This test appeared to have the support of Lords Morris and Pearce.
There may be some merit in the argument put forward on behalf of the respondents in the Esso case that all contracts are subject to the doctrine but that most contracts are quite clearly reasonable.
All contracts could be described quite properly as being in restraint of trade, but this was not a term of abuse, and only those contracts which were in unreasonable restraint of trade would be struck down by the courts.
This is an attractive argument which seems to provide an easy answer to the problem by disregarding it entirely.
It is supported by Lord Hodson in Esso and in Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain v Dickson [1970]AC 403.
The difficulty with the argument is that it may provide a rogues' charter.
But in practice we think it is a reasonable approach because of the powers which the court has to deal with unmeritorious points.
An important aspect of the Esso case is that it illustrates that the restraint of trade doctrine is not simply applicable to those restraints which continue after the end of the contract period.
Indeed, there is earlier authority for the application of the doctrine during the period of contract though as these cases are very much in the minority, they are sometimes forgotten.
In McEllistrim v The Ballymacelligott Co-op Agricultural & Dairy Society [1919]AC 548 a co-operative society had changed its rules so as to prevent any member from selling milk other than to the society.
If a member did so there was a heavy penalty.
Moreover there could be no termination of membership without the society's permission.
The House of Lords applied the restraint of trade doctrine.
In English Hop Growers Ltd v Dering [1928]2 KB 174 the Court of Appeal had to consider an agreement under which the defendant contracted to sell his crop to the plaintiffs for a period of five years.
The Court of Appeal applied the restraint of trade doctrine and found that the agreement was reasonable.
In Foley v Classique Coaches Ltd [1934]2 KB 1 the restraint of trade doctrine was applied to an agreement whereby a purchaser of land agreed to take from the seller all the petrol required for the purchaser's business carried out on that land.
See also Servais Bouchard v Prince's Hall Restaurant Ltd (1904) 20 TLR 574.
In R v General Medical Council, ex parte Colman [1990]1 All ER 489 the Court of Appeal on one view appear to have refused to apply the restraint of trade doctrine when asked to do so by a doctor who complained that the General Medical Council (GMC) had refused to allow him to advertise.
It was found that the decision of the GMC to prevent advertising in the press was a  lawful exercise of the statutory powers conferred on it by s35 of The Medical Act 1983, and that if a statutory power was exercised intra vires, reasonably and in accordance with the purpose of the Act conferring the power,(even though it restricted the plaintiff's freedom to trade or practice his profession) the court could not review the exercise of the power on the basis that it caused a restraint of trade, since the exercise of the power in accordance with the policy and the purpose of the Act could not be contrary to public policy and any review by the court would be unconstitutional.
An alternative view might be that as the court considered whether the GMC had exercised its power in accordance with the Act it was in fact embarking on an exercise which involved making a finding of reasonableness (or the lack of it) in a fashion analogous to an application of the restraint of trade doctrine.
1.2 Extension of the principles In recent years there has been an extension of the principles behind the restraint of trade doctrine so as to embrace:(a) restraints in contracts which do not fit neatly into what was hitherto regarded as amounting to a restraint of trade;(b) situations where the contract in question was not between the plaintiff and defendant and to which the plaintiff was not privy although he was affected by the working of the contract; and (c) situations when no contract existed at all but the plaintiff could claim that a set of rules or certain conduct affected him prejudicially.
See Schroeder (A) Music Publishing Co Ltd v Macaulay [1974]1 WLR 1308; Eastham v Newcastle Football Club Ltd [1964]Ch 413, Nagle v Feilden [1966]2 QB 633 and McInnes v Onslow Fae [1978]3 All ER 211.
These cases are referred to as "restraint of trade" cases and indeed that phrase was used in them.
They can rightly be described as such because in each case the plaintiff's freedom and ability to earn a living was affected.
It was that which gave him locus standi.
The Schroeder case concerned an agreement between a young songwriter and a music publisher.
There came a stage when the songwriter no longer wanted to be bound by the agreement so he sought a declaration that it was contrary to public policy and therefore unenforceable.
The case reached the House of Lords and at every hearing the plaintiff succeeded.
Lord Reid identified why the agreement was in restraint of trade.
He said that the agreement was on its face unduly restrictive having regard to:(a) its likely duration;(b) the publishers' right to assign copyright in songs which they had acquired in full under the agreement, so that it could not be argued that they would be unlikely to act oppressively and so damage their goodwill;(c) the fact that the publishers were not bound to publish or promote the songwriter's work if they chose not to do so, so that he might earn nothing, and his talents be sterilised, contrary to the public interest; and  (d) the absence of any provision entitling the songwriter to terminate the agreement.
Lord Reid went on to point out that this case was not of the type which would usually have been described as in restraint of trade; there was for example no provision which prevented the plaintiff from working once the contract had run its course.
He said: Any contract by which a person engages to give his exclusive services to another for a period necessarily involves extensive restriction during that period of the common law right to exercise any lawful activity he chooses in such manner as he thinks best.
Normally, the doctrine of restraint of trade has no application to such restrictions: they require no justification.
However he went on in an important passage to say that if contractual restrictions appear to be unnecessary or to be reasonably capable of enforcement in an oppressive manner then they must be justified before they can be enforced.
By "justified" he meant "proved to be reasonable" .
Therefore, there seem to be two bases on which a contractual term can be attacked even though it does not attempt to restrain a party after the contractual period had ended.
These are:(a) Is the restriction necessary?(b) Is the restriction reasonably capable of enforcement in an oppressive manner?
(There appears to be some foundation for this approach in Lord Pearce's judgment in Esso.)
Note that it does not have to be shown that there has actually been oppressive enforcement simply that such is "reasonably capable" .
What is clear is that the word oppressive does not necessarily mean that the defendant has been induced to enter the restriction by fraud, misrepresentation, deceit or forced to enter it by duress.
The question of oppression or unconscionable conduct was further considered in Lobb (Alec)(Garages) Ltd v Total Oil (Great Britian) Ltd [1985]1 All ER 303.
There it was pointed out by Dillon LJ that inequality of bargaining power was not sufficient on its own to enable a court to strike down a contract.
It was also necessary to show unconscionable conduct etc.
Moreover, as was pointed out in Multiservice Bookbinding Ltd v Marden [1979]Ch 84 unreasonableness is not sufficient to amount to unconscionable conduct.
This is the traditional view.
It is generally accepted that in order to succeed on a plea of unreasonableness it is not necessary for the covenantor to show that the covenantee had acted oppressively.
Schroeder however does appear to equate unreasonableness with oppression but it is suggested that it was not laying down any principle to that effect: it so happened that on the facts in that case unreasonableness and oppression both existed.
The Schroeder case was applied in Davis (Clifford) Management Ltd v WEA Records Ltd [1975]1 WLR 61, in which Lord Denning MR pointed out that the agreement was not in restraint of trade in the traditional sense because: It does not preclude a man from exercising his trade at all.
But it is an agreement which is "restrictive of trade" in this sense, that it requires a man  to give his services and wares to one person only for a long term of years to the exclusion of all others.
See further Lloyds Bank Ltd v Bundy [1975]QB 326.
A further example of the wide application of the restraint of trade doctrine is found in Eastham v Newcastle Football Club Ltd [1963]3 All ER 139.
In that case, the plaintiff was a professional footballer registered with a league club, Newcastle United.
He had asked to be transferred, but his club had given him notice of retention and refused to release him.
He refused to sign again with his club and sought, inter alia, declarations that the rules of the Football Association relating to the retention and transfer of football players, including the plaintiff, and the regulations of the Football League relating to retention and transfer were not binding on him, because they operated in unreasonable restraint of trade.
He also claimed a declaration that the refusal of the directors of Newcastle United to release him from its retention list or alternatively to put him on its transfer list was unreasonable.
Wilberforce J held, among other things, firstly, that the retention provisions, which operated after the end of the employee's employment, substantially interfered with his right to seek employment and therefore operated in restraint of trade; secondly, that the transfer system and the retention system, when combined, were in restraint of trade and that, since the defendants had not discharged the onus of showing that the restraints were no more than was reasonable to protect their interests, they were in unjustifiable restraint of trade and ultra vires; thirdly, that the court could examine a contract between employers only and declare it void on grounds on which such a contract would be declared void if it had been a contract between an employer and employee, and that it was open to an employee to bring an action for a declaration that such a contract was in restraint of trade, inasmuch as it threatened his liberty of action in seeking employment, which was a matter of public interest; and, fourthly, that it was a case in which the court could and should grant the plaintiff the declarations sought.
See also Chapter 19 below for discussion of other similar cases.
In Balston Ltd v Headline Fillers Ltd [1987]FSR 330 it appears that an express confidential information clause which sought to protect secrets other than "business secrets" (in the narrow sense that that phrase is used in Faccenda Chicken v Fowler; see pp78-9 below) was subjected by Scott J to the restraint of trade doctrine (see also Harman J in Systems Reliability Holdings plc v Smith [1990]IRL R 377).
This is consistent with the principles enunciated by Lord Morris in Esso (see p 1 above) although it is unusual to find a specific reference to the doctrine in this context.
The usual approach of the courts is to examine whether any confidential information exists, whether it is protected by an express or implied term and, subject to arguments as to the balance of convenience, grant or refuse the injunction sought.
1.3 Conclusion One can conclude that:(1) The following classes of case are usually subject to the doctrine:(a) employment contracts regarding the period after the contract has ended;(b) contracts analogous to (a) such as some agency agreements and partnership agreements;(c) business sales contracts which preclude the vendor from competing with his former business;(d) solus agreements; and (e) any situation, not necessarily involving a contract, in which it appears a party has acted unreasonably, unfairly or oppressively so as to restrict another party, usually the plaintiff in the action, in the exercise of his trade, profession or employment.
(2) The following classes of cases are usually not subject to the doctrine:(a) those which include a restraint which does not involve the convenantor in giving up a freedom which he would otherwise have enjoyed unless the restraint creates a positive duty to do something which restricts his freedom during the period of its operation;(b) those which, under contemporary conditions, may be found to have passed into the accepted and normal currency of commercial or contractual or conveyancing relations; and (c) those in which the purpose and nature of the restraint is coterminous with the purpose of the contract.
2 An interest meriting protection In order to succeed the party arguing for the validity of the restraint of trade must first persuade the tribunal that the facts demonstrate the existence of a legitimate interest meriting protection.
The nature of the interest meriting protection will differ according to the type of restraint under consideration.
In employment contracts the interests are usually business secrets, trade connections or goodwill.
In solus agreements efficiency of distribution, and in cases concerning sporting organisations the proper promotion of the sport, have been held to be interests meriting protection.
 "Goodwill" is made up of two components: trade connections and reputation.
The latter is only really relevant when considering business sales, however the former is important in all types of situation.
The application of these principles is well illustrated in Stenhouse Australia Ltd v Phillips [1974]AC 391.
Lord Wilberforce examined the interests which an insurance-broking business might have in preventing an employee canvassing its clients once he had left.
He said that in the business of insurance and insurance broking, a successful enterprise depends upon a number of factors which vary according to the nature of the customer, or client, with whom business is done.
The more varied or diversified the business of the client, and the larger the amount of insurance to be placed, the more likely it is that he will look around the market for himself in order to obtain the best terms.
With a less diversified business, the likelihood grows that, while he is satisfied with the service he gets, he will keep his business, at least for a period, with the same insurer, and place it through the same broker.
The advice and guidance, based  on collation of information, by the broker, will be more valuable in such a case, to both broker and customer.
In either case, in order to obtain and to retain business it is necessary to cultivate and accumulate knowledge of the client's requirements and of his record, so as to be able to offer him attractive terms.
To develop this may be a fairly long-term affair: even if it has been developed there is always the risk that the client may decide to go elsewhere if better prospects offer.
It is clear from this, he said, that the connection between an insurer or insurance broker and his client is not nearly so firm as, for example, that between a solicitor and his client.
On the other hand its comparative fragility makes the risk of solicitation of clients by a former employee the more serious.
A client is not easily detached from a solicitor who has been handling his affairs over a period of years, but a comparatively mild solicitation may deprive an insurance broker of valuable business which otherwise might safely be reckoned on for a period.
He concluded that the facts demonstrated the existence of a protectable interest.
Regarding business secrets, a problem which arises in practice is the necessity in employment cases to make a distinction between what is a business secret and what is simply the general skill of the employee.
That distinction is dealt with in Chapter 3 at p18.
However the courts have consistently recognised the interest that the employer or any other covenantee has in protecting business secrets.
For example, in Littlewoods Organisation Ltd v Harris [1978]1 All ER 1026 Megaw LJ said:…it is appropriate that a covenant, restricting an employee from full freedom of taking other employment when he leaves his existing employment, should be included in the contract of employment where there is a real danger that the employee will in the course of that employment have access to and gain information about matters which could fairly be regarded as trade secrets; and that applies even though the information may be carried in his head and even though (perhaps, particularly though) it may be extremely difficult for the employee himself, being an honest and scrupulous man, to realise that what he is passing on to his new employers is matter which ought to be treated as confidential to his old employers.
Once the party seeking to enforce the restraint has established that there is an interest meriting protection the next question is whether the restraint is reasonable between the parties.
3 Reasonableness between the parties The question whether a particular restraint is reasonable in the interests of both parties generally divides into three parts:(a) Is the scope of the activities which the clause restrains reasonable?(b) Is the geographical extent of the restraint reasonable?(c) Is the duration of the restraint reasonable?
In all three parts "reasonable" means providing no more than relevant and  necessary protection for the legitimate interest of the covenantee.
Before relying on any case as a precedent for what is reasonable between the parties the important observations made in the case of Esso Petroleum Co Ltd v Harper's Garage (Stourport) Ltd [1968]AC 269 must be noted.
Lord Reid said that where a party, who is in no way at a disadvantage in bargaining, chooses to take a calculated risk, then he could see no reason why the court should say that he had acted against his own interests.
Lord Hodson said that in the case of agreements between commercial companies for regulating their trade relations the parties are usually the best judges of what is reasonable.
In such a case, as Lord Haldane said in North Western Salt Co Ltd v Electrolytic Alkali Co Ltd [1914]AC 461, the law "still looks carefully to the interests of the public, but it regards the parties as the best judges of what is reasonable as between themselves" .
3.1 Scope: activities restrained In order to demonstrate that a particular provision is reasonable between the parties it is necessary to demonstrate that the scope of those activities is reasonably referable to a legitimate interest, although it is not necessary to have absolute consistency between the restraint and the relevant interest.
In M & S Drapers v Reynolds [1957]1 WLR 9 Morris LJ said "I do not consider that a restriction…would necessarily be held to be unreasonable merely because it could be shown possibly to extend to one or two cases beyond the range of contemplated protection" .
It is submitted that this is sensible: if the party seeking to enforce the restraint were required to match the restraint exactly to the interest very few restraints, if any at all, would be found to be reasonable.
3.2 Geographical extent Important factors to be considered when examining a geographical area are not simply the distance involved (usually a radial measurement from a given place) but the character of the area, the ease of travel/communication and the character of the business in question.
It is generally true to say that if the area is predominantly rural then the geographical extent of the restriction can sometimes be greater than if an urban area is under consideration.
For example, in Routh v Jones [1947]1 All ER 179 Evershed J paid especial regard to the rural nature of an area in deciding that a restriction which extended to ten miles from a certain place was not unreasonable.
3.3 Time restrictions If there is no mention of a time restriction in a covenant then the courts will normally infer that it is intended that the restriction should last forever.
No general rules can be laid down as to the reasonableness of a time period because these obviously depend on the facts of each case, however as Lord Shaw said in the Morris (Herbert) case "as the time of the restriction lengthens and the space of its operation extends, the weight of the onus on the covenantee grows" .
It is important to remember that a classic type of restraint of  trade clause frequently mentions two quite separate time periods.
The first and obvious one is the period to which the covenant relates once the contract is at an end.
The second occurs in those clauses which seek to circumscribe contact with those who were, for a given period, clients of the covenantee.
An example of such a clause is one which says the employee is not to canvass or solicit during a period of five years from the date of the determination of this agreement for whatever reason any person, company or firm who were customers of the employer with whom he dealt during the last three years of his employment.
There is no reason why both periods should not be scrutinised.
4 Reasonableness in the public interest It has been common in the past to underestimate the importance of public policy or the public interest in the restraint of trade doctrine.
See A-G of the Commonwealth of Australia v Adelaide Steamship Co [1913]AC 781.
Although it is usually true that if the interests of the covenantee and the covenantor are satisfied then so is the public interest, it is important to realise that in some cases the courts have chosen to examine the restraint primarily from the point of view of the public interest rather than from that of the parties.
In the Esso case Lord Reid said "as the whole doctrine of restraint of trade is based on public policy its application ought to depend less on legal niceties or theoretical possibilities than on the practical effect of a restraint in hampering that freedom which it is the policy of the law to protect" .
Lord Reid went on to say that the reason that the court will not enforce a restraint which goes further than affording protection to the legitimate interests of a party is because too wide a restraint is against the public interest.
What is public policy?
Although, as Lord MacMillan said in Vancouver Malt & Sake Brewing Co Ltd v Vancouver Breweries Ltd [1934]AC 181, it is important to realise that "public policy is not a constant" it appears to have some easily recognisable and immutable general characteristics.
For example, the two competing public interests in employment cases are:(a) a person should be held to his promise; and (b) every person should be free to exercise his skill and experience to the best advantage of himself and of those who may want to employ him (see Lord Atkinson in Morris (Herbert) v Saxelby [1916]1 AC 688).
In business sales cases the conflicting public interests are that a man is not at liberty to deprive himself or the community of his labour and expertise unreasonably and yet he must have a freedom to sell his business for the best price; which may be only obtainable if he precludes himself from entering into competition with the purchaser (see James VC in Leather Cloth Co v Lorsont (1869) LR 9 Eq 354).
However, judicial opinion has varied in its view of what is the dominant ingredient of public policy.
For example, in English Hop Growers Ltd v Derring [1928]2 KB 174 Scrutton LJ said "I have always for myself regarded it as in the public interest that parties who, being in an equal position of bargaining, make contracts, should be compelled to perform them, and not to escape from their  liabilities by saying that they had agreed to something which was unreasonable" .
However, it should be noted that Scrutton LJ's words were said in a case involving a contract between commercial parties and it now seems that the insistence that public policy is primarily concerned with holding people to their agreements is now out of favour.
Likewise, it is submitted that no modern court would say as Sir George Jessell MR did in Printing and Numerical Registering Co v Sampson (1875) LR 19 Eq 462:…if there is one thing which more than another public policy requires it is that men of full age and competent understanding shall have the utmost liberty of contracting, and that their contracts when entered into freely and voluntarily shall be held sacred and shall be enforced by courts of justice.
Therefore, you have this paramount public policy to consider—that you are not lightly to interfere with this freedom of contract.
If one sets that quotation against the context of modern cases such as Schroeder (A) Music Publishing Co v Macaulay [1974]1 WLR 1308 one is left in no doubt that the courts nowadays, whilst paying tribute to the sanctity of contract, will vigorously refuse to uphold contracts which in their view are oppressive or unreasonable.
Indeed, it is submitted that the reasoning in Schroeder's case was based on public policy and Lord Diplock explained what was meant by public policy.
He said that the public policy which the court was implementing was not some 19th century economic theory about the benefit to the general public of freedom of trade, but the protection of those whose bargaining power is weak against being forced by those whose bargaining power is stronger to enter into bargains that are unconscionable.
It is submitted that this is not a complete modern definition of what amounts to public policy but is one facet of that definition.
Important cases in which public policy has been the paramount or only reason for striking down a provision as an unreasonable restraint of trade include Morris (Herbert) v Saxelby and Leng (Sir WC) & Co Ltd v Andrews [1909]1 Ch 763.
Moreover, in Strange (SW) Ltd v Mann [1965]1 WLR 629 Stamp J said that an employee's skill and knowledge "is in no sense the employer's property and it is contrary to public policy to restrain its use in any degree" .
In the Esso case both Lords Hodson and Pearce specifically rested their judgments in striking down a solus agreement which extended to 21 years on the basis of public policy.
Finally, it can be said that the public interest and public policy have played an especially important part as a vehicle for providing a reason for giving redress in those cases in which the parties are not contractually bound.
For example, Slade J in Greig v Insole [1978]3 All ER 449 charmingly described the public interest in that case as the "public pleasure" in watching cricket played by talented cricketers, and described the Football Association and the Football League in Eastham v Newcastle Football Club Ltd [1964]Ch 413 as being "custodians of the public interest" .
Restraint of Trade
1 The form of the agreement The form of a restraint is irrelevant.
Only its contents are important.
It may be a direct or an indirect restraint or it may be contained in an agreement outside the primary contract between the parties.
1.1 Direct and indirect restraints Most cases quite obviously involve a direct restraint on the covenantor from doing a certain thing or things.
However, some cases do involve indirect restraints.
In Wyatt v Kreglinger and Fernau [1933]1 KB 793 the restraint was contained in a letter dealing with the plaintiff's retirement rather than in his contract of employment and it effectively said that the defendants would pay him a pension if he refrained from working in the wool trade.
This restraint was held by the court to be an indirect one and on the facts of the case it was found to be unreasoanble and therefore the plaintiff was not entitled to his pension.
A further example of an indirect restraint is found in the case of Mineral Water Bottle Exchange and Trade Protection Society v Booth (1887) 36 Ch D 465 where a trade association had a rule that no member should employ an employee who had left the service of another member without the consent in writing of his late employer until a period of two years had elapsed from the time of the end of his employment.
This was quite clearly not an agreement between the employer and the employee but had the effect of being an indirect restraint on any employee who wanted to work for another member of the trade association within the two year period.
The rule was struck down as being an unreasonable restraint of trade when the Society attempted to prevent the defendants from employing an employee who had recently left another member of the association.
A recent example of an indirect restraint is found in the case of Kores Manufacturing Co Ltd v Kolok Manufacturing Co Ltd [1957]3 All ER 158.
In that case the plaintiffs and the defendants were two companies who manufactured similar goods.
They entered into an agreement by correspondence, each company writing in substantially the same terms to the other that they would not, without the written consent of the other, at any time, employ  any person who during the past five years had been an employee of the other.
The covenant was held to be an unreasonable restraint of trade.
See also Bull v Pitney-Bowes Ltd [1967]1 WLR 273.
In Sadler v Imperial Life Assurance Co of Canada Ltd [1988]IRLR 388 the question of whether an indirect restraint of trade existed was considered.
The defendants, a life assurance company employed the plaintiff as an insurance agent.
He was in fact an employee rather than an independent agent and had worked for the defendants for 17 years.
He then resigned from his employment in accordance with the terms of his employment contract and brought an action against his former employers relating to commission payments.
The plaintiff was remunerated by a commission calculated by reference to the premium paid by the insured persons introduced by him.
The purchaser of a life assurance contract does not make one payment at the beginning of the contract but pays a premium in instalments over a number of years.
This fact was reflected in the commission structure that the defendants agreed to pay the plaintiff.
Commission was payable to the plaintiff on premiums paid during the first ten years of any policy.
The commission was paid on a reducing basis so a substantial amount of commission was paid in respect of the premium paid in the first policy year and a lower commission in subsequent years up to the tenth year.
Accordingly, the total commission payable to the plaintiff in respect of a policy effected through his introduction would take ten years to accrue.
It was recognised by the defendants that when the employment of an agent came to an end it was likely that there would be in existence a number of policies which would have been effected during the period of the plaintiff's employment in respect of which commission would normally be paid in future years if the employment had continued.
The employment contract between the parties dealt with this eventuality by the continuance of such payments to the employee after he had ceased to be employed "provided that the agent's entitlement to such commission will immediately cease if the agent enters into a contract of service or for services directly or indirectly with any limited company, mutual society, partnership or brokerage operation involved in the selling of insurance or would be in breach of any part of clause 9A hereof were this contract still subsisting" .
Clause 9A of the contract incorporated a restraint on competing activities during employment.
It effectively prevented him from working for another insurance company during that period.
In his statement of claim the plaintiff admitted that since termination of the contract he had by reason of continuing to work within the insurance industry acted in such a way that, if the contract were still subsisting, he would have been in breach of clause 9A.
It was in the light of that breach that the defendants had refused to pay the plaintiff any post-determination commission.
It was argued on behalf of the plaintiff that:(a) the proviso quoted above constituted an unlawful restraint of trade;(b) the proviso was severable and might be struck out of the contract without affecting the remainder;(c) the plaintiff's entitlement to post-determination commission accordingly continued notwithstanding his admitted breach of clause 9A.
The defendants argued that:(a) The proviso quoted above came within the first test enunciated by Lord Reid in the Esso case (see p 7 above) ie that it did not deprive the plaintiff of any freedom which he would otherwise have had; accordingly that it did not operate as a restraint of trade and therefore that it was effective on the admitted facts to terminate the plaintiff's entitlement to commission.
(b) That if the effect of the proviso were to impose a restraint of trade then the consequence was that not only the proviso but also the whole of the paragraph to which the proviso related and which contained the stipulation that post-termination commission would be paid was void.
Therefore, the plaintiff would have no entitlement to post-termination commission at all.
It was agreed by the parties that if the proviso on its true construction operated as a restraint of trade it could not be justified on the ground of reasonableness.
The judge found that the substance of the post-termination commission clause was that in the event of termination following a prescribed period of service, commission would be paid to the plaintiff in respect of premiums actually paid under the relevant policies issued during his appointment but that it was subject to the proviso that the agent's entitlement to such commission would cease if he entered into competing activities.
The judge concluded that there was thus a direct financial inducement for the agent not to enter into such activities but to restrict his post-termination employment to non-competing activities.
The effect of the proviso was that if the plaintiff were to recover post-termination commission he would be required to give up some freedom which he would otherwise have had, namely the freedom to take employment in whichever field he wished.
He therefore found that the facts of the case were indistinguishable from those of Wyatt and Bull.
1.2 Proximity of the restraint to the main contract A covenant in restraint of trade is usually contained in a contract.
For example, an employee will have a written contract of employment in which clauses will provide for the restraint of trade and for the protection of business secrets.
However, it is not necessary for the restraint of trade clause to be part of the main contract so long as it is possible to argue that it is referable to it or is in some other way of contractual force.
In Commercial Plastics Ltd v Vincent [1965]1 QB 623 the contract of employment was concluded on 20 December 1959 and yet the restraint of trade clause was contained in a letter of 27 November 1959.
It was accepted by the Court of Appeal that the letter had to be construed as part of the written contract.
In Stenhouse Australia Ltd v Phillips [1974]AC 391 the restraint of trade clause was part of an agreement made between the parties after employment had ceased as it had been in Wyatt's case.
In the Esso case, the restraint in a supply and purchase contract was reinforced in a mortgage deed.
The court refused to accede to the appellant's argument that the fact that the restraint was contained in a mortgage deed excluded the application of the restraint of trade doctrine.
Lord Morris said that a consideration of the facts and documents led him to the view that the solus  agreement, the loan agreement and the mortgage could be linked together as an instance of one transaction and that the intention was that in providing that the mortgage should be irredeemable for the period of the tie it should become a support for the solus agreement.
2 The time at which reasonableness is considered It is generally accepted that the relevant time at which reasonableness is to be considered is the time of entering the contract.
Therefore a court will ask the question was the restraint reasonable when it was entered by the parties?
The matter was discussed extensively in Commercial Plastics Ltd v Vincent [1965]1 QB 623.
Pearson LJ said when construing the restraint "although the time for ascertaining the competitors is the time of termination of a contract of employment, the time for ascertaining the reasonableness of a restrictive covenant or provision is the time of the making of the contract" .
This highlights one of the problems of the approach that the time at which reasonableness should be considered is the time of contract.
Many restraints, as in Commercial Plastics, refer to the fact that a party may not solicit or compete with the other party in relation to those who were customers at the date of the determination of the contract.
One therefore has the dichotomy of examining what is reasonable at one time (ie the start of the contract), whilst also examining the ultimate purpose of the restraint at another (ie the end of the contractual period).
However, there is no doubt that the majority of authorities do favour an examination of reasonableness at the time of contracting.
The practical effect of this is illustrated by the case of Strange (SW) Ltd v Mann [1965]1 WLR 629 where at the time of entering the contract the business was exclusively a credit-betting business and it was accepted by all parties that the validity of the covenant fell to be tested without regard to the fact that subsequently betting shops became legal and that a betting shop had been set up by the plaintiff.
Stamp J therefore considered the reasonableness of the restraint purely in the context of a credit-betting business.
Indeed, it was this fact which principally led him to describe the restraint as unreasonable.
An important consequence of this approach is that generally the courts have refused to accept that supervening events (ie events subsequent to the time of contract) can render an initially reasonable covenant unenforceable.
It seems that the reason for this is that to hold otherwise would be to give rise to an unacceptable degree of uncertainty.
In Gledhow Autoparts Ltd v Delaney [1965]1 WLR 1366 Diplock LJ said"It is natural…to tend to look at what in fact happened under the agreement; but the question of the validity of a covenant in restraint of trade has to be determined at the date at which the agreement was entered into and has to be determined in the light of what may happen under the agreement, although what may happen may be and always is different in some respects from what did happen.
A covenant of this kind is invalid ab initio or valid ab initio.
There cannot be a moment from which it passes from the class of invalid into that of valid covenants".
Moreover, in Schroeder Lord Reid said that a consequence of examining validity at the time when the contract was signed made it unnecessary to deal with the reasons why  the respondent (originally the plaintiff) now wished to be freed from it.
This must mean that cross-examination about these reasons is irrelevant.
Although one looks at reasonableness at the time the agreement is entered into, it is only practical also to take into account the legitimate expectations of the parties at that time regarding the future, and what is reasonably foreseeable.
See Putsman v Taylor [1927]1 KB 741 and Lyne-Pirkis v Jones [1969]1 WLR 1293 per Edmund Davies LJ.
However it may be that expansion of the business goes beyond the reasonable expectation of the parties; in which case it may be necessary for the covenantor to renegotiate the ambit of the restraint.
In order to attempt to provide for this possibility there should be a contractual provision which permits renegotiation and see R S Components Ltd v Irwin [1974]1 All ER 41.
In Shell UK v Lostock Garage Ltd [1976]1 WLR 1187 Lord Denning MR explained what he thought was meant by the proposition that reasonableness is to be considered at the time when the contract is made: If the terms impose a restraint which is unreasonable in the sense that it may work unfairly in circumstances which may reasonably be anticipated, the courts will refuse to enforce the restraint: but it will not hold it to be unenforceable simply because it might work unfairly in certain exceptional circumstances outside the reasonable expectation of the parties at the time of making the agreement.
He found that the circumstances which had arisen were not foreseeable at the time of the contract but he still decided to take into account supervening events: this made the contract unenforceable and unreasonable.
He specifically disagreed with Diplock LJ's judgment in Gledhow quoted above and he particularly said that there was no such thing in this area of law as a contract which was void or invalid ab initio because an unreasonable restraint was only unenforceable if a party attempted to enforce it.
He said that there were two situations in which the court would not enforce a clause:(a) if at the time of making the contract it is seen that it may in the future operate unfairly or unreasonably; or (b) if after the time of making the contract it is found to operate unreasonably or unfairly even if those circumstances were not envisaged beforehand.
Therefore it was possible to have supervening unenforceability.
It seems that Kerr J at first instance had come to the same conclusion as Lord Denning via a public policy route.
However, Lord Denning was in the minority in the Court of Appeal for both Ormrod LJ and Birdge LJ disagreed with him.
Furthermore as authority for his departure from Diplock LJ's judgment, Lord Denning relied on dicta of their Lordships in Esso Petroleum Co Ltd v Harper's Garage (Stourport) Ltd [1968]AC 269 which are of doubtful support.
However, whilst Lord Denning's view does not represent the law on this topic, it is submitted that his lack of faith in the traditional approach because the question of reasonableness is bound to be viewed with hindsight, is a valid criticism.
It is rare for counsel to be stopped from corss-examining on what actually did happen during the currency of an agreement, or addressing the court on this, even if such events were not reasonably foreseeable.
Moreover in the area of business secrets there may be a different approach.
If what was a secret at the time that the contract was entered into subsequently becomes public knowledge then it would be unrealistic if the court were simply to examine the question of reasonableness at the time when the contract was entered.
On the other hand, it could be said that this type of objection does not relate to reasonableness but is concerned with breach.
3 Construction The problem of construction only arises if ambiguity exists.
Throughout the cases it is possible to discern two distinct approaches to construction.
The first, which is currently out of favour, although it made a brief reappearance in Commercial Plastics Ltd v Vincent, is the literal approach.
The second, which has recently been heavily supported in Littlewoods Organisation Ltd v Harris [1978]1 All ER 1026, holds that the object and intent of the whole contract should be found and that the specific restraint should be construed in its light.
The problem with a literal approach is that it has frequently been used to persuade a court that wholly unlikely consequences might arise and that the court should, in the light of those consequences conclude that the restraint is unreasonable.
On the whole, the champions of the literal approach have been the party attempting to strike down a particular clause whilst the object and intent approach tends to favour parties who are attempting to uphold the restraint.
In our view, particularly because of the extravagant results that have arisen in some cases by applying the literal rule, there can be no doubt that in the modern context the object and intent rule is much fairer.
The object and intent rule really has its basis in the reaction of the courts against the reductio ad absurdum type of argument put forward by counsel on behalf of defendants.
In Rannie v Irvine (1844) 7 Man & G 969 Tindal CJ said "if the contract is reasonable at the time it is entered into, we are not bound to look out for improbable and extravangant contingencies in order to make it void" .
In Nevanas (SV) & Co Ltd v Walker & Foreman [1914]1 Ch 413 Sargant J said "The covenant has not been held bad because it might work unreasonably in certain exceptional circumstances not within its main and principal purpose and meaning" .
Other cases which have consistently championed the object and intent approach are Mills v Dunham [1891]1 Ch 576, Moenich v Fenestre (1892) 61 LJ Ch 737, Underwood (E) & Son Ltd v Barker [1899]1 Ch 300, Haynes v Doman [1899]2 Ch 13, and Caribonum Co Ltd v Le Couch (1913) 109 LT 385 in which Eve J used the object and intent approach in order to construe a business secrets clause.
More recent cases such as Home Counties Dairies Ltd v Skilton [1970]1 WLR 526 and Plowman (GW) & Sons Ltd v Ash [1964]1 WLR 568 show the sense of the approach.
In Plowman's case it was argued that on its true construction the restrictive covenant was too wide as it applied to goods of all kinds and would prevent canvassing by the employee in articles of trade of any kind.
Harman LJ agreed that no specification existed but in applying the object and intent test he said:…one must regard the contract as a whole, and this is a contract where a sales representative in South Lincolnshire serving a firm which, as appears from the very clause in question…is a corn and agricultural merchant and animal feeding stuffs manufacturer.
In my opinion it is no wider than that: the articles in which he may not canvass are the very articles in respect of which his employer employed him.
See also White (Marion) Ltd v Francis [1972]1 WLR 1423.
In Littlewoods Organisation Ltd v Harris Lord Denning MR said that by construing a restriction according to the object and intent rule the courts refuse to hold a covenant bad merely because of unskilful drafting and will cut it down so as to reveal its essential reasonableness.
However he said that the courts will only do so if the covenant is "intrinsicaly just and reasonable" .
Therefore it would seem on this approach that the court first has to decide whether the covenant is intrinsically just and reasonable before it applies the object and intent test.
In practice this may be a very difficult exercise to undertake because in order to decide what is intrinsically just and reasonable the court will surely have to apply some rule of construction.
However Lord Denning MR also put forward an alternative test.
This applies when the words are so wide that on a strict construction they cover improbable and unlikely events.
In such cases the court should not apply the strict construction so far as to make the whole clause void or invalid or unenforceable.
All that should be done is that, if that improbable and unlikely event ever takes place, the courts should decline to enforce the clause.
He then construed the words in a restrictive covenant which prevented the defendant from working for Great Universal Stores (GUS) or any of its subsidiaries.
The clause read: In the event of the determination of this Agreement for any reason whatsoever [Harris]shall not at any time within 12 months after such determination:(i) enter into a Contract of Service or other Agreement of a like nature with GUS Ltd or any company subsidiary thereto or be directly or indirectly engaged concerned or interested in the trading or business of the said GUS Ltd or any such company aforesaid…
Did the inclusion of 'subsidiary"invalidate the restrictive covenant as it was accepted that many subsidiaries did not deal in the mail order business (one was a restaurant in Alice Springs).
He concluded that it was proper to look at the GUS group as a single entity.
Therefore it was fair for the provision to cover subsidiaries as well.
As the group was under one unified control it was possible for an employee to be moved around within the group or at least have "his information and knowledge" so transferred making it important that Littlewoods should have protection regarding the whole GUS group.
If they did not and Harris had been free to work for a GUS company which was not in the mail order business he could still have passed Littlewoods' business secrets back to the mail order companies because of the structure of the GUS group.
The next point which posed a problem in this case was that the clause was unlimited in geographical area and the business of Littlewoods was solely within the UK whereas the businesses of the GUS group were worldwide.
Lord Denning decided that if the clause was limited by its perceived object it applied  only to such part of the GUS group as operated within the UK.
It was therefore reasonable on this basis.
The final point was that the only business of Littlewoods which could reasonably require protection was their mail order business and not their retail chain store business.
However, the clause did not make this clear.
Lord Denning said that it should be limited to the mail order business only because Harris' contract was at all relevant times with the mail order part of Littlewoods' business.
The problem with this reasoning is that it comes very close to construing a clause to the extent that the plaintiffs seek to enforce it rather than as it stands.
This approach was specifically rejected in Gledhow by Sellers LJ and it is submitted that he was right to do so.
Megaw LJ agreed with Denning MR but Browne LJ dissented: he said that the majority were effectively remaking the contract which was something which the court was not entitled to do.
It is submitted that there is a great deal to be said for Browne LJ's view.
On the majority view the defendant was actually left free to work for a subsidiary of GUS which was not involved in the mail order business in the United Kingdom even though that would have been in clear breach of the restriction.
The approach of the majority seems to have been that even if there was such a breach the courts would refuse to acknowledge that it existed.
It is submitted that the views of Browne LJ in Littlewoods case are to be preferred and that the approach of the majority is an extreme example of the object and intent approach which should not be followed.
In his judgment Lord Denning MR was highly critical of the decision in Commercial Plastics Ltd v Vincent because the agreement there was just and made in good faith.
In that case the Court of Appeal was very much attracted by a reductio argument put forward on behalf of the defendant.
However they decided the case on another basis and Pearson LJ said "it may be said in answer to the possibility of such a reductio ad absurdum, though no doubt , it has to be taken into account, is far from conclusive, because it may involve unlikely hypotheses, which would be outside the reasonable expectations of the parties at the time of the making of the contract of employment" .
This is correct though we doubt if a reductio has to be taken into account and prefer the approach of non-fanciful construction which has been recently reaffirmed in Home Counties Dairies v Skilton (see p63).
This seems to chart a safe course between the extremes of Littlewoods on the one hand, and Commercial Plastics on the other.
It is submitted that a number of cases which in the past applied the literal rule would now be decided in the opposite way.
The literal approach to construction has been most consistently and in our view, most erroneously applied in a line of cases concerning general medical practitioners.
In Routh v Jones [1947]1 All ER 758 the Court of Appeal held that a restraint on a medical assistant to a partnership which prevented him from practising "in any department of medicine, surgery or midwifery (or accepting) any professional appointment" was unreasonable because it covered, inter alia, practice as a consultant or medical officer of health.
There were other good reasons for not enforcing the covenant—length of time and its geographical scope, instead of resorting to an unconvincing analysis of the contrast between the legitimate interest of the plaintiffs and the width of the  restraint as construed on a literal basis.
Routh v Jones was followed by Romer J in Jenkins v Reid [1948]1 All ER 471 in which a restraint on a medical assistant to an ordinary country general medical practice was struck down because, as it prevented practice as "a physician, surgeon or apothecary" , the plaintiff would be unable to practice as a consultant in the geographical area covered by the restraint.
Once again there were other reasons for not enforcing the covenant which did not involve taking an unrealistic and literal approach to the activities restrained.
A similar approach was taken in Lyne-Pirkis v Jones [1969]1 WLR 1293 and in Peyton v Mindham [1972]1 WLR 8.
We are pleased to state that since the appearance of the first edition of this book the Court of Appeal has at last seen sense in its approach to construction in cases involving general medical practitioners: see Clarke v Newland [1991]1 All ER 397.
The case is important because the Court of Appeal considered in some detail the way in which a restraint of trade clause should be construed.
The parties were partners in a general medical practice in central London.
The plaintiff was the senior partner and the defendant the junior partner.
Clause 15 of the partnership agreement stated: "in the event of a partnership being [so determined]the salaried partner undertakes not to practice within the practice area…" , the practice area being defined.
At first instance the judge, in refusing the injunction, decided that he was bound by the decision in Lyne-Pirkis v Jones and the plaintiff appealed.
The case for the plaintiff was argued on four bases:(a) The verb "practice" in the relevant clause had to be construed in the context of the agreement as a whole and in the proper factural matrix.
In particular the attention of the court was drawn to clause 1 of the agreement which referred to the practice carried on by the parties as a "practice of general medical practitioners" .
(b) The agreement had to be given a purposive construction.
(c) If so construed the word "practice" plainly meant practice as a general medical practitioner.
It was not a question of implying a term but giving the proper construction to the relevant word.
(d) The decision in Lyne-Pirkis v Jones and the early decision of the Court of Appeal in Routh v Jones were clearly distinguishable.
In both those cases the express words used and the relevant clause could be compared with other express words used elsewhere.
On behalf of the defendant it was argued that some limitation had to be placed on the word "practice" and the natural and proper limitation was to imply the words "as medical practitioners" .
There was no warrant for implying the more restrictive limitation "as general medical practitioners" .
Both the plaintiff and defendant were free to practice either as doctors in a hospital or as medical consultants.
In approaching this case the court first stated that there were many cases where a court has to construe a standard clause in, for example, a charter party, and there may be some earlier decisions on the same clause or on a clause which is in terms which are indistinguishable.
In some of these cases the earlier decision would be a binding authority and it would have to be followed.
In other cases in this category the earlier case, though not formally binding, was often followed in order to provide certainty and consistency in an area where  commercial relations may depend on an accepted construction.
In the present case however the court was not concerned with a standard clause and therefore it decided its approach should be different.
The court was satisfied that the right approach was to try to reach a conclusion on a proper construction of the relevant clause before turning to any other cases where similar clauses had been used.
Having reviewed the authorities which dealt with the construction of restraint of trade clauses, the court applied the following rules:(a) The question of construction should be approached in the first instance without regard to the question of legality or illegality. (b) The clause should be construed with reference to the object sought to be obtained.
(c) In restraint of trade cases the object is the protection of one of the partners against rivalry in trade.
(d) That the clause should be construed in context in the light of the factural matrix at the time when the agreement was made.
Applying those rules to the facts of this case the Court of Appeal decided that the word "Practice" in the partnership agreement clearly meant practice as a general medical practitioner and did not mean anything wider.
Lyne-Pirkis v Jones was distinguished on the basis that in that case there was an express antithesis between the phrase "as general medical practitioners" in a recital and "as a medical practitioner" in the relevant clause.
What this case clearly shows is that one has to be very careful in assuming that in restraint of trade cases a phrase ascribed a meaning in one case will also be ascribed the same meaning in another.
In Business Seating (Renovations) Ltd v Broad [1989]ICR 729 it was claimed by the defendant that a non-solicitation covenant was void because the business not to be solicited was not defined.
Millett J had to deal with the argument that it would be a breach of the covenant if the defendant were during the remainder of the period of restraint, to solicit any business of any kind from any company which happened to have been a customer of the plaintiff company during the relevant period.
It was said that if the defendant took employment as a milk roundsman he would not be able to solicit orders for milk from any of the customers who had had their chairs renovated by the plaintiff company.
The judge pointed out that another clause in the contract of employment expressly described the prohibited business: it was clearly restricted to repairing or renovation of office furniture and commercial seating.
The evidence before the judge also showed that that was the nature of the plaintiff's business.
The defendant was employed as a sales representative who sold the service of renovating and repairing office furniture and commercial seating and the judge correctly decided that that must be the business which was referred to by the restraint of trade clause.
4 Phrases and words In Rex Stewart etc. v Parker [1988]IRLR 483 the court was asked to consider a non-solicitation clause which related to any person"…who to your knowledge is or has been during the period of your employment a customer of the  company…
".
It was successfully argued that the phrase "is or" could only relate to a customer when the soliciting is taking place.
Accordingly it would catch persons who may not have been customers of the plaintiff at the time when the defendant left his employment but who had become customers subsequently.
This is a clear example of inept drafting.
The phrase should simply have said "was" .
In Allied Dunbar (Frank Weisinger) Ltd v Frank Weisinger [1988]IRLR 60 Millett J when discussing a clause which prevented soliciting (but not dealing) appeared to give judicial approval to the defendant's understanding that the clause prevented him approaching a client on a secret or confidential basis and telling him that "he can still advise him but only if the client makes the approach" .
Finally, there are four general points.
The first is that in cases of doubt the courts will construe the restriction contra proferentes.
Secondly, it seems that the courts construe business sale covenants more liberally than restraints of trade in employment contracts and do so in an effort to make business sale covenants more easily enforceable: Ronbar Enterprises Ltd v Green [1954]1 WLR 815.
Thirdly, it is of fundamental importance in a few cases to consider whether the covenant is too vague to be enforced or void for uncertainty.
This is a general ground for striking down a covenant.
See Davies v Davies (1887) 36 Ch D 359 where a covenant which sought to restrain trade "so far as the law allows" was found to be too uncertain to be enforced.
Vagueness was resorted to by the judge in Jenkins v Reid in order to explain why a reformulation of a clause was unacceptable and in Gledhow Autoparts Ltd v Delaney [1965]1 WLR 1366 Dankwerts LJ criticised the phrase "districts in which the traveller had operated" as being too vague especially as instructions given as to where he should work were purely oral.
Fourthly, it was pointed out sensibly in Littlewoods by both Lord Denning MR and Megaw LJ that a clause made "inter rusticos" (ie without legal help on either side) can be properly construed in the light of the way in which both parties thought it would be likely to be interpreted.
See also Normalec Ltd v Britton [1983]FSR 318. 5 Severance There are two different uses of the word severance.
The first concerns whether the offending covenants can be cut out altogether from the contract—leaving an entire contract behind: see Lobb (Alec)(Garages) Ltd v Total Oil (Great Britain) Ltd [1985]1 Al ER 303 and Stenhouse Australia Ltd v Phillips [1974]AC 391.
Thus, in some cases where the covenant is all, or substantially all, the consideration, a consequence of a finding of unreasonableness is to strike down the whole contract.
However, even if the covenantee would not have entered the agreement without the covenant, the contract may not be invalidated as a whole if there is consideration independent of the covenant: see Vancouver Malt & Sake Brewing Co Ltd v Vancouver Breweries Ltd [1934]AC 181 and Amoco Australia Pty Ltd v Rocca Bros Motor Engineering Co Pty Ltd [1975]AC 561.
The ultimate question for the court is whether the absence of the covenant changes the contract in character from the original.
The second approach is to consider whether an objectionable part of a covenant can be severed so as to leave an enforceable obligation.
This is the approach most  commonly discussed in restraint of trade cases.
Severance of the constituent parts of a restraint, if more than one part exists, can often be critical.
The availability of severance frequently has a direct effect on whether at the end of the day the court considers the clause to be reasonable.
A party seeking to enforce the clause which has been attacked as being an unreasonable restraint of trade will usually argue in the first place that the restriction as a whole is reasonable and secondly that any part which is unreasonable can be severed thereby leaving only the reasonable part which should be enforced.
It is therefore important to know when severance is available.
There appear to be two distinct approaches.
The first, which is much more liberal, is most frequently found in business sales cases.
This strains to make severance available in order to enforce the restraint.
The second approach, is much more strict and applies predominantly in employment cases.
In Attwood v Lamont [1920]3 KB 571 it was said by Lord Sterndale MR "…a contract can be severed if the severed parts are independent from one another and can be severed without the severance affecting the meaning of the part remaining" .
Younger LJ said that severance was only permissible where the covenant is not really a single covenant but is in effect a combination of several distinct covenants.
It is submitted that this is the strict and correct approach to severance.
Earlier authority for it is found in Mills v Dunham [1891]1 Ch 576.
It was recently applied in Commercial Plastics Ltd v Vincent [1965]1 QB 623 where it was said that as the provision was a single one and could not correctly be divisible into two or more parts severance could not take place.
However, in Ronbar Enterprises Ltd v Green Jenkins LJ, having reviewed some earlier business sale cases in which severance had taken place viz Goldsoll v Goldman [1914]2 Ch 603 and British Reinforced Concrete Engineering Co Ltd v Schelff [1921]2 Ch 563, said that Attwood v Lamont could be distinguished because it concerned an employment contract.
This distinction has been criticised recently in Lucas (T) and Co Ltd v Mitchell [1974]Ch 129.
The court struck down an area restraint on dealing by an employee but severed that from a restraint on soliciting and supplying.
The court held that there were two relevant questions: is there in reality more than one restraint?
If so, is the excision of the unenforceable part capable of being achieved without other addition or modification?
It rejected the majority view in Attwood that, in employment cases, there existed a third consideration viz: it is for the court to decide in its discretion whether or not to treat the two restraints as separate or not.
It may have been this subjective judicial approach which led to the strange result in Attwood.
However, whichever approach is applied, it is quite clear that whether severance is available is entirely dependent on the facts of the case.
A very good example of what cannot be achieved by severance is found in Baker v Hedgecock (1888) 39 Ch D 520.
In that case there was an agreement by the defendant with his employer, a tailor, not to carry on "any business whatsoever" for a period of two years within a certain area.
The employee set up as a tailor within the relevant area within two years of leaving his employment.
It was held that the agreement was void and that effect could not be given to it by rejecting the general restraint which appeared in it and limiting the agreement for the purposes of the action to carrying on the business of a tailor.
For a recent example of a case dealing with severance see Business Seating (Renovations) Ltd v Broad [1989]ICR 729 the facts of which are set out at p98 below.
There Millett J having held that the part of a non-solicitation clause which gave protection to the plaintiff was valid but that the part which sought to give protection to an associated company of the plaintiff was invalid had then to decide whether the invalid part could be severed or whether the whole clause was invalid.
He concluded that in this case there were two companies each with its own separate and distinct business and each with its own customers although many of the customers were common to both.
He said that although there was a single clause there were in effect two separate covenants each taken with the plaintiff but for the protection of the respective business of each company.
He decided that there was not only no difficulty gramatically in severing the two covenants but that severance left entirely unaffected the covenant which related to the customers of the plaintiff company itself.
Accordingly he severed the invalid part from the valid part and granted an injunction based on the latter.
See also Rex Stewart Jeffries Parker Ginsberg Ltd v Parker [1988]IRLR 483 in which that part of a clause which related to "associated companies" was severed.
The question of the availability of severance was crucial in the recent case of Sadler v Imperial Life Assurance Co of Canada Ltd [1988]IRLR 388, the facts of which are set out in para 1.1 of this chapter.
In that case the judge found that a proviso to a clause dealing with the payment of post-termination commission to an insurance agent was an indirect and unreasonable restraint of trade.
The former employee, who was the plaintiff and who sued for the payment to him of commission under the first part of the clause argued that the proviso could be severed and that therefore the obligation of the defendants to pay him such sums remained.
The defendants argued that the proviso could not be severed and that as it had been found to be an unreasonable restraint of trade the whole of the clause was void.
The judge having reviewed the relevant authorities said that a contract which contains an unenforceable provision nevertheless remains effective after removal of the severance of that provision if the following conditions are satisfied:(a) The enenforceable provision is capable of being removed without the necessity of adding to or modifying the wording of what remains.
(b) The remaining terms continue to be supported by adequate consideration.
(c) The removal of the unenforceable provision does not so change the character of the contract that it becomes "not the sort of contract that the parties entered into at all" .
He concluded that all three conditions were satisfied in this case and gave judgment for the plaintiff.
Finally, under the Treaty of Rome, if Art 85(1) applies, then only the relevant clauses are automatically void; the remainder of the contract is severable: see La Technique Miniere [1966]ECR 235.
Whether, in fact, the whole contract is void is a matter for national law.
See Société de Vente de Ciments et Betons de l'Est SA v Kerpen and Kerpen GmbH (Case 319/82)[1985]1 CMLR 511.  6 Assignment There is no doubt that the benefit of a restrictive covenant can be assigned in accordance with normal contractual rules.
It most frequently happens in employment contracts after the first employer has sold his business.
Wessex Dairies Ltd v Smith [1935]2 KB 80 is an example of such a case, though there the plaintiffs sued as equitable assignees as that agreement to assign had not been executed.
In business sales cases the assignment of the benefit of a restrictive covenant is usual upon a sale of goodwill and will be implied if not excluded: Townsend v Jarman [1900]2 Ch 698.
What if there is no express covenant on a business sale and X purchases the business from Y and eventually sells it to Z?
Can Y, the original vendor, then solicit or canvass customers of his old business?
There is no doubt that there is an implied restraint as between Y and X and between X and Z and it would equally seem that the benefit of the implied covenant between Y and X would pass to Z upon the sale of goodwill.
The benefit of the restrictive covenant attaches to the business itself and not to the owner and is therefore assignable.
Finally the fact that a covenantor agrees only to sell to another who will accept a restraint is not in itself unreasoanble: Esso Petroleum Co Ltd v Harper's George (Stourport) Ltd [1968]AC 269 per Lord Reid.
7 The consequences of a finding of unreasonableness It can be stated with some degree of certainty that both academic and judicial opinion is divided as how to characterise a contract in unreasonable restraint of trade and the consequences thereof.
Treitel describes such contracts as illegal and contrary to public policy and says that restraint of trade clauses are prima facie void.
Anson agrees they are illegal whilst Cheshire and Fifoot specifically claim they are void—but not, illegal.
They say that a restraint is "prima facie void" but "become binding" on proof of reasonableness.
Chitty, on the other hand says that an agreement in unreasonable restraint of trade is generally not unlawful if the parties choose to abide by it.
It is however unenforceable if the parties choose not to do so.
There is judicial support for the word "void" : Nordenfelt v Maxim Nordenfelt Guns and Ammunition Co [1894]AC 535; Haynes v Doman [1899]2 Ch 13 per Lindley MR and Greig v Insole [1978]1 WLR 302.
Lord Denning MR waivered in his view.
In the Littlewoods case he described a restraint of trade clause as void, invalid and unenforceable.
However, in Office Overload Ltd v Gunn [1977]FSR 39 he settled for "unenforceable" and rejected "void or invalid" .
Indeed the trend of modern authority seems to have chosen "unenforceable" as the appropriate description.
See Lord Wilberforce in Stenhouse and Lord Reid in Esso: "…an agreement in restraint of trade is not generally unlawful if the parties choose to abide by it: it is only unenforceable if a party chooses not to abide by it" .
It is suggested that the words used are important.
If a covenant in unreasonable restraint of trade is described as illegal then it will be impossible to recover any money paid under it.
If the unreasonableness produces voidness  that means that so far as the law is concerned the clause has never existed: it may well then be possible to claim in tort for the restitution of money or goods although no specific action can be brought on the basis of the contractual force of the clause.
On the other hand to characterise a bad clause as voidable must mean that it is possible for one party to bring contractual relations to an end and sue for the return of money/goods.
Finally, the description unenforceable really means that up until the time of judgment it was valid but thereafter cannot be used as a basis for an action.
The consequences, as pointed out in Schroeder (A) Music Publishing Co v Macaulay [1974]1 WLR 1308 in the Court of Appeal, is that all acts taken under the clause prior to judgment remain undisturbed but that future ones will, assuming the successful party chooses to rely on the judgment, be unenforceable. 8 Consideration In any contract there has to be consideration but the question which has frequently arisen in restraint of trade cases is whether the court is at all concerned as to the adequacy of the particular consideration in the instant case.
One view is that the court is not concerned to examine the adequacy of the consideration.
Support for this is found in the judgment of Lord Parker in Morris (Herbert) v Saxelby [1916]1 AC 688 where he said "the court no longer considers the adequacy of the consideration in any particular case" .
There is no doubt that in the 19th century the courts did consider the adequacy of consideration in restraint of trade cases, but more recently in M & S Drapers v Reynolds [1957]1 WLR 9 Hodson LJ said "…although the position of the employee has to be considered, the court will not inquire into the adequacy of the consideration or weigh the advantages accruing to the covenantor under the contract against the disadvantages imposed on him by the restraint" .
However in our view although many judgments pay lip service to Lord Parker's words they do, in fact, go on to examine the adequacy of consideration as relevant to the question of reasonableness.
Authority for this view is found in Lord MacNaghten's judgment in the Nordenfeldt case where he said "Of course the quantum of consideration may enter into the question of the reasonableness of the contract" .
This was specifically endorsed by Lord Pearce in Esso where he explained that what Lord MacNaghten meant was that the adequacy of consideration was a key to oppression and that oppression is a key to reasonableness.
In Davis (Clifford) Management v WEA Records [1975]1 WLR 61 Lord Denning MR expressly considered the adequacy of the consideration.
He said that the publisher got the copyright in each song written by the defendant for one shilling.
He described this as "grossly inadequate" and said that this was effectively a symptom of the basic unreasonableness of the contract.
In Foley v Classique Coaches Ltd [1934]2 KB 1 the Amoco case and Bridge v Deacons [1984]AC 705 the adequacy of consideration was closely linked to the question of reasonableness.
In Amoco Lord Cross said the fact that a covenantor had obtained and would continue to enjoy benefits under the agreement which he claimed to be unenforceable was pro tanto a reason for  holding that the covenant was not in unreasonable restraint of trade.
Dillon LJ echoed this point in Alec Lobb. 9 Pleading restraint of trade In the typical case of an action by an employer against a former employee the employer will plead in his statement of claim that by doing a certain thing the employee has breached express or implied terms of his contract.
This follows the usual contractual claim for breach.
There may also be a claim against third parties for inducing breach of contract and/or tortious conspiracy.
However, does the defendant in his defence have to plead specifically the unreasonableness of the restraint?
In all cases it is necessary that the defendant specifically pleads that a certain term in a contract is in unreasonable restraint of trade.
However, if he fails to do so can he still ask the court to examine the contract in the light of the restraint of trade doctrine because of the existence of the public interest?
The answer appears to be in the negative following the judgment of Diplock LJ in Petrofina (Great Britain) Ltd v Martin [1966]Ch 146.
However the courts have frequently allowed a restraint of trade argument to be adduced at trial even though not pleaded.
Judicial intervention is not unknown: see White (Marion) Ltd v Francis [1972]1 WLR 1423.
However, in addition to pleading that a provision is in unreasoanble restraint of trade a defendant can also plead repudiation, vagueness and that in any event he has not acted in breach of the clause.
Whether breach has occurred is usually a matter of construction.
10 Burden of proof Dealing first with the question of reasonableness as between the parties it is now accepted that the burden of proof falls on the party seeking to enforce the restraint.
Typically this is an employer or the purchaser of a business.
Support for this proposition is found in Mason v Provident Clothing and Supply Co Ltd [1913]AC 724 in Morris (Herbert) v Saxelby, and in Attwood v Lamont [1920]3 KB 571.
The earlier cases of Mills v Dunham [1891]1 Ch 576 and Haynes v Doman [1899]2 Ch 13 are now wrong on this point.
The only recent murmur of dissent occurred in Lord Reid's judgment in Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain v Dickson [1970]AC 403 in which he expressed a doubt as to whether, in a case where a restraint was part of a professional code of conduct, the burden of proof regarding justification fell on the professional body.
However the majority view was otherwise.
It is important to note that the burden does not amount to proof of reasonableness itself, for that is a question for the judge, but to prove the facts from which reasonableness can be inferred.
But, as Heydon says, judges attach little significance to the point and it really only plays a part if, as in Dickson's case, one side refuses to adduce any evidence of reasonableness at all.
Secondly, regarding public policy the burden of proof is on the party raising public policy (see Morris (Herbert) v Saxelby and the A-G of the Commonwealth  of Australia v Adelaide Steamship Co [1913]AC 781).
Even in cases in which a declaration is sought, such as the Schroeder case, the burden of proof appears to be on the party arguing that the restraint was reasonable.
The whole question of the burden of proof was nicely summed up in the Esso case by Lord Hodson where he said: It has been authoritatively said that the onus of establishing that an agreement is reasonable as between the parties is upon the person who puts forward the agreement, while the onus of establishing that it is contrary to the public interest, being reasonable between the parties, is on the person so alleging…
The reason for the distinction may be obscure, but it will seldom arise since once the agreement is before the court it is open to the scrutiny of the court in all its surrounding circumstances as a question of law.
Lord Pearce said "When the court sees its way clearly, no question of onus arises" .
Business Secrets
CHAPTER 4: INTERACTION BETWEEN BUSINESS
SECRETS CLAUSES AND RESTRAINT OF TRADE CLAUSES
CHAPTER 5: THE CHARACTERISTICS OF CONFIDENTIALITY
Interaction between Business Secrets Clauses and Restraint of Trade Clauses
It has long been recognised by the courts that the protection of business secrets is a legitimate ground for the imposition of restrictions on persons to whom such secrets have been disclosed.
Two types of contractual provision are commonly used for the purpose of protecting business secrets.
Firstly there are undertakings to maintain the confidentiality of business secrets and not to use them except for limited purposes.
However, this type of business secrets clause suffers from the problem of detecting breach.
Secondly there are restraints upon the business in which the person receiving the business secrets may engage (ie not to compete in a certain way for a particular time because of the risk of use or disclosure of business secrets).
The restraint of trade doctrine is relevant to both types of provision.
The effect of the restraint of trade doctrine on the first type of provision is to place limits on the type of information which may be made subject to the confidentiality provision.
Apart from the restraint of trade considerations there would seem to be no reason why a contract under which one person undertakes to keep silent on a particular subject should not be enforceable in accordance with its terms.
However where the restraint of trade doctrine applies, for example in contracts of employment, a confidentiality obligation will only be enforced if the information in question can fairly be regarded as a separate part of the employee's stock of knowledge which a man of ordinary honesty and intelligence would recognise to be the property of his employer and not his own to do what he likes with.
(See Printers and Finishers Ltd v Holloway [1965]1 WLR 1.)
This is, in practice, the same as saying that the obligation of confidentiality will not be enforced where the information concerned does not include a trade secret or its equivalent (see Faccenda Chicken Ltd v Fowler [1985]1 All ER 724).
The effect of the doctrine on provisions of the second type has been the subject of more numerous decisions of the court.
The protection of business secrets is one of the two grounds upon which a restraint of trade clause can in general be justified (the other being the protection of customer connections).
The term "business secrets" , where used in this book, is intended to cover any confidential information of value used in business.
It is not used in the more  restricted sense given to the term "trade secrets" in Faccenda Chicken v Fowler [1985]1 All ER 724 but which has now been effectively viewed as being too narrow by two members of the Court of Appeal in Lansing Linde Ltd v Kerr [1991]1 All ER 418: see p82 below, we think the approach in Lansing Linde is to be preferred.
The extent to which covenants in restraint of trade can be justified on the grounds of protection of business secrets is discussed in general terms in Part I and in relation to specific types of contracts in Parts III to VI.
The Characteristics of Confidentiality
Three elements are normally required for a case of breach of confidence to succeed.
Firstly, the information must have the necessary quality of confidence about it.
Secondly, it must have been imparted in circumstances importing an obligation of confidence.
Thirdly, there must be an unauthorised use of that information to the detriment of the party communicating it.
(See Coco v Clark (AN)(Engineers) Ltd [1969]RPC 41.)
Whilst theses three elements have been elaborated upon in subsequent cases they are a convenient starting point for consideration of the case law.
1 The necessary quality of confidence In Saltman Engineering Co v Campbell Engineering Co Ltd [1963]65 RPC 203, Lord Greene MR defined the necessary quality of confidence thus: "it must not be something which is public property and public knowledge" .
As will be seen the courts have not applied this test literally.
When determining whether information is public knowledge they have regard to the form in which it is available.
If substantial work is required to collate the publicly available information into the material in which protection is sought then this will usually be sufficient to take the material out of the public domain.
Lord Greene MR stated in Saltman that it is perfectly possible to have a confidential document, be it a formula, a plan, a sketch, or something of that kind, which is the result of work done by the maker on materials which may be available for the use of anybody.
He explained that what makes the document confidential is the fact that the creator of the document has used his brain and thus arrived at a result which can only be produced by somebody who goes through the same process.
In addition it is clear that the route by which information becomes public knowledge may be crucial to determining whether it thereby loses the necessary quality of confidence.
In some cases the courts have upheld a duty of confidence even where the information is demonstrably publicly available.
The question of public accessibility is only one of the issues which must be addressed in determining whether information has the necessary quality of confidence.
The court will also consider whether the information is of a type which it is willing to protect at all.
Both these issues are now considered in detail.
1.1 Inaccessibility The question of the extent to which the information must be inaccessible to the public has arisen in widely differing situations and although it is difficult to formulate any more specific statement of principle than that of Lord Greene MR in Saltman, it is useful to consider some of the cases.
The issue of whether publication in one place meant that the information lost its quality of confidence everywhere at that time arose in Exchange Telegraph Co Ltd v Central News Ltd [1897]2 Ch 48.
The plaintiffs gathered information as to the results of horse races from various courses and transmitted that information to subscribers on terms that it should be used only in the newspaper or posted only in the club, newsroom, office or other place to which it was delivered.
The defendants also ran a wire service and it was found by the judge that they had been obtaining information from a subscriber to the plaintiff's service for republication by them.
It was held that the defendants, who had acquired the information in the knowledge that the supply was a breach by that subscriber of his contract with the plaintiff, could be restrained by injunction from surreptitiously obtaining or copying information collected by the plaintiffs.
The judge rejected the defendants' argument that the information was made publicly available at the race meeting and that they were accordingly free to publish it.
The Exchange Telegraph case is perhaps an early example of what, following the dicta of Roxburgh J in Terrapin Ltd v Builders' Supply Co (Hayes) Ltd [1960]RPC 128, has come to be called the "springboard" doctrine.
In that case he said: As I understand it, the essence of this branch of law, whatever the origin of it may be, is that a person who has obtained information in confidence is not allowed to use it as a springboard for activities detrimental to the person who made the confidential communication, and springboard it remains even when all the features have been published or can be ascertained by actual inspection by any members of the public.
In the Terrapin case the judge held that because all the details relating to the construction of a particular type of portable building could be ascertained by dismantling and measuring an example of it, the possessor of confidential drawings and other information still had a head start.
Any other person would have to prepare plans, construct prototypes and conduct tests.
Therefore the possessor of that information had to be placed under a special disability in the field of competition in order to ensure that he did not get an unfair start.
The duration and nature of this disability has been the subject of comment in subsequent cases.
The passage quoted above was adopted by Roskill J in Cranleigh Precision Engineering Ltd v Bryant [1965]1 WLR 1293.
In Seager v Copydex Ltd [1967]1 WLR 923 it was adopted by Lord Denning MR who added the following point concerning the difficulties which arise where part of the information disclosed to the defendant is only partly within the public domain: When the information is mixed, being partly public and partly private, then the recipient must take special care to use only the material which is in the  public domain.
He should go to the public source and get it: or, at any rate, not be in a better position than if he had gone to the public source.
This paragraph seems to indicate that it may be possible for a person who has received information in confidence which he could have obtained through other sources to relieve himself of the 'special disability"under which he is otherwise placed by going to those sources.
A further possibility which is suggested by Lord Denning's judgment is that in such circumstances it may not be a case for injunction but only for damages.
However this does not fit well with the result of the Terrapin case where Roxburgh J in fact granted an injunction.
In Coco v Clark (AN)(Engineers) Ltd Megarry V-C considered the implications of Lord Denning's judgment in Seager but was unable to reach any firm conclusion.
He said that "the essence of the duty seems more likely to be that of not using without paying rather than of not using at all" .
However this was a matter which he thought might be resolved at the trial.
The point was briefly touched upon again by Lord Denning in Potters-Ballotini Ltd v Weston-Baker [1977]RPC 202 where he said "although a man must not use such information as a springboard to get a start over others, nevertheless that springboard does not last for ever" .
The Court of Appeal has recently clarified the position.
In Bullivant (Roger) Ltd v Ellis [1987]ICR 464 they held that it was not right to extend the term of the injunction beyond the period for which the advantage might reasonably be expected to continue.
Accordingly an injunction against the defendant fulfilling any contract with any person named on a card index which he had obtained from his former employer was discharged, the court saying it was bound to limit the period to one year at the longest.
In practice the question of the duration of the disability imposed by the springboard doctrine does not frequently arise because most cases concerning confidential information do not come to trial following the grant of an interlocutory injunction and it can therefore be assumed that either the parties settle the action or that interlocutory judgment is treated as final.
It is important that the springboard doctrine be understood in its context.
What is being said is that the recipient of confidential information cannot use the information as a shortcut to side-step the work which other members of the public would have to do.
Thus if the confidential information was published in full detail then the initial recipient would not have a head start.
Members of the public would not need to prepare plans, construct prototypes or conduct tests.
The need for the special disability would lapse.
For example in Mustad v Allcock and Dosen [1963]3 All ER 416 it was held that because the appellants had published the information which they alleged was confidential in a patent specification they were not entitled to an injunction restraining the respondents from disclosing that information.
This case was followed by Cross J in Franchi v Franchi [1967]RPC 149 where he held that publication of the information in a Belgian patent application was sufficient to cause the plaintiff's claim to fail.
Of course for the obligation of confidence to lapse the information published must be the same as the confidential information.
In Cranleigh Precision Engineering Ltd v Bryant Roskill J held that the defendant who had, whilst a director of the plaintiff company, been made aware of a patent held by a third party which affected the plaintiff's products, could not justify his failure to disclose the  existence of the patent to the plaintiffs and his subsequent acquisition of the patent for himself on the ground that it was public knowledge, for what he had misused was his confidential knowledge of the relationship of the information in the patent to the plaintiff's products.
It will frequently happen that information disclosed in confidence is or becomes known to a limited number of people or to a specific section of the public only.
It is clearly a question of degree whether the information retains the necessary quality of confidence.
In Ackroyds (London) Ltd v Islington Plastics Ltd [1962]RPC 97 a subcontractor used the information supplied by the plaintiff to manufacture and sell goods on its own account to the plaintiff's customers.
The plaintiffs obtained an injunction to restrain the defendants notwithstanding that the product in question (a swizzle stick embossed with the name of the ship upon which it was to be used) was available to anyone who happened to take a cruise on that ship.
The defendants were presumably outside the class of people who were likely to have access to the information publicly.
See also the Exchange Telegraph case and Sun Printers v Westminster Press [1982]IRLR 292.
Megarry V-C, in Marshall (Thomas)(Exports) v Guinle [1979]Ch 227 set out a test of four elements which is most helpful for determining whether the information is too widely known to retain the necessary quality of confidence.
Firstly, the owner must believe that the release of the information would be advantageous to his rivals or injurious to him.
Secondly, the owner must believe the information is not in the public domain.
(Megarry V-C said that even if some or all of the owner's rivals have the information as long as the owner believes it is confidential he is entitled to try to protect it.)
Thirdy, the owner's belief as to the first and second elements must be reasonable.
Fourthly, the information must be judged in the light of the usage and practices of the particular trade or industry concerned.
It should be noted that this test was expressly limited by Megarry V-C to secrets in industrial or trade settings.
The interesting question of whether publication by or caused by the confidant affects the existence of the confidence was discussed in Attorney General v Guardian Newspapers Ltd (No 2)[1988]3 All ER 545.
Lord Donaldson MR said at p 609 that dissemination of confidential information knowingly in breach of the plaintiff's right cannot undermine the right itself: it can however affect the remedies available to the plaintiff especially regarding the appropriateness of injunctive relief.
Lord Goff, at p 664, reserved the question whether some limited obligation (analogous to the springboard doctrine) may continue to rest on a confidant, who, in breach of confidence, destroys the confidential nature of the information entrusted to him.
In relation to third parties the matter was most sensibly dealt with by Bingham LJ at p625.
A third party coming into possession of confidential information is accordingly liable to be restrained from publishing it if he knows the information to be confidential and the circumstances are such as to impose on him an obligation in good conscience not to publish.
No such obligation would in my view ordinarily arise where the third party comes into possession of information which, although once confidential, has ceased to be so otherwise than through the agency of the third party.
1.2 Type of information Sufficient inaccessibility is not the only requirement of the necessary quality of confidence.
In addition the type of information must be considered.
This book is concerned primarily with business secrets and so such issues as marital confidences and privacy are not considered even though they may occasionally have commercial value.
(See for example Duchess of Argyll v Duke of Argyll [1967]Ch 302, Lennon v News Group Newspapers Ltd [1978]FSR 573, Woodward v Hutchins [1977]1 WLR 760 and Stephens v Avery [1988]2 WLR 1280.)
It is clear that information need not be complex in order to be the subject of confidentiality.
In Coco v Clark Megarry V-C said"…the mere simplicity of an idea does not prevent it being confidential…
Indeed, the simpler an idea, the more likely it is to need protection".
See also Under Water Welders and Repairers Ltd v Street and Longthorne [1968]RPC 498.
Conversely, mere volume or complexity of information disclosed will not be sufficient.
In Yates Circuit Foil Co v Electrofoils Ltd [1976]FSR 345 Whitford J said "I know of no direct authority which has laid it down that a fetter can be placed upon the disclosure of a body of information of a general character if the body of information is over some particular size" .
However, the Yates decision should not be regarded as authority for the proposition that a collection of individually non-confidential items of information cannot be the subject of confidentiality where the confidentiality lies in the fact that they are collected together.
A typical example of a confidential collection of information might be a list of customers (see for example Robb v Green [1895]2 QB 315 and Summers (William) & Co Ltd v Boyce & Kinmond & Co (1907) 23 TLR 724 and Bullivant (Roger) v Eillis Ltd [1987]ICR 464 but cf Auto Securities Ltd v Standard Telephones and Cables Ltd [1965]RPC 92).
It was suggested by Hirst J in Fraser v Thames Television Ltd [1983]2 All ER 101 that some degree of originality is required for confidential information to be protected.
However it is clear from the context that all that he meant was that, where what is claimed to be confidential is an idea based on a well-known theme, it must have something such as a significant twist or slant which is not public knowledge.
In that case the making of a television series by the defendants based on a concept communicated in confidence by the plaintiffs was held to be a breach of confidence.
(See also Gilbert v Star Newspapers Co Ltd (1894) 11 TLR 4 and Frazer v Edwards (1905) MacG Cop Cas (1905–10) 10.)
One further restriction on the type of information which may be subject to an obligation of confidentiality has been briefly mentioned above.
Information acquired by an employee which becomes part of his general skills and stock of knowledge is not the subject of an obligation of confidentiality although during the term of the employment it may be a breach of the employee's duty of good faith to disclose it to third parties.
Information relating to customers, prices, technology and business methods have been held to fall into this category (see the discussion of Faccenda Chicken v Fowler [1985]1 All ER 724 in Chapter 8 and see Printers & Finishers Ltd v Holloway [1965]1 WLR 1, and Stevenson Jordan & Harrison Ltd v MacDonald & Evans (1952) 69 RPC 10).
The courts  will normally refuse to allow claims of confidentiality in respect of the names and addresses of employees so as to prevent offers of other employment being made to them by departing staff (see Baker v Gibbons [1972]1 WLR 693 and Searle (GD) & Co Ltd v Celltech Ltd [1982]FSR 92).
In Ixora Trading Incorporated v Jones [1990]1 FSR 251 Mummery J struck out the plaintiffs' writ and statement of claim which, inter alia, alleged breaches of express and implied duties of confidence.
The plaintiffs were part of a group of companies which operated Bureaux de Change.
The defendants had been employed as executives by the plaintiffs.
The defendants had both received training in the plaintiffs' business, including familiarisation with the contents of two manuals.
The defendants had in the course of their employment visited Paris to assess the feasibility of opening Bureaux de Change in France.
As a result they produced a document called an "Initial Feasibility Study" .
Since the termination of the defendants' employment a company in the same group as the plaintiffs had opened a number of Bureaux de Change in Paris.
The company set up by the defendants had also opened Bureaux de Change in Paris.
The plaintiffs relied on an express term set out in the letters of appointments written to the defendants as follows: You will not disclose any of the company's affairs or any of its subsidiary or associated companies business or trade secrets to a third party either during or after you have ceased to be an employee of the company without the express written consent of the company.
In addition, the defendants gave undertakings to the plaintiff, one of which was as follows: Any information which I have access to or knowledge which I acquire arising out of or in the course of my contract of service shall remain confidential and shall not be used by me to obtain any gain, benefit or advantage or profits for myself or for any member of my family or connected person.
The judge pointed out that in the statement of claim the confidential information relied on was described in a general way as a fund of technical knowledge and experience relating to a number of matters; in particular the contents of the manuals and the Initial Feasibility Study.
The judge concluded that none of the documents or the contents of them satisfied the requirement of the kind of confidential information which an employer is entitled to prevent an ex-employee from using after the termination of the employer/employee relationship.
Moreover he found that a concession made in the pleadings to the effect that the plaintiffs did not allege that the defendants had made use of any of the plaintiffs' trade secrets since leaving their employment was, in the light of the judgment of Faccenda Chicken Ltd v Fowler [1986]1 All ER 617 fatal.
That concession may not be now as fatal as the judge thought due to the extension of the meaning of the phrase "trade secret" found in the Court of Appeal judgments in Lansing Linde Ltd v Kerr.
The judge went on to find that not only was the information contained in the manuals and the feasibility study not a trade secret but that the information contained in the feasibility study was too  obvious and too vague and unspecific to be caught by any alleged fiduciary duty that the defendants were under.
In Berkeley Administration Inc v McClelland [1990]FSR 505 the plaintiffs were a company related to Ixora.
The fifth and sixth defendants had been employed by a group of companies of which the plaintiffs were a part in senior positions for short periods before being dismissed.
After their dismissal the first and sixth defendants drafted a business plan for the purpose of raising finance to set up a Bureau de Change business in competition with the plaintiffs.
Shortly afterwards they invited the seventh defendant who was employed by the plaintiffs' group to join them.
After the seventh defendant had resigned from the plaintiffs the three refined the business plan and set up the fourth defendant and the fifth defendant companies.
The plaintiffs alleged the first, sixth and seventh defendants in preparing their business plan had used five specific items of information derived from financial projections contained in an appendix to a business plan ( "the blue book" ) of the plaintiffs namely:(a) the average operating profit per Bureau de Change;(b) the average profit of the first year of operation as a percentage of a full years profit;(c) the average costs per Bureau;(d) the average number and/or transactions per Bureau;(e) the average value of each transaction.
The plaintiffs contended that their business plan was confidential, that the items of information relied upon were sufficiently confidential to be protectable after termination of the defendants' employment and that it could be inferred that the defendants had used those items by virtue of alleged similarity between figures appearing in the respective business plans.
Wright J accepted that the blue book was described as a confidential memorandum by the plaintiffs and that confidentiality was heavily emphasised in its pages.
A limited number of copies were produced, each copy was numbered and a record was kept of the persons to whom the copy was issued.
It was plain that the document as whole was intended to be kept confidential by the plaintiffs and that this fact was firmly impressed upon anyone who had anything to do with it.
Although the three individual defendants had either signed or had been made aware of undertakings of confidentiality when they entered the employment of the plaintiff, counsel on behalf of the plaintiffs did not rely upon such undertakings before the judge but relied upon general implied principles of law in this area.
The judge declined to find that any of the information contained in the blue book bore the stamp of confidentiality within the criteria laid down in Faccenda Chicken, ie it could not be described as a trade secret or anything approximating thereto.
This question has also been the subject of a recent decision by the Court of Appeal.
In Johnson and Bloy (Holdings) Ltd v Wolstenholme Rink Plc [1989]IRLR 499 the Court of Appeal granted an injunction to the plaintiffs to prevent the defendant from disclosing or using the information that two specified ingredients might be used in combination in the manufacture of a drier for a printing ink and from manufacturing or arranging for the manufacture of printing inks containing therein a drier containing the two ingredients.
The  defendant had argued that this information, ie the knowledge that the combination of the two ingredients produced an effective drier could not be protected by an injunction since the knowledge of that combination was knowledge which the second defendant must inevitably have taken away from the plaintiffs when he left their employment and that he could not proceed to expunge that knowledge from his mind.
Parker LJ rejected that submission by pointing out that there was no evidence that the combination of the two ingredients was commonly known or used in the trade.
Moreover he pointed out that there is no principle in English law which says that anything which is inevitably in somebody's head when they leave their employment is something which they are free to use.
In certain cases such information may well be confidential.
This was such a case.
It is often said that there can be no confidence in iniquity.
In general, however, the cases tend to view that the disclosure of iniquity is a just cause for breaking an obligation of confidentiality.
Accordingly, these cases are examined in the context of breach of the duty of confidentiality.
2 Circumstances importing an obligation of confidence The courts have found it difficult to determine a generally applicable test of the circumstances in which an obligation of confidence will arise.
In part this difficulty may stem from the uncertain legal nature of the action for breach of confidence.
In many cases the obligation has been held to arise out of an implied term of a contract between the parties.
In others, where the courts have been unable to find any contract between the parties, the courts have had to rely on an equitable doctrine of confidence.
However, in practice it is rare to find circumstances in which the court would be prepared to find that an obligation of confidence arises by virtue of an implied term of a contract but not by virtue of an equitable obligation (see for example Marshall (Thomas)(Exporters) Ltd v Guinle [1979]Ch 227).
However a plaintiff should always plead both the equitable and the contractual duty for the remedies available are different: see Part VIII.
The principles set out below for determining when an obligation of confidence will arise would therefore seem equally applicable to both equitable and implied contractual obligations.
Perhaps the most elegant formulation of principle was given in Coco v Clark (AN)(Engineers) Ltd where it was said that if a reasonable man standing in the shoes of the recipient of the information would have realised that upon reasonable grounds the information was being given to him in confidence then this should suffice to impose upon him the equitable obligation of confidence.
Although this formulation has been referred to in subsequent cases it has not been adopted as laying down an all embracing test.
The courts have instead tended to consider a number of factors which point to the existence of an obligation of confidentiality.
These factors can be conveniently categorised under three headings.
2.1 Express indications of confidentiality Where the person disclosing information expressly states to the recipient that it is being disclosed in confidence this will usually suffice to impose an obligation of confidence (assuming the information has the necessary quality of confidence).
For example in Dunford & Elliott Ltd v Johnson & Firth Brown [1978]FSR 143 information supplied to investors under cover of a letter making express reference to its confidential nature was held to have been imparted in circumstances of confidence (although the action failed on other grounds).
Similarly, where a product which contains a secret mechanism is supplied subject to a condition that the recipient should not examine the mechanism, this will establish confidence in the mechanism (see Paul (KS)(Printing Instruments) Ltd v Southern Instruments (Communications) Ltd and EP Ellis (Male)(Trading as Ellis and Sons)[1964]RPC 118).
Unsolicited information gives rise to difficulties for it is not clearly established whether this may be made subject to an obligation of confidence.
It is submitted that there is no good reason why an obligation of confidence should not arise if the supplier of the information clearly expresses it to be confidential.
Provided the springboard doctrine is sensibly applied and injunctions granted only in the clearest of cases so that the recipient of the information is not effectively placed in a worse position than if he had not received it, the interests of both the supplier of the information and the recipient can be satisfied.
2.2 Mode of expression Where no express indication of the confidentiality of the information disclosed has been given it is necessary to examine the circumstances surrounding the disclosure.
This has frequently been necessary in the case of information obtained by employees in the course of their employment.
The cases are discussed in Chapter 8 at p76.
It would appear that an obligation of confidence may arise in relation to information which is overheard but it seems that this will only be the case where the recipient has used surreptitious means to put himself in a position to overhear the information.
This question has achieved some notoriety in two cases concerning telephone tapping.
In the first, Malone v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis (No 2)[1979]2 All ER 620, which concerned the use to which recordings of telephone conversations made with the authority of the Secretary of State for the Home Office, Megarry V-C said "it seems to me that a person who utters confidential information must accept the risk of any unknown overhearing that is inherent in the circumstances of the communication" .
In the second case, Francome v Mirror Group Newspapers Ltd [1984]2 All ER 408, the Court of Appeal held that there was a serious issue to be tried on the question of whether information obtained by illegal tapping by private individuals was subject to confidentiality.
It is however apparent from the judgment in that case that the Court of Appeal regarded information overheard as a result of accidents or imperfections in the telephone system as free from the obligation of confidence.
Francome is important because the court recognised the possibility that information taken without anyone's consent, for example by  espionage, might be held subject to an obligation of confidence.
In Attorney General v Guardian Newspapers Ltd (No 2)[1988]3 All ER 545 (part of the Spycatcher case) it was recognised that information which Peter Wright had unearthed by his own endeavours was clearly covered by an obligation of confidence even though one could not say there existed a "confider" or "confidant" in relation to that information.
Whether the courts would extend this remedy to information in documents which were accidentally released as opposed to surrepticiously obtained was answered in English and American Insurance Co Ltd v Herbert Smith [1988]FSR 232.
The papers of counsel acting for the plaintiffs in a pending action in the Commercial Court were mistakenly sent to the solicitors for the other side.
The papers were entitled to legal professional privilege.
Those solicitors, the first defendant, realised what had happened and did not at first read the papers.
However, they considered it their duty to tell their clients, the second defendants, that they had them.
Their clients instructions were to read the papers.
They did so and informed their clients of what they had discovered; they then returned the papers.
By notice of motion the plaintiffs claimed an interlocutory order restraining the defendants from making any use of any information derived from the privileged documents.
Such an order would prevent the defendants using that information for any purpose of defending an action in the Commercial Court.
The defendants, inter alia, submitted that the owner of confidential information could not restrain its use by a party to whom it had accidentally escaped and who had not himself undertaken the duty of confidentiality.
Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V-C granted an order limited to overt use of the information.
He held that an injunction could be granted against a stranger who had come innocently into the possession of confidential information to which he was not entitled.
See also Derby and Co Ltd v Weldon (No 8)[1990]3 All ER 762. 2.3 Limited purpose of disclosure There is a large body of authority in support of the proposition that information which is disclosed for a limited purpose is received under an obligation of confidence and cannot be used or disclosed otherwise than for that purpose.
Information disclosed by one party to another in the course of negotiations will be subject to the obligation of confidence where information relates to the subject matter of the negotiations and has the necessary quality of confidence.
Thus in Seager v Copydex Ltd [1967]1 WLR 923 details of an unpatented invention disclosed in the course of negotiations relating to a similar patented invention were held to have been disclosed under an obligation of confidence.
Similarly in Coco v Clark (AN)(Engineers) Ltd [1969]RPC 41 Megarry J held that information concerning an engine supplied by the plaintiff in the course of negotiations was subject to an implied obligation of confidence.
Megarry J suggested that the test of an officious bystander could be helpful: if the parties, when asked by an officious bystander whether their discussions were  confidential, would have responded "but obviously it is" , that would establish the obligation.
Business negotiations
Clearly there may be some negotiations where it would be unwise to assume that an obligation of confidence will arise.
One example would be negotiations for settlement of litigation.
Another example which recently came before the court concerned confidentiality in an offer made to a vendor of land.
The vendor's agent disclosed the amount of an offer made by one potential purchaser to another.
The offeror, who was unsuccessful in obtaining the property sued for breach of confidence.
The court held on the facts that the vendor's agent was not under a duty of confidence (Trees Ltd v Cripps (1983) 267 EG 596).
Information supplied by clients to their professional advisers will be received subject to an obligation of confidence.
In the case of solicitors this is clearly shown in Rakusen v Ellis, Munday & Clarke [1912]1 Ch 831 where it was said "A solicitor can be restrained as a matter of absolute obligation and as a matter of general principle from disclosing any secrets which are confidentially reposed in him" .
The obligation of confidence is of wider ambit than legal professional privilege.
In Weld-Blundell v Stephens [1920]AC 956 it was held that an accountant owed a duty to keep a letter of instructions confidential.
Bankers are under a similar duty of confidentiality to their clients (see Tournier v National Provincial and Union Bank of England [1924]1 KB 461).
Statutory regulation of the disclosure of confidential information in the banking sphere is found in ss82-7 of the Banking Act 1987.
Under this the Bank of England is permitted in certain circumstances to disclose information provided to it.
Information having the necessary quality of confidence which is supplied by one party of a contract to another for the purpose of enabling that other to perform a contract will usually be subject to an obligation of confidence so that the recipient may only use it for the purpose of that contract.
Professional advisers and bankers
Information supplied to enable the performance of contracts
A common situation where such an obligation of confidence is likely to arise is in subcontracting arrangements where the prime contractor supplies detailed information relating to the products which are to be built to his subcontractor.
This information may only be used by the subcontractor for the purpose of performing the agreement.
A typical example of this was the subject of Saltman Engineering Co v Campbell Engineering Co (1963) 65 RPC 203 where drawings of tools for the manufacture of leather punches were placed in the hands of subcontractors for the purpose of manufacturing the tools for one of the plaintiffs.
The defendants used the drawings to manufacture tools which they sold on their own account.
The court held that the defendants were guilty of a breach of confidence.
(See also Ackroyd v Gill (1856) 5 E&B 808, Tuck & Sons v Priester (1887) 19 QBD 629 and Prince Albert v Strange (1849) 1 Mac & G 25.)
Schering Chemicals v Falkman [1981]2 WLR 848 provides perhaps the most extreme example of  the obligation of confidence arising from disclosure for a limited purpose.
In that case Schering employed Falkman Ltd to give its executives instruction in how to deal with the media regarding one of its products.
Falkman employed a freelance expert to assist it.
Schering disclosed what it regarded as confidential information to Falkman and the expert for this purpose.
It was held that the expert was bound to maintain the confidentiality of the information and was accordingly not entitled to use the information for the purpose of making a television film.
This was the case notwithstanding the fact that all the information which was given to the expert had in fact been previously published.
As Templeman LJ put it: As between Scherings and [the expert]if [the expert]had obtained the information from sources other than Scherings, then it would of course not have been confidential in his hands, but, by agreeing to advise Scherings and by accepting information from them to enable him to advise Scherings,[the expert]placed himself under a duty, in my judgment not to make use of that information without the consent of Scherings in a manner which Scherings reasonably considered harmful to their cause.
This difficult case was discussed in Attorney General v Guardian Newspapers Ltd [1987]3 All ER 376 at p 374 per Lord Oliver, and Attorney General v Guardian Newspapers Ltd (No 2)[1988]3 All ER 545 at p 625 per Bingham LJ.
Considerable difficulties of construction can arise in licence and distribution agreements where confidential information relating to the products is supplied to the licensee or distributor.
In Regina Glass Fibre v Schuller [1972]RPC 229 it was held that the licensee had the right to continue using improvement patents and know-how even after the end of the licence agreement.
Conversely in Torrington Manufacturing Co v Smith and Son (England) Ltd [1966]RPC 285 it was held that a distributor's right to use drawings of products supplied by the manufacturer was limited to the purpose and duration of the agreement.
It could not use them to manufacture its own products (see also Peter Pan Manufacturing Corp v Corsets Silhouette [1964]1 WLR 96).
What is required is an agreement which clearly addresses the point.
For an example of the difficulties in proving what is confidential in such a case see Suhner and Co AG v Transradio Ltd [1967]RPC 329.
An obligation of confidence will usually arise as between partners.
Thus in the case of Morrison v Moat (1851) 9 Hare 241 when one partner communicated a secret recipe of the partnership to his son who subsequently sought to exploit that recipe for his own account, an injunction was granted to restrain him.
Information disclosed on discovery in legal proceedings is clearly held under an obligation of confidence and may be used only for the purpose of those proceedings.
See for example Distillers Co (Biochemicals) Ltd v Times Newspapers [1975]QB 613 and Riddick v Thames Board Mills Ltd [1977]QB 881.  3 Duration of the duty It is difficult to lay down any general rule for determining the period for which an obligation of confidence will last.
Much will depend upon the circumstances of the disclosure, the nature of the information itself and even whether it is capable of being protected by an implied obligation.
In the case of an employment contract, Scott J, in Balston Ltd v Headline Filters Ltd [1987]FSR 330 at p 348, said that the implied obligation referred to in Faccenda Chicken of protecting trade secrets "will always be unlimited in time" and probably in area as well.
The question of the duration of the duty in cases where the 'springboard"doctrine applies has been discussed above.
An example of the limited duration of an obligation of confidence in a 'springboard"case is found in Fisher-Karpark Indusries Ltd v Nichols [1982]FSR 351 where account was taken in determining the duration of an injunction of the extent to which the information was generally available from public sources.
The obligation will usually last only for as long as the information retains the necessary quality of confidence.
For example in Franchi v Franchi [1967]RPC 149 the obligation of confidence in information relating to a method of making stone tiles was held to have lapsed upon the publication by the plaintiff of the information in a patent application.
However, publication of the information will not always bring the obligation to an end.
In Schering Chemicals v Falkman the fact that all the information which the defendant sought to use was already available in published material did not relieve the defendant of his duty.
As Shaw LJ said"It is not the law that where confidentiality exists it is terminated or eroded by adventitious publicity.
Nor is the correlative duty to preserve that confidentiality".
The pragmatic approach of the courts to the question of when publication brings the obligation to an end is shown in Speed Seal Ltd v Paddington [1985]1 WLR 1327 where the publication of the plaintiff's secrets had been made by the defendant.
Fox LJ pointed out that the purpose of the injunction was to protect the plaintiff.
If the defendant was the only person other than the plaintiff using the information (or one of a few) then the injunction would be effective to protect the plaintiff and would be granted.
The following conclusions can perhaps be drawn from the authorities.
Firstly, where the use to which the information is to be put is publication or sale of the information the courts will be less sympathetic to arguments that there can be no confidence.
This is perhaps inevitable because in such cases it is not entirely illogical to argue that if the information was already publicly known why should anyone want to publish it or sell it?
It is perhaps for this reason that the Court of Appeal in Faccenda left open the question as to whether an employee could sell the information which was comprised in the skills acquired in the course of employment which he could not be prevented from using himself.
Secondly, that where information becomes publicly available through the actions of the plaintiff the courts will more readily find that the information no longer has the requisite quality of confidence than where publication is by a third party.
It was in this context that Lord Denning in Dunford and Elliott v Firth Brown [1978]FSR 143 added a gloss to the analysis of Megarry V-C in Coco v Clark (AN)(Engineers) Ltd when he said that if the stipulation of confidence was  unreasonable at the time of making it; or if it was reasonable at the beginning, but afterwards, in the course of subsequent happenings, it becomes unreasonable that it should be enforced: then the courts will decline to enforce it.
In that case the plaintiff had made information relevant to evaluating a takeover bid for its shares available to 43 per cent of its shareholders.
The information had also been disclosed in confidence to another shareholder who was using if for the purpose of making a bid for the plaintiff company.
It was held that the widespread use of the information drove a hole in the blanket of confidence.
A further circumstance in which the obligation of confidence will come to an end is where an express provision of limited duration expires.
In such a case it will be difficult to persuade a court to imply any further obligation: see the judgment of Lord Denning in Potters Ballottini Ltd v Weston-Baker [1977]RPC 202.
Similarly the court in Bullivant (Roger) Ltd v Ellis took note of the duration of a restrictive covenant in a former employee's contract of employment in determining how long it would restrain the defendant from using an index of customers removed from his former employers.
In Systems Reliability Holdings Plc v Smith [1990]IRLR 377.
Harman J decided that the injunction restraining a breach of confidence should expire at the same time as a restrictive covenant.
Lastly, an obligation of confidence, at least where it is only equitable, will come to an end when public policy will no longer be served by upholding it.
This principle is unlikely to be of great relevance in cases for the protection of business secrets.
It is best illustrated by the Crossman Diaries Case, A-G v Jonathan Cape Ltd [1976]QB 752 where the court would not prevent the publication of diaries of cabinet discussions on grounds of confidentiality after a period of ten years.
4 Breach of the duty The question of what constitutes a breach of the duty of confidentiality falls into two parts.
There is the difficult issue of whether use as opposed to disclosure constitutes breach.
In addition there are circumstances in which disclosure is permissible.
In general, it would appear that where an obligation of confidentiality arises, the courts will give relief, not only in respect of disclosure of the information, but also as to use of the information without the consent of the person to whom the duty of confidentiality is owed.
This will be the case even where disclosure of the information is not an inevitable consequence of its use (see for example Amber Size and Chemical Co Ltd v Menzel [1913]30 RPC 433).
However the courts are often reluctant to grant injunctions against the use of information where such information could have been relatively easily acquired by the defendant through his own legitimate efforts (see Seager v Copydex Ltd and Coco v Clark (AN)(Engineers) Ltd).
Care must be taken in the drafting of express contractual restraints to ensure that they clearly cover both use and non-disclosure.
In Marshall (Thomas)(Exporters) Ltd v Guinle [1979]1 Ch 227 Megarry V-C held that an express contractual restriction on disclosure did not also prohibit use of the information (the plaintiff was, in fact, granted an injunction against  use on the grounds of the defendant's duty of good faith but this duty will not exist in all cases).
This point is discussed further at p104. 5 Defences 5.1 Iniquity In a long line of cases the courts have held that the disclosure of information relating to what was originally termed iniquity will not be restrained: see Gartside v Outram (1856) 2 LJ Ch 113, Weld-Blundell v Stephens [1920]AC 956; Initial Services Ltd v Putterill [1968]1 QB 396; Fraser v Evans [1969]1 QB 349; Hubbard v Vosper [1972]1 All ER 1023; Church of Scientology of California v Kaufman [1973]RPC 635; British Steel Corporation v Granada Television Ltd [1981]1 All ER 417; and Lion Laboratories Ltd v Evans [1984]2 All ER 417.
This doctrine has its roots in the equitable nature of the duty of confidence but can now be regarded as covering both equitable and contractual obligations of confidence (see Initial Services Ltd v Putterill).
Although originally the doctrine was thought to be restricted to cases of iniquity or wrong-doing on the part of the party seeking to enforce the obligation of confidence, it is now clear that this is not so.
The test is whether the public interest in disclosure outweighs the public interest in the preservation of confidence.
As Griffiths LJ explained in Lion Laboratories Ltd v Evans "I believe that the so-called iniquity rule evolved because in most cases where the facts justified a publication in breach of confidence the plaintiff had behaved so disgracefully or criminally that it was judged in the public interest that his behaviour should be exposed" and, as he aptly stated, "there is a world of difference between what is in the public interest and what is of interest to the public" .
In Re A Company's Application [1989]3 WLR 265 the plaintiff company carried on the business of providing financial advice and was subject to the regulatory scheme imposed by FIMBRA pursuant to the provisions of the Financial Services Act 1986.
The defendant had been employed by the company as its compliance officer; his duty it was to supervise the procedures and practices of the plaintiff so as to secure fulfilment of the regulatory requirements imposed by FIMBRA.
FIMBRA was entitled at its discretion from time to time to make spot checks on companies subject to its regulatory umbrella and therefore the details of the businesses carried out by the company might at any time have become known to it.
In October 1988 the company gave the defendant one month's notice.
On 12 December 1988 a telephone conversation took place between the defendant and one of the company's chief executives which the plaintiff's company interpreted as an attempt to blackmail, whereas the defendant contended that he had merely indicated his intentions to seek compensation for dismissal.
The defendant also raised certain matters which in his view represented breaches of the regulatory scheme by the plaintiff or improprieties in regard to tax.
The plaintiffs made an application for an interlocutory injunction to restrain the defendant from disclosing to the regulatory body or to the revenue its confidential information or documents.
Scott J concluded that if this were a case in which there was any question or  threat of general disclosure by the defendant of confidential information concerning the way in which the plaintiff carried on its business or concerning any details of the affairs of any of its clients there would be no answer to the claim for an injunction; but it was not general disclosure that the defendant had in mind.
He desired to disclose only to FIMBRA and the Inland Revenue.
He asked himself whether an employee of a company carrying on the business of giving financial advice and of financial management to the public under the regulatory umbrella provided by FIMBRA owes a duty of confidentiality that extends to barring disclosure information to FIMBRA.
He answered that question in the negative and likewise in relation to the Inland Revenue.
He granted an injunction restraining the defendant from using and/or disclosing confidential information but qualified it so that it did not apply to communications made by the defendant either to FIMBRA or the Inland Revenue in respect of the matters identified in the defence.
In addition he accepted an undertaking by the defendent not to reveal other than to his legal advisers the fact that he had made communications to FIMBRA and the Inland Revenue.
In W v Egdell [1989]2 WLR 689 Scott J had to consider the duty of confidentiality owed by a doctor to a patient.
The plaintiff had applied to a Mental Health Tribunal to be transferred from a secure hospital.
In support of the application he sought a report from the first defendant, an independant consultant psychiatrist.
The first defendant's report was unfavourable to the plaintiff and it was sent by him to the plaintiff's solicitors.
The plaintiff's solicitors withdrew the application to the tribunal.
The first defendant learnt of this but also became aware that no copy of his report had been sent to the tribunal or was on the plaintiff's file at the hospital.
The first defendant decided to supply a copy of it to the hospital and subsequently copies were sent to the Home Secretary and the Department of Health and Social Security.
The plaintiff issued a writ against the defendant claiming that a breach of confidence had occurred.
The judge was in no doubt that if the defendant had sold the contents of his report to a newspaper that would have been a breach of confidence.
However the question in the present case was whether the duty of confidence which the defendant no doubt owed to the plaintiff extended so far as to bar disclosure of the report to the hospital or the Home Office.
In order to answer that question the court had to balance the interest to be served by non-disclosure against the interest served by disclosure.
Scott J concluded that it was in the public interest for there to have been disclosure to those two bodies.
5.2 Miscellaneous It will be no breach of confidentiality to disclose documents on discovery in the course of litigation even if they are held subject to a duty of confidence owed to a third party.
See for example Chantry Martin & Co v Martin [1953]2 QB 286 and Crompton (Alfred) Amusement Machines Ltd v Commissioners of Customs & Excise [1974]AC 405.
However in a proper case the court is prepared to balance the public interest in full disclosure on discovery against the public interest in honouring an obligation of confidence.
Thus in D v NSPCC [1978]AC 171 the court was willing to permit the NSPCC to withhold  the name of their informant but in British Steel Corporation v Granada Television Ltd [1981]1 All ER 417 the defendants were ordered to disclose the name of the plaintiff's employee who had supplied them with confidential information belonging to the plaintiff.
Similarly an obligation of confidence may not be prayed in aid of a refusal to disclose secret information to a trustee in bankruptcy if it can be regarded as part of the bankrupt's property (see Keene, Re [1922]2 Ch 475).
6 The question of detriment It has been suggested in some cases (see eg Coco v Clark (AN)(Engineers) Ltd [1969]RPC 41) that an obligation of confidence will not be enforced unless the disclosure or use of the information results in a detriment to the plaintiff or an advantage to his competitors.
As far as any remedy in damages is concerned this point will not be of any significance and it is most unlikely that any action would be brought in a business secrets case unless some damage or advantage to a competitor had occurred or was thought likely to do so.
However in an application for an injunction it is of great significance.
The matter was discussed in Attorney General v Guardian Newspapers Ltd (No 2)[1988]3 All ER 545.
Lord Keith at p 640 said, as a general rule it is in the public interest that confidences should be respected, and the encouragement of such respect may in itself constitute a sufficient ground for recognising and enforcing the obligation of confidence even where the confider can point to no specific detriment to himself.
Information about a person's private and personal affairs may be of a nature which shows him up in a favourable light and would by no means expose him to criticism.
The anonymous donor of a very large sum to a very worthy cause has his own reasons for wishing to remain anonymous, which are unlikely to be discreditable.
He should surely be in a position to restrain disclosure in breach of confidence of his identity in connection with the donation.
 "…I would think it a sufficient detriment to the confider that information given in confidence is to be disclosed to persons whom he would prefer not to know of it, even though the disclosure would not be harmful to him in any positive way." 
Lord Griffiths at pp 649–50 concluded that "detriment or potential detriment" was necessary in order to obtain an injunction.
Lord Goff at p 659 went further in saying "I would…wish to keep open the question whether detriment to the plaintiff is an essential ingredient of an action for breach of confidence" .
However, he pointed out that in most cases detriment will exist.
This is certainly correct in commercial cases.
7 Locus standi (to whom is the duty owed) Leaving aside the question of duties of third parties who receive confidential information which is dealt with below, the question of locus standi to bring a claim for breach of confidence has not often come before the courts.
The leading case is Fraser v Evans [1969]1 QB 349.
That case concerned an article which The Sunday Times were proposing to publish.
It was to be based on a  report which the plaintiff had prepared for the Greek Government.
The plaintiff's contract with the Greek Government placed him under an obligation of confidence but placed the Greek Government under no such obligation.
It appeared that The Sunday Times had obtained their copy of the report from an unauthorised Greek Government source.
It was said by the court that the plaintiff's case must fail because any duty of confidence which might exist was owed to the Greek Government and not to the plaintiff.
It therefore seems clear that in order to found an action for breach of confidence the defendant must have obtained the information as a result of a disclosure by the plaintiff in circumstances of confidence.
Presumably it is also possible to acquire locus standi to bring a claim by means of an assignment, subject to the usual limitations on the assignment of bare causes of action.
8 Third parties Without doubt the courts will in proper circumstances restrain a breach of confidence by third parties who have come by confidential information.
The nature of those circumstances is unclear.
Two clear situations can be discerned.
Firstly, if the defendant receives the information in the knowledge that it is being disclosed in breach of confidence he will be bound by an obligation of confidence (see for example Albert (Prince) v Strange (1849) 1 Mac & G 25, Schering Chemicals v Falkman [1981]2 WLR 848).
Secondly, if X discloses information in confidence to Y and Y then discloses the information in confidence to Z (but does not tell Z that he has obtained the information from X) then X will be able to proceed directly against Z if Z disregards the obligation of confidence (see Saltman Engineering Co v Campbell Engineering Co [1963]65 RPC 203).
Greater difficulties arise where the defendant comes by the information without notice of any restrictions on its disclosure.
In certain cases it might well be that the defendant's ignorance will not help him.
In the Argyll Group Plc v Distillers Co Plc [1986]1 CMLR 764 the confidentiality of documents produced on discovery was in issue.
Talbot J said "those who disclose documents on discovery are entitled to the protection of the court against any use of the documents by any person into whose hands they come unless it is directly connected with the action in which they are produced" .
There was no suggestion that an innocent recipient should be permitted to use the documents (by the same token there was no suggestion that the recipients were innocent of the means by which the documents had been obtained).
In other cases an innocent recipient may be protected at least until he becomes aware of the confidential nature of the information.
As Lord Denning said in Fraser v Evans: No person is permitted to divulge to the world information which he has received in confidence, unless he has just cause or excuse for doing so.
Even if he comes by it innocently, nevertheless once he gets to know that it was originally given in confidence, he can be restrained from breaking that confidence.
However it should be recalled that even if an obligation of confidence is held to exist the grant of an injunction is in the discretion of the court.
Where the defendant has innocently made a substantial investment on the basis of information innocently acquired it is most unlikely that an injunction would be granted to restrain him from making use of that information (although the fact that an injunction might drive the defendant into liquidation is not relevant if the tests in American Cyanamid Co v Ethicon [1975]AC 396 have been satisfied; per May LJ in Bullivant (Roger) Ltd v Ellis [1987]ICR 464).
Thus, in Seager v Copydex Ltd [1967]1 WLR 923 no injunction was granted to prevent the defendant's use of information supplied by the plaintiff in ignorance of the duty of confidence but the plaintiff had a remedy in damages.
In Attorney General v Guardian Newspapers Ltd (No 2)[1988]2 WLR 805 at p873, Lord Donaldson MR stated that at first instance Scott J had come to the conclusion that the duty to maintain confidentiality was not necessarily in all circumstances the same in relation to third parties who became possessed of confidential information as it was in relation to the primary confident.
He agreed with that proposition and stated: The reason is that the third party recipient may be subject to some additional and conflicting duty which does not affect the primary confidant or may not be subject to some special duty which does effect that confidant.
In such situations the equation is not the same in the case of the confidant and that of the third party and accordingly the result may be different.
Even though this case went to the House of Lords no disagreement with that statement of principle is found in the judgments there.
9 Equity, law and property There has been much academic discussion about the nature of the law of confidence.
It is clear that one cannot own confidential information in the sense that one can own a car.
This is because information is not the same sort of thing as a car.
This is obvious when one considers that two identical copies of a blueprint clearly contain the same information, but two identical cars are not the same car.
To talk of owning information is therefore misleading.
All one may own are such rights as the law confers upon someone who holds confidential information.
These rights do not exist in the information itself but arise from its confidential nature and the circumstances in which persons other than the originator of the information come by it.
As has been seen the courts prefer, where possible, to give these rights a contractual basis (see Faccenda Chicken Ltd v Fowler [1985]1 All ER 729).
However, where no express or implied contract exists, as for example will be the case where third parties come by confidential information, the rights are presumably equitable in nature.
The judgments in Attorney General v Guardian Newspapers Ltd (No 2)[1988]3 All ER 545 made no distinction between contract or equity as a basis for the duty of confidence.
It should not however be supposed that because of the equitable  nature of these rights a bona fide purchaser for value will be protected.
Although the point is undecided (but see the Australian Wheatley v Bell [1984]FSR 16) the nature of information would seem to conflict with the existence of any legal estate.
Equity only protects the bona fide purchaser for value of a legal estate and so the rule should be of no application.
It is more probable that the whole matter lies in the discretion of the court as to the grant of an injunction (or damages in lieu).
In one respect, however, confidential information can be regarded as property.
It is possible to transfer it from one person to another so that the recipient can exercise such rights against third parties as may arise (see for example Keene, Re [1922]2 Ch 475).
If this is the aim it will, by the agreement of transfer, be necessary to specify that the transferor will not further use or disclose the information himself, otherwise the transferee will simply be one further person who is aware of the information.
The right of the transferee to sue, in his own name, persons who used information obtained from the transferor in breach of confidence before the date of the transfer is not clearly established.
Any well-drafted transfer will therefore provide for the transfer of the right to sue for such breaches.
In addition, it will be prudent for the transferee to join the transferor as a party to any such action.
10 Contractual rights The courts adopt substantially the same rules when implying an obligation of confidence into a contract and when finding an equitable obligation of confidence.
This is shown by the judgment of Lord Greene in Saltman where he said: "If two parties make a contract under which one of them obtains for the purpose of the contract or in connection with it some confidential matter, even though the contract is silent on the matter of confidence the law will imply an obligation to treat that confidential matter in a confidential way as one of the implied terms of the contract; but the obligation of confidence is not limited to cases where the parties are in a contractual relationship" .
This passage also shows the clear preference of the courts to rely on an implied contractual obligation (see also Faccenda).
10.1 Relationship between copyright and confidentiality It is important to remember that the actions for breach of confidence and breach of copyright are fundamentally different.
Whereas copyright protects the form in which an idea is expressed but not the idea itself, confidence can protect both the form and the idea.
Employer and Employee
CHAPTER 6: THE CLASSIC PROBLEMS
CHAPTER 7: IMPLIED AND EXPRESS DUTIES
CHAPTER 8: INTERESTS PROTECTABLE AFTER EMPLOYMENT ENDS
CHAPTER 9: DRAFTING RESTRICTIONS IN EMPLOYMENT CONTRACTS
The Classic Problems
There are two categories of case to which the restraint of trade doctrine has traditionally been applied: contracts between employers/employees and business sale agreements.
In Chapters 10-12 we examine the latter and in the next four chapters the former.
The general law relating to restraint of trade and business secrets is analysed in the first five chapters.
The usual difficulties which arise from restraint of trade and business secrets clauses in employment contracts occur because an employee has decided to set up as, or work for, a competitor of his employer.
His former employer will quite clearly not benefit from this conduct and the courts are concerned with defining how far the employer can restrict such competition.
It is important to divide the analysis between the position during employment and what happens once the employee has left because, generally, the courts are much more protective of the employer's interests during employments.
During employment the employee may damage his employer's business in the following ways:(a) working for a competitor during his hours of employment;(b) working for a competitor in his spare time;(c) making preparations in order to compete with his employer after he has left;(d) disclosing or using the employer's business secrets; or (e) failing to disclose information which may be of use to his employer and in some instances personally profiting from its use.
Once employment has terminated the employee may still damage his former employer's business by:(a) competing with his former employer;(b) canvassing or soliciting his former employer's business connections;(c) using or disclosing his former employer's business secrets; or (d) enticing his former colleagues away from his former employer to his new employer or business.
This part analyses the limits which the courts have placed on the freedom of an employee in the absence of express restrictive covenants and upon the ability of employers to restrain employees by contractual restrictions.
1 The attitude of the courts The courts have developed a practice of viewing the position of an employee as particularly special and significant when dealing with restraint of trade claims by an employer.
The reasons for this approach are clear.
Traditionally the contract of employment was drawn up by the employer and there was little or no negotiation as to its contents.
The employee was thought to lack bargaining power.
In M & S Drapers v Reynolds [1956]3 All ER 814 Denning LJ said: During the last 40 years the courts have shown a reluctance to enforce covenants of this sort.
They realise that a servant has often very little choice in the matter.
If he wants to get or to keep his employment, he has to sign the document which the employer puts before him and he may do so without fully appreciating what it may involve.
Moreover if these covenants were given full force, they would tend to reduce his freedom to seek better conditions even by asking for a rise in wages; because if he is not allowed to get work elsewhere he is very much at the mercy of his employer.
Whilst showing proper reluctance to enforce these convenants, the courts will, however, do so if they are shown to be reasonable…
Another reason for this special approach is that the employer does not pay a premium for freedom from competition from his employee.
On the other hand on the sale of a business the purchaser frequently does pay such a premium and the vendor correspondingly receives a price higher than if no restraint existed (see Morris (Herbert) Ltd v Saxelby [1916]1 AC 688 per Lord Atkinson).
Another reason for the special attitude of the courts in employment cases was given by Younger LJ in Attwood v Lamont [1920]3 KB 571: the employer cannot prevent the employee from using skill and knowledge once he has left, but he frequently tries to do so.
His attempts must be curbed.
In more recent times and in a case which did not strictly involve an employee, Lord Diplock said that the real concern of the courts was simply to ask whether the party with the greater bargaining power had exacted an unfairly onerous benefit (Schroeder (A) Music Publishing Co v Macaulay [1974]3 All ER 616).
However, the existence of the special approach towards employees can be overstated and it is dangerous to assume its existence.
Although a managing director will usually be an employee the courts sensibly view him in a different light from that of a manual worker.
As Denning LJ said in the M & S Drapers case: "A managing director can look after himself" .
In other words the courts are not required to be so vigilant in his case as he is presumed to have negotiated the terms of his contract.
It may also be thought that when an agreement is negotiated by a trade union inequality of bargaining power as understood in the cases is not often a relevant factor.
However, there is no reported case in which this point has been taken by an employer in order to argue that the special approach is not always applicable; it may be that the special approach is so entrenched in judicial thinking that even an employer who is able to demonstrate that the factual bases for the special approach do not exist in the instant case will not succeed in persuading the court to abandon it.
However it must be worth trying to do so especially if a senior employee has received independent legal advice before entering the agreement and has been  specifically compensated (as is common in the USA) for accepting the restraint.
The courts have recently demonstrated a reaction against an absurdly over-generous approach to the construction of agreements in the employee's favour: see Home Counties Dairies Ltd v Skilton [1970]1 WLR 526 in which the defendant was employed by the plaintiffs as a milkman and he expressly agreed that for a period of one year after his employment terminated he would not 'serve or sell milk or dairy produce"to any person who had been a customer of his employers and who had been served by him during the six months prior to his leaving.
Harman LJ noted that the clause appeared to have been carefully limited to avoid the usual pitfalls associated with an employer trying to "get too much" .
The defendant did leave and worked as a milkman for a competitor of his former employer.
At first instance, the court found that the restriction was unreasonable.
It acceded to an argument that it would prevent the defendant being employed by a grocer in selling dairy products in his shop.
This construction meant that the clause went beyond the protection of the goodwill of the employer's business.
On appeal, the court took a much more sensible view of the clause: it allowed the appeal on the basis that the clause should be read in the context of the whole employment agreement.
That agreement made it clear that the defendant was employed as a milkman and that the intention of the clause was to afford the employer protection only against the activities of an employee who worked as a milkman once his employment ended.
The court was adamant in its rejection of fanciful interpretations of the clause so as to make it so wide as to be unreasonable.
This case has been extensively cited and approved in more recent authorities: see for example Littlewoods Organisation Ltd v Harris [1978]1 All ER 1026.
Finally the courts do not appear to exhibit such a protective attitude towards the employee when asked to control his misuse of business secrets.
The result of this dichotomy is that the employer who can rely on the right to protect his business secrets is much more likely to succeed in court than when he seeks to enforce a traditional restraint of trade clause.
Implied and Express Duties during Employment
1 Implied duties During employment the employee owes his employer a duty of "fidelity" , alternatively called "good faith" .
This general duty has been considered in many cases and is quite clearly based on what a person of ordinary honesty would consider honest/dishonest (see Robb v Green [1895]2 QB 315; Printers and Finishers Ltd v Holloway [1964]3 All ER 731 and Roger Bullivant Ltd v Ellis [1987]ICR 464 at p475 per Nourse LJ).
In Robb v Green Lord Esher MR justified the implication of such a term: "It is impossible…that a master would have put a servant into a confidential position of this kind unless he thought that the servant would be bound to use good faith towards him; or that the servant would not know…that the master would rely on his observance of good faith…" .
However, as was recognised by Lord Greene MR in Hivac Ltd v Park Royal Scientific Instruments Ltd [1946]Ch 169, "The practical difficulty in any given case is to find exactly how far that rather vague duty of fidelity extends" .
The general duty of fidelity will be examined in the next five sections.
1.1 Duty not to compete within the duration of the employment contract This aspect of the duty of fidelity requires the employee not to work for any person who is or who might be in competition with his employer during the working day.
In Marshall (Thomas)(Exporters) Ltd v Guinle [1978]3 WLR 116 whilst managing director of the plaintiffs and without their knowledge or consent, the defendant placed orders for the benefit of himself and his own company with the plaintiffs' suppliers.
He also sold goods for his own benefit to customers of the plaintiffs.
His conduct was described by Megarry V-C as amounting to gross and repeated breaches of his implied obligation to be faithful to the plaintiffs.
There could be no doubt that by competing with the plaintiffs both as regards supplies and customers he had placed himself in a position in which there was a conflict of interest and duty.
Even though this case dealt with a managing director who was clearly in a fiduciary position, its  principles are equally applicable to other employees (see Sanders v Parry [1967]2 All ER 803).
This duty also prevents an employee from taking advantage of any approach which is initiated by a customer or supplier even though the employee did not seek or even encourage it, as happened in Sanders' case.
The degree of involvement which an employee has to demonstrate in order to fall foul of this duty need not always be very great.
He may simply assist a competitor in any way which does or may have an adverse and material effect on his employer's business.
As Brightman J said in United Sterling Corp Ltd v Felton and Mannion [1974]RPC 162 "This contractual obligation of fidelity…may prevent a skilled employee from giving his assistance to a competitor despite the fact that such assistance is provided by the employee in his own time and despite the fact that no information has been disclosed to the employees in confidence" .
However, it should not be thought that any assistance given to a competitor by the employee is necessarily a breach of his duty, for it may have been done with the employer's authority, though this will be a rare occurrence.
In practice, an employer will not always rely on the implied duty of fidelity: there will often be an express clause in the employment contract which directs the employee to devote his time exclusively to the promotion of the employer's business.
1.2 The employee's duty not to compete in his spare time As a general rule an employee cannot compete with his employer in his spare time without being in breach of his duty of fidelity.
The basic question is: do the activities of the employee interfere with the employer's legitimate interests or are they likely to do so?
If the answer is positive then the employer can seek redress.
In Hivac Ltd v Park Royal Scientific Instruments Ltd [1948]1 Ch 169 employees of the plaintiffs who were highly skilled in assembling hearing-aid valves had Sundays off.
The defendants who manufactured similar valves and were effectively competitors of the plaintiff company offered work to the plaintiff's employees on Sundays.
The employees accepted.
The defendants alone were sued for inducing/procuring the employees to breach their contracts of employment.
There was no evidence that the employees had misused any of the plaintiffs' business secrets.
The Court of Appeal concluded that this was a case of deliberate and secret action by the employees and the defendants in circumstances in which they must have known the exact result of what they were doing and must have known it was wrong.
In addition to this breach of the moral duty of fidelity, the court appears to have been concerned with the risk of confidential information being passed to competitors, because it was satisfied that the plaintiffs did own certain business secrets of which the employees had knowledge.
The court also commented that a manual worker might owe a duty which did not extend outside his hours of employment and this seems sensible.
On the other hand the very nature of the work may be such as to make it quite clear that the duties of the employee to his employer cannot properly be performed if he engages in certain activities in his spare time.
Each case depends on its facts.
The court discussed the example of a solicitor's clerk and said that in such a case it would be improper for him to work for another solicitor in his spare time.
There might be a real risk of embarrassment to his full-time employers if he were asked to act for a client in his spare time who was on the other side of a case in which his main employers were engaged.
The important points which emerge from this case are that the employer will be able to rely on this part of the duty of fidelity if it can be shown that the employee works for a trade competitor in his spare time and:(a) knows of business secrets which may be of use to the competitor and/or (b) occupies a position which makes it expedient to recognise the existence of his duty to work for the employer alone.
See also Nova Plastics Ltd v Froggatt [1982]IRLR 146 which concerned an "odd-job" man.
1.3 The employee's duty not to make preparations in order to compete with his employer after he has left or to enable another to do so The employee cannot make preparations during his employment, either during the working day or in his spare time, with a view to competing with his employer once his employment is over if such preparation may have a material effect on his employer's business.
Obviously, an employee is free to apply for another position even with a rival of his present employer, or to find premises in which to set up a future business so long as in doing so he is not in breach of any valid express term in his employment contract: see Searle (GD) & Co Ltd v Celltech Ltd [1982]FSR 92.
Certainly, the law will not imply a term which prevents him from doing so.
What he cannot do without infringing the duty of fidelity is to make such preparations in his employer's time or use or disclose either the business secrets or trade connections of his employer.
Only after he had left is he free, in the absence of express restraint, to make use of the latter though never the former.
In Marshall (Thomas)(Exporters) Ltd v Guinle [1978]3 WLR 116 the defendant was not simply competing with the plaintiff during his employment but was also taking steps to prepare to compete once he had left by dealing with customers and suppliers of his employer.
This was a very clear example of breach but others are less obvious.
Detection is a great problem as breach is frequently only discovered after employment ends.
The employer may find it difficult when he becomes aware of the fact that his former customers are now dealing with his former employee to prove that preparation to entice them away or enticement did in fact take place during employment.
The usual way in which this duty is breached is for the employee to mention to customers that he is leaving and either directly or indirectly suggest to them that he is available to meet their needs once he has left.
He may also consciously memorise client's names and their particular requirements.
In Robb v Green [1895]2 QB 315 the defendant, employed by the plaintiff as the manager of his business, surreptitiously copied from the plaintiff's order book a list of names  and addresses of customers with the intention of soliciting them after he had left employment and had set up a similar business on his own.
Subsequently he did leave and did use the list.
The Court of Appeal affirmed the existence of an implied duty not to prepare to compete and gave judgment for the plaintiffs.
However, they did not deal with a suggestion made by Hawkins J at first instance that, in some circumstances, an employee could "legitimately canvass, issue his circulars, have his place of business in readiness, hire his servants, etc" [1895]2 QB 1.
He was relying on the earlier case of Nichol v Martyn [1799]2 Esp 732, but in Wessex Dairies Ltd v Smith [1935]2 KB 80 Maugham LJ cast doubt on both those judgments and so far as the modern law is concerned they should not be relied on to the extent that they indicate the employee can canvass or issue circulars to customers of his employer before he leaves.
Nor can the employee do anything else in Hawkins J's list in his employer's time.
In the Wessex Dairies case, it was found that on the last day of his employment as a milkman the defendant, whilst on his round, informed customers that he would soon cease to be employed by the plaintiffs, that he was going to set up business on his own and could supply them with milk.
The court said that he was plainly soliciting their custom at a time when he was under a duty of fidelity to his employer and awarded his former employers damages.
A more recent example is Sanders v Parry [1967]1 WLR 753 which concerned a solicitor's practice.
After joining the plaintiff as an assistant solicitor the defendant entered an agreement with T, one of the plaintiff's clients.
The agreement stated that the defendant would leave the plaintiff's employment and set up on his own in premises which T would lease to him and T would transfer his custom to the defendant.
When the plaintiff heard of this, he dismissed the defendant, and sought an injunction to prevent him breaching his duty of fidelity.
In his defence, the defendant claimed that it was T who had approached him and that he had not initiated the agreement.
Havers J accepted this but said:…there was a duty on the defendant at all times during the subsistence of [the employment]agreement to protect his master's interests, especially to do his best to retain Mr Tully as a client of his master…
Now, in accepting Tully's offer, the defendant was not protecting his master's interests…[he]was placing himself in a position in which there was a conflict of interests between him and his principal and he was looking after his own interests to the detriment of his master's interests.
He was knowingly, deliberately and secretly acting, setting out to do something which would inevitably inflict great harm on his principal.
However, the dividing line between what is and what is not permissible is often difficult to draw, as Maugham LJ illustrated in the Wessex Dairies case:…although the servant is not entitled to make use of information which he has obtained in confidence in his master's service he is entitled to make use of the knowledge and skill which he acquired while in that service, including knowledge and skill directly obtained from the master in teaching him his business.
It follows, in my opinion, that the servant may, whilst in the employment of the master, be as agreeable, attentive, and skilful as it is in his power to be to others with the ultimate view of obtaining  the benefit of the customers' friendly feelings when he calls upon them if and when he sets up business for himself.
What he cannot do is anything more positive.
In Island Export and Finance Ltd v Umunna [1986]BCLC 460 it was held that a director's fiduciary duty did not necessarily come to an end when he ceased to be a director.
A director was precluded from diverting to himself a maturing business opportunity which his company was actively pursuing even after his resignation where the resignation was prompted or influenced by a desire to acquire that opportunity for himself.
However, on the facts of the case the plaintiff's claim failed as it had not proved:(a) the existence of a "maturing" business opportunity;(b) that it was actively pursuing the business either when the defendant resigned or when he subsequently obtained the contracts; or (c) that his resignation was prompted or influenced by the wish to acquire the benefit of the contracts for himself.
It is to be noted that even in the case of a fiduciary the ambit of his duty once he has ceased to be for example, a director, is circumscribed.
A difficult question is whether in the case of an employee who is not a fiduciary the same principles also apply.
It is submittted that, on the whole, most employees are under no such implied duty once employment has ceased.
If the employer requires protection he should have the foresight to include an express covenant in the employment contract.
In Balston Ltd v Headline Filters Ltd [1987]FSR 330, H, the second defendant, on 17 March gave notice of termination of his employment as deputy managing director with Balston Ltd.
It was agreed that his employment would end on 11 July.
On 16 April he resigned his directorship of Balston Ltd and it was agreed that he need not attend work during the remainder of the notice period.
In the period between 16 April and 11 July he bought H Ltd off the shelf, arranged premises for it and ordered materials preparatory to the start of trading on 11 July.
H Ltd was to trade in direct competition with Balston Ltd.
Scott J however did not criticise H for his activities during the notice period.
It may be that the decisive factor in H's favour was the fact that H was effectively on "garden leave" .
It may be that if he had been actively working for Balston Ltd his activities might have been in breach of his implied duty of fidelity.
This subject has been recently considered by the Employment Appeal Tribunal in Laughton v Bapp Industrial Supplies Ltd [1986]ICR 634.
In that case the employees, who were warehousemen employed by a company which supplied nuts and bolts, wrote to ten of their employers' suppliers informing them that they intended to start up in business on their own trading in nuts and bolts, and asking for details of their products.
The employers learned of the letters and summarily dismissed the employees for gross misconduct.
On their complaints of unfair dismissal an industrial tribunal found that the employers were justified in their decision that the employees were in breach of their implied duty in their contracts of employment that they should be loyal to their employers and that the dismissals were not unfair.
The employees appealed and it was held, allowing the appeal, that the industrial tribunal had erred in law in holding that an intention to compete in the future with their employers  expressed by the employees in letters to their employers' suppliers was in itself a breach of a duty of fidelity owed by the employees to the employers and that accordingly the dismissals had been unfair.
Peter Gibson J said, at p638: An employee with experience in a particular industry who is intending to leave, whether to join a competitor as an employee or to set up in competition on his own account, commits no breach of contract in doing so unless either there is a specific term of his contract to that effect which does not fall foul of the doctrine against restraint of trade or he is intending to use the confidential information of his employer otherwise and for the benefit of his employer.
See also Ixora Trading Inc v Jones [1990]1 FSR 251 per Mummery J at p262.
There the evidence before him merely disclosed that the defendants whilst being employed by the plaintiffs simply made plans or preparations for their future post termination activities.
This, he said, could not be characterised as having breached the duty of good faith which amounted to no more than a principle of fair and honourable dealing.
1.4 The employee's duty not to disclose or use his employer's business secrets What constitutes a legitimate business secret has already been discussed earlier.
However, given the existence of such a secret there is an implied duty that an employee will not disclose such secrets to another or use them himself.
A general principle in the employment field was laid down in Printers and Finishers Ltd v Holloway [1964]3 All ER 731 where Cross J said that employees are prohibited from using information which "can fairly be regarded as a separate part of the employee's stock of knowledge which a man of ordinary honesty and intelligence would recognise to be the property of his old employer and not his own to do as he likes with" .
(See also Bents Brewery Co Ltd v Hogan [1945]2 All ER 570.)
Unfortunately, this test has proved somewhat difficult to apply to practical situations.
However it was used in Industrial Furnaces Ltd v Reaves [1970]RPC 605.
The defendant had been a director of plaintiffs for 13 years and had been in charge of the development and sales of a certain type of heater.
On leaving the plaintiffs, the defendant set up another company which sold heaters of a similar type to some of the plaintiffs' previous customers.
On being sued by the plaintiffs for breach of the implied duty of confidentiality, the defendant claimed that he had made all his calculations in designing the heater from information which had been published in a readily obtainable leaflet.
Graham J found that such information was not readily available and went on to say that the information had been obtained as a result of considerable labour and expense on the part of the plaintiffs and was therefore valuable and, it followed, confidential.
A particular problem which frequently arises is a claim by an employee that even if he must have realised, in accordance with the principle laid down in the Printers and Finishers case, that he was under a duty to maintain a confidence, such duty was in fact overridden by the way in which his employer acted towards  the information ie that the employer is estopped from now relying on confidence.
An example of such a case is Bjorlow (GB) Ltd v Minter [1954]71 RPC 321 in which the employer claimed that a process was secret and had been wrongfully used and disclosed by the defendant, a former employee.
The plaintiff could not prove that the defendant knew it was a secret process either because of its nature or because he had been specifically told that it was and Vaisey J pointed out that if it were really secret it was surprising that the defendant's employment had brought him into contact with it; he had been to prison in the past.
He said that the defendant had never been told he was being entrusted with secrets, there was no express covenant covering business secrets and the defendant never knew that he must not talk about his work outside his employment.
Vaisey J went on to say that the employers had shown"the utmost carelessness in allowing this defendant to get knowledge of what they knew was a very valuable secret…
People with valuable secrets ought not to allow subordinate employees…to obtain knowledge of this kind, and if they choose to do it without warning them they will find it very difficult to claim interlocutory relief successfully".
Evershed MR said that "the plaintiffs took no steps whatever…to impress upon anybody that there was here any important secret which they desired to preserve" .
This case shows neither that employers should refuse jobs to those who have a murky past nor that they should not entrust secrets to subordinate employees—that is impracticable—but that they should not simply rely on the implied duty of confidence; it can lead to misunderstandings and difficulties as to what is really secret.
A prudent employer will always have an express contractual term protecting business secrets.
Whether the court's approach in cases such as Bjorlow would also be adopted even if the employee made use of or disclosed business secrets during employment has not been determined: in Bjorlow, the defendant made use of the information only after he had left.
It is submitted that in the former case the approach would probably be modified by the basic duty of fidelity to the extent that confidentiality would be lost only if the employer could be said to have shown wilful disregard to the quality of the confidence, rather than having been merely negligent.
Recently, in Faccenda Chicken Ltd v Fowler [1985]1 All ER 724;[1986]1 All ER 617 Goulding J and the Court of Appeal considered information which was not protected by an express clause and which was clearly used by employees once employment had ended.
In addition, comments were made about the ambit of the implied duty of fidelity and business secrets during employment.
There is a full discussion of this case at p76. 1.5 The employee's duty to disclose to his employer information which may be of use to that employer (and not personally to profit from it) If, during the course of employment, an employee receives information which is or may reasonably be relevant to his employer's business then he is under a duty:(a) to disclose all relevant information received to the employer; and (b) not to use that information for his or another's benefit unless the employer consents.
The source of the information is irrelevant.
Moreover, the information need not be confidential as is shown in Sanders v Parry [1967]1 WLR 753 and Swain v West (Butchers) Ltd [1936]1 All ER 224; 3 All ER 261; though it was in Cranleigh Precision Engineering Ltd v Bryant [1966]RPC 81.
It need only be relevant to the wellbeing of the employer's business.
In Sanders v Parry, the defendant whilst in the plaintiff's employment as an assistant solicitor was told by another member of staff that she was dissatisfied with her employment.
It seems that the other staff member had never spoken to her employer on the subject, though she had opportunity to do so.
Moreover, an important client of the plaintiff told the defendant that he was dissatisfied with the plaintiff's conduct of his affairs.
Instead of passing on this information, the defendant persuaded the other employee to leave and join his own business; the discontented client in the meantime had agreed with the defendant that he would use him as his legal adviser in the future.
The result of the case—in which the defendant was found in breach of his duty of fidelity—was inevitable.
The defendant had placed himself in a position where his duty and interest conflicted even though both the employee and client appear to have had no intention of remaining with the plaintiff.
In Swain v West (Butchers) Ltd it was held that an employee, having learnt of detrimental behaviour of another employee, which was relevant to his employer's business, was under a duty to report that fact to his employers.
Although there was an express clause in the employment contract by which the employee was under a duty "to promote, extend and develop the interests of the company" the court would clearly have reached the same conclusion on the basis of the implied duty of fidelity.
Obviously, what is or may be of importance to an employer's business is a question of fact; and it was no doubt significant in Swain that S was the general manager, the wrongful employee was the managing director, his conduct was dishonest and it could have had a material effect on the defendant's business (labelling meat as "Empire Products" when it was not).
Moreover, Greer LJ specifically said "I do not decide that in every case where the relation of master and servant exists it is the duty of the servant to disclose, or to disclose upon inquiry, any discrepancies of which he knows of his fellow servants" .
This caveat was echoed in Sybron Corp v Rochem Ltd [1983]3 WLR 713 where it was said that if an employee were required to report each and every breach of duty by fellow employees this would ruin good industrial relations.
The ambit of the duty must depend on the circumstances, especially the respective positions of those involved.
Moreover that case established that the duty still exists even if by reporting the conduct the reporter incriminates himself.
The Court of Appeal in Sybron were not in a position to criticise the House of Lords decision in Bell v Lever Bros Ltd [1931]AC 161 though they distinguished it.
Bell says that a contract of employment is not a contract uberrimae fidei so as to require disclosure by the employee of his own misconduct, either before he is taken into employment or during the course of his employment.
It seems to us that the House of Lords today might come to another conclusion.
However, see Horcal Ltd v Gatland [1984]IRLR 288.
Cranleigh Precision Engineering Ltd v Bryant [1964]3 All ER 289, is a particular example of the misuse of confidential information received by an employee for his employer's benefit.
B was the managing director of the plaintiffs.
However, he had, unknown to the plaintiffs, set up another business which was dormant until he left their employment.
Whilst still employed by the plaintiffs, B was told by that company's patent agents of a foreign invention of a product similar to that of the plaintiffs.
That invention had been awarded an English patent but B did not mention that fact to the plaintiffs, and after he left he acquired it.
Roskill J said that B was in breach of an implied duty in:(a) not communicating to the plaintiffs' board the information which he received from the patent agents and in taking no steps to protect the plaintiffs against possible consequences of the existence of the patent; and (b) using information regarding the patent for his own benefit.
Moreover, as the patent specification was not published by the plaintiffs but by another party, its publication did not cause the information to lose its quality of confidence and therefore B was not released from his duty to the plaintiffs.
B was enjoined from using the patent; see also Industrial Development Consultants v Cooley [1972]2 All ER 192. 2 Express duties In some instances all of the duties which are implied by law during the currency of an employment contract will be expressly included in such a contract.
However, practice differs and it invariably happens that express provision is made only regarding two areas: non-competition/canvassing and non-disclosure/use of business secrets.
2.1 Non-competition/canvassing clauses It is common to find in an employment contract an express clause which restricts competition/canvassing by an employee both during and after employment.
Later we deal with how far a clause can legitimately restrict competition by a former employee: legitimacy is determined by whether the restriction is reasonable.
However, it is important to decide at this stage whether that part of an express clause which seeks to control competition during employment is also subject to such a test.
There is authority on this point.
In Esso Petroleum Co Ltd v Harper's Garage (Stourport) Ltd [1968]AC 269 Lord Reid said: Whenever a man agrees to do something over a period he thereby puts it wholly or partly out of his power to "exercise any trade or business he pleases" during that period.
He may enter into a contract of service or may agree to give his exclusive services to another: then during the period of the contract he is not entitled to engage in other business activities.
But  no one has ever suggested that such contracts are in restraint of trade except in very unusual circumstances…
See also Warner Bros Inc v Nelson [1937]1 KB 209; Schroeder (A) Music Publishing Co Ltd v Macaulay [1974]1 WLR 1308 and Davis (Clifford) Management Ltd v WEA Records Ltd [1975]1 WLR 61.
These cases were discussed earlier.
2.2 Business secrets The particular importance of an express clause covering business secrets during employment is that it avoids some of the problems encountered in Bjorlow (GB) Ltd v Minter (1954) 71 RPC 321.
It creates certainty as it specifically defines what amounts to a business secret and brings its existence to the mind of the employee.
Interests Protectable After Employment Ends
The end of employment is a critical and decisive event.
The practical effect of it is to reduce the law's interest in implying duties largely for the reason that public policy demands that an employee be free to work for whom he chooses.
This is reflected by the fact that, in the absence of express provision, it is now quite legitimate for the employee to compete with his old employer and to canvass his customers.
However, the employee is still prevented from betraying his employer's business secrets.
Put briefly, once employment ends he cannot, without a specific covenant, be prevented from doing anything unless his actions contravene what is perceived to be a proprietary right of his employer: Morris (Herbert) Ltd v Saxelby [1916]1 AC 688.
Therefore, once he has left, the employee is allowed to pursue his own interests.
How far he can go in the absence of restrictive covenants is dealt with later.
However, first we must discuss when employment ends.
This may be dealt with in some way in the contract in that a certain notice period may have been specified and this may have been adhered to by the parties.
What if the situation is more complicated—as it was in Marshall (Thomas)(Exporters) Ltd v Guinle [1978]3 WLR 116.
Having decided that the doctrine of automatic determination (ie determination of a contract solely at the will of the party who was guilty of a wrongful repudiatory breach) did not exist, even in employment contracts, Megarry V-C concluded that as the breach had not been accepted by the innocent party then the contract subsisted and therefore for the period which it had to run—circa four and a half years—the defendant was bound by its terms.
His status as an employee had ended but the continuing terms of the contract of employment subsisted.
This meant, inter alia, that a provision in the contract which allowed him to solicit once employment was over did not come into effect until that contractual period was up.
See also Gunton v Richmond-upon-Thames LBC [1981]Ch 448, especially the judgment of Brightman LJ.
Therefore, if an employer wants to sue on the basis of a continuing obligation which lasts after determination and requires a remedy other than damages, he should not accept the repudiation but treat the contract as if alive.
In Spencer v Marchington [1988]IRLR 392 the plaintiff was employed by the defendant for a fixed period of one year.
Just over two months before the expiry of that term the plaintiff was informed that her contract would not be renewed.
Indeed she was asked to stay away from work for that remaining  period.
It was held that the defendant had not repudiated the plaintiff's contract of employment by refusing to allow her to carry out her duties until her fixed-term contract had expired.
The request for her to stay away from work for two months out of 12 was not sufficient to amount to a fundamental breach.
Moreover even if it had been, there was no evidence that the plaintiff had accepted the repudiation by electing to treat the contract as at an end.
In staying away she was only doing what she had been asked to do and that was as consistent with her agreement to the request as her rejection of it.
What is the effect of dismissal?
If an employee is wrongfully dismissed then whether a covenant is reasonable or not is irrelevant.
A wrongful dismissal is a repudiation by the employer.
Once accepted by the employee he will be discharged forthwith from any contractual duties including compliance with the restraint of trade clause (see General Billposting v Atkinson [1909]AC 118).
However, it is quite clear that if an employee gives notice in accordance with the contract he is by so doing affirming the existence of the contract and not accepting any perceived repudiation by the employer: see Normalec Ltd v Britton [1983]FSR 318.
In Briggs v Oates [1991]1 All ER 407 the plaintiff and his partner in a firm of solicitors employed the defendant as a solicitor for a period of five years.
His contract of employment contained a restraint of trade clause.
Following the dissolution of the partnership in August 1983 the defendant wanted to practice with other solicitors in prima facie breach of that clause.
The plaintiffs sought to enforce the clause but Scott J dismissed the action for he found that on its true construction the employment agreement was a contract of employment of the defendant by the two partners, that the dissolution of that partnership within the term of the employment constituted a breach of the contract of employment and brought it to an end and that accordingly the restraint of trade clause ceased thereafter to be binding upon the defendant.
If an employee is justifiably dismissed then provided the restraint is reasonable it is still enforceable.
An example where this happened is White (Marion) Ltd v Francis [1972]1 WLR 1423.
See also the novel case of Foot DC v Easter Counties Timber Co Ltd [1972]IRLR 83. 1 Implied duties 1.1 Competition with previous employer The courts will not imply any duty which prevents competition with a previous employer or the canvassing of his customers: Attwood v Lamont [1920]3 KB 571.
Therefore, if an employer feels that such protection is necessary he must include express restrictions in the contract of employment.
The plaintiff in Diamond Stylus Co Ltd v Bauden Precision Diamonds Ltd [1973]RPC 675 paid the price for not having an express covenant restraining employees from soliciting customers after employment ended and was forced to argue that solicitation could only have come about because of the misuse of business secrets.
Graham J concluded that the defendants had simply remembered the names of clients, the number of whom was very small.
They had not consciously  memorised the names or done anything which an honest man would consider wrong.
However, what appears to be competition/soliciting which cannot be restrained without an express clause frequently amounts to a breach of the duty of fidelity.
For example, it often happens that the ability to compete/canvass arises from a breach of duty committed during employment.
In Wessex Dairies Ltd v Smith [1935]2 KB 80 Smith breached his duty of fidelity by canvassing his employers' customers during his last day of employment when he made his last milk round.
Subsequently, as a direct result of such canvassing, they became his customers.
It would be absurd if the law did not recognise the causal connection between these events despite its refusal to imply a non-competition restriction post employment.
In this case it did so recognise that connection and Smith had to pay damages.
Similarly, the ability to compete may arise from the use and disclosure of business secrets.
Even if these are used only after employment ends the implied duty not to use or disclose them will mean that the employer can effectively prevent any competition based on breach.
It is therefore vital that what appears to be a non-restrictable act is examined in order to find what really lies behind the employee's ability to compete/ canvass. 1.2 Business secrets The implied duty to maintain confidence in the employer's business secrets continues after employment ends.
The most common example of breaches of this duty are the use or disclosure of a former employer's client list or of a secret process belonging to him.
See Under Water Welders and Repairers Ltd v Street and Longthorne [1968]RPC 498.
A recent case, which has authoratively reviewed the implied duty of fidelity as it applies to the use of confidential information once employment has ended, is Faccenda Chicken Ltd v Fowler [1985]1 All ER 724;[1986]1 All ER 617 (CA).
The company claimed that Fowler, a former senior employee and eight other former employees and a new company set up by Fowler had wrongfully made use of confidential information which had been acquired during employment.
The information was:(a) the names and addresses of customers;(b) the most convenient routes to be taken to reach the individual customers;(c) the usual requirements of individual customers, both as to quality and quantity;(d) the days of the week and the time of the day when deliveries were usually made to individual customers;(e) the prices charged to individual customers.
It was argued that all of the information, as a package, was confidential and that (e) was itself secret.
Goulding J found as a fact that all parts of the sales information had been used for the purposes of the defendant's business and he divided information into three categories where it was not the subject of any express provision:(1) Information which because of its triviality or public accessibility was not confidential at all.
The employee, either during or after employment was free to impart it to anyone—including his employer's competitor.
(2) Information which was confidential in the sense that the employee had been told it was or because from its character it was obviously so.
Goulding J was in fact referring to the employee's skill and knowledge acquired in the course of his present employment.
During employment the employee could not use or disclose this information without breaching the duty of fidelity.
However once employment had ended it could be used or disclosed by an employee in competition with his former employer.
The employer could only be protected by an express stipulation.
The Court of Appeal specifically disagreed with Goulding J on the ability of the employer to prevent use of such information once employment had ended.
(3) Information which was confidential, such as details of a secret process; this type was so confidential that it could not be used by the employee at any time for the benefit of anyone but the employer.
He concluded that the information in the case came within category (2).
As it had been used after employment it could only have been protected by an express term.
The absence of such a term meant that there had been no breach of duty and therefore he dismissed the plaintiff's claim.
The plaintiff appealed.
The Court of Appeal decided to undertake a review of the basic principles of the law in this area and as this has not been done for some time we now set out in detail what they held.
Neill LJ giving the judgment of the court said:(1) Where the parties are, or have been, linked by a contract of employment the obligations of the employee are to be determined by the contract between him and his employer.
(No mention is made here of express terms which are defective and if in that event the court is free to imply terms, though as we suggest below, there is such power.)(2) In the absence of an express term, the obligations of the employee in respect of the use and disclosure of information are the subject of implied terms.
(3) While the employee remains in the employment of the employer the obligations are included in the implied term which imposes a duty of good faith or fidelity on the employee.
It is to be further noted:(a) That the extent of the duty of good faith will vary according to the nature of the contract;(b) That the duty of good faith will be broken if an employee makes or copies a list of the customers of the employer for use after his employment ends or deliberately memorises such a list, even though, except in special circumstances, there is no general restriction on an ex-employee canvassing or doing business with customers of his former employer.
(4) The implied term which imposes an obligation on the employee as to his conduct after the determination of the employment is more restricted in scope than that which imposes a general duty of good faith.
It is clear that the obligation not to use or disclose information may cover secret processes of  manufacture such as chemical formulae, or designs or special methods of construction, and other information which is of a sufficiently high degree of confidentiality as to amount to a business secret.
The obligation does not extend, however, to cover all information which is given to or required by the employee while in his employment, and in particular may not cover information which is only "confidential" in the sense that an unauthorised disclosure of such information to a third party while the employment subsisted would be a clear breach of the duty of good faith.
Therefore, in this context there are clearly two classes of confidential information when the employer is having to rely on the implied duty in order to protect his business secrets.
The first class is of wider ambit than the second and exists only during the period of employment.
The second class is apparently restricted to what, the judgment calls a "business secret" , eg a secret process.
In the absence of any express provisions once employment has ended the law will only protect information within the second class.
It is submitted that the only way for an employer to protect all forms of confidential information post employment is to have an express contractual provision relating to confidentiality.
Faccenda had made the mistake of not having such an express term in their employment contracts.
(5) In order to determine whether any particular item of information falls within the implied term so as to prevent its use for disclosure by an employee after his employment has ceased, it is necessary to consider all the circumstances of the case.
The Court of Appeal was satisfied that the following matters were among those to which attention should be paid: 1 The nature of the employment Employment in a capacity where "confidential" material is habitually handled may impose a high obligation of confidentiality because the employee can be expected to realise its sensitive nature to a greater extent than if he were employed in a capacity where such material reaches him only occasionally or incidentally.
(This is no doubt in some way concerned with the employee's honesty.) 2 The nature of the information itself Information will only be protected if it can properly be classed as a business secret or as material which, while not properly described as a business secret is, in all the circumstances, of such a highly confidential nature as to require the same protection as a business secret eo nomine.
The restrictive covenant cases demonstrate that a covenant will not be upheld on the basis of the status of the information which might be disclosed by a former employee if he is not restrained, unless it can be regarded as a business secret or the equivalent of a business secret.
The court appeared to disagree with Goulding J at first instance in that it seemed to say that confidential information which cannot be described as a "business secret" (in the narrow sense of that phrase) could not be protected by an express clause.
This difficulty in the court's approach was addressed by Scott J in Balston Ltd v Headline Fitters Ltd [1987]FSR 330 who stated that  Faccenda was not authority for the proposition that confidential information that could not be protected by an implied term ipso facto could not be protected by express agreement.
Scott J pointed out that an implied obligation may involve different considerations from an express one in that an implied obligation will be unlimited in time.
The court then went on to say that it was impossible to provide a list of matters which will qualify as business secrets or their equivalent.
Secret processes of manufacture provide obvious examples, but innumerable other pieces of information are capable of being business secrets, though the secrecy of some information may only be short lived.
In addition, the fact that the circulation of certain information is restricted to a limited number of individuals may throw light on the status of the information and its degree of confidentiality.
3 Whether the employer impressed on the employee the confidentiality of the information Thus, though an employer cannot prevent the use or disclosure merely by telling the employee that certain information is confidential, the attitude of the employer towards the information provides evidence that may assist in determining whether or not the information can properly be regarded as a business secret.
(This is obviously correct; one does not make something a business secret by simply describing it as such.
It needs to have the necessary quality of confidence about it.) 4 Whether the relevant information can be easily isolated from other information which the employee is free to use or disclose This to some extent relies on the intelligence and honesty of the employee.
The court said that it would not regard the separability of the information in question as being conclusive, but the fact that the alleged "confidential" information is part of a package and that the remainder of the package is not confidential is likely to throw light on whether the information in question is really a business secret.
(This perhaps indicates that it was tactically inept in this case for the plaintiffs to seek to persuade the court that the whole package of information was confidential.) 5 Whether additional protection should be afforded to an employer where the former employee is not seeking to earn his living by making use of the body of skill, knowledge and experience which he has acquired in the course of his career, but is merely selling to a third party information which he acquired in confidence in the course of his former employment Goulding J drew no such distinction.
The distinction is an interesting and telling one.
Although the Court of Appeal expressed no opinion on it, the court was  clearly concerned that the employer might possibly be able to protect himself from the use of the employee's skill and knowledge post employment by means of express provision if the employee were simply to sell that knowledge as a commodity (ie not use it as a means to gain further employment).
Presumably this could happen if the employee retired and sold the information or if he joined company X and yet sold the information to company Y. It may be a recognition by the Court that the attitude of the courts generally towards employees since 1913 has, in some cases, been over generous.
The correct answer to the question seems unclear.
If one accepts, as so many cases do that the skill and knowledge of the employee has become part of himself then it is difficult to see why any distinction should be made as postulated in the question.
He should be free to use or disclose or sell his skill and knowledge after the end of employment in any way he thinks fit.
However that theory has to a certain extent been undermined by the ratio of this judgment which says that during employment the employee may not disclose or use his skill and knowledge to the detriment of his employer without being in breach of his duty of fidelity.
The alternative view is that the reason for the present rule regarding skill and knowledge is that without it the employee might well be prevented from earning his living in the area in which he has the greatest experience.
This is clearly not in his interests and is clearly contrary to public policy as well.
If one then takes away the element of his ability to earn his living by the use of his skill and knowledge and supplants it with the notion of the employee selling that skill and knowledge as some commodity to a competitor of his former employer does that significantly change the situation?
It could be said that by doing so he was simply in some way earning his living.
The court then went on to apply the law as it saw it to the facts of the case.
It decided that the information about prices or as to sales information as a whole was not a business secret in this case.
It did so despite the fact that Goulding J had found that an experienced salesman quickly acquired a good idea of the prices obtained by his employer's competitors, but that such knowledge was usually only approximate and that in this field accurate information was valuable, because a difference of even one penny a pound might be important.
The court accepted that in certain circumstances information about prices could be invested with a sufficient degree of confidentiality to make that information a business secret or its equivalent but in the present case it found factors which led it to the conclusion that neither the information about the prices nor the sales information as a whole had the degree of confidentiality necessary to support the plaintiff's claim.
These factors were as follows:(1) The sales information contained some material which the plaintiff conceded was not confidential if looked at in isolation.
(The concessions related to the defendant's entitlement to make use of any recollection they might have of the names and addresses of the plaintiff's customers as well as the most convenient routes by which the premises of such customers could be reached.
There was a muted concession made regarding the requirements of the plaintiff's customers and the times when deliveries were made to them.)(2) The information about the prices was not clearly severable from the rest of the sales information.
(3) Neither the sales information in general, nor the information about the prices in particular , though of some value to a competitor, could reasonably be regarded as plainly secret or sensitive.
(4) The sales information, including the information about prices, was necessarily acquired by the defendants in order that they could do their work.
Moreover, as Goulding J had found, each salesman could quickly commit the whole of the sales information relating to his own area to memory.
(5) The sales information was generally known among the van drivers who were employees, as well as secretaries, at quite a junior level.
This was not a case where the relevant information was restricted to senior management or to a specific category of staff.
(6) There was no evidence that the plaintiffs had ever given any express instructions that the sales information or the information about prices was to be treated as confidential.
1.3 Problems caused by the judgment in Faccenda Chicken The judgment of the Court of Appeal in the Faccenda case has been perceived to cause as many problems as it has solved.
The real area of difficulty is based on whether an express clause can validly protect information which does not fall within the Court of Appeal's narrow definition of a trade secret.
It is claimed that the Court of Appeal said that information that came within Goulding J's second category cannot be protected by an express clause and that that is the wrong approach.
We are sure that that reading is incorrect because we think the second category was meant to relate only to the skill and knowledge of the employee acquired during employment and that the Court of Appeal's approach is consistent with authority and is correct.
However, others have not read the judgment in that way.
They have seen the Court of Appeal's judgment as stating that even an express clause cannot validly protect confidential information unless it is a narrow trade secret or its equivalent.
The first reported expression of dissent occurred in Balston Ltd v Headline Filters [1987]FSR 330 where Scott J at pp347 and 348 said, having quoted from the judgment of Neill LJ in Faccenda, both counsel before me express some reservations about that passage insofar as it suggests that confidential information cannot be protected by a suitably worded restrictive convenant binding on an ex-employee unless the information can be regarded as trade secret in the third of the categories described by Goulding J. I am bound to say that I share these reservations.
I do not however think the Court of Appeal can have intended to exclude all information in Goulding J's second category from possible protection by a restrictive covenant.
He pointed out that trade secrets falling in to the third category would subsequent upon the judgment of the Court of Appeal, be protected under an implied term of the contract and therefore an expressed restrictive covenant would not be needed to protect trade secrets or their equivalent.
Therefore Neill LJ must have been contemplating protection by an express restrictive covenant of confidential information in respect of which an obligation against  use or disclosure after the determination of the employment could not be implied.
He concluded that he declined to read the Faccenda case as holding that confidential information which could not be protected by an implied term ipso facto could not be protected by a suitably limited express covenant.
The concerns of Scott J were echoed by Harman J in Systems Reliability Holdings Plc v Smith [1990]IRLR 377 where the judge concluded (in a case where he was concerned with an express restriction on the use and disclosure of, in particular the knowledge acquired by the defendant during his employment of the ability to modify an old computer by a small addition so as to make a new product of significant commercial value) that the controversial part of Neill LJ's judgment did not bind him to hold that there cannot be in an express restrictive of covenant any restriction on information held by an ex-employee which is not a trade secret or something similar.
He distinguished Faccenda on two bases; the first was that the case was clearly dealing with implied covenants and therefore any observations made by the court relating to express restrictions were clearly obiter.
Secondly, that he was in fact dealing with a purchaser/vendor agreement and not with an employer/employee one.
However these two bases are distinct and it is clear from Harman J's judgment that even if he had been dealing with an express confidential information clause in an employment agreement he would have declined to have followed Faccenda.
In Lansing Linde Ltd v Kerr [1991]1 All ER 418, CA Staughton LJ discussed (a) the definition of trade secrets and (b) whether and if so how, trade secrets differ from confidential information.
He defined trade secrets (at p425 a-j) as:(a) information used in the trade or business;(b) of which the owner limits the dissemination or at least does not encourage or permit widespread publication;(c) and which if disclosed to a competitor would be liable to cause real or significant harm to the owner of the secret.
He said that was his preferred view of the meaning "in this context" by which he seems to have meant that it was not an exhaustive definition.
He continued "it can thus include not only secret formulae for the manufacture of products but also in an appropriate case, the names of customers and the goods which they buy" .
He anticipated that some might say that not all such information is a trade secret in ordinary parlance but if that were correct then "the class of information which can justify the restriction is wider and extends to some confidential information which would not ordinarily be called a trade secret" .
His approach is a clear indication that the apparent rigours of Faccenda are now being mitigated by judges because the definition of trade secrets given in that case has been found to be too narrow to be workable.
Staughton LJ said that in this case plans for development of new products and for the discontinuance of existing products were likely to qualify as trade secrets or as confidential information which could be protected.
The evidence showed that the defendant was aware of the timing of the fading out of old products, the timetable for the development of a prototype, the commencement of the production and of the sales of new products.
Knox J at first instance had  assumed that this information was confidential as he did prices and discounts allowed to customers.
The Court of Appeal accepted his assumption.
Butler-Sloss LJ said that the meaning of the words "trade secrets" had developed since Herbert Morris v Saxelby and was now interpreted in the wider context of "highly confidential information of a non-technical or non-scientific nature…" . 1.4 The employee's skill and knowledge Although the courts are anxious to uphold the employer's right to have his business secrets protected they have ensured that the employee is not prevented from using, once he has left his employer, the general skill and knowledge which he has acquired during employment even though this may have been acquired at some cost to the employer.
Frequently, a claim by an employer based on breach of confidence has failed as it was perceived to be an attempt to prevent the employee from working in the same field by offering his skill to another employer.
Even in such an early case as Morris (Herbert) Ltd v Saxelby [1916]1 AC 688 the plaintiffs abandoned a claim based on an express restraint because, as Lord Atkinson said, the clause prevented the defendant using "…in the service of some other employer that skill and knowledge which he had acquired by the exercise of his own mental faculties on what he had seen, heard, and had experience of in…employment…" (see also Leng (Sir WC) & Co Ltd v Andrews [1909]1 Ch 763 where it was held, inter alia, that the defendant was entitled to use his acquired skill and knowledge for the benefit of himself and the benefit of the public who gained the advantage of him having had such admirable instruction).
The courts have said that the general skills of an employee are his property and the employer can only protect his property—business secrets.
The matter was discussed in Commercial Plastics Ltd v Vincent [1965]1 QB 623 where it was said: It is clear from the authorities that the plaintiffs were not entitled to impose a restriction which would prevent the defendant from using in competition with the plaintiffs the skill and aptitude and general technical knowledge acquired by him in his employment by the plaintiffs.
The restriction has to be justified in this case as being reasonably required for the protection of the plaintiffs' trade secrets by preventing the defendant from disclosing confidential information imparted to him by the plaintiffs in the course of his employment…
The defendant has no doubt gained much skill and aptitude and general technical knowledge with regard to the production of PVC calendered sheeting in general and particularly for the production of such sheeting for adhesive tape.
But such things have become part of himself and he cannot be restrained from taking them away and using them.
A good example of general skill and knowledge was given by Younger LJ in Attwood v Lamont.
There, a former customer of the plaintiffs gave evidence that he had met the defendant in the street and mentioned to him that he had heard he had set up his own business and wanted the defendant to cut him a suit.
Younger LJ said "The appellant is a dangerous rival of the plaintiff…not by reason of any knowledge of the plaintiff's connection or customers  possessed by the appellant, but by reason of his own skill" .
Although the cases lay down the rule that a distinction between general skill and knowledge and business secrets must be maintained, it is impossible to formulate any general test.
Each case turns on its own facts but once the boundary between protectable secrets and general skill and knowledge is crossed the employer cannot, even by way of express covenant, restrict the employee's ability to use those skills once employment has ended (Faccenda Chicken Ltd v Fowler [1985]1 All ER 724).
Whilst it is clear that an employee cannot be prevented from using his general skill and knowledge once employment is over, there has been some doubt until recently as to whether the employer could exert any control over such use during employment or whether the law would imply such control.
Brightman J in United Sterling Corporation Ltd v Felton and Mannion [1974]RPC 162 suggested that such control would be implied.
However, in Strange (SW) Ltd v Mann [1965]1 All ER 1069 Stamp J said that it was against public policy to allow an employer to exercise control by way of contract over an employee's skill and knowledge.
It seems that he would have come to the same conclusion regarding the implication of such control.
However, there is no doubt that many express terms which bind the employee to devote his time to his employment and to devote his energies to furthering his employer's business contemplate control over his skill and knowledge.
Now, there is no doubt that the law will imply control over skill and knowledge during employment as being relevant to the general duty of fidelity (see Faccenda Chicken).
However, the fact that an employer may have evidence to support his claim does not preclude the employee from arguing that the employer has conducted himself in such a way that despite an express clause confidentiality no longer exists.
For example, an employer who has allowed all his employees access to information or has entrusted it to the least skilled may find the court unsympathetic.
Likewise, if visitors have been allowed to walk around his premises without restriction then the court will take this into account in its examination of the claim.
This is especially so in the case of visiting competitors.
If an employer does not prevent them availing themselves of the opportunity to learn business secrets how can he later seek to restrain an employee from using the same information.
The existence of any secrecy which might have existed will have been destroyed by the indifference of the employer (see for example Sun Printers Ltd v Westminster Press Ltd [1982]IRLR 292).
Mere negligence on the part of the employer may be sufficient to defeat confidence.
In practice, unless the employer can show that the employee has copied or physically removed a list of names or the details of a process then it may be very difficult to establish that the knowledge of the employee is exclusively due to confidential information.
If the court is left in doubt as to whether the information might not have been acquired wholly or partly from the general experience gained by the employee then the employer will fail.
A simple process may become part of his general knowledge but the more complex it is the less reasonable will be his claim that knowledge of it is part of his general skill and knowledge; the difficulties can be illustrated in United Indigo Chemical Co Ltd v Robinson [1931]49 RPC 178.
The plaintiffs were manufacturers of a boiler disincrustant and claimed that it had been produced by a secret process.
They  sought to restrain the defendant, who had been employed as their works manager, from using or disclosing information obtained in their service.
They alleged that the product marketed by his company could only have been made by his wrongful use of their business secrets.
They claimed that he had made and taken away copies or had memorised extracts from a book of secret formulae.
The plaintiffs conceded that their product was not made of secret materials but secrecy arose from the way in which the materials were mixed, the temperature employed in various stages of manufacture and the method of testing the consistency of the product.
The defendant denied that any secret process existed or that he had taken and used any information.
Bennett J found that the defendant had not copied any formulae from the book; that he had not been warned as to secrecy when he entered his employment and that he was able to learn the relevant processes without difficulty; indeed this was information which he could not help acquiring in the course of his work.
That knowledge had become his own and he had acquired it honestly and not surreptitiously.
The plaintiff's claim failed.
There is no doubt that dishonest or surreptitious acquisition of information is usually overwhelming evidence that information was confidential and not part of the defendant's skill and knowledge.
Indeed, the courts will take a pragmatic view of the complexity of the information and the employee's ability to remember it as a test of whether it has been wrongfully used/disclosed by him.
In Morris (Herbert) Ltd v Saxelby there was no doubt that the defendant knew of business secrets but the court decided they were far too complicated and detailed for the defendant to have been able to carry them away in his head and as there was no evidence of actual copying, this part of the claim failed.
Another problem which frequently arises in practice is the claim by the employee that, after the end of his employment, he only used information which was already in his memory.
This claim is then used as evidence of the fact that the information has become part of his general skill and knowledge and is not a business secret.
The employee will further claim that he made no conscious effort to memorise the information.
In Printers and Finishers Ltd v Holloway [1964]3 All ER 731 Cross J made a distinction between the two concepts of remembering something and conscious memorising: "The mere fact that the confidential information is not embodied in a document but is carried away by the employee in his head is not…of itself a reason against the granting of an injunction to prevent its use or disclosure by him" .
He then went on to discuss whether an employee could use his recollection of any features of the plaintiff's plant, machinery or process which they claimed were peculiar to them even though they admitted that their competitors used similar machinery.
Cross J in dismissing the claim, went on to say: "Recalling matters of this sort is…quite unlike memorising a formula or list of customers or what was said (obviously in confidence) at a particular meeting" .
In order to show conscious memorising the employer will have to demonstrate that the complexity of the process or that the list of trade connections was so lengthy or important that an honest employee would have realised that these were the property of his employer.
If however, it can be said that the employee had reasonable grounds for believing the information to be part of knowledge properly acquired during his employment then his defence  will succeed.
In the United Sterling case the basis for dismissing the motion was that there was no evidence that the defendant was given any special information which he ought to have regarded as a separate part of his stock of knowledge which an honest employee would have recognised as property of the employer.
1.5 Business methods A further problem which frequently arises in practice is the ability of an employer to claim that information about "business methods" or "business organisation" constitutes a business secret which is protectable.
The main problem with such a claim in the employment context is the difficulty of separating knowledge of business methods from the general skills etc of the employee.
A claim in Morris (Herbert) regarding general business methods was defeated because of this difficulty.
A similar view was taken in Leng (Sir WC) v Andrews.
More recent authority has come to the same conclusion: see Commercial Plastics Ltd v Vincent [1965]1 QB 623 per Pearson LJ and Littlewoods Organisation Ltd v Harris [1978]1 All ER 1026 per Megaw LJ.
Megaw LJ in Littelwoods however gave examples of what went beyond mere knowledge of the way in which the plaintiffs ran their business.
These were the trends of mail order sales, the percentage and identity of the returns, the sources of manufacture, market research results, plans for mail order catalogues in the future and that Harris knew intimately the chairman of the manufacturers.
See also Greer v Sketchley Ltd [1979]FSR 197.
In Amway Corporation v Eurway International Ltd [1974]RPC 82 Brightman J described "business methods, and paperwork" as "mere know-how" .
However, this case was an extreme example of disregard by the plaintiffs towards the quality of confidence (a tape recording was provided to, inter alia, the defendants, saying that the plaintiff's sales and marketing plan was available to anyone and could be copied by them: the tape gave details of the plan).
In Under Water Welders and Repairers Ltd v Street and Longthorne [1968]RPC 498 Buckley J, on motion, said nothing adverse about a clause which sought to make "the policy" of the company a business secret.
The conclusion must be that it will be unusual, though not impossible to envisage, that business policy etc will be protectable.
Relevant factors will be the type of business, the attitude that the employer has demonstrated towards the information and the precise type of information.
If blanket assertions regarding business methods can be broken down into categories then a claim of confidence may succeed.
For example information about prices can, in certain circumstances, constitute a business secret: see the discussion in Faccenda Chicken Ltd v Fowler [1985]1 All ER 724 and Lansing Linde Ltd v Kerr [1991]1 All ER 418. 2 Express duties once employment has ended By including express restrictive covenants in an employment contract an employer will seek to achieve three goals once employment is over:(a) to prevent the ex-employee canvassing orders from the employer's customers;(b) to prevent the ex-employee competing with his business (usually within a defined geographical area);(c) to prevent the ex-employee from using/disclosing any legitimate business secrets.
Note that (a) and (c) alone are not enough: neither would prevent an employee from serving those customers of his ex-employer who approached him.
Similarly (b) alone may not be sufficient as the courts have laid down principles which effectively restrict the time for which any such covenant can run and also the geographical area it can cover.
A clever employee would be able to set up business outside the restricted area and be able to serve former customers from there if (a) did not exist.
In summary, the law is that the courts will not enforce any post employment restraint on the activities of an employee unless the restraint is reasonable.
What amounts to reasonableness is a question of fact and any answer approaching certainty can only be given after examining the circumstances of each case.
However, what generally amounts to reasonableness can be examined by reference to three criteria although they inevitably overlap.
The theoretical difference between the categories may well come down to a question of the burden of proof, though in practice a party seeking to uphold the validity of the restrictive covenant—usually the employer—has to make all the running.
The three criteria are:(a) Does the employer have an interest which merits protection?(b) Is the restraint reasonable as between the parties?(c) Is the restraint reasonable in the public interest?
One can sum up the position as being that a restraint will be invalid if it is imposed in order to prevent competition simpliciter or the use of personal skill and knowledge of the employee.
3 The existence of an interest which merits protection The employer will be required to show that the restraint protects a valid interest: see Morris (Herbert) Ltd v Saxelby [1916]1 AC 688 "a proprietary right" .
There are generally two possible valid interests on which he may rely; special trade connections and business secrets.
He is entitled to protect both of these: see Morris (Herbert) and Attwood v Lamont [1920]3 KB 571. 3.1 The employer's special trade connections The employer is entitled only to protect his business against use of his special trade connections by others but not to protection from competition from his former employee: see the Morris (Herbert) case.
Protection from pure  competition is known as "a covenant in gross" and has always been rejected by the courts.
We use the phrase "trade connections" rather than "customer connections" because the interest is not limited to customers of the employer; it can in certain cases extend to potential customers and also to suppliers: see Gledhow Autoparts Ltd v Delaney [1965]3 All ER 288 and Marshall (Thomas)(Exporters) Ltd v Guinle [1978]3 WLR 116.
In practice the employer must show two things:(a) the existence of trade connections which are to an extent "special" to him; and (b) that the employee is or will be in a position to take advantage of those special trade connections.
The first requirement will usually be simple to establish.
The customers on a milk round are an obvious example of a special trade connection; see Home Counties Dairies Ltd v Skilton [1970]1 All ER 1227 and Wessex Dairies v Smith [1935]2 KB 80; so are the clients of a solicitor: see Sanders v Parry [1967]1 WLR 753; as is a person who uses an estate agent's services: see Scorer v Seymour-Johns [1966]3 All ER 347.
All of these examples concerned customers who had or were likely to use the employer's services on more than one occasion.
This is what made them 'special".
However, it is not necessary for an employer to prove that the connections are exclusive to him and they need not be long established.
A customer may buy from several competitors in a given field; a supplier will invariably supply to more than one business and yet, depending on the facts, the employer may be able to argue that these connections are sufficiently special.
Obviously, the more widely dispersed the loyalty of customers or suppliers, the less likely the employer will be able to succeed in claiming the speciality required.
If a customer is known to buy from nearly every producer in the field then it will be very difficult to establish speciality.
In order to establish whether an employee was or is in a position to take advantage of his employer's special trade connections, it is necessary to examine the quality of the contact between the employee and those connections: "the character of the work done" per Younger LJ in Attwood's case.
It is usually not sufficient for the employer to demonstrate that some contact has taken place.
It is suggested that there must usually be a special element in the employee/connection contact which creates a reasonable risk that the employee will be able to appropriate some part of the business when he leaves because of the chance that customers would seek him out on account of his knowledge of their requirements.
A milkman who serves the same customers every day and who is usually known to them personally will clearly have sufficient contact.
It was said in Scorer v Seymour-Johns [1966]3 All ER 347 per Salmon LJ that the special element can be characterised as the connection relying on the employee to the extent that they regard him as the business rather than his employer: in that case the employer's business had many recurring customers (cf Fellowes & Son v Fisher [1975]2 All ER 829).
He said"When the employee was in the Kingsbridge office he was in effect the Kingsbridge office.
Every customer who came into that office dealt with him.
He  was in a position in which he would have every opportunity of gaining knowledge of the customers' business and influence over the customers'.
Moreover, he was in sole charge of a relatively new branch office.
However, it is important to realise that it is not always necessary to be able to characterise an employee "as the office" .
The factual question is whether sufficient quality of contact has been demonstrated.
A clear example of an employee who was not in a position to influence customers is found in Morris (Herbert) v Saxelby.
The real question is whether the employee has any power over customers.
See also Stenhouse Australia Ltd v Phillips [1974]AC 391 (insurance brokers), and also Routh v Jones [1947]1 All ER 758: "…the character of a general medical practice is such that one who is employed therein as a medical assistant, necessarily acquires such a special and intimate knowledge of the patients of the business that the employers…are entitled to protect themselves against unfair competition on the servant's part" , per Evershed J.
Can mere contact ever be enough?
In Gilford Motor Co Ltd v Horne [1933]Ch 935 Romer LJ suggested that mere contact between an employee and a customer was sufficient.
Whatever may have been said in the 1930s—even if it reflected current views then—cannot be correct today.
If mere contact were always enough then manifest injustice would be done in many cases.
For example, a telephonist in a large company may have contact with a customer by answering his calls but this cannot be a reasonable basis for preventing that person from working for a trade competitor.
Even employees who come into personal, face to face contact with the employer's trade connections, cannot always be said to have sufficient quality of contact.
For example, a receptionist at a solicitor's office will no doubt meet clients but it would be most unusual for her to be in a position to take advantage of that connection to the detriment of her employer once she has left his employment.
The case of Strange (SW) Ltd v Mann [1965]1 All ER 1069 is an example of frequent contact still not being sufficient.
The defendant who was employed as the manager of a bookmakers only met customers once (if at all) as most business was done by telephone and was of a credit nature.
It was immaterial to the customers who dealt with them on the telephone.
Even though the defendant knew the names and addresses of all customers, the quality of contact was not of the degree required in order to establish that he was ever regarded as "being the business" or even had any influence over the customers.
What of special trade connections introduced by an employee; can he freely take these with him when he leaves?
It often happens that when an employee enters new employment he legitimately brings with him trade connections of use to his new employer.
When he eventually leaves that employer how far can the latter control the ex-employee's ability to deal with the clients which he brought with him.
Such a problem was analysed in M & S Drapers v Reynolds [1956]3 All ER 814 when Denning LJ said: I do not…see why the employers should be able to forbid him to call on the people whom he already knew before he worked for them…
His knowledge of these people and his influence with them, was due to his own efforts—or at any rate they were nothing to do with these employers.
His goodwill with those customers belonged to him and cannot reasonably be taken from him by a covenant of this kind.
Moreover, Hodson LJ said that as well as the period of restriction, an added circumstance which has to be taken into account in assessing reasonableness was the fact that many of the customers covered by the covenant had been introduced by the defendant.
The other members of the court were of a similar view.
Although there is no example in the cases, it seems possible for an employer to appropriate the goodwill which an employee brings with him by express provision.
Such is common in partnership agreements.
The final point to consider in this section is the ability of an employer to seek protection for the trade connections not only of his own company but also of other associated companies.
In Leetham (Henry) & Sons Ltd v Johnstone-White [1907]1 Ch 322 Farwell LJ commented:…a man whose business is a corn miller's business, and who requires to protect that, cannot, if he has also a furniture business, require the covenantee who enter into his service as an employee in the corn business to enter into covenants restricting him from entering into competition with him in the furniture business also, because it is not required for the protection of the corn business in which the man is employed, however much it may be beneficial to the individual person, the owner both of the corn business and of the furniture business.
That is a clear example where there was no real common interest between the businesses.
But, it did not accord with the facts of the case before him in which all companies within a group were millers.
The Court of Appeal decided however that the defendant had really only contracted with one company within the group and that regarding the area in which it did its business a countrywide restraint was unreasonable.
It rejected the idea that the associated companies which together did have a countrywide business were in any way relevant.
By applying a strict rule of corporate personality it decided that a restriction which benefited any person other than the contracting parties was "in gross" and therefore unenforceable.
In Stenhouse Australia Ltd v Phillips [1974]AC 391 the Privy Council chose to ignore strict rules of corporate personality between different companies in a group because of the existence of a patent identity of interest.
It now seems that only in those cases where there is no identity of interest will the problem of other businesses gaining the benefit of a restrictive covenant be at all important and the courts will not take account of the doctrine of incorporation or of privity of contract if such an identity exists.
This is further demonstrated by the decision in Littlewoods Organisation Ltd v Harris [1978]1 All ER 1026. 3.2 Business secrets There is no doubt that business secrets are recognised as constituting an interest meriting protection.
In the Littlewoods case in which the court upheld a 12 month restraint allied to protectable business secrets, Lord Denning MR said that the information acquired by Harris was confidential: "It has been acquired at great expense and by great expertise by Littlewoods.
No servant should be at  liberty to carry it off to a rival in trade and thus save him the expense and expertise of doing it himself".
The employer is entitled only to adequate protection for his business secrets: the concept of adequacy prevents the employee being restricted from using his general skills and knowledge.
The only doubt about this was raised by the Court of Appeal in Faccenda Chicken Ltd v Fowler [1985]1 All ER 724 where the court specifically left open the question whether additional protection should be afforded to an employer where the former employee is not seeking to earn his living by making use of the body of skill, knowledge and experience which he has acquired but is merely selling the knowledge to a third party (see p79 above).
In Commercial Plastics Ltd v Vincent [1965]1 QB 623 the restrictive covenant read: "In view of the highly technical and confidential nature of this appointment you have agreed not to seek employment with any of our competitors in the PVC calendering field for at least one year after leaving our employ" .
Therefore, the basic question was: what were business secrets?
There were none in the general field of PVC calendering but only in the special field of PVC for adhesive tape.
As the restriction sought to prevent the defendant from taking employment with a competitor in the general PVC calendering field it was held to be too wide.
4 Reasonableness between the parties: competition and canvassing The fact that an employee has agreed to be bound by a restrictive covenant does not in itself make that restriction reasonable between the parties.
Instead, the courts will subject the clause to the objective test of reasonableness.
But remember the words of Glidwell LJ in Rex Stewart Jeffries Parker Ginsberg Ltd v Parker [1988]IRLR 483: "in the end, whether a particular provision is or is not reasonable to protect the employer's legitimate interest is a matter of impression" .
In the area of competition and canvassing there are three general headings under which the courts will examine the existence of reasonableness of a restraint: 4.1 Restricted activities If the employer seeks by contractual restraint to restrict the activities of a former employee by proscribing the types of business in which the employee may become engaged once employment is over then he can only do so if he can establish a close connection betwee the restriction and the work done by the employee prior to leaving.
Moreover, the employer can only protect himself from activities by his employee which might reasonably affect the customer connection which has been built up.
The first question which has to be answered is: what is the employer's business?
This is a question of fact but it is crucial.
See Routh v Jones [1947]1  All ER 758.
The defendant was prohibited from practising "in any department of medicine, surgery or midwifery" .
This clause was construed by both Evershed J and the Court of Appeal to include acting as a consultant.
Therefore, the plaintiffs, a partnership in general medical practice, were seeking to prevent an employee once he had left, from, inter alia, practising as a consultant within a certain area and for a certain time.
The court found that as practice by the defendant as a consultant could not injure the plaintiffs' professional business, the clause was too wide in that it sought to encompass activities in which the plaintiffs did not have a legitimate interest.
Moreover, the covenant went on to restrict the defendant's ability to accept any professional appointment.
This was held to be reasonable during employment but was construed as being too wide post employment as it would prevent the defendant becoming a medical officer of health in which capacity he could not prejudice the plaintiff's goodwill.
See also Jenkins v Reid [1948]1 All ER 471.
Moreover, it may not be enough for an employer to say "I'm a wine merchant and my ex-employee is now working as a wine merchant and so I am entitled to enforce an express restriction" .
It may be that the ex-employee is now working in an entirely different area of that business, such as wholesale, whereas his former employer's business is retail.
The distinction between the wholesale and retail sides of a business was discussed in Rogers v Maddocks [1892]3 Ch 346.
Once it has been established what the relevant scope of the employer's business is, the next question is whether the restriction does no more than protect any existing customer connection.
In Technograph Printed Circuits Ltd v Chalwyn Ltd [1967]RPC 339 a restrictive covenant prevented the employee for a period of two years after the end of his employment from being associated with any company in the UK concerned with manufacture of "printed electrical circuits" .
It was found that such a restriction would prevent employees from being associated with a manufacturer of single-sided printed circuit boards and yet it was only in relation to multi-layered printed circuit boards that the plaintiff had any interest.
Therefore the restrictions went beyond what was necessary.
Some restrictions go too far in their precision and thus are judged unreasonable whilst others are struck down as being too imprecise and/or wide.
An example of the first type is found in Morris (Herbert) Ltd v Saxelby [1916]1 AC 688 where the defendant was bound for seven years after employment not to work in the UK or Ireland in the sale or manufacture of pulley blocks, hand overhead runways, electric overhead runways or hand overhead travelling cranes.
The court found that all his experience had been in these areas; he had always worked for the plaintiffs and therefore the clause rendered him unemployable over a very wide area for a significant time.
The clause was held to be unreasonable.
Later cases have also insisted that if an employee is to be prevented from working in that area in which he has gained great expertise then the covenant is unlikely to be upheld.
See Commercial Plastics Ltd v Vincent [1965]1 QB 623.
Examples of the second type are cases such as Davies, Turner and Co v Lowen (1891) 64 LT 655 in which a clause sought to prevent an employee entering any business similar to that "now or hereafter to be carried on" by the employer; or Perls v Saalfeld [1892]2 Ch 149 in which a clause preventing an employee from accepting "another situation as clerk or agent" was struck down.