

Introduction
In recent years it has become increasingly common for businesses buying and selling goods and services to seek to rely on standard terms of trading to govern their contracts.
Turn over any order or acknowledgment form, price list or catalogue, delivery note or invoice and one is likely to find a lengthy set of terms, often in small print, which purport to define the terms upon which their proponent will supply, or purchase, goods or services.
I say "purport" deliberately because, for a variety of reasons the terms may fail in their objective in any particular case.
An individual term may be ineffective in law; or the terms as a whole may not have been incorporated into the contract in question.
One of the purposes of this book is to offer guidance on the preparation of standard terms in order to help reduce the risk of such failure.
The standard terms in widespread use are derived from a number of sources.
Some businesses may take legal advice, either from in-house legal advisers, or from their solicitors in private practice, and obtain a set of terms more or less tailored to their individual requirements.
Other businesses may obtain their terms from a trade association or similar organisation, in which case the association may have taken legal advice in the preparation of the terms.
Yet others may draft their own terms, often by copying those used by other businesses in the same line.
However a set of terms arrives in a particular document, it is likely that at some stage it was prepared by someone with some degree of legal knowledge.
This book is intended to assist the drafter with some legal knowledge.
It may be that it may help those in business understand their own, or their trading partners' standard terms; however, it is not intended that it should be used by persons without legal knowledge to draft standard terms without legal advice.
In any situation there may be unforeseen pitfalls or legal difficulties, and any business contemplating preparing a set of standard terms, or changing an existing set, would be well advised to obtain legal advice rather than go it alone.
It is important to bear in mind that a set of standard terms is a legal document which sets out the terms of a contract.
The same care is therefore required in drafting standard terms as would be exercised when drafting any other legal document, such as a conveyance, a will or a pleading.
Indeed, it might be said that a set of standard terms requires greater care because it will be used for a large number of separate transactions, possibly  involving a wide range of goods and/or parties.
Although the individual value of any one transaction may be small in comparison with the value of an individual estate or conveyance, the total value of all the transactions governed by the standard terms may be enormous; the cost of liability if terms prove ineffective may be even greater.
However, whereas there is a well-established and substantial body of legal writing dealing with the drafting of other, perhaps more formal, legal documents, there has until recently been relatively little material which seeks to deal with the practical drafting of commercial contracts in general and with standard terms in particular.
There is, of course, a substantial, and growing, body of precedents which may be used by the drafter preparing a set of standard terms.
In addition to the general precedent books, including the Encyclopaedia of Forms and Precedents and Kelly's Draftsman, most larger firms of solicitors now have their own standard office precedent set of standard terms, which may be adapted to meet the needs of a particular client.
However, the general precedents often contain little or no guidance about when to use a particular form, or why a particular term is drafted in a particular way (although many firms' own in-house precedents are accompanied by a commentary explaining the terms and offering suggestions for modifications).
There is now a growing body of literature containing guidance on and precedents of particular types of clause, such as Yates and Hawkins' Standard Business Contracts: Exclusions and Related Devices; however, such works tend to deal with only one particular type of clause, although in great depth.
(For full references to all books cited in the text and details of other works which the reader may find useful, see Appendix B, Bibliography.)
In order to draft effectively, and to make intelligent use of precedents, the drafter must not only know what to say but why it is necessary to say it, how to say it, and what will be the result of saying it differently.
In other words, the drafter must understand what he/she is trying to achieve.
That requires that the drafter must know: 1 what the relevant law is; 2 what its practical implications are; 3 what the client, who will use the standard terms, wants to achieve; 4 how to manipulate language in order, in the light of 1 and 2, to achieve the client's objective.
The experienced drafter, with expertise in contract and commercial matters, may need little or no guidance on these matters.
Where guidance is required, it is possible to obtain it on points 1 and 2 from the relevant (many excellent) texts on contract and commercial law and on point 4 from some of the texts on general drafting.
The aim of this book is to provide the person drafting standard terms of business with essential information on all these matters in one volume.
Clearly if the book is to be of manageable size it cannot contain an exhaustive statement of the principles of relevant  substantive law, of the principles of drafting, or precedents to cover every eventuality, and it does not seek to do so.
However, in treating the subject as fully as possible, the book does contain specimen clauses.
These are included to assist the reader and as a means of illustrating drafting techniques, but they should be used carefully with appropriate amendment.
Why Have Standard Terms?
A person drafting any document needs to have in mind at the outset, and keep in mind throughout the drafting process, what it is that the document is intended to achieve.
When drafting a set of standard terms, it is obviously necessary to understand the objective of each term, and the legal factors which affect its wording.
However, it is also necessary to consider the overall purpose of the terms as a whole.
First, the drafter must bear in mind that, whilst a set of standard terms is not itself a contract, it is intended to supply the terms of a number of contracts; it must therefore be capable of withstanding legal scrutiny.
However, the terms will be used by the drafter's business client; they must therefore satisfy the client's commercial, as well as legal, objectives, and the drafter must therefore take account of those objectives at each stage of drafting.
Before considering what those objectives are likely to be, it is worth establishing what is meant by "standard terms" .
1 What are "standard terms of trading" 
In Schroeder Music Publishing Co Ltd v Macaulay [1974]1 WLR 1308, HL, Lord Diplock recognised two categories of "standard form contracts" .
The first category includes contracts whose terms, although in standard form, are the result of careful negotiation between the parties or, more often, between organisations representing the interests of the parties.
Such contracts are widely used in large scale commercial operations and may greatly facilitate commercial activity.
Examples of such contracts are charterparties, insurance policies and the standard terms used for large scale dealings in commodities.
The second category are sometimes called "contracts of adhesion" .
The terms of the contracts in this category are rarely negotiated; instead, they are prepared by or for one party who effectively imposes them on the other party to the contract, saying "If you want to do business with me, you must use my terms" .
The courts have recognised that, whilst contracts in the first category, even though on standard terms, may be unobjectionable, very different criteria apply to those in the second category, and in modern times the courts have generally been vigilant to prevent the abuse of contracts of adhesion by parties with stronger market power, especially in the context of "consumer" dealings.
The distinction between the two categories of "standard terms" recognised  in Schroeder v Macaulay remains valid.
Section 3 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 (UCTA 1977) applies a test of reasonableness to certain terms where one party deals on the other's "written standard terms of business" .
The scope of this provision, which is examined later in this book, is unclear, but it would seem that both categories of standard terms identified in Schroeder may fall into the definition of "written standard terms" ; however, those in the first category are more likely to be regarded as reasonable than those in the second.
Moreover, the common law is likely to take a stricter approach when dealing with terms in the second category than when considering those in the first.
The significance of this distinction lies in the fact that we are here concerned with the second category of standard terms, often referred to as "back of order" conditions, because they are typically printed on the back of business order forms or similar contract documentation.
Such terms are used for a wide range of contracts; this book, however, is primarily concerned with the drafting of standard terms to govern contracts for the supply, or purchase, of goods (in particular) or services.
Of course, there is no reason why individual contracts cannot be negotiated for individual transactions.
For one-off or large scale contracts it will generally be preferable to negotiate an individual contract, and whilst some of the legal matters discussed in this book may be relevant to such a contract, it will generally be subject to many different considerations: for instance, where the contract is between two businesses, it will fall outside the scope of s3 of the UCTA 1977.
However, where a business is involved in a large number of contracts, possibly of low individual value, with a large number of different customers, it will often be impracticable to negotiate individual terms for each individual transaction; indeed, one of the reasons for using standard terms is to minimise transaction costs by avoiding the need for individual negotiation.
Instead, a business will have one set of terms which it will seek to apply to all its transactions.
The primary terms, such as price, quantity and delivery dates, may be negotiated individually, but the detailed legal terms will be those in the standard form.
Where the terms are applied to a large scale transaction, or at the commencement of a trading relationship, they may be scrutinised by the business's trading partner, and there may even be some degree of negotiation.
However, in most cases they will be presented on a "take it or leave it" basis.
Often they will be left totally unread, unless and until a dispute arises.
Such terms are effectively imposed rather than agreed.
Suppliers of goods and services have used standard terms for some time.
In recent years, however, it has become increasingly common for businesses to use standard terms of purchase to govern transactions under which they acquire goods and services.
A business may then order goods on a form incorporating its standard terms of purchase; the seller may respond by acknowledging the order on a form incorporating its standard terms and a "battle of the forms" may result.
Such exchanges raise difficult legal problems, which are discussed later in Chapter 4, 6.
However, the business  reality, which must be recognised here, is that the exchanges in the battle may be purely reflex actions: the seller will send an acknowledgment including its standard terms as a matter of course, generally without reading the terms on the buyer's order; indeed, in order to win the battle of forms it will generally be good practice to ensure that all orders are acknowledged in this way.
There may be a lengthy exchange, with documents including the standard terms of the two parties passing to and fro, before the battle is won; in certain circumstances the battle may result in neither set of terms governing the contract.
However, in many cases the battle will be lost by inadvertence: the winner's terms will govern the resulting contract, but the exchange of standard terms should not be mistaken for negotiation.
Where one party wins the battle of the forms, whether due to the inadvertent error or deliberate concession of the other party, the winner's terms are imposed on the loser, and whilst the loser may be taken to have "accepted" the terms in law, there is no real agreement to them.
Typically a business's back of order terms of supply are applied to all the business's contracts of supply.
However, although it may be impracticable to negotiate the terms for each individual contract, it may be appropriate and desirable to negotiate special terms for particular individual contracts—for instance, those of a high unit value—or for individual customers.
Thus, for instance, if a business has a particular customer with whom it will do a lot of business, it might be appropriate to negotiate special terms for all contracts between the business and that customer.
Alternatively, the same result could be achieved by entering into one long-term "requirements" contract on specially negotiated terms with that customer.
In either case, the cost of individual negotiation may be justified in light of the value of the anticipated trading between the business and the particular customer; moreover, individual negotiation is likely to offer commercial advantages by promoting a harmonious relationship between business and customer and, in the event of any dispute arising, the terms of the contract are more likley to withstand judicial scrutiny, both at common law and under the UCTA 1977.
Many of the issues to be considered in this book will be relevant to such negotiated terms; however, if they are to be subject to negotiation, the initial approach to drafting may be different from that taken to drafting typical back of order terms.
2 The need for standard terms—drafting objectives
It is well established that the courts cannot make a contract for the parties.
If the terms of an agreement are unclear, or incomplete in some material aspect, it may be that in law the parties have not yet entered into a contract.
However, the courts have frequently recognised that businessmen do not share the lawyer's desire for certainty, and that insistence that all terms be precisely agreed would prevent many business agreements being regarded as contracts at all.
Thus there is generally a presumption that business  agreements are intended to be legally binding, and the courts generally accept an element of imprecision in business agreements so that "the dealings of men may so far as possible be treated as effective and that the law may not incur the reproach of being the destroyer of bargains" (per Lord Tomlin in Hillas v Arcos [1932]All ER Rep 494, at p499).
Thus, provided that the parties have reached agreement on the essential aspects of a transaction, a court will generally treat their agreement as legally binding, especially where one of the parties has acted on the assumption that there is a binding contract (see Hillas v Arcos [1932]All ER Rep 494; Foley v Classique Coaches Ltd [1934]2 KB 1).
Generally all that will be required to give rise to a binding contract will be agreement on quantity, price and delivery date.
Obviously this is only a general rule: in particular, where the goods are complicated, or where the normal course of dealing would so indicate, it may be relatively easy to establish that the parties did not intend their agreement to become binding until other details were finalised; this issue is examined further in Chapter 4, 6 below.
However, in many cases the parties may create a binding contract by agreement on the three matters already identified.
In many cases no other agreement will be necessary.
Indeed, strictly, agreement is not necessary on price or delivery date: if no price is agreed, it will be implied that the buyer of goods will pay a reasonable price (Sale of Goods Act 1979 (SGA 1979), s8(2)) and, if no date is agreed for delivery of the goods, that they will be delivered within a reasonable time, and at a reasonable hour (SGA 1979, s29(3),(5); strictly s29(3) only applies where the seller is bound to send the goods to the buyer, but a similar, more general rule applies at common law: see below Chapter 7).
Similar rules apply to contracts for the supply of services (Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982 (SGSA 1982), s15 (implied term that the customer will pay a reasonable charge) and s14 (implied term that the service will be performed within a reasonable time)).
However, a failure to agree a price will often be strong evidence that the parties have not reached a binding agreement (see, eg Courtney and Fairbairn Ltd v Tolaini Bros (Hotels) Ltd [1975]1 WLR 297).
In many cases such rudimentary agreement on the basic terms of the bargain may be sufficient.
Even if disputes do arise, the vast majority will be dealt with by negotiation and consent, in the interests of a harmonious continuing trading relationship.
However, where negotiation fails, the parties must fall back on the law, and their rights and liabilities will then be governed by the terms of their contract.
Where a problem arises for which there is no express provision in the contract, common law or statute may fill the gap, either by implying terms, such as requiring the goods supplied to be merchantable, or the service to be performed with reasonable skill and care, or by ruling that the impact of unforeseen events is to frustrate the contract.
The application of such legal rules as those concerned with implied terms and frustration will often be uncertain, creating scope for disputes as to the extent of the parties' rights and liabilities, costing valuable time and money.
Far better to make express provision for as many contingencies as possible, thus allowing the parties to form a clear view of their rights and liabilities and minimising, so far as possible, the scope for dispute.
The primary objective when drafting a set of standard terms is therefore to define, so far as possible, the obligations of the parties by anticipating any difficulties which may arise in performance of the contract.
Moreover, the drafter should aim not only to define the obligations of the parties, but also the consequences of a failure to perform.
Disputes frequently arise where one party seeks to withhold its performance, or even withdraw from the contract altogether, on account of an alleged breach by the other.
In that case, assuming that the allegation of breach is well founded, the rights of the parties will depend on the classification of the term broken.
If it is classified as a condition, the victim of the breach will be entitled to withdraw; if it is classified as a warranty, the victim will only be entitled to damages and, by withdrawing, will be committing a breach of contract.
In many cases terms may be classified as "innominate" , in which case the victim's right to withdraw depends on the seriousness of the breach and its consequences (Hong Kong Fir Shipping Co Ltd v Kawasaki Kisen Kaisha [1962]2 QB 26).
Even where breach is admitted there is therefore scope for dispute about whether or not the breach justifies withdrawal from the contract.
In order to avoid such disputes the drafter should therefore define the consequences of breach of any particular obligation.
It will not be enough to define a term as a "condition" or "warranty" , for a court may decide that the parties did not intend any breach of a term labelled a "condition" to give rise to a right to withdraw, and thus disregard the label given to the term by the parties (Schuler AG v Wickman Machine Tool Sales Ltd [1974]AC 235).
The drafter should therefore seek to avoid such problems by defining clearly and precisely the consequences of breach of any particular term of the contract.
Thus, for instance, a set of terms of sale might require the buyer to take delivery of the goods on receipt of notice that they are ready for delivery and then provide: If the Buyer fails to take delivery of the goods in accordance with the terms of this contract, the Seller shall be entitled to terminate the contract with immediate effect.
On termination, the Seller may exercise any of the following rights, either alone, or in any combination:(i) dispose of the goods as it thinks fit;(ii) retain any deposit or part payment made by the Buyer;(iii) recover damages from the Buyer in respect of any losses it suffers as a result of the Buyer's failure to take delivery, including, but not limited to, the profit it would have made had the buyer performed its obligations, the costs of storage of the goods and the costs of disposing of the goods.
Similarly, the buyer's terms of purchase might contain a provision to deal with late delivery:(a) If the Seller fails to deliver the goods in accordance with the terms of this contract, the Buyer is entitled to terminate the contract with immediate effect.
(b) On termination by the Buyer in accordance with clause (a) the following provisions shall have effect:(i) all sums payable by the Buyer under the contract cease to be payable;(ii) the Seller must repay to the Buyer all sums paid by the Buyer prior to termination; and (iii) the Buyer is entitled to recover damages from the Seller in respect of any losses caused to the Buyer as a result of the Seller's failure to make delivery or as a result of the termination of the contract.
Of course, care must be taken in drafting provisions defining the rights available on a breach of contract, since their effectiveness may be governed by the rule against penalties or by the rules governing exclusion clauses.
The important point for the present is that the above clauses leave no room for doubt that a breach of contract will justify the victim in terminating the contract.
Careful definition of the obligations of the parties can minimise the scope for dispute.
However, disputes may still arise, and a second objective of the contract is therefore to provide machinery for resolution of any disputes which may arise.
In general, businesses prefer to avoid the courts, litigation (and even lawyers) so far as possible, and the terms may therefore make provision for settlement of disputes by arbitration, or by one of the other systems of alternative dispute resolution, such as conciliation, which are now available.
The contract may also contain procedural terms designed to facilitate the resolution of any disputes which may arise, for instance, concerning the procedure for notifying claims and the evidence which may be adduced.
Again, the drafter must bear in mind that such terms may be subject to legal control, under legislation such as the UCTA 1977, or the Consumer Arbitration Agreements Act 1988.
It is often said that one of the objectives of a commercial contract is to allocate risks between the contracting parties and the drafter's client will generally wish to throw as many of the risks as possible onto its trading partners.
It will therefore seek to minimise its own obligations whilst ensuring, so far as possible, that its trading partners perform theirs.
The contract will therefore seek: 1 to define the client's obligations and, so far as possible, to minimise them; 2 to define the scope of the contract by defining which statements form part of it; 3 to minimise the scope for variation of the contract duties, by defining the authority of the client's representatives to make statements binding on it, or to vary the contract; 4 to minimise the likelihood of the client being in breach of contract, by defining the client's obligations in flexible terms: for instance, the quantity of goods to be delivered may be subject to tolerances; or the contract may provide for the time for delivery to be extended in certain situations; 5 to minimise the extent of the client's liability for any breach it commits: for instance , by excluding liability for certain kinds of loss, or by placing a financial ceiling on liability; 6 to define the obligations of the client's trading partners; 7 to define the consequences of non-performance by the client's trading partners; 8 to provide machinery to encourage prompt performance by the client's trading partners: for instance , a seller may require interest on late payments, or offer discounts for early payment; a buyer may contract for the right to withhold payment until satisfactory performance; 9 to allow the client to use procedurally simple enforcement methods: for instance , terms of sale should be drafted so as to allow the seller to bring a liquidated claim for the price of the goods; 10 to provide the client with security against non-performance by its trading partners: thus terms of sale are likely to seek to provide the seller with security against non-payment, for instance by means of a retention of title clause; terms of purchase will seek to minimise the buyer's exposure by allowing some or all of the price to be retained against satisfactory performance.
Many of these devices will be subject to legal control, either under statute, such as the UCTA 1977, or common law rules such as the rule against penalties or the law governing the effectiveness of retention of title clauses.
In many cases it may be impossible to predict with certainty whether or not a particular clause will be effective.
The client will often be promising less than it hopes to be able to deliver: although it may exclude liability for defects in goods, the client will generally seek to deliver goods free from defects, in order to establish or maintain its commercial reputation and protect its trading relationships.
The purpose of such terms is often to comply with the terms of the client's insurance, or to reduce the cost of obtaining insurance cover.
If the client's competitors trade on terms which minimise their liability, the client may have to do likewise in order to obtain insurance cover as cheaply as possible, and thus keep its prices competitive.
The drafter should bear in mind that many of the terms included in the standard terms will not be enforced in most transactions; their purpose may be to deter claims from trading partners, to deter litigation, or provide a basis for a negotiated settlement.
Thus, while they should be drafted, so far as possible, to withstand judicial scrutiny, they will only be the subject of litigation in exceptional cases.
3 The advantages of standard terms
Whilst it may be desirable, for the reasons discussed above, for a business to make detailed provision in its contracts for contingencies which may arise, it will generally be impossible to negotiate separate contracts for each transaction.
By using a set of standard terms for all its contracts the business can achieve many of the benefits of a detailed contract for all its transactions, without incurring the costs and trouble which individual negotiation would involve.
The business can therefore achieve maximum protection at minimum transaction cost, promoting its competitiveness.
Standard terms are also convenient.
They allow contracting procedures to be standardised and streamlined.
Provided proper procedures are established and followed to ensure their incorporation into the business's contracts, contracts can be concluded by relatively junior employees whilst the terms can limit or exclude the power of such employees to negotiate or vary the business's obligations.
Similarly, contracts may be concluded on consistent terms at a number of outlets, over a period of time, and despite changes in personnel.
Thus the use of standard terms may promote certainty: the terms of the contract may be easily located and identified; where the same terms are used over a period, the business and its trading partners will come to know their respective rights and obligations; terms may be applied to resolve disputes and thus acquire "precedent" value.
In extreme cases the meaning and effectiveness of the terms may even be clarified by consideration by the courts.
However, standard terms have their drawbacks.
A business may come to rely too heavily on its standard terms rather than on other, commercial safeguards, such as adequate quality or credit control systems.
In view of the legal uncertainty surrounding many of the terms which are likely to be included, that may be a dangerous course; it may also damage the business's commercial standing.
Moreover, the standard terms will be wholly useless unless proper contracting procedures are established to ensure that they are incorporated into the business's contracts.
If the terms are too one-sided, they may provoke customer resistance, leading to a battle of forms or to the loss of potential custom and a bad trading reputation.
Finally, the use of standard terms will mean that the effectiveness of many of the terms of the contract is affected by the UCTA 1977, and the drafter should keep that Act in mind throughout the drafting process.
4 Standard terms and the Unfair Contract Terms Act
Section 3 of the UCTA 1977 subjects certain contract terms to a test of reasonableness.
Its full extent is unclear and although it is true to say that the 1977 Act does not impose a general standard of fairness on contract terms, s3 is capable of applying to many of the terms which will be included in a set of standard terms of trading.
Section 3 applies where either (a) one party contracts as a consumer or (b) one party contracts on "the other's written standard terms of business" .
Section 3 is therefore particularly important in this context; in view of the apparent width of its ambit, it is crucial to know when it applies.
Unfortunately, although the Act provides a definition of "consumer" , it  provides no definition of "written standard terms of business" .
There is no English authority on the meaning of this expression; however, most commentators agree that it is likely to be given a wide interpretation by the courts, and this is borne out by the Scottish case of McCrone v Boots Farm Supplies Ltd 1981 SLT 103.
The problem of interpreting s3 can be illustrated by considering whether a number of common business situations fall within its ambit:(a) In most cases, essential terms such as delivery date, price and quantity, are likely to be agreed between the parties.
Is the contract then on "written standard terms" ?
Is the contract on "written standard terms" if the terms are held on a word processor and one term is altered for dealings with a particular customer?(b) A business regularly contracts on terms prepared by its trade association: are those terms its "written standard terms" ?(c) A business makes individual contracts by telephone, or other instantaneous communication, but incorporates its normal terms of business into the contracts by express oral reference, or by a course of dealing; are the terms then "written standard terms" ?(d) Are terms "standard" on the first occasion they are used?(e) A business has negotiated a set of terms for use on all contracts with a particular customer.
Are those terms the business's "written standard terms" ?
McCrone concerned s17 of the UCTA 1977, the equivalent provision to s3 which applies in Scotland, and it suggests that in all the above cases, except possibly the last, the answer would be "yes" , and the terms would be caught by s3 (or s17).
In McCrone the proponent sought to rely on an exclusion clause in its standard terms of trading which, it alleged, had been incorporated into the contract by a course of dealing.
The proponent argued that the terms were therefore not covered by s17.
The wording of s17 is slightly different from that of s3; it applies to terms in a "standard form contract" .
In McCrone Lord Dunpark thought that this wording was "wide enough to include any contract, whether wholly written or partly oral, which includes a set of fixed terms or conditions which the proponer applies, without material variation, to contracts of the kind in question" .
Lord Dunpark's interpretation would appear wide enough to cover all the five situations ((a)—(e)) described above; the only possible exception would be where particular terms are altered, perhaps by word processor, for an individual contract, and the variation is substantial.
A similar interpretation could be applied to s3; the only exception might be example (e) on the grounds that s3 refers to "the other's written standard terms" whereas the terms in (e) are the terms of both parties.
However, in cases on other provisions of the Act reported to date the courts have adopted a broad, purposive, interpretation, and it therefore seems reasonable to  assume that s3 could apply to all the situations described.
If this is correct, s3 applies to both categories of standard form contract identified by Lord Diplock in Schroeder Music Publishing Co Ltd v Macaulay.
Of course, it should be remembered that s3 subjects the terms to which it applies to a test of reasonableness, and where individual terms have been varied for a particular customer (situation (a)), or where the terms have been approved by a trade association (situation (b)) or negotiated between the parties (situation (e)) they are more likely to satisfy the test of reasonableness.
Where one party enters into a contract as a consumer, or on the other contracting party's written standard terms of business, so that s3 applies, the Act provides (in s3(2)) that "the other" (ie the non-consumer, or the party on whose written standard terms the contract is made) cannot by reference to any contract term—(a) when himself in breach of contract, exclude or restrict any liability of his in respect of such breach; or (b) claim to be entitled—(i) to render a contractual performance substantially different from that which was reasonably expected of him, or (ii) in respect of the whole or any part of his contractual obligation, to render no performance at all, except in so far as …the contract term satisfies the requirement of reasonableness.
There has been much academic debate about the ambit of s3.
The problem is essentially concerned with the effect of certain types of contract term.
Section 3(2) applies to two types of clause.
The first, covered by s3(2) (a) will be instantly recognisable as an exclusion clause: it includes any term which purports to exclude, limit or restrict the proferens' liability for a breach of contract: for instance, a clause such as : The Seller accepts no liability for any loss suffered by the Buyer as a result of any delay in delivery would be caught by s3(2) (a).
Such clauses only take effect after it has been found that there has been a breach of contract.
However, it has been argued that certain clauses operate at an earlier stage so as to define and restrict the extent of the contractual obligation undertaken and so prevent there being any breach of contract.
For example, a term such as : All delivery dates are estimates only and the Seller undertakes no contractual commitment as to the time of delivery arguably prevents there being any contractual date for delivery.
Indeed, it may be that it goes further, and effectively means that the seller has not undertaken to deliver the goods at all, so that it may be argued that the seller has undertaken no obligation and, prior to delivery, there is only a unilateral contract under which the buyer is committed to pay if the seller delivers.
However, leaving aside that possibility, it can be argued that such a clause merely defines the seller's obligation, and does not operate to  "exclude" or "limit" liability because the result of the clause is that no liability arises.
There is some judicial support for such an approach (see per Lord Diplock in Photo Production Ltd v Securicor Transport Ltd [1980]AC 827, at p851).
However, such a clause would appear to be caught by s3(2) (b), as a clause by which the seller claims to be entitled to render "a contractual performance substantially different from that which was reasonably expected of him" , or "no performance at all" .
The view might be held that s3 has no application to such a clause, because s3 only applies to clauses under which the proferens purports to be entitled to a performance diffferent from that reasonably expected, whereas the effect of the clause quoted above is to define the performance which may reasonably be expected of the seller, so that the buyer cannot reasonably expect any particular delivery date.
In other contexts the courts have taken a broad, purposive approach to the interpretation of the 1977 Act; thus in Smith v Eric S Bush; Harris v Wyre Forest DC [1989]2 All ER 514 the House of Lords held that a disclaimer of liability on a surveyor's report, which purported to prevent the surveyor owing a duty of care to the recipient of the report, was subject to s2 of the Act and was required to be reasonable.
One important factor whch applied in that case would not apply to a case considered under s3: s13 of the Act, which defines the classes of the clauses to which the Act applies, provides that to the extent that ss2 and 5-7 of the Act prevent the exclusion or restriction of liability, they "also prevent excluding or restricting liability by reference to terms and notices which exclude or restrict the relevant obligation or duty" .
The disclaimer in Smith v Bush, which purported to prevent any duty of care arising was therefore caught by s13; however, that part of s13 does not apply to s3, so that a clause which prevents a duty arising is not necessarily an exclusion for the purposes of s3.
Nevertheless, it is fair to assume that a clause such as the one identified above is at least potentially caught by s3.
The crucial question under s3(2) (b) is what was the performance reasonably expected of the proferens?
Is that to be defined by reference to the express terms of the contract or are they to be excluded in defining what was reasonably to be expected?
There is as yet no reported case on the ambit of s3.
However, there is authority from cases decided before the 1977 Act that the approach to such clauses is first to construe the contract to define the parties' obligations without reference to the disputed clause, and then take account of the clause in order to decide what its effect is on those obligations (see Karsales (Harrow) Ltd v Wallis [1956]1 WLR 936).
If a term defining and restricting the liability of the proferens is unusual, either in relation to the normal dealings between the parties, or by comparison with the terms used by other, similar businesses, it will probably be easier for the other party to argue that it "reasonably expected" more.
Given this uncertainty it is probably safest for the drafter to assume that s3 will be given its widest possible interpretation.
When s3 is read together with s13, it appears that that may be very wide indeed.
Section 13(1) provides that: To the extent that this Part of this Act prevents the exclusion or restriction of any liability it also prevents—(a) making the liability or its enforcement subject to restrictive or onerous conditions;(b) excluding or restricting any right or remedy in respect of the liability, or subjecting a person to any prejudice in consequence of his pursuing any such right or remedy.
For instance, clauses restricting liability for late delivery, allowing for variation of the delivery date or tolerances in relation to the quantity to be delivered, clauses enabling the proferens to substitute alternative goods for those ordered, to withhold performance of its obligations or vary the terms of the contract, and force majeure clauses excusing non-performance, or extending the time for performance in the event of circumstances outside the proferens' control, and possibly even clauses giving one party the right to withhold performance, or terminate the contract, in the event of breach by the other party, are all potentially subject to s3.
Indeed, it may even be possible to argue that certain types of reservation of title clause are caught by s3, in so far as they purport to allow the seller to retain title until certain conditions are fulfilled, and therefore permit it to render a performance substantially different from that reasonably expected of it, or no performance at all.
This is not to say that such clauses will be ineffective.
Section 3 does not invalidate a term, but subjects it to a test of reasonableness.
Many of the terms potentially caught by s3 are likely to satisfy that test, especially if the contract is between businesses and the terms are consistent with similar terms used by other businesses in the same line.
Nevertheless, the drafter should keep s3 in mind throughout the drafting process and try to ensure that the terms are reasonable and can be justified, if necessary, and should warn the client for whom the terms are prepared of the potential impact of the section and the resulting uncertainty.
Drafting Standard Terms
1 Preparing to draft
As noted in Chapter 2, a set of standard terms is an important document.
The same degree of care is required when drafting a set of standard terms as when drafting any other legal document, whether a conveyance, will, trust deed or pleading.
The cumulative value of transactions covered by a set of standard terms may be greatly in excess of the value of any individual conveyancing transaction and, although it may be possible to amend the terms for future transactions if problems emerge in use, once the terms have been incorporated into a particular contract, unlike a pleading, there is no chance to amend them for the purposes of that contract.
Careful preparation is essential.
Before beginning to draft, the drafter should make sure that he/she has to hand all the information likely to be required in order to draft the terms.
The drafter must have a clear idea of what the terms are intended to achieve; broadly, he/she must have (1) a sound grasp of the relevant law applying to contracts of supply and (2) a clear understanding of the nature of the client's business and the client's particular needs.
(a) The use of precedents A wide range of precedents is now available for the drafter.
In addition to the commercially available collections of precedents, many solicitors' offices have their own in-house standard precedent, and the terms of other businesses in the same line as the client may also serve as a source of ideas.
Precedents are a valuable tool for the drafter.
However, they must be used with care and should not be slavishly copied.
First, copying a precedent, particularly if the precedent in question is the standard terms of a rival business, may involve a breach of copyright.
Second, a particular precedent may be inappropriate for the client's business.
A set of standard terms must be an individually tailored product, designed to meet the particular needs of the client's business.
It will therefore be rare that a precedent will exactly satisfy those needs; it may contain terms not needed by the client, or fail to deal with problems special to the client's business.
Often the drafter will be able to improve on a precedent.
The value of precedents is as a source of ideas.
The drafter should therefore consider a wide range of precedents, to consider the different  matters that may need to be dealt with, and the different ways in which individual problems can be overcome.
It may be helpful, when considering a precedent, to ask why a particular term has been included, and what it is intended to achieve, and then consider whether the same result can be achieved in any other way: for instance, it may be possible to express the same idea more clearly or concisely.
The drafter may be tempted to adopt a 'scissors and paste"approach, drawing individual clauses from a number of precedents and putting them together to form a finished product.
However, this carries its own dangers.
Above all, the drafter should take care to ensure that the different component pieces do fit together and that the individual pieces are mutually consistent.
At its simplest, this may be a matter of ensuring that terminology is consistently used.
To take an obvious example, the drafter may draft the terms referring to the parties as 'seller "and" Buyer "; if a clause is then incorporated from a different document, referring to" the Customer ", it may give rise to difficult questions of interpretation: prima facie it will be assumed that" the Buyer "and" the Customer"are different people.
(b) Taking instructions As noted above, the drafter needs to have a clear understanding of the nature of the client's business, in order to ensure that the terms meet the needs of the client's business, taking account of its products, customers and problems.
It is therefore vital to take clear and full instructions before beginning to draft.
If the terms are to be tailored to fit the client, the client must be "measured" for the terms.
The first requirement is to make sure that suitable representatives of the client's business are chosen to give instructions.
The managing director or chief executive may not be the appropriate person to do so.
Instructions should be obtained from a person or persons with recent, practical experience of the business's transactions, its products and customers or suppliers, and the problems it has experienced.
It will often be best to take instructions from a briefing team rather than from an individual.
The drafter should have a clear idea of the matters on which instructions are required.
A checklist may be useful.
A list of the matters which should be covered in a set of standard terms is included at Appendix A at the end of this book.
The drafter should ensure that he/she has all the information necessary to decide if those matters are relevant to the client's needs, and, if so, how they hould be dealt with.
In general, if drafting conditions of sale or supply, information will be required on the following matters:(1) The nature of the business's products.
Are they low value, high volume products, or single, "big ticket" items?
The unit value, and the use to which goods will be put by customers, may be highly relevant in assessing whether, and if so how, to limit the supplier's liability for defects.
(2) How does the business acquire the products it supplies: by manufacture or by purchase?
If by manufacture, are products produced from raw  materials or by assembling purchased components?
If the business buys goods for resale, or components for assembly, the terms on which it buys should be considered: to what extent is it possible to pass back liability for defects in those goods; can the business recover an indemnity from its supplier against any liability it incurs to third parties, or is such liability excluded?(3) Who are the business's customers?
The UCTA 1977 restricts the use of certain terms in contracts of supply; in particular, it prevents exclusion of the statutory implied terms relating to the goods supplied under contracts of supply where the buyer is a "consumer" as defined in the Act.
As a result of the decision of the Court of Appeal in R & B Customs Brokers Co Ltd v UDT Finance Ltd [1988]1 All ER 847 the phrase "deals as a consumer" has been given an extended meaning.
The meaning of that phrase is considered later in this book at Chapter 6, 2.
For now the point is that the drafter needs to know at the outset whether any of the business's customers will fall within the definition of "consumer" : if so, care must be taken in drafting clauses excluding or limiting liability.
It is a criminal offence under the Consumer Transactions (Restriction on Statements) Order (SI 1976 No 1813) to purport to exclude or restrict liablity for breach of the statutory implied terms relating to goods in ss13-15 of the SGA 1979 where the buyer deals as a consumer within the meaning of that expression in the UCTA 1977.
In addition, the effectiveness of certain other types of clause is limited by statute where one of the contracting parties deals as a consumer; for instance , the Consumer Arbitration Agreements Act 1988 restricts the enforcement of an arbitration clause against a person who makes a contract as a consumer, unless certain conditions are fulfilled.
The 1988 Act adopts the same definition of "consumer" as that used in the 1977 Act.
Conversely, if the businesss' customers are other businesses, who may have their own conditions of purchase, it may be necessary to include provisions to deal with the possibility of a battle of forms.
(4) What will customers do with the goods?
This will be relevant both in relation to the client's potential liability for breach of contract, and the need to limit such liability, and in relation to any attempt to provide the client with security by such means as a retention of title clause.
Will the goods be used in the customer's business, in order to earn profits?
Will they be retained in specie, or used in a manufacturing process?
If the goods are to be used in manufacturing, will the process result in the production of a new product?
Will the goods be resold?
If so, who are the likely buyers?
To what use will the goods ultimately be put?
How will the goods be stored prior to use or resale?(5) Has the client experienced any particular problems in the past?
If so, it may be possible to include specific provisions to prevent them recurring.
(6) What do other businesses in the same line as the client do?
If they have standard terms, can the client produce a copy of their terms for  examination.
As already noted, the drafter should not copy a competitor's terms.
However, competitors' terms may provide the drafter with an indication of the points which should be covered in the standard terms.
They will also indicate what is usual in the particular trade.
Unusual terms may need to be given special prominence, or be highlighted in some way, otherwise they may not be incorporated in the contract (Interfoto Picture Library Ltd v Stiletto Visual Programmes Ltd [1988]1 All ER 348).
In addition, comparison with other, similar terms will be relevant when assessing the reasonableness of the client's terms.
(7) Is the client a member of a trade association?
Many trade associations stipulate conditions upon which their members must trade, or at least recommend minimum standards.
Such recommended terms must be registered under the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976.
They will then be considered by the Restrictive Practices Court to decide if they are fair and reasonable, unless the Office of Fair Trading recommends that reference to the court is unnecessary on the basis that the terms are reasonable.
Approval by the OFT or by the court does not guarantee that individual terms will be considered reasonable if they are challenged under the UCTA 1977.
However, if there is a recommended set of conditions, approved by the OFT or by the court, the drafter may adopt them with some confidence that they will pass the reasonableness test.
Moreover, if the trade association fixes a minimum standard, the drafter must ensure that the terms produced for the client satisfy that standard, otherwise the client may be in breach of the rules of the trade association and risk being disciplined.
(8) What product support is the client prepared to give?
Manufacturers may be prepared to offer product support in the form of a warranty or repair or replacement service.
Such support may be commercially attractive; in addition, if the client is prepared to offer an express warranty, any exclusion of the statutory implied terms may be more likely to satisfy the test of reasonableness. (9) How does the business make contracts?
How are orders placed?
Much business is done by telephone or fax.
There may then be practical problems in incorporating the terms into the business's contracts.
The establishing of proper procedures to incorporate the standard terms into contracts is at least as important as the drafting exercise itself; the drafter should therefore be prepared to advise the client on contract formation procedures, and may include appropriate terms to cover the problems created by telephone orders etc. (10) What insurance cover is available to the client?
Some risks cannot be excluded or transferred; they must be covered by insurance.
In addition, where a contract term places a financial limit on liability, the availability of insurance cover is one of the factors which a court must take into account when assessing the reasonableness of the limitation (UCTA 1977, s13(4)).
There would seem to be no reason why the drafter should not recite the fact that the business's insurance cover is limited in the standard terms, as an indication of the reason for the limitation.
Similar information will be required, although for different reasons, when drafting standard terms of purchase for a client to use when buying goods.
2 The drafting process
(a) General considerations Once the drafter has taken full instructions, the first draft of the terms can be prepared.
Before beginning to draft the terms it is useful to prepare a list of the matters to be covered by the terms, bearing in mind the client's instructions and the general law.
The individual terms included in that list can then be arranged in a logical order before beginning to draft.
Throughout the drafting process the drafter should keep in mind the objectives the terms are intended to achieve.
As already noted, those objectives can be described, in broad terms, as being to minimise the obligations of the drafter's client, whilst ensuring, so far as possible, that the client's trading partners perform their obligations.
Above all, the drafter should attempt to minimise the scope for dispute about the meaning or effect of the terms.
It is worth bearing in mind that disputes are likely to arise not out of the terms themselves, but, often, because one party seeks to escape from the effect of the contract.
Thus in many cases where a buyer seeks to reject goods supplied under a sale contract, it does so because the transaction has proved uneconomical, for instance because the market has fallen, or because it has found a cheaper source of supply; it may then sieze on any trivial breach, or any ambiguity in the contract, in order to justify rejection of the goods.
If a dispute does arise, it can quickly be resolved if it is clear (1) that the terms cover the situation in question,(2) what the terms mean and (3) what the effect of the terms is.
Thus the drafter should seek to provide, so far as possible, for all eventualities which may arise, and to do so in terms which are clear and precise.
Any lack of precision or clarity may provide an excuse for a dispute or even litigation: for example, if it is not clear when payment is due, the client's customer may rely on the uncertainty in the terms to withhold payment until the latest possible date.
Doubt about the effectiveness of the terms is most likely to arise from doubts about their reasonableness.
As previously stated, many of the terms which may be included in a set of standard terms of trading are likely to be subject to a test of reasonableness under s3 of the UCTA 1977.
The application of the reasonableness test is examined in more detail later at Chapter 6, 2; for the present, suffice to say that it is difficult, if not impossible, to predict what clauses will satisfy the reasonableness test, but a clause which appears reasonable is less likely to provoke a challenge than  one which appears less reasonable.
The drafter should therefore resist the temptation to make the terms too one-sided or restrictive.
If a clause is challenged as unreasonable, it may be possible to rebut the challenge and prove that it is reasonable; but the client may incur expense and inconvenience in meeting the challenge and in the meantime may face a delay in obtaining payment or performance under the contract.
Moreover, such a challenge is likely to damage the trading relationship between the client and the customer concerned.
In order to minimise the scope for dispute about the effectiveness of the terms, the drafter should therefore seek to draft for acceptance by the client's trading partners and for clarity.
(b) Drafting for acceptance In many cases where standard terms are used, they will be incorporated into the contract without ever being considered by either party; they may be "accepted" , in law, by the client's trading partner without the partner ever reading them, let alone considering and consciously agreeing to them.
However, in high value transactions, or at the commencement of a trading relationship, the terms may be subject to careful scrutiny.
If they are too heavily weighted in favour of one side, they may be rejected; or the trading partner may put forward its own terms, causing a battle of the forms.
In cases where the terms are likely to be subjected to such scrutiny, they must therefore be sufficiently balanced to be acceptable to the client's trading partners.
Even in cases where the terms may be incorporated into contracts without being considered, or where the client has sufficient bargaining power to insist on its own terms, there are still advantages in the terms being acceptable to the client's trading partners.
If the terms are excessively one-sided, the client may acquire a bad commercial relationship; a customer against whom the terms are enforced once may refuse to do further business on those terms.
Above all, as noted above, if the terms do appear to be too one-sided, the client's trading partners may be encouraged to challenge them as unreasonable.
The drafter's aim, therefore, should be to prepare terms which are sufficiently balanced to maximise the chances of the terms, or any individual term, satisfying the statutory test of reasonableness under the UCTA 1977.
Moreover, it is worth repeating the point that if the terms appear reasonable, they are less likely to provoke a challenge.
In contrast, if the terms in general appear unfairly weighted in favour of one party, or if an individual term appears unreasonable, the other party may be encouraged to challenge their effectiveness, and a court may sympathise with the challenger and strive to find ways to reduce the scope of the terms.
Thus unreasonable or unusual terms may be held not to have been incorporated into the contract unless special notice of them is given in the contract (Interfoto Picture Library Ltd v Stiletto Visual Programmes Ltd [1988]1 All ER 348).
The client, or the drafter, may be tempted to have strict terms and then  relax them in practice, for instance by not insisting on their strict application.
However, such a course is dangerous.
If the client informs its trading partners before entering into a contract that it will not insist on the strict letter of the terms, it may be estopped from relying on their letter; similarly, if the client describes the effect of a term, a court may hold that the client is bound by that description and can only enforce the term to the extent of that description (Curtis v Chemical Cleaning and Dyeing Co Ltd [1951]1 KB 805).
A similar estoppel could be raised by conduct: if the client adopts a practice of not insisting on the strict letter of its terms, its conduct may be held to create an estoppel in the same way as a statement of the effect of the terms.
Such a course of conduct may also be taken into account in assessing the reasonableness of the term for the purposes of the UCTA 1977.
In Geo Mitchell (Chesterhall) Ltd v Finney Lock Seeds Ltd [1983]2 AC 803 it was held that the defendants' limitation of liability was unreasonable and therefore unenforceable under the Act; a decisive factor was that in previous cases the defendants had settled claims without seeking to rely on the limitation clause, impliedly recognising that it was not reasonable.
In order to overcome the possibility that a trading partner may object to the terms, it may be tempting to prepare a second, less stringent set of "fall back" terms.
However, such a course must be adopted with great care.
A willingness to accept greater liability under a contract in return for payment of a higher price may make it more likely that an exclusion or limitation of liability will satisfy the test of reasonableness (Woodman v Photo Trade Processing Ltd (1981), unreported; see Lawson, Exclusion Clauses p174); however, the fact that the client has a second set of terms of business, containing less restrictive terms, may be taken as recognition that the more stringent terms are unreasonable.
A slightly better idea may be to prepare a separate set of terms for use in consumer transactions, since the supplier's freedom to restrict liability is more restricted in such cases, and exclusions are less likely to be held reasonable.
However, because of the potential for error if the wrong terms are used in a particular transaction, it is probably better to have only one set of terms, and draft in appropriate provisions to allow them to be used for both consumer and business transactions, unless the client can keep its consumer and other business wholly separate.
There may also be a temptation to include terms which cannot be enforced.
The UCTA 1977 makes some clauses wholly ineffective, but the drafter or the client may be tempted to include such terms in order to deter claims, relying on the fact that many of the persons against whom the contract will be enforced will be ignorant of the law.
However, this is also a dangerous practice.
The use of certain exclusion clauses is made a criminal offence: the Consumer Transactions (Restriction on Statements) Order (SI 1976 No 1813) makes it a criminal offence to seek to exclude or limit liability for breach of the implied terms in contracts of sale where the buyer deals as a consumer a defined in the UCTA 1977.
Moreover, even where the use of an ineffective term is not prohibited, the attempt to "frighten off" claims may  put the business in a bad light in any litigation which does result; it may also be taken into account by the Office of Fair Trading for a number of purposes, including that of deciding whether to grant, renew or revoke a licence under the Consumer Credit Act 1974.
From the point of view of the drafter there is a further danger.
The presence of an unenforceable restriction on liability may unrealistically raise the client's expectations.
The client may adopt less stringent quality control or other relevant procedures, in the belief that it is protected by its contract terms.
If the client's expectations are disappointed in litigation on the term it is likely to visit its disappointment on its legal adviser.
A device which may be adopted by the drafter to increase the likelihood of terms being accepted and being regarded as reasonable, is to include a justification for the term.
For instance, a limitation or exclusion of liability could be justified by a preamble or postscript to the clause explaining that its purpose is to limit liability so as to enable the person protected by it to obtain insurance cover, and thus keep its costs down: In order to enable the Seller to insure against its liability under this contract, the Seller's liability in respect of any defect in the goods or any loss caused by such defect is limited to £n; the Buyer must bear the risk of any loss in excess of £n and should insure against such loss.
A court is likely to take the availability of insurance into account in assessing the reasonableness of any exclusion or limitation of liability; where liability is subject to a financial limit, the court is expressly directed to have regard to the availability of insurance (UCTA 1977, s11(4) (b)).
However, the inclusion of an explanation or justification of a clause may increase the chances of the clause being regarded as reasonable, both by the court and by the other party to the contract.
(c) Drafting for clarity There are well-developed rules of construction used by the courts when interpreting a contract, and the drafter should bear them in mind.
The effect of a contract depends on the intention of the parties, but that intention is assessed objectively and is derived primarily from the words of the contract itself.
The words used will be interpreted according to the so-called "golden rule" : they will be given their ordinary grammatical and literal meaning unless that produces absurdity, inconsistency or repugnancy, when the literal meaning can be modified so as to avoid that absurdity, inconsistency or repugnancy.
The court may take account of the circumstances surrounding the making of the contract, in order to understand its purpose, but will not take account of the subsequent conduct of the parties in order to interpret the wording of the contract itself.
The drafter should therefore try to draft the terms as a whole, and individual terms, so that they are clear and comprehensible.
Above all, the legal effect of the terms should be clear and certain, and they should be drafted so as to avoid ambiguity.
Although a court will generally strive to  resolve uncertainties and ambiguities so as to give effect to a commercial contract wherever possible (especially where the agreement is already partly executed), uncertainty or ambiguity may lead a court to conclude that the term is too uncertain to be enforceable, and in extreme cases the whole contract may be held to be void.
Even if ambiguity is not fatal to the contract, the drafter's objective is not merely to enable the client to win any dispute which may arise but, so far as possible, to avoid such disputes.
If the meaning of the terms is clear and unambiguous on their face, the scope for dispute is reduced.
Moreover the drafter should bear in mind that a set of standard terms, unlike a will or conveyance, is intended to be used by the client and its trading partners without legal advice.
The terms should therefore be comprehensible to their intended users, and the desirability of clarity is even greater where the terms are to be used in transactions involving consumers.
In addition to the obvious practical benefits of clarity, it may also have a legal benefit.
The clarity and comprehensibility of the terms is likely to be taken into account by any court in assessing the reasonableness of the terms.
In Stag Line Ltd v Tyne Ship Repair Group Ltd (The Zinnia)[1984]2 Lloyd's Rep 211, 222 Staughton J observed that he was tempted to hold that exclusion clauses in the contract before him were unreasonable because "first…they are in such small print that one can barely read them; secondly, the draftsmanship is so convoluted and prolix that one almost needs an LLB to understand them" .
Moreover any ambiguity in a term, particularly an exclusion clause, will be resolved contra proferentem—contrary to the interests of the party seeking to rely on it.
There is an enormous body of case law concerned with the meaning of particular words and phrases in contracts and other documents.
However, the drafter should generally avoid relying on the interpretation given to a word or term in a previous decided case.
The construction of a contract is a question of law and a court interpreting a contract may therefore be guided by a decision as to the meaning of a certain word or phrase in an earlier case.
In particular, a decision on the meaning of a word or phrase in a standard form commercial agreement will generally be followed because, as Lord Denning put it in The Annefield [1971]P 168,"Once a court has put a construction on a standard form, commercial men act upon it.
It should be followed in all subsequent cases.
If the business community is not satisfied with the decision, they should alter the form."
However, this approach is particularly suited to standard forms such as those commonly used for bills of lading, commodity dealings and construction and engineering contracts.
A decision on a particular business's standard terms will be a very powerful precedent in a subsequent dispute on those same terms; however, a decision on a particular clause in one set of terms will not necessarily be a binding precedent in a case on a different set of terms.
In order to interpret a word or clause the court will take account of the context in which it appears; this will include the other terms of the contract and the factual circumstances in which the contract was made.
There is therefore ample  scope for the court to distinguish a decision on the meaning of a particular word or clause in a different contract.
In Acme Transport v Betts [1981]1 Lloyd's Rep 131, at p134, Cumming Bruce LJ said that the Court of Appeal "were indebted to the judgment and tact of Counsel in that neither of them sought to confine us by referring to authority on the meaning of other exemption clauses in other contexts" .
Many similar statements can be found in the Law Reports: as Lord Wright put it in Luxor (Eastbourne) Ltd v Cooper [1941]AC 108"Decisions on one contract may help by way of analogy and illustration in the decision of another contract.
But however similar the contracts may appear, the decision as to each must depend on the consideration of the particular contract, read in the light of the material circumstances of the parties in view of which the contract is made".
The overall structure The first requirement of clarity is a clear structure.
The drafter should not begin to draft until he/she knows exactly what he/she wants to say.
An aid in setting down ideas and identifying the structure of the document is to produce a list of the matters to be covered by the terms and then arrange them in a logical order.
For instance, the terms might start with a list of definitions, and then set out any provisions relating to the formation and scope of the contract.
Terms dealing with related points, such as delivery, quantities and requirements for the buyer to inspect the goods, or price, price variation and payment, could all be gathered together.
The terms can be made easier to understand by using a numbering system to make the structure clear.
There are several different numbering schemes which may be used.
For instance, the drafter could use a decimal numbering system, using a numerical sequence for the main clauses and a further numerical sequence for sub-clauses within each clause.
Thus terms might be numbered as follows: 1.
Definitions 2.
Scope of the Agreement 2.1.
Content of the contract 2.2.
Authority of agents 3.
Delivery 3.1.
Date of delivery 3.2.
Quantity This system allows the drafter to use any number of sub-divisions within a clause: a sub-clause can be further sub-divided into paragraphs as follows: 8.
Retention of title 8.1.
The goods remain the Seller's property until the Buyer has paid in full 8.1.1. all sums due to the Seller under this contract; and 8.1.2. any other sums due from the Buyer to the Seller.
8.2.
As soon as the goods are delivered to the Buyer in accordance with this contract they are at the Buyer's risk.
8.3.
So long as the goods remain the Seller's property in accordance with clause 8.1. the Buyer will: 8.3.1. insure them against loss or damage under a policy which protects the Seller's interest in the goods; 8.3.2. store them separately from other, similar goods owned by any other person, so that they remain identifiable as the Seller's property; 8.3.3. allow the authorised representatives of the Seller to have access at any reasonable time to the premises where the goods are stored, in order to inspect the goods.
Alternatively, the drafter can use separate, bracketed, numbers for sub-clauses and lower case letters for individual paragraphs within sub-clauses.
This is the method commonly used in statutes.
The above example would then look like this: 8.
Retention of title 8(1) The goods remain the Seller's property until the Buyer has paid in full(a) all sums due to the Seller under this contract; and (b) any other sums due from the Buyer to the Seller.
8(2) As soon as the goods are delivered to the Buyer in accordance with this contract they are at the Buyer's risk.
8(3) So long as the goods remain the Seller's property in accordance with clause 8(1) the Buyer will:(a) insure them against loss or damage under a policy which protects the Seller's interest in the goods;(b) store them separately from other, similar goods owned by any person, so that they remain identifiable as the Seller's property;(c) allow the authorised representatives of the Seller to have access at any reasonable time to the premises where the goods are stored, in order to inspect the goods.
If further sub-divisions are required, small Roman numerals—(i),(ii),(iii) etc—can be used.
Another approach is to use a mixture of numbers, upper and lower case letters and large and small Roman numerals.
The terms might then be structured as follows: I. A.1. 2. 3. (a)(b) B.1. 2.
II.
Other numbering systems are possible.
None is necessarily better than any other, although the decimal numbering system described above is probably the easiest to use.
The important point is to adopt a system and  then stick to it, applying it consistently.
It is best to prepare the system before starting to draft, rather than making it up as sub-divisions arise during the drafting.
The structure can be further clarified by using headings and the layout of the document.
Thus sub-paragraphs can be indented, as above.
Again, the important point is to be consistent.
If a dispute arises, a court will probably not take account of the layout in construing the contract, although it may take account of headings and/or marginal notes.
However, standard terms are not prepared simply for the court, but for everyday use by the drafter's business client and its trading partners; headings and layout will help those persons to use the document, acting as convenient "road signs" to identify and locate relevant parts of the document.
If the drafter wishes to ensure that headings are, or are not, taken into account by a court interpreting the terms, a provision to that effect can be included in the definitions or scope of the contract clause as follows: The headings used in these terms do not form part of the contract and no account is to be taken of them in interpreting its provisions.
Grammar and style A set of standard terms is not a work of literature, but there is no reason why it should not be written in clear and comprehensible English.
The first requirement is for the terms to be written in grammatically correct English—errors of grammar may disguise or even distort the meaning of a term.
Traditionally many legal documents have been written without punctuation; in modern documents punctuation is more common.
There is no reason why the drafter should not use punctuation; proper punctuation is a useful aid to comprehension, and the drafter should therefore use it.
Although the position is not entirely clear, it seems that a court construing the terms will take punctuation into account.
The drafter must therefore take care to use punctuation clearly and accurately.
Legal writing is frequently criticised for being unclear, verbose, convoluted and incomprehensible.
The famous Marx Brothers' contract scene in A Night at the Opera ( "The party of the first part shall be known in this contract as the party of the first part" ) exaggerated the worst excesses of legal drafting, but it had some basis in fact.
Since a set of standard terms is intended to be used by the drafter's business client, the drafter should try to make it as clear and comprehensible as possible.
However, the drafter must also ensure that the terms are legally correct.
With care it is generally possible to express most ideas clearly and accurately; however, on occasions it may be necessary to adopt particular language or legal formulae in order to express an idea accurately.
This was recognised by Sir Ernest Gowers in The Complete Plain Words:[L]egal draftsmen have to ensure to the best of their ability that what they say will be found to mean precisely what they intended, even after it has been subjected to detailed and possibly hostile scrutiny by acute legal  minds…
Legal drafting must therefore be unambiguous, precise, comprehensive and largely conventional.
If it is readily intelligible, so much the better; but it is far more important that it should yield its meaning accurately than that it should yield it on first reading, and legal draftsmen cannot afford to give much attention, if any, to euphony or literary elegance.
(p7) If the drafter has to choose between clarity and legal accuracy, clarity must be sacrificed, but that should rarely be necessary.
The following steps may all help to make the terms clear:(a) Keep sentences short.
The more ideas a sentence contains, the more difficult it becomes to read it.
Short, clipped sentences are generally easy to understand.
This is clearly illustrated in the Law Reports where Lord Denning's judgments are a model of simplicity and clarity.
Such a style may sometimes become a little wearing, and may, perhaps, lack elegance, but a set of standard terms is not read for pleasure.
(b) Avoid convoluted sentence structures.
There is a tendency to make sentences unnecessarily complex, perhaps because it is thought that a convoluted structure makes them seem more formal.
The traditional legal style, where "it is submitted" is preferred to "I submit" , tends to encourage this style.
Ideas expressed in the active mood are generally more direct and "punchier" than the same ideas expressed in the passive mood.
Contracts are often written in the future tense, presumably on the basis that they refer to acts to be performed in the future.
However, this can make sentences convoluted.
There is no reason why the present tense cannot be used.
For instance, If the Buyer shall fail to pay for any delivery in accordance with the terms of this contract, the Seller shall be entitled to withhold future deliveries until such payment is made can be replaced by If the Buyer fails to pay for any delivery in accordance with the terms of this contract, the Seller may withhold further deliveries until such payment is made.
It might be even better to write the clause as: If the Buyer fails to pay for any delivery in accordance with the terms of this contract, the Seller may withhold further deliveries until the Buyer pays for the deliveries already made.
This is longer: shorter is not necessarily better.
It avoids the argument that a late payment cannot be "such payment" —ie payment in accordance with the terms of this contract.
This is probably being excessively pedantic; it is fairly clear what "such payment" is intended to mean, but it does illustrate another problem—the difficulties which the word 'such"may cause.
A court will interpret references in the present tense as applying throughout the period covered by the contract where the sense requires  such an interpretation.
Switching from the future to the present tense has other advantages.
First, it allows the word 'shall"to be reserved for mandatory statements of events which the parties intend to happen automatically.
For example: If the Buyer fails to pay any instalment promptly in accordance with the terms of this contract, the whole balance then outstanding shall immediately become payable.
Second, it avoids the need to use the future perfect tense.
Thus instead of writing If the Seller shall have given the Buyer notice that the goods are ready for collection, and the Buyer shall fail to collect them within seven days from service of such notice, the Seller shall be entitled to make arrangements for the storage of the goods and the Buyer shall reimburse the Seller all costs and charges incurred as a result of such storage the drafter could write If after the Seller has given the Buyer notice that the goods are ready for collection, the Buyer fails to collect the goods within seven days, the Seller may make arrangements for the storage of the goods and the Buyer shall reimburse the Seller all costs and charges incurred as a result of such storage.
This is still not perfect, but the change of tense does improve the drafting.
(c) Structure individual terms so that they can be clearly understood.
There are several ways to do this.
One possibility is to follow the principles of drafting devised by George Coode in the 19th century (and described in Piesse, The Elements of Legal Drafting).
Coode suggested that a legal sentence should be structured as follows: 1 The "case" —the circumstances in which the sentence applies.
2 The "condition" —acts which must be done to make the sentence operative.
3 The "subject" —the person entitled to take action.
4 The action which may be taken.
This structure is followed in the example given above and can be broken down as follows: If after the Seller has given the Buyer notice that the goods are ready for collection [case], the Buyer fails to collect the goods within seven days [condition], the Seller [subject]may make arrangements for the storage of the goods [action]and the Buyer shall reimburse the Seller all costs and charges incurred as a result of such storage.
In this example there are two consequences of the conditions being fulfilled:(1) the seller may make arrangements for storage and (2) the buyer must then reimburse the seller any costs and charges.
In this type of case it is better to set out the two consequences in separate sub-paragraphs.
A better version would therefore read: If the Seller gives the Buyer notice that the goods are ready for collection but the Buyer fails to collect the goods within seven days of service of that notice, the following provisions shall apply:(a) the Seller may make arrangements for the storage of the goods until they are collected and (b) the Buyer shall reimburse the Seller all costs and charges incurred in connection with the storage of the goods.
The use of sub-clauses and separate paragraphs in this way has a second advantage.
It may assist the court to sever any part of a clause which it finds to be objectionable, leaving the rest enforceable.
In general the drafter should seek to maximise severability. (d) Use simple language.
Long words may seem attractive because they give an impression of formality.
However, to quote Piesse, "Polysyllabic pomposity sounds unpleasant" , and the drafter should use simple, everyday language wherever possible.
Similarly, the drafter should avoid unnecessary use of "legalese" .
Critics of legal drafting often complain that lawyers are fond of using legal jargon.
Many words and phrases have a technical legal meaning, and it is quite proper, and often necessary, to use such language in order to convey a precise legal meaning: for instance, the drafter may deliberately refer to the requirement that the goods be "merchantable" , because that word is used in the SGA, even though it is not in common use.
However, a distinction can be drawn between such technical terms of art and legal jargon.
Words such as "aforesaid" , "hereinafter" , "the same" , "whensoever" , "whereof" and so on are not in general use, and they can generally be avoided.
For instance, "aforesaid" and "aforementioned" are often used merely to mean "the" ; "X, hereinafter referred to as" the Buyer "" in a definitions clause could as easily be written as "X, referred to in this document as" the Buyer "" , or simply "X (" the Buyer "" )".
Where it is necessary to express a proviso to a rule or term, lawyers often use the expression "provided always that" ; however, the proviso can be expressed in more straightforward language by using a word such as "except" or by reversing the provision, putting the proviso first and using the word "unless" .
If technical legal words are used, they will normally be given their technical legal meaning, especially in a standard form document drafted by lawyers.
Thus, for example, "theft" would probably be given the same meaning that word bears in the Theft Act 1968; if the drafter intends some other meaning, he/she should define the relevant word for the purposes of the contract.
Try to avoid repetition or tautology.
There is a common, whispered suspicion that lawyers make legal documents unecessarily long because they are paid by the word or by the inch.
To quote Piesse again, "If there is much legal jargon and intricacy of arrangement [the client]may feel he is the victim of some art practised perhaps for the draftsman's own purposes or at least with neglectful indifference to its effect on ordinary people" (p54).
Certainty and definitions The importance of certainty in drafting has already been mentioned.
The drafter may sometimes be tempted to leave something deliberately vague in order to mask its meaning, perhaps to avoid frightening a potential contract partner.
That temptation should be resisted.
Uncertainty provokes disputes; ambiguities may be resolved contra proferentem and, in extreme cases, uncertainty may lead to a term or a whole contract being held to be void.
The well-known case of Scammell (G) and Nephew Ltd v Ouston [1941]AC 251 provides a classic illustration of the dangers of uncertainty.
The respondents agreed to buy a van on the basis that the price could be paid "on hire purchase terms over a period of two years" .
The House of Lords held that there was no contract at all: the reference to "hire purchase terms" was uncertain, as there was no indication of the terms intended.
The drafter should therefore avoid meaningless terms and where in doubt, terms should be defined.
(See also British Electrical and Associated Industries (Cardiff) Ltd v Patley Pressings Ltd [1953]1 WLR 280– "usual force majeure conditions" .)
It is increasingly common for contracts to include definition clauses.
If definitions are used carefully, they can help the drafter produce a more concise document.
A definition should be used wherever there may be dispute about the meaning of a word or phrase, or wherever a word is used in a special or unusual sense.
Words or phrases which appear only once, or in only one clause, can be defined in the clause in which they appear; however, words or phrases which appear several times throughout the terms are best defined in a definitions clause.
Thus the terms might contain definitions of "the Buyer" , "the Seller" , "the price" , "the goods" and so on.
If the terms require the service of notices, it may be useful to define what is meant by 'service".
Words or phrases may be defined by reference to other documents.
Thus, for instance, in a set of terms for use in international trading, expressions such as  "fob" and "cif" could be defined by reference to the current version of Incoterms (International Rules for the Interpretation of Trade Terms, published by the International Chamber of Commerce).
Alternatively the drafter may adopt definitions from statutes; for instance, ss736 and 736A of the Companies Act 1985 (as amended) contain definitions of "holding company" and "subsidiary company" .
The drafter should bear in mind that statutes and standard form documents, such as Incoterms, are altered and updated from time to time.
In the event of a dispute, a court will generally interpret a reference to some external document as a reference to the version in force at the time the contract is made (Smith v S Wales Switchgear Ltd [1978]1 WLR 165); however, a different rule may apply to procedural rules, such as the rules of an arbitration scheme.
To avoid problems the drafter should make clear whether the reference in the terms is to the definition current at the time of drafting or to the version in force from time to time.
Certain useful statutory definitions will apply automatically and there is therefore no need to include them, unless for the sake of completeness and clarity.
Thus s61 of the Law of Property Act 1925 provides that  in all…contracts…made or coming into operation after the commencement of this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—(a) "Month" means calendar month;(b) "Person" includes a corporation;(c) The singular includes the plural and vice versa;(d) The masculine includes the feminine and vice versa .
If the drafter does use definitions, care should be taken to use them accurately.
There is a difference between "means" and "includes" .
For instance: "intellectual property rights" means copyright, design right and moral rights provides an exclusive definition of the phrase "intellectual property rights" ; patents, trade marks and confidential information would be excluded.
However, "intellectual property rights" includes copyright, design right and moral rights does not provide an exclusive definition; it merely provides clarification by saying that the three rights listed are included in the definition.
A court could therefore hold that other rights are also included in the definition.
The drafter should also take care to use defined words and phrases consistently.
It may be useful to draw up the definitions clause after drafting the rest of the terms, to ensure that all words and phrases which require definition are included; then, when checking the terms, the drafter should check the meaning of defined words and phrases each time they appear in the document to ensure that the definition is appropriate.
(d) Special problems Provisions relating to time The terms may contain a number of provisions concerned with periods of time: for example, they may set limits on the time for action to be taken, including the time for delivery, the service of notices, notification of claims and payment of the price.
Unless great care is taken such provisions can give rise to difficult problems of interpretation.
There is a large body of case law concerned with the meaning of particular expressions in particular contexts, but the drafter should bear in mind the cautionary words of Lord Esher MR: No general rule exists for the computation of time, either under the Bankruptcy Act or any other statute, or, indeed, where time is mentioned in a contract, and the rational mode of computation of time is to have regard in each case to the purpose for which the computation is to be made (Re North, ex parte Hasluck [1895]2 QB 264).
This may be too strong; it is possible to state "general rules" for the interpretation of some common provisions, but those rules are only rebuttable presumptions and it is generally possible to find authorities to support a different interpretation.
In general: "Year" can mean either a calendar year starting on 1 January or a period of 12 consecutive months.
 "Month" means a "calendar month" (Law of Property Act 1925, s61) made up of a period of consecutive days.
The number of days in a month will obviously depend on the month in question; thus if a contract requires goods to be paid for within one month of delivery, and goods are delivered on 19 February, they must be paid for by 19 March (see Dodds v Walker [1980]1 WLR 1061).
 "Day" can mean either a calendar day or a period of 24 hours, according to context, and the meaning of "working day" will depend on the custom of the particular trade—and may vary from place to place and from time to time.
References to the hour of the day are to Greenwich Mean Time (Interpretation Act 1978, s9), except during summer time, when they are references to British Summer Time (Summer Time Act 1972, s3).
Where a period of time is to run "from" a specified date, the specified date is excluded in calculating the period.
As a result, the period begins at midnight on the named date, and expires at midnight of the last day in the period.
Similarly, where an act is to be done "within X days" of an event, the date of the event which starts the period is excluded.
Thus if goods are to be paid for within two months of delivery and are delivered on 5 October, they must be paid for by close of business—or midnight? —on 5 December, the day of delivery being excluded from the two-month period (Webb v Fairmainer (1838) 3 M & W 473).
 "Forthwith" generally means "as soon as reasonably practicable" or "without delay" (see Roberts v Brett (1865) 11 HL Cas 337) rather than "immediately" .
Thus if a manufacturer agrees to do something "as soon as possible" he "is not bound to discard all other work for the occasion" (Hydraulic Engineering Co Ltd v McHaffie Goslett & Co (1878) 4 QBD 670, per Bramwell LJ).
However, the test is objective, so that the act must be done as soon as reasonably practicable.
Of course, in many cases a difference of one day may be unimportant.
However, the drafter should remember that problems frequently arise where one party to a contract seeks to escape from it on the grounds that the other is in breach of a condition, and that the time for performance of obligations (other than payment of money) under a commercial contract is normally "of the essence" : a failure to perform on time in accordance with the contract will therefore justify the other party in terminating the contract (see Bunge Corpn v Tradax Export SA [1981]1 WLR 711).
Another example of the importance of time periods is provided by the decision in Hendy Lennox (Industrial Engines) Ltd v Grahame Puttick Ltd [1984]1 WLR 485 where the sellers' terms of trading contained a retention of title clause which entitled them to repossess goods "in the case of default in payment by the purchaser" .
As a result it was held that the sellers' right to repossess the goods did not arise until the expiry of the credit period allowed by the terms.
However, by that time property in the goods had passed to the buyers'  customers, so that the sellers were unable to recover their goods (by virtue of s25 of the SGA 1979).
In respect of one item the credit period expired at midnight on 1 December and property in it was transferred to the buyers' customer on 2 December.
The sellers were therefore able to recover that item (or, actually its value) on the grounds that they had already puported to terminate the contract with the buyers; however, it is not difficult to imagine cases where a difference of one day could be crucial and defeat the sellers' claim.
By careful drafting the drafter can avoid many of the problems associated with references to periods of time.
For instance, rather than The Buyer shall pay the price within 30 days of delivery the terms could provide that The Buyer shall pay the price within a period of 30 days commencing on the date of delivery making it clear that the date of delivery is included in the period or The Buyer shall pay the price within a period of 30 days commencing on the date immediately following the date of delivery if the date of delivery is to be excluded.
Alternatively, a separate provision can be included in the terms indicating how periods of time are to be calculated.
In general the drafter should be beware of expressions such as "within n days" , "from" or "of" a date or event, "until" .
Wherever the terms require something to be done within a period of time, the drafter should also consider what are to be the consequences of a failure to comply.
As noted above, stipulations in commercial contracts which fix time limits for action by the parties are normally interpreted as conditions, so that a failure to perform on time entitles the other party to terminate the contract.
The drafter may wish stipulations not to be "of the essence" , or to avoid any possible dispute about the consequences of a failure to perform.
It will therefore be desirable to define the consequences of a failure to perform on time, for instance by stating that "time for performance is of the essence" , or by defining a term as a "condition" or by expressly providing that "if X fails to perform on time in accordance with this provision, Y shall be entitled to terminate this contract" .
Lists Terms often contain lists: for instance, of rights which may be exercised in certain situations, or of facilities to be provided.
They may provide considerable scope for disputes over meaning.
For instance, if the terms provide that The Supplier shall bear the cost of connecting the goods to the electricity, gas, water and other services who is reponsible for connecting the goods to the telephone network, or to the buyer's internal computer network?
Similarly, if the contract provides that  The Customer shall provide such temporary roadways, footways, scaffolding and other equipment as may be necessary for the safe installation of the goods who has to bear the cost of equipment hire if a fork lift truck, or heavy lifting crane, is needed for the installation?
There are general rules of construction which the courts will adopt in interpreting such provisions, and the drafter should bear them in mind.
Express mention of some things may be taken to exclude other, similar items, which are not mentioned, unless they are included by general words: expressio unius est exclusio alterius.
However, general words in a list may be interpreted restrictively.
In Tropwood AG of Zug v Jade Enterprises [1982]1 Lloyd's Rep 232 a charterparty allowed the owners to withdraw the ship "failing punctual and regular payment of hire…or on any breach of this charterparty" .
The owners sought to withdraw for late payment of an insurance premium required by the contract.
It was held that they were not entitled to do so; the express reference to one particular form of late payment impliedly excluded other late payments from the reference to "any breach of this charterparty" .
General words may also be restricted by the ejusdem generis rule.
Where a list of specific words is followed by a general word, the general word will be interpreted restrictively, and given a meaning similar to the meanings of the specific words in the list.
Thus in the above example, the customer probably is not responsible for the provisions of the crane.
This rule only applies where the specific listed items have some common feature so that a genus can be identified, and it may not apply where the general word precedes the list.
It can be evaded by careful drafting such as the addition of "whatsoever" , or some synonym for it which may prevent its application.
The above clause could therefore be redrafted as The Customer shall provide such temporary roadways, footways, scaffolding and such other equipment, of whatever kind, as may be necessary for the safe installation of the goods or The Customer shall provide all the equipment, of whatever kind, which may be necessary for the safe installation of the goods.
For the purposes of this provision "equipment" includes, but is not limited to, temporary roadways, footways, and scaffolding.
The words "and" and "or" in lists can also cause problems.
 "And" is normally read conjunctively, "or" is normally read disjunctively, but in some circumstances the context may require "and" to be disjunctive or "or" to be conjunctive.
The problems which those words can create are illustrated by a provision such as: If the Buyer fails to pay any instalment promptly in accordance with the terms of this contract the Seller may terminate the contract, recover goods already delivered and retain all payments already made.
On its face this seems to require the seller to exercise all three rights together.
But if "and" is replaced by "or" , the seller is apparently only entitled to exercise one of the rights.
The drafter may be tempted to overcome this problem by using "and/or" , as follows: If the Buyer fails to pay any instalment promptly in accordance with the terms of this contract the Seller may terminate the contract and/or recover goods already delivered and/or retain all payments already made.
However, careful analysis shows that the meaning of this provision is still not clear: for instance, does "terminate…and recover…or retain" mean that the seller may either (1) terminate and recover or (2) retain, or does it mean that the seller may terminate and either (1) recover or (2) retain?
In many cases it may be clear that a particular meaning is intended, but the drafter's job is to avoid ambiguity and possible disputes.
The solution in many cases is to use a different formula.
Thus, the above provision could be worded as: If the Buyer fails to pay any instalment promptly in accordance with the terms of this contract the Seller may exercise any of the following rights, either alone or in any combination:(a) terminate the contract (b) recover goods already delivered (c) retain all payments already made.
3 Checking the draft
It goes without saying that the draft should be checked carefully.
If possible it is probably helpful to leave the draft for a time, so that the drafter can return to it later and view it from a more detached position.
Even better, if possible, get someone else to read it and comment on it.
When checking, the drafter should ask:(a) Do the terms do what they were intended to do?(b) Do the terms deal with all the points which the drafter wished to deal with?(c) Have all necessary terms been defined?(d) Have words and terms been used consistently throughout the terms?
If the same word is used in more than one place in a document, it will be assumed that it means the same thing each time it appears.
In contrast, if different words are used, it will be assumed that they mean different things.
(e) Are the terms too one-sided?
Will they provoke a challenge?
Will they satisfy the test of reasonableness?
4 Advice to the client
The drafter's job is not quite finished when the terms are drawn up.
They will be useless to the drafter's client unless they are explained.
If possible, it  may be desirable to offer a clause-by-clause explanation of the terms.
However, even if that is not possible or practicable, the drafter must offer advice on certain matters in order to allow the terms to be used effectively.
Advice on other matters may also be prudent in order to protect the drafter by discharging the duty of care he/she owes to the client.
The client should be advised that terms cannot be watertight—the need to satisfy the statutory test of reasonableness allows terms to be challenged, but in many cases the drafter should be able to provide assurance that the terms will probably satisfy the test.
In other cases it may be difficult to guarantee effectiveness because of the uncertain state of the relevant law.
For example, the effectiveness of a retention of title clause which purports to extend to proceeds of sale is currently unclear.
As a result, the client should be advised that the use of standard terms should not be regarded as removing the need to adopt other sensible business precautions.
Adequate credit control systems will still be necessary and, above all, it is essential to recommend to the client that it obtains adequate insurance cover to guard against the risks to which it is exposed.
That may include public liability, product liability and bad debt insurance.
The client should also be warned of the dangers of misrepresenting the effects of the terms, and of settling claims without reference to the terms.
As noted above, the decision in Geo Mitchell (Chesterhall) Ltd v Finney Lock Seeds Ltd [1983]2 AC 803 shows that if a person settles claims without relying on their standard terms, those terms may be judged unreasonable and the person may be prevented from relying on them.
It may also be prudent to advise the client that the standard terms may not be suitable for all transactions and that, if it has any regular business partners, or long-term contracts, it may be better to have a specially negotiated contract for that customer/transaction.
Above all, the client should be advised of the need to adopt proper contracting procedures to ensure that the terms are properly incorporated into its contracts.
The most carefully drafted terms will be useless if they are never incorporated into the client's contracts.
The client should therefore be advised to present the terms clearly and legibly, and to resist the temptation to use small print, faint ink or to try to impose its terms on its trading partners by stealth.
These matters are covered in more detail in the next chapter.
Incorporation of Terms
No matter how much care the drafter puts into the preparation of a set of standard terms, the terms are wholly useless unless they are effectively incorporated into the contracts they are intended to govern.
If a dispute arises between the parties to a contract and one of them seeks to rely on its standard terms, the first question the other party's legal advisers will ask is "Do the terms apply?" or, to put it another way, "Were the terms incorporated into the contract?" 
All too often the answer to that question is "No" .
The legal rules which govern the formation of contracts do not mesh easily with common business practices and are often not appreciated by businesses.
However, whilst it is impossible to guarantee that a business's terms will be incorporated into all its contracts, if a business takes care to adopt proper contract formation procedures, it can maximise the chances of its terms being incorporated into its contracts, and therefore its chances of being able to rely on those terms should any dispute arise.
The drafter should regard it as part of his/her job to advise the business client on the adoption of proper procedures.
1 The time of introduction
It is a fundamental rule of English contract law that new contract terms cannot be introduced after the formation of the contract.
Therefore, once the parties have committed themselves to an offer and acceptance, it is too late to introduce new terms.
It may be that there is a special rule for reservation of title clauses: this is examined below (Chapter 10) but subject to that possible exception, once a contract has been made, its terms can only be altered or supplemented by a variation, and such variation will only be effective if it is supported by consideration.
The performance of existing duties under a contract can amount to consideration for a promise if performance confers a practical benefit on the promisor (Williams v Roffey Bros & Nicolls (Contractors) Ltd [1990]1 All ER 512), but the promise will be unenforceable if it is obtained by duress, including economic duress.
If after the contract is formed one party refuses to perform unless the contract is amended to include his terms, it is unlikely that the terms will apply even if the other agrees: even if there is consideration for the other's promise, the  threat to break the contract amounts to economic duress (see Atlas Express Ltd v Kafco (Importers and Distributors) Ltd [1989]1 All ER 641).
The effect of the rule that terms must be incorporated no later than when the contract is concluded is illustrated by the case of Olley v Marlborough Court Hotel [1949]1 KB 532.
The plaintiffs registered as guests at the defendant hotel.
Having registered at the reception desk they went to their room and found a notice which purported to exempt the hotel for liability for the loss or theft of property from the rooms.
Some furs were stolen from the room while the plaintiffs were out, and the plaintiffs sued the hotel.
It was held that the hotel could not rely on the notice to protect it against liability.
The contract had been made at the reception desk; the notice was ineffective because it was introduced too late.
The commercial significance of this rule is often not appreciated.
Many businesses print or refer to their standard terms of trading on their invoices which are normally sent out after the contract has been performed—for instance by delivery of goods.
It is quite clear that it is too late to introduce new terms by reference to them on an invoice.
If there has been previous trading between the same parties it may be possible to establish that the terms are incorporated by a course of dealing.
However, whether or not previous trading is sufficient to establish a course of dealing will be a question of fact, and will almost always lead to a dispute as to whether or not the terms were incorporated.
 "Course of dealing" is therefore an argument of last resort.
A similar problem may arise where orders are placed by telephone, or at trade fairs, over lunch and so on.
One party may then send out a copy of its standard terms.
If it is established that the contract was actually concluded during the telephone or other conversation, the terms will be ineffective because they will be introduced too late to be part of the contract.
It may be possible to establish that no contract was actually made on the telephone.
In Levison v Patent Steam Carpet Cleaning Co Ltd [1978]QB 69 the plaintiff telephoned the defendants and asked them to collect a carpet for cleaning.
When the defendants' employees called to collect the carpet they presented a form for signature by the plaintiffs.
Two members of the Court of Appeal held that no concluded contract had been made on the telephone; the plaintiff had merely made an invitation to treat.
The terms were therefore incorporated.
When the defendants called to collect the carpet they made an offer to contract on their terms, which the plaintiffs accepted.
This aspect of the decision in Levison is open to question; the parties had agreed the price and the date for the collection of the carpet, and it might be thought that that would indicate that a binding contract had been made on the telephone.
When a contract is made following initial telephone contact and one party tries to rely on its standard terms, it is likely that the other will dispute the incorporation of the terms.
Clearly modern businesses cannot refuse to take orders by telephone.
Where the initial contact is by telephone, it may be possible to satisfy a court that no contract was made on the telephone, and that the contract was governed by standard terms sent after the initial telephone contact.
Alternatively, it may be possible, and preferable, to establish procedures to incorporate terms by reference on the telephone.
However, before considering what procedures may be adopted in such circumstances it is necessary to outline the other rules governing the incorporation of terms.
2 Acceptance and agency
In order to establish that its terms were incorporated into a particular contract, a business must show that they were accepted by, or on behalf of, the other contracting party.
Generally it will be argued that the terms were accepted by an employee on behalf of the other party.
It is important to bear in mind the fundamental rule of agency law, that the acts of an agent are only binding on the principal if the agent had actual or apparent authority to perform those acts.
It is therefore vital that a business which seeks to have its terms accepted by a trading partner should have them accepted by someone with authority to bind the trading partner.
Who has such authority will depend on the nature of the particular business and the way in which it is organised.
Sales and purchasing directors and managers will probably have authority to make commercial contracts in most cases, whilst warehouse and delivery staff will generally not have authority to agree contracts or vary terms, but no hard and fast rule can be laid down.
What is clear is that a business cannot claim that its terms were accepted by a trading partner if they were accepted by an employee whom it knows has no authority to accept them.
In order to protect themselves against employees accepting terms put forward by trading partners, many businesses include an express provision in their terms of trading limiting the authority of their agents and employees.
This is generally coupled with an "our terms only" clause in an attempt to ensure that all the business's contracts are governed by its own terms without any addition or variation.
The terms of this order are to govern any contract between the Buyer and Seller and shall prevail over any terms put forward by the Seller, unless the Buyer expressly agrees to them in writing.
No conduct by the Buyer shall be deemed to constitute acceptance of any terms put forward by the Seller.
No employee or agent of the Buyer has authority to vary these terms orally.
No addition to or variation of these terms is binding on the Buyer unless agreed in writing signed on the Buyer's behalf by its Purchasing Director.
The effect of this provision is to deprive all employees other than the purchasing director of apparent authority to agree to variation of the terms.
Difficult questions may still arise if an employee misleads a trading partner as to the contents of the terms.
This problem is examined below.
3 Signed documents
The general rule is well established that if a person signs a document which contains contract terms, he/she is bound by those terms, provided that the document was presented for signature before the contract was concluded.
In L "Estrange v Graucob ([1934]2 KB 394) Scrutton LJ said that" When a document containing contractual terms is signed then, in the absence of fraud or, I will add, misrepresentation, the party signing it is bound, and it is wholly immaterial whether he has read the document or not."
Indeed, a party who signs a document will normally be bound by its terms even though he/she could not read them, for instance because he could not read the language in which they were written (The Luna [1920]P22).
As recognised by Scrutton LJ in L"Estrange v Graucob there are limitations to the signature rule.
It is accepted that the rule does not apply where the party seeking to rely on the document was guilty of fraud.
Fraud is difficult to prove, but misrepresentation may also allow the signer to escape from the effect of the terms.
In Curtis v Chemical Cleaning and Dyeing Co Ltd [1951]1 KB 805 the plaintiff took her wedding dress to be dry cleaned and was asked to sign a form.
She asked about its contents and was told that the terms merely protected the cleaners from liability for damage to sequins and beads.
In fact the document contained a clause which provided that "the company is not liable for any damage, howsoever caused" .
It was held that the company could not rely on the clause to protect it against liability when the dress was stained during the cleaning process.
The company was bound by the representation and could only rely on the exclusion clause to exclude liability for damage to beads and sequins.
Similar reasoning has been applied in other cases (see eg Mendelssohn v Normand Ltd [1970]1 QB 177; Jaques v Lloyd D George and Ptnrs [1968]1 WLR 625).
As the decision in Curtis shows, a business should take care to ensure that its employees do not misrepresent the effects of its terms.
It may be possible to prevent employees misrepresenting the effect of the terms by including a specific provision excluding their authority to make representations about the meaning or effect of the terms.
In Overbrooke Estates Ltd v Glencombe Properties Ltd [1974]1 WLR 1335 it was held that a term excluding the authority of agents to make representations about the subject matter of the contract was not subject to the test of reasonableness in s3 of the Misrepresentation Act 1967: its effect was to prevent the agent having apparent authority to make representations.
The effect of a term excluding the agents's authority to make representations about the meaning or effect of the terms would appear to prevent the other contracting party claiming that the agent had any actual or apparent authority to make such statements.
However, it may still be possible for a person who signs a document after a misrepresentation of its effect by an agent of the other party to argue that, regardless of authority, the other party is vicariously responsible for the agent's misrepresentation, and that the misrepresentation  prevents reliance on the signed document.
In Armagas Ltd v Mudogas SA [1986]2 All ER 385 the House of Lords held that where an agent had no apparent authority to make statements about the subject matter of the contract, a party dealing with the agent could not argue that the agent had apparent authority to make statements about his own authority, nor that the principal was vicariously liable for his fraud.
However, in Armagas the person dealing with the agent knew that he had no actual authority to enter the transaction in question.
Different considerations might apply where the agent's misrepresentation is about the effect of the document which deprives him of apparent authority.
There are suggestions in Curtis that there may be a wider exception to the signature rule.
Lord Denning said: In my opinion any behaviour, by words or conduct, is sufficient to be a misrepresentation if it is such as to mislead the other party about the existence or extent of the exemption.
This may provide the explanation for the recent decision in Harvey v Ventilatoren-Fabrik Oelde GmbH [1988]BTLR 138.
A German company (S) entered into a contract to supply machinery to an English customer (B) who, as representatives of the German company knew, spoke no German.
S sent B two sets of forms containing the terms, in English, of the proposed contract.
B signed and returned one copy and kept the other.
When a dispute arose under the contract, it was discovered for the first time that the copy returned by B had a number of terms printed on the back, in German, including a clause conferring jurisdiction in relation to disputes under the contract on the German courts.
The Court of Appeal held that the jurisdiction clause was not binding on B. The way the documents were presented to him for signature was misleading: B was entitled to assume that the two copies of the terms were identical.
(See also H Glynn (Covent Garden) Ltd v Wittleder [1959]2 Lloyd's Rep 409.)
It should be emphasised that the test to be applied in a case such as this is objective: would a reasonable person have been misled?
The signer cannot rely on subjective factors, or his own inability to read the language of the document, except perhaps if that fact is known to the other party.
It therefore seems that if a person who signs a document is mistaken as to its effect as a result of the words or conduct of the other party, the signer may not be bound by its terms.
However, if the signer is mistaken without being misled, the only way to escape from the contract will be to plead non est factum.
That is only possible where the signer can establish (a) that he/she signed the document without negligence and (b) that he/she mistakenly thought he/she was signing a document of a fundamentally different type from that actually signed (Saunders v Anglia BS [1971]AC 1004).
It will rarely be possible to establish non est factum when a person has signed a document containing standard terms in a commercial context.
There are therefore limitations to the effectiveness of signature as a means of incorporating terms into a contract, but it is probably the most  reliable method of incorporation.
Provided that the signer is not misled, he/she will generally be bound by terms in a signed document.
It is therefore desirable to devise procedures which allow a business which wishes to rely on standard terms to rely on the signature rule.
It may be impracticable to have a separate, signed contract each time goods or services are ordered, particularly in view of the increasingly widespread adoption of just-in-time ordering and stock control systems.
However, if the business has regular customers the difficulty can be overcome by creating a global contract.
The terms can be drafted so as to provide that all contracts between the parties are to be governed by those terms, and a copy of the terms can be signed by trading partners at the commencement of a trading relationship.
Each order for goods or services then gives rise to a separate contract, subject to the agreed terms.
A business which wishes to rely on the signature rule as a means of incorporating its terms into its contracts should ensure that the terms are signed by someone who has authority to bind its trading partners—for instance, a sales or purchasing director.
Schedule 2 to the UCTA 1977 provides that, in assessing the reasonableness of a clause under the Act, the court should take into account "whether the customer knew, or ought reasonably to have known of the existence and extent of the term (having regard, amongst other things, to any custom of the trade and any previous course of dealing between the parties)" .
Thus if a business manages to establish that its terms are incorporated into its contracts by signature, it may still find that it cannot rely on any of the terms which are subject to the reasonableness test under the Act if, for instance, the business knows the signer did not read the terms before signing.
Signature may have a further effect.
It may be possible to argue that the parol evidence rule applies and that the signed document contains the whole of the parties' agreement, which cannot be supplemented or varied by reference to any other document or oral agreement.
However, the parol evidence rule is now generally regarded merely as a rule of presumed intention; it is therefore generally possible to avoid it if it can be shown that the written document was not intended to contain the whole of the parties' agreement (J Evans and Son (Portsmouth) Ltd v Andrea Merzario Ltd [1976]1 WLR 1078) or that the written agreement was supplemented by a collateral agreement, either oral or in writing (De Lasalle v Guildford [1901]2 KB 215; Brikom Investments Ltd v Carr [1979]QB 467).
It is better to include a specific provision in the standard terms to prevent a party proving a variation of the standard terms, or a collateral contract, rather than relying on the parol evidence rule.
4 Unsigned documents
Where terms are contained or referred to in an unsigned document, the question whether or not they are incorporated into the contract is one of  fact.
The rules which apply to such cases and can be derived from the cases are summed up in Chitty on Contracts as follows:(1) If the person receiving the document did not know that there was writing or printing on it, he is not bound.
(2) If he knew that the writing or printing contained or referred to conditions, he is bound.
(3) If the party tendering the document did what was reasonably sufficient to give the other party notice of the conditions, and if the other party knew that there was writing or printing on the document, but did not know that it contained conditions, then the conditions will become the terms of the contract between them.
If, therefore, it can be established that the recipient knew that the document contained terms, they will be incorporated.
However, in most cases the crucial question will be whether the person seeking to rely on the terms had taken reasonable steps to give the recipient notice of their existence.
One aspect of this requirement is that the document on which the terms are printed should be the sort of document which would reasonably be expected to include contract terms (see Chapelton v Barry UDC [1940]1 KB 532).
However, this is unlikely to cause any difficulties in the context of commercial operations: it is well known that documents of the kind on which standard terms of business are likely to be printed, such as orders, acknowledgments and delivery notes, commonly include contract terms.
The test of reasonable notice is objective.
Provided that the person putting the terms forward has taken reasonable steps to bring the terms to the attention of persons in general, it is irrelevant that those steps were insufficient to bring the terms to the attention of the particular contracting partner, for instance because he/she is illiterate, blind or cannot speak the language in which the terms are printed (Thompson v London Midland and Scottish Railway Co [1930]1 KB 41).
However, whilst there is no need to take account of the attributes of a particular contracting partner, if a business contracts with people of a particular class, the steps must be reasonably sufficient to bring the terms to the notice of a member of that class—in Richardson, Spence & Co v Rowntree [1894]AC 217, terms on a steamer ticket for carriage in steerage class were not incorporated into a contract because the defendant had taken insufficient steps to bring them to the notice of steerage class passengers.
In addition, although the test of incorporation is generally objective, special steps may be necessary where the person seeking to rely on the terms knows that the other person is under a disability; for instance , that he cannot read the language in which the terms are printed (Geier v Kujawa [1970]1 Lloyd's Rep 364).
Standard terms are often printed on the reverse of standard business documents, such as orders, acknowledgments and delivery notes.
Although there is no absolute legal requirement, it is safest to ensure that there is some reference to the terms on the face of the document; for instance: This order is for the supply of goods subject to the terms printed overleaf or We acknowledge receipt of your order and agree to supply you, subject to our terms printed overleaf.
There is no absolute requirement for the terms to be printed on the document which incorporates them into the contract.
In many cases a business's standard terms may be so long and complicated that that would be impracticable.
The terms can be incorporated by reference.
It may be sufficient simply to use words such as: We acknowledge receipt of your order and agree to supply you, subject to our terms of business.
A copy of our terms will be supplied on request.
(See Smith v S Wales Switchgear Ltd [1978]1 WLR 165.)
However, it is probably preferable to send a copy of the terms with the document which refers to them, at least on the first occasion that the parties do business.
If not, the reference to the terms should at least draw attention to the fact that the terms contain exclusion clauses.
Even if the terms can be incorporated without such a notice, reference to the presence of the exclusions may well be relevant if the reasonableness of the terms has to be assessed by a court.
The reference might therefore state: We acknowledge receipt of your order and agree to supply you, subject to our terms of business.
Those terms include terms which limit and exclude our liability for breaches of contract.
Businesses often seek to incorporate their terms, or individual terms, by using a rubber stamp.
This is particularly common when a new term has been added, to save the cost of printing new documentation.
Alternatively, a stamp may be used to stamp a document sent by the other party, such as a delivery note, with a notice such as "accepted subject to our standard terms of business" .
Such stamps must be used with care; a stamp may often be illegible and, if so, it may be held that terms contained or referred to in the stamped notice are not incorporated.
Similarly, the stamp may obscure other provisions; if this is the case, they may be held not to be incorporated (Richardson, Spence & Co v Rowntree [1894]AC 217; Sugar v London Midland and Scottish Railway [1941]1 All ER 172).
Standard terms may be updated from time to time.
This may give rise to dispute where terms are incorporated by reference to some other document, as in the examples above.
Which version of the terms is incorporated?
If a version of the terms is supplied, that will normally be the version incorporated.
However, if no copy of the terms is supplied, the reference will normally be interpreted as a reference to the version of the terms current at the time the contract is made (Smith v S Wales Switchgear Ltd [1978]1 WLR 165).
The drafter can avoid such disputes by appropriate wording: We acknowledge receipt of your order and agree to supply you.
The contract will be governed by our standard terms of business current at the date of this acknowledgment. or We acknowledge receipt of your order and agree to supply you.
The contract will be governed by our standard terms of business in force from time to time, and if the terms are varied before discharge of the contract, the contract will be governed by the terms as varied.
5 Special notice for particular terms
Generally all that is required is that reasonable notice should be given of the terms as a whole.
However, in a number of cases the courts have required special notice to be given to individual terms.
The requirement was first suggested by Lord Denning in Spurling v Bradshaw [1956]1 WLR 461 in connection with exclusion clauses.
He said: the more unreasonable a clause is, the greater the notice which must be given of it.
Some clauses would need to be printed in red ink with a red hand pointing to it before the notice could be held to sufficient.
The "red hand" test was reaffirmed by the Court of Appeal in Thornton v Shoe Lane Parking [1971]2 QB 163.
In that case Lord Denning said that special notice was required for "unreasonable" clauses, while Megaw LJ spoke of a need for special notice for "unusual clauses" .
The "red hand" test was developed in cases concerned with exclusion and similar clauses.
Where the UCTA 1977 applies and a term is subject to the reasonableness test, similar considerations will be taken into account in assessing reasonableness under para (c) of Sched 2.
However, the common law "red hand" test remains relevant in cases not covered by the Act.
Moreover, the test applies to all unusual or unreasonable terms, and is not limited to exclusion and limitation clauses.
This became clear in Interfoto Picture Library Ltd v Stiletto Visual Programmes Ltd [1988]1 All ER 348.
The plaintiffs supplied photographic transparencies to the defendants for the defendants to consider their suitability for use in an advertising campaign.
The transparencies were delivered together with a copy of the plaintiffs' standard terms.
In fact the defendants did not consider the transparencies suitable for their project and placed them in a drawer, together with the unread terms, and forgot about them.
Some weeks later the plaintiffs sent the defendants an invoice for £3,783.50, relying on a clause in their standard terms which provided that if the transparencies were not returned within 14 days, a holding charge and a fee of £5 per transparency per day would be charged.
The defendants denied liability and the Court of Appeal held that the term in question was not incorporated into the contract.
There was evidence that other businesses in the same line as the plaintiffs charged a much lower fee—in most cases  less than £3.50 per transparency per week.
The disputed clause was just "one of four columns width of conditions printed across the foot of the delivery note" .
Dillon LJ said that "if one condition in a set of printed conditions is particularly onerous or unusual, the party seeking to enforce it must show that that particular condition was fairly brought to the attention of the other party" .
Bingham LJ said that "the plaintiffs did not do what was necessary to draw this unreasonable and extortionate clause" to the defendants' attention.
However, "to the extent that the conditions…were common form or usual terms regularly encountered in this business" the terms were incorporated.
It is therefore still not entirely clear whether the requirement is for special notice of "unusual" or "unreasonable" terms, but insofar as Dillon LJ referred to "particularly onerous" terms, it seems that after Interfoto special notice must be given of any clause which is unusual or unreasonable.
What is clear is that the drafter should consider the sort of terms commonly used by other businesses in the particular line, and that if any of the terms is substantially different from those used by other businesses, special notice must be given to them.
On the other hand, if a term is of a type commonly found in the business, and is not unusually onerous, there is no need for special notice.
In Snow v Woodcroft [1985]BCLC 52 Boreham J held that a (fairly standard) retention of title clause did not require special notice.
6 The battle of the forms
The use of standard terms can result in a different problem.
Both parties to the contract may have their own terms, and each may wish to contract on its own terms.
The terms of buyers and sellers are likely to contain very different provisions, since they will have been prepared to protect the interests of the particular business.
A conflict can therefore result.
In some cases a seller may receive an order from a potential customer, read the customer's terms and object to them; or a buyer may read and object to the seller's standard terms.
In many more cases a business will not read its trading partner's standard terms, but will simply respond to any communication from the other side by sending out its own terms.
For instance, a buyer may place an order on a form including its own terms.
The seller responds by acknowledging the order on a form including its terms.
The question which then arises is which set of terms govern the contract.
The traditional approach of the courts is to analyse the dealings between the parties in terms of the normal rules of offer and acceptance.
Thus if B orders goods on its terms and S responds by acknowledging the order on its own, different terms, S has made a counter offer (see British Road Services Ltd v Arthur Crutchley & Co Ltd [1968]1 All ER 811).
A similar approach was taken by the Court of Appeal in Butler Machine Tool Co v Ex-Cell-O Corpn [1979]1 WLR 401.
S supplied a quotation for the manufacture of a machine on its own terms of business.
B replied with an order, accepting the quotation, but using a form which incorporated B's  own standard terms.
S replied, accepting the order, and referring to its original quotation.
However, the B's order form included a tear off slip which stated "we accept your order on the terms and conditions stated therein" .
S signed and returned the tear off slip.
It was held that the contract was governed by B's terms.
The return of the tear off slip was crucial.
The Court also considered what would have happened had there been no tear off slip.
The majority approved the orthodox offer/counter offer acceptance analysis.
The result is that the battle of the forms is won by the party who fires the "last shot" .
Lord Denning suggested an alternative approach: the court should try to construe a contract out of all the communications passing between the parties.
The result of this approach would be that there would be a contract, including those terms common to the two sets of terms and, perhaps, those terms from each form not contradicted by the other.
In most cases, however, the conflict will be resolved on the basis that the party which sends out its terms of business last will make the final counter offer which may be accepted by conduct—for instance, the seller may accept the buyer's offer by supplying goods; the buyer may accept the seller's offer to supply by retaining and accepting goods delivered.
The drafter may try to protect his/her client in the battle of the forms by including an appropriate provision in the terms such as: The terms of this order are to govern any contract between the Buyer and Seller and shall prevail over any terms put forward by the Seller, unless the Buyer expressly agrees to them in writing.
No conduct by the Buyer shall be deemed to constitute acceptance of any terms put forward by the Seller.
The effect of such a provision is to prevent any conduct of the business being construed as acceptance of any counter offer coming from the other party.
However, whilst such a provision can prevent the business losing the battle of forms, it cannot guarantee victory.
The sellers had such a term in Butler but were held to have waived its effect, and accepted the buyers' terms by returning the tear off slip.
Moreover, difficulties may arise if both parties have such a provision in their standard terms.
If the term is interpreted according to its apparent tenor, neither side can be taken to have accepted the other side's terms.
The result would appear to be that either (a) there is no contract or (b) there is a contract, but governed by neither set of terms: in effect, an "open" contract, depending solely on the common law rules and any relevant statutory implied terms.
The only other alternative would be for the court to disregard one of the clauses and hold that one party had, by conduct, accepted the other party's terms and waived its own, including the provision providing that it should not be taken as accepting any other terms.
Suppose that both parties have an "our terms only" clause.
The buyer orders goods on its terms.
The seller acknowledges the order on its own terms.
It could be argued that, by putting forward its own terms, including an "our terms only" clause, the seller has rejected all of the buyer's terms, including the buyer's "our terms  only" clause and made a counter offer; the buyer then accepts the seller's offer by accepting the goods.
(a) No contract A similar problem can arise in different ways.
In British Steel Corpn v Cleveland Bridge & Engineering Ltd [1984]1 All ER 504 B asked S to quote to supply a quantity of steel nodes for use on a construction project.
S supplied an estimate which was stated not to be final; however, B purported to accept the estimate and sent S a letter of intent, asking it to commence manufacture.
B also suggested that its own terms should govern the contract.
S made clear that it was not prepared to agree to B's terms, and that the price was not yet finalised, but agreed to commence work.
All the nodes were manufactured and all but one was delivered; however, the parties did not finalise agreement on the price or the terms to govern the contract and S retained the final node at its factory, pending agreement.
In fact the node became trapped by a strike and was eventually delivered very late.
S claimed payment for the nodes, and B counterclaimed damages for late delivery.
Goff J analysed the communications between the parties and held that no contract had been finalised.
B was therefore entitled to no damages for late delivery, and S was not entitled to contract payment.
However, S was entitled to be paid on a quantum meruit basis for the nodes delivered.
On the facts of British Steel the seller was not prejudiced by the absence of a contract.
However, the position would have been different if the nodes had been defective and caused damage or injury to the buyer: the seller would then have been open to a claim in tort, or perhaps under the Consumer Protection Act 1987, but would have been unprotected by any exclusion, limitation or indemnity clauses.
The problem which arose in British Steel can be overcome if agreement is finally reached.
In Trollope & Colls v Atomic Power Construction [1962]3 All ER 1035 a contractor commenced work, at the client's request, before terms were finally agreed.
It was held that the terms which were ultimately agreed could apply, retrospectively, to work which had already been done.
There seems no reason why an express provision could not be included in a contract to achieve the same result; for instance: It is agreed that if any of the goods included in the Buyer's order have been delivered before the formation of this contract, the provisions of this agreement shall apply to those goods and govern the rights and liabilities of the parties in relation to those goods.
(b) The battle in practice The first contact between contracting parties will normally be the sending out of a price list or catalogue, or perhaps a potential buyer's request for an estimate or tender.
Such communications will normally be regarded as invitations to treat, rather than as offers (Grainger v Gough [1896]AC 325–wine merchants' price list; Partridge v Crittenden [1968]1 WLR 1204—advertisement).
This is not an absolute rule: for example, it may be easier to construe as an offer a price list or catalogue issued by a manufacturer rather than by a wholesaler or retailer.
The status of such communications will be a question of fact depending on all the facts of the case.
An invitation for tenders may include an undertaking to consider tenders which are submitted and which satisfy the conditions of the invitation (Blackpool and Fylde Aero Club Ltd v Blackpool BC [1990]3 All ER 25).
Even if a document such as a catalogue or price list is not an offer in law, there is no reason why it cannot set out the terms of the offer, for instance by indicating that the party who issues it will only contract on those terms.
If an order is then placed, it may be held that the resulting contract incorporates the terms from the catalogue (etc) by reference (see Snow v Woodcroft [1985]BCLC 52).
However, to reduce the scope for dispute, it is preferable for the contract documents to refer expressly to the terms in the catalogue and incorporate them by reference.
The next stage in formation of the contract will be the customer's order.
If the buyer uses a form provided by the seller, for instance, in the seller's catalogue, that form can refer to the seller's terms and will amount to an offer to contract on those terms.
If the seller then supplies goods or services in response to that order, there is a contract on those terms.
If the customer orders on a form referring to its own terms, there is an offer to contract on the customer's terms.
If the seller supplies goods or services in response, the supply may be regarded as an acceptance of those terms.
However, if the seller responds with an acknowledgment of the order, referring to its own terms, the seller makes a counter offer.
If there is no further communication and the goods or services are supplied, the buyer's acceptance of the goods or services will also amount to acceptance of the seller's terms, and they will govern the contract.
Alternatively, the seller may simply deliver goods together with a delivery note.
That may also be construed as a counter offer, which the customer accepts by retaining the goods; however, if a delivery note is sent with goods, and received by the buyer's warehouse staff, the buyer may be able to argue that those staff have no actual or apparent authority to accept an offer.
If the buyer subsequently retains the goods without objection, it may be taken to have accepted the offer; however, if within a reasonable time the buyer responds making clear that it does not accept the seller's terms, it will make a counter offer and will not be bound by the seller's terms.
The onus will then be on the seller to reject the buyer's counter offer.
In order to avoid being taken to have accepted a seller's terms by accepting a delivery note, the buyer may arrange for its warehouse staff to acknowledge receipt of goods delivered by issuing a form referring to its own terms; alternatively, it may stamp the seller's delivery note with a receipt referring to its own terms, which may be effective to incorporate them if the stamp is legible.
Such a form or stamp is unlikely to be immediately effective, since the seller will be able to argue that a delivery  agent will not normally have authority to accept contract terms.
There will therefore be a reasonable time within which the seller will be able to reject the buyer's terms.
As the preceding analysis should make clear, there is no way to guarantee success in the battle of the forms.
However, some simple practical steps can be taken to minimise the chances of defeat.
1 A party should print, or refer, to its standard terms on all its contract documentation.
2 No forms, or tear off slips, originating from the other party should be returned—except where they have been read and a conscious decision is taken to accept any relevant terms.
3 Where possible, procedures should be established to ensure that all documents coming from new trading partners are referred to some responsible person within the business for consideration.
4 All communications from the other party should be acknowledged with a form referring to the business's own terms.
Viewed in this way the battle of forms becomes a war of attrition, which is lost by the first party to make a mistake, or lose the will to fight.
However, the prospect of terms passing backwards and forwards ad infinitum is unrealistic; a sensible course would be for the business to decide that once a certain stage is reached, it will attempt to negotiate a compromise, for instance, a seller might decide to negotiate with customers who "reject" terms in a delivery note.
This is a matter for commercial judgment; from the drafter's point of view, the important thing is to ensure that the client is aware of the legal implications of its contract procedures and does not lose the battle of forms by inadvertence.
7 Instantaneous communication and face to face contracts
Most businesses will place, or take, orders by telephone, or as a result of face to face dealing, for instance as a result of a representative's visit or, less formally, at a trade fair or over a business lunch.
Increasingly, businesses wish to make use of modern methods of instantaneous communication, including fax, telex and computer commnications (electronic data interchange—EDI).
These contract procedures may give rise to special difficulties.
Where the parties deal face to face, it may be relatively easy to ensure that the business's terms are incorporated into the contract, by obtaining the other party's signature to a form referring to the terms.
However, that is not possible where an order is placed by telephone.
It may be argued that a binding contract was made on the telephone; if so, any subsequent attempt to introduce new terms into the agreement will be ineffective unless there is a binding variation of the contract, supported by consideration.
Where the parties have done business together regularly over a period of time it may be possible to establish that the terms are incorporated by a course of dealing.
In other cases the first question will be to decide whether a contract was  actually formed over the telephone.
This will depend on the facts of the case and the words used.
If the telephone conversation amounts to no more than an inquiry or preliminary discussion, it may be that no contract is made then.
In Interfoto Picture Library Ltd v Stiletto Visual Programmes Ltd [1988]1 All ER 348 the initial contact between the parties was by telephone, but it was held that there was no concluded contract at that stage (see also Saphir v Zissimos [1960]1 Lloyd's Rep 490).
However, if the parties have agreed the essential terms—price, quantity, date for performance—a court may find that they have reached a concluded contract on the telephone (but see Levison v Patent Steam Carpet Cleaning Co Ltd [1978]QB 69) unless it can be established that the parties contemplated further formalities before concluding their contract.
It will be easier to establish that the contract was not concluded over the telephone, or that the terms were incorporated into it, if appropriate words are used when taking telephone orders, such as"We will be happy to accept your order subject to our standard terms of supply.
Would you like us to send you a copy? "or" We will send you a formal contract"(see Saphir v Zissimos).
Similar problems may arise where other instantaneous means of communication are used.
It may be possible to send copies of standard terms by fax, although where the print is small, the faxed copy may be difficult, or impossible, to read; thus faxed terms may be held not to have been incorporated, or to be unreasonable.
It will generally be impracticable to send a copy of standard terms by telex.
Fax or telex messages should therefore refer to the standard terms, but the terms themselves be sent by post.
Since fax and telex are treated as "instantaneous" , acceptance is only effective when received; however, if a message is received on the recipient's terminal but not immediately seen, difficult questions may arise as to exactly when the acceptance is effective.
In Brinkibon Ltd v Stahag Stahl GmbH [1983]AC 34 Lord Wilberforce said that "No universal rule can cover all such cases; they must be resolved by reference to the intentions of the parties, by sound business practice and in some cases by a judgment where the risks should lie" .
Where parties expect to do business together on a regular basis and to use fax or similar media to place and accept orders, the drafter should include an appropriate provision to avoid this problem, indicating when messages are to be deemed effective.
Similar problems arise where the parties wish to use EDI: messages will be received in the parties' "electronic mailboxes" , and it may be necessary to decide when such messages are effective.
It is likely, at present, that businesses will use EDI for contracts with regular trading partners, rather than for one-off contracts.
The parties should therefore use a detailed "data interchange agreement" setting out the terms governing their use of EDI.
The agreement should contain terms requiring the parties to check their electronic mailboxes regularly, and defining the consequences of a failure to do so.
The interchange agreement should also deal with such matters as authentication of messages, liability for errors and system failure, system  and message security, record keeping and so on.
The interchange agreement is separate from the individual contracts of supply; it is intended to define the terms of use of the communication medium.
Where parties use EDI it is generally desirable that the detailed contract terms, other than those concerned with price, quantity and delivery date, should not be contained in individual transaction messages, but should be contained in a separate master agreement and incorporated into individual contracts by reference.
8 Course of dealing
Where parties do business together on the same terms on a regular basis over a period of time, their trading may amount to a course of dealing.
The result will be that those terms will be implicitly incorporated into their contracts, even though not specifically incorporated.
For instance, if the seller regularly acknowledges orders on a form incorporating its terms of business, those terms may still apply to a case of a contract made by telephone where no acknowledgment is sent (J Spurling Ltd v Bradshaw [1956]1 WLR 461; SIAT di del Ferro v Tradax Overseas SA [1978]2 Lloyd's Rep 470).
The basis of incorporation by a course of dealing seems to be that terms will apply to the contract if the reasonable expectation of the parties is that the terms will apply.
Similarly, if terms are common in a particular trade, those terms may be held to apply to a contract between parties both familiar with that trade and its custom (British Crane Hire Corpn Ltd v Ipswich Plant Hire Ltd [1975]QB 303).
A court will construe the parties' contractual relationship against its factual background.
Thus in SIAT di del Ferro v Tradax Overseas SA [1978]2 Lloyd's Rep 470 Donaldson J explained that a court should ask the question "Would the parties have agreed that a particular term formed part of the contract if they were reasonable men looking at the matter objectively in the knowledge that no adverse consequences could flow from the answer?" 
A party seeking to establish a course of dealing must show that there has been regular trading between the parties, and the dealing must have been consistent.
"It is the consistency of a course of conduct which gives rise to the implication that in similar circumstances a similar contractual result will follow.
Where the conduct is not consistent, there is no reason why it should produce an invariable contractual result"(Lord Pearce in McCutcheon v David MacBrayne Ltd [1964]1 WLR 125).
Effectively this means that the previous dealings must have been on the same terms and a consistent procedure must have been followed.
However, "consistency" does not mean that the normal course must have been followed on the occasion in question, otherwise it would be impossible to argue course of dealing in the case where it is most relevant.
In McCutcheon v David MacBrayne Ltd Lord Devlin suggested that a course of dealing can only be established where it can be shown that the  party against whom the terms are to be enforced had actual knowledge of them as a result of the previous dealings.
However, this appears to be inconsistent with other cases (see Victoria Fur Traders Ltd v Roadline (UK) Ltd [1981]1 Lloyd's Rep 570 where the plaintiffs had received air waybills over a period of 25 years and never read the terms on them) and it seems clear that constructive notice of the terms will suffice.
McCutcheon can be explained on the basis that the terms of previous contracts had not been consistent.
However, the position may be different if the party seeking to enforce the terms knows that the other has never had actual knowledge of them, since he cannot then claim to reasonably believe that the other was agreeing to the terms.
It seems that a course of dealing can be established even though the terms have never been incorporated into any of the contracts between the parties.
In Henry Kendall & Sons v Wm Lillico & Sons [1969]2 AC 31 a course of dealing was established where it was shown that the parties had done business together three or four times per month for three years on the basis that contracts were made orally and the sellers then sent the buyers a 'sold note"containing their terms of trading.
The crucial factor in deciding if a course of dealing exists is the frequency of dealing between the parties.
It will be difficult or impossible to establish a course of dealing on the basis of a small number of transactions over a long period.
Thus it has been held that there was a course of dealing where the parties contracted three or four times per month for three years (Kendall v Lillico) and where there had been 81 transactions over a period of six years (SIAT di del Ferro v Tradax Overseas SA [1978]2 Lloyd's Rep 470), but not where there had been only three or four contracts over a five-year period (Hollier v Rambler Motors (AMC) Ltd [1972]2 QB 71; in addition the alleged course of dealing was not consistent).
Decided cases suggest that it may be more difficult to establish a course of dealing in a consumer case than in the context of dealings between businesses.
In view of the uncertainty surrounding the requirements which must be satisfied to establish a course of dealing, incorporation by course of dealing is an argument of last resort.
In addition, it is obvious that it cannot be relied on until there has been a substantial amount of trading between the same parties.
However, it is clearly sensible for a business to adopt standard contract formation procedures.
If standard steps are followed on each occasion, it should be easier to prevent mistakes occurring and ensure that the terms are incorporated into all contracts; in addition, if the normal procedures do break down on a particular occasion, it may be possible to rely on the previous course of dealing.
9 Change of terms
There is one danger in establishing a regular course of dealing: if a business regularly contracts on particular terms, its trading partners may believe that those terms continue to govern their relationship.
If a business changes  its terms it should therefore take additional steps to bring those terms to the attention of its trading partners, for instance by sending out a copy of the terms to regular trading partners (see Burnett v Westminster Bank Ltd [1966]1 QB 742) and specifically mentioning the change.
Objectives, Obligations and Exceptions
It has already been suggested that the drafter's primary objective is to transfer, so far as possible, the risks of the contract away from his/her client and onto the other party to the contract.
The drafter will therefore seek to (1) to minimise his/her client's obligations and liabilities and (2) ensure, so far as possible, that the other party to the contract will perform their obligations.
In order to achieve the first objective the drafter will seek to define his/her client's obligations, restrict the circumstances in which the client will be in breach of contract, and restrict, limit or even exclude liabilities which would otherwise otherwise.
In order to achieve the second objective, the drafter will seek to ensure that the other party cannot escape from the contract and that, if necessary, the contract can be enforced by quick, and procedurally simple methods, such as liquidated rather than unliquidated claims.
In order to achieve these objectives the drafter must have a clear understanding of the following matters.
1 The nature of the client's potential obligations, ie the obligations which the law would impose if the contract were silent.
2 The extent of the client's potential liability for breach of those obligations.
3 The extent to which, and means by which, the law permits those obligations to be modified, or liability for breach to be restricted.
4 The potential obligations of the other party under an open contract.
5 The remedies available to the client to enforce performance of those remedies or to obtain redress for breach.
6 The extent to which the law allows those obligations and remedies to be supplemented.
1 Basic duties of the parties
Under a contract for the sale of goods the seller's basic obligation is to deliver the goods, and the buyer's basic obligations are to accept and pay for them (SGA 1979, s27).
The Act requires each party to perform "in accordance with the terms of the contract" , so that the seller must deliver goods which conform to all the express and implied terms of the contract  including the statutory implied terms concerned with the quality and condition of the goods delivered.
It is an implied term of the contract that the seller should have a right to sell the goods (SGA 1979, s12) and it has been held that a breach of this implied condition amounts to a total non-performance of the contract by the seller.
In view of the approach taken by the courts to this implied term it is probably fair to regard it as imposing on the seller a separate obligation to pass to the buyer a good title to the goods.
The duties of seller and buyer under an open sale contract are "concurrent conditions" so that, if the contract is silent, "the seller must be ready and willing to give possession of the goods to the buyer in exchange for the price, and the buyer must be ready and willing to pay the price in exchange for possession of the goods" (SGA 1979, s28).
The obligations of the parties under other types of contract, and the interrelationship of their obligations, will depend on the construction of the particular contract and consideration of what the parties have undertaken.
Under a contract for work and materials which involves the production of a finished product, it is almost certain that obligations analogous to those in a simple sale will be implied, so that the supplier will be required to deliver the finished product, and the buyer to accept and pay for it.
Terms qualifying the obligations of parties under contracts for services, or of work and materials, will be implied by the SGSA 1982.
The basic remedy available in the event of a breach of contract will be an award of damages.
Damages will be assessed in accordance with general contract principles.
They will seek to put the innocent party, so far as possible, in the position he would have been in had the contract been performed.
Regardless of the nature of the contract, damages may be awarded for all losses caused by the breach, subject to the general requirement that damages must not be too remote (Hadley v Baxendale (1854) 23 LJ Ex 179) and that plaintiffs must take reasonable steps to mitigate their losses.
Under a contract of sale, these rules are reflected by the rule that damages for non-delivery or non-acceptance are normally assessed by reference to the market price rule (SGA 1979, ss50,51).
In addition, a serious breach, or a breach of a term classified by the contract or by the general law as a condition, will allow the innocent party to terminate the contract.
Under a contract of sale, breach of condition by the seller allows the buyer to reject the goods (if delivered) and terminate the contract.
Similarly, breach of condition by the buyer allows the seller to treat the contract as repudiated and terminate it.
The position is similar under other types of contract.
However, there are two significant differences.
First, whereas the implied terms relating to goods supplied under a contract of sale, or any other type of supply contract, are classified by statute as conditions, the implied term requiring work to be performed with reasonable skill and care will normally be an intermediate stipulation (SGSA 1982, s13) so that breach will only justify termination of the contract if the breach is serious or goes to the root of the contract.
Second, whereas a rejection of the goods supplied under a contract of sale entitles the buyer to claim a refund of the price, if already paid, termination of a contract for work and materials or for services will normally only entitle the innocent party to claim damages for the breach.
A refund will only be available if the breach results in a total failure of the consideration for which the money was paid.
In most cases damages will be for the difference between the value of the service provided and the value of the service which should have been provided under the contract.
The position is the same under a contract of hire purchase.
Specific performance of a commercial contract will rarely be ordered.
With these factors in mind, it can be seen that, if drafting for the supplier, the drafter's objectives are: 1 To ensure that the buyer accepts the goods/services supplied and does not reject goods or terminate the contract.
Parties to commercial contracts tend not to terminate the contract even in cases of breach of condition, but will normally be happy to allow the other party to make good any breach.
However, a breach of condition may be used to justify termination by a party who wants to escape from a contract for commercial reasons.
2 To ensure that the buyer pays for the goods/services supplied.
3 To exclude or limit the supplier's liability for non-performance or defective performance.
If drafting for the buyer, the objectives are: 1 To ensure that the supplier performs/delivers. 2 To obtain the maximum product support from the supplier.
3 To secure the buyer against non-performance or defective performance by the supplier.
2 Excluding and modifying liabilities
It is possible for a contracting party to modify its obligations in a number of different ways.
(a) Defining obligations A party may seek to restrict its liability by defining in the contract the obligations it has undertaken.
For instance, in a contract to build and supply machinery, the supplier might expressly undertake to manufacture the machinery in accordance with the agreed specification using the materials specified by the specification and to perform the work with reasonable care; the supplier has then undertaken absolute obligations that the machine and materials used will conform to the specification.
In contrast, if the supplier undertakes to use reasonable care to manufacture the machine in accordance with the agreed specification, it could be argued that the supplier is only liable for any departure from the specification if it can be shown to be due to negligence.
Similarly the seller under a contract of sale might undertake to use best endeavours to deliver the goods on time: The Sellers will use their best endeavours to secure delivery of the goods on the estimated delivery dates from time to time furnished, but they do not guarantee time of delivery.
(See Monckland v Jack Barclay Ltd [1951]2 KB 252.)
The effect of such a provision may be to replace the normal absolute obligation to deliver on the agreed date with an obligation to use best endeavours.
However, in other cases the courts have held that where a clause requiring best endeavours appears with an exclusion or force majeure clause, it qualifies the latter, so that the contractor can only rely on the exclusion or force majeure clause if it can establish that it used best endeavours (see Yates and Hawkins, Standard Business Contracts: Exclusions and Related Devices, p165).
The weakness of clauses expressly undertaking obligations is that they will not prevent other, more extensive obligations being imposed unless they are inconsistent with the implied obligation.
In some cases a party may effectively exclude liability by including a comprehensive list of the duties it undertakes and making it clear that the list is exclusive.
In some cases such a clause will not be an exclusion at all.
However, where the contract is of a type into which terms are normally implied by statute or by established common law rule, those implied terms must be excluded.
This is obviously the case with contracts for the sale of goods and other supply contracts, where there is an extensive body of statutory implied terms.
If the seller of goods gives an express warranty in respect of them, he will still be subject to the liabilities created by the implied terms in the SGA (SGA 1979, ss13-15) unless those liabilities are expressly excluded: for instance by a term such as: This warranty is given instead of , and excludes, all other express or implied conditions, warranties or other contractual undertakings concerned with any of the following:(i) the condition or quality of the goods,(ii) their fitness for any particular purpose,(iii) their compliance with any description which might otherwise arise at common law or under any statute.
Clearly such a clause is an exclusion of liability.
A party's obligations may also be defined by a term providing that obligations which would otherwise fall on the contractor shall be borne by the other party to the contract.
For instance, construction and similar contracts normally include provisions allocating the responsibility to insure between the parties.
In Archdale & Co Ltd v Comservices Ltd [1954]1 WLR 459 a contract between the defendant decorators and property owners provided that: existing structures and the works and unfixed materials shall be at the sole risk of the employer as regards loss or damage by fire and the employer shall maintain a proper policy of insurance against that risk.
It was held that the effect of the clause was to throw onto the employer the risk of damage caused by fire, so that the contractor was not liable even for a fire caused by the negligence of its employees (and despite the presence of a clause under which the contractor undertook to indemnify the employer against losses in respect of damage to property caused by the negligence of the contractor's employees, which was held to be qualified by the clause dealing with fire insurance).
(See also Norwich City Council v Harvey [1989]1 All ER 1180 where a similar clause was held to prevent the imposition of a tortious duty of care on a sub-contractor who was not party to the contract.)
The effect of clauses which define the contractor's obligations is that, if the contractor performs in accordance with the express undertaking, it has performed the contract and is not in breach of contract at all.
Obligations can also be defined in negative terms, by excluding duties which would otherwise arise.
For instance, the seller of goods might expressly exclude the statutory implied terms relating to the goods—The Seller gives no undertaking that the goods are fit for any particular purpose.
This excludes the implied condition (in s14(3) of the SGA 1979) that the goods should be reasonably fit for the buyer's purpose.
Similarly, All conditions and warranties, express or implied, as to the quality or fitness for any purpose of the goods are hereby expressly excluded purports to exclude the implied terms concerned with merchantability (SGA 1979, ss14(2) and 15(2) (a),(c)) and fitness for purpose (SGA 1979, s14(3)).
As noted above, clauses such as these will often be coupled with a clause expressly undertaking other, generally less onerous, obligations.
The same result can also be achieved by excluding the circumstances which give rise to an implied term.
Thus, for instance, the implied term that goods supplied under a contract of sale should be fit for the buyer's purpose (SGA 1979, s14(3)) only applies if the buyer makes known to the seller the purpose for which it wants the goods, relies on the seller's skill or judgment, and does so reasonably.
A provision could therefore be included in the contract that the buyer has not made its purpose known, has relied exclusively on its own skill and judgment, or that the seller claims no expertise in relation to the suitability of the goods for any stated purpose.
However, it seems that such a provision cannot be a contractual promise, and will only be effective if it gives rise to an estoppel; it therefore will not exclude the implied term of fitness for purpose unless the seller believes it and relies on it (Lowe v Lombank [1960]1 All ER 611).
A party may also avoid being in breach by including clauses giving it a unilateral right to change the contents of the contractual obligations, such as clauses allowing the seller to change the delivery date, deliver a different quantity from that ordered by the buyer, alter colours, specifications etc.  (b) Excluding liability A second alternative is for a clause to state, baldly, that a contracting party is not to be liable, or responsible, for stipulated acts.
For instance: We are not liable for any loss or damage caused by breach of any express or implied term of this contract or We accept no liability for any loss or damage, howsoever caused.
The effect of such clauses seems to be that the party relying on them is in breach of contract in the circumstances covered by the clause, but is not legally liable for that breach.
Neither of the above clauses would appear to be effective to prevent there being a breach, and so, if the term broken is classified as a condition, or if the breach is serious, the innocent party is entitled to terminate the contract.
(c) Clauses defining the consequences of breach A further alternative is for clauses to define the rights available to the innocent party in the event of breach of contract.
This can be done simply by defining the term imposing the duty as a "condition" (giving a right to terminate the contract in the event of breach) or "warranty" (so that breach gives no right to terminate); however, care must be taken because a court may not necessarily be bound by the label attached to a clause by the parties: for example, a term described as a "condition" will not necessarily be interpreted as a "condition" in law, so that breach of it will not necessarily allow the innocent party to terminate the contract (L Schuler AG v Wickman Machine Tool Sales Ltd [1974]AC 235).
Similar reasoning (although reaching the opposite result) could apply to a term defined as a "warranty" .
It is therefore preferable for the drafter to avoid disputes about the consequences of breach of a particular term by defining the consequences of breach explicitly.
This may be done by a provision such as: If the Seller is in breach of this term the Buyer may reject the goods and terminate the contract [making the term a condition]or The Buyer will accept the goods even if they are delivered late and late delivery will not entitle the buyer to terminate the contract [making the term a warranty]or by using the words "condition" and "warranty" and then defining them in the contract: "condition" means a term of this contract any breach of which will entitle the party not in breach to (i) terminate the contract and (ii) claim damages for losses caused by breach of condition whether or not he terminates the contract.
 "warranty" means a term of this contract breach of which will entitle the party not in breach to claim damages for losses caused by the breach, but not to terminate the contract.
Insofar as defining a term as a warranty prevents the innocent party terminating the contract in the event of breach, its effect may be to limit the choice of remedies available to the innocent party in the event of breach.
However, where such a term is used simply to define the consequences of breach of an express term in the contract it cannot be regarded as an exclusion clause.
On the other hand, where the contract redefines as a warranty a term which would otherwise be a condition, its effect is to exclude a remedy (the right to reject goods and/or terminate the contract) which would otherwise be available to the innocent party, and it will then be regarded as an exclusion clause.
Even where the contract merely defines an express undertaking as a warranty, there will normally be a related exclusion of liability.
The contract will generally contain an express warranty intended to be in substitution for a condition which would otherwise be imposed.
In that case, as already suggested, the contract will also have to contain an express exclusion of the implied condition.
(d) Clauses excluding remedies A similar result can be achieved in a less subtle way by simply excluding some of the remedies which would otherwise be available to the innocent party in the event of breach.
The most important example of such a clause would be one which limits, or excludes the right to reject goods or terminate the contract.
A simple example of such a clause would be: The Buyer shall not be entitled to reject the goods on the grounds of any breach of contract by the Seller.
Generally a restriction on the right to reject will be coupled with an express undertaking to make an allowance against the goods, or to repair or replace them.
The same result can be achieved slightly differently by requiring the innocent party to accept repair or replacement in satisfaction of any claim it might have: if the goods prove defective in any way the Seller will replace them and the Buyer shall accept that replacement in satisfaction of any claims he may have in respect of the defects.
A similar effect can be achieved in other ways: for instance, a clause providing that the seller will not refund any sums paid by the buyer effectively prevents rejection where the buyer has already paid the price.
This would probably be coupled with a clause requiring the buyer to make payment in full regardless of any claims against the seller, and restricting the buyer's right of set-off (which would otherwise arise under s53(a) of the SGA 1979).
(e) Clauses limiting liability or damages A further type of clause commonly used is one which imposes a limit or restriction on the amount of damages payable in the event of breach.
This can be done in various ways.
(1) The contract can exclude liability for certain types of loss: "the seller shall not be liable for any consequential losses suffered by the buyer" (but on the effectiveness of this formula see Croudace Construction Ltd v Cawoods Concrete Products Ltd [1978]2 Lloyds Rep 55).
(2) The contract may impose a financial limit on liability ( "our liability for any breach of contract shall be limited to £100" ).
Such provisions are common in contracts of carriage or bailment which normally impose a financial limit of £n per item or per unit of weight; sale contracts generally restrict liability to the amount of the price of the goods, or (possibly) a multiple of it, for instance "our liability to pay damages for any breach of contract shall not exceed the amount of the contract price" .
A similar provision might be used in a contract for services, such as an engineering contract; for instance "our total liability for loss, damage or injury shall not exceed the total value of the contract" (see Harbutt's "Plasticine" Ltd v Wayne Tank and Pump Ltd [1970]1 QB 447).
(3) The contract may limit liability to certain heads of damage: if the goods prove defective our liability is limited to the refund of all payments made by the Buyer or if the goods prove defective our liability is limited to the cost of repairing or making good the defects in the goods, provided that, if the cost of repair exceeds the contract price, we may at our option replace the goods or refund all payments made by the Buyer and such replacement or refund shall be in full satisfaction of all our liability under this contract.
It is clear that clauses of all these types operate to restrict the remedies available on a breach of contract; they do not prevent a breach occurring.
Their purpose is to allow the contactor to assess the extent of its maximum liability for breach, and thus obtain appropriate insurance cover.
(f) Clauses imposing procedural restrictions Another option is for the contract to impose procedural restrictions on the bringing of claims.
Such terms may take several forms.
The contract may impose a time limit for notification of claims: The Buyer will inspect the goods as soon after delivery as is reasonably practicable and will notify the seller of any shortages, defects in the goods or any other complaint in respect of them within three days from delivery.
If the Buyer fails to comply with this clause the Seller shall be under no legal liability in respect of any alleged shortage, defect or complaint.
Frequ  ently such a provision will require claims to be notified in a particular manner—in writing, or to a particular person.
Or, the contract may impose a time limit on bringing proceedings: We will be discharged from all liability arising under this contract unless proceedings are commenced within 12 months from the date of delivery of the goods.
Similar provisions appear in international conventions which lay down the terms of contracts for international carriage of goods.
A contract will often include a combination of these provisions, requiring claims to be notified in a particular manner within a specified period, and proceedings to be commenced within a (longer) stipulated period, and provide that in default of compliance with the procedural requirements the claim is discharged, or waived.
The effect of such a provision is that the claim in question cannot be enforced in any way, either by litigation or indirectly, for instance by set-off or counterclaim.
In Aries Tanker Corpn v Total Transport Ltd [1977]1 WLR 185 the House of Lords considered the effect of Art III 6 of the Hague-Visby rules which govern the carriage of goods by sea and provide that "the carrier and the ship shall…be discharged from all liability whatsoever in respect of the goods, unless suit is brought within one year of their delivery or of the date when they should have been delivered" .
The defendants alleged short delivery under a contract of carriage and withheld part of the freight payable under the contract.
After the expiry of the one-year period, the plaintiff carriers brought an action for the freight and the defendants raised a counterclaim and set-off based on the short delivery.
The House of Lords held that the effect of the clause was not merely to bar proceedings but to extinguish the carrier's liability if it was not complied with.
The defendants therefore could not maintain their counterclaim, since it was discharged.
The practical advantages of such a clause are worth noting: the onus is placed on the party who alleges a breach to commence proceedings to establish its case.
It cannot simply withhold performance and wait to be sued: if it does, the other party merely has to wait until expiry of the contractual time bar period and then sue.
If the clause is effective, there is no longer any claim which can found a set-off or counterclaim.
Such clauses in domestic contracts will now be subject to the UCTA 1977.
Their purpose is to require claims to be brought while evidence is still relatively fresh, and to allow the party relying on them to "close the books" on the transaction after a certain period.
Provided that the party relying on a time bar clause can establish a need for such a clause—which will be relatively easy in a commercial contract—and provided that the period stipulated is not unreasonable, such a clause will probably be enforceable under the Act.
A time bar clause is not regarded as an ouster of the jurisdiction of the court and so is valid at common law (Atlantic Shipping and Trading Co v Louis Dreyfus & Co [1922]2 AC 250).
A similar result can be achieved by requiring claims arising under the contract to be referred to arbitration.
An arbitration clause is valid at  common law; it does not operate as an ouster (Scott v Avery (1856) 5 HLC 811—clause excluding the right to bring court proceedings until arbitrators have made award) and is not an exclusion clause for the purposes of the UCTA 1977.
However, arbitration clauses in consumer contracts are regulated by the Consumer Arbitration Agreements Act 1987.
Other procedural clauses may restrict the evidence which can be used in support of a claim: for instance, a contract may provide that a certificate of quality by an inspector or surveyor shall be conclusive evidence that goods conform to the contract; or that "failure to notify the sellers of any defects or shortages within three days shall be conclusive evidence that the goods were in conformity with the contract in all respects" ; or even that "acceptance of the goods shall be conclusive evidence of their conformity with the contract" .
A simple example of a procedural clause sometimes seen in a consumer contract is "No refunds without receipt" .
(Such a clause would be ineffective in a consumer contract to exclude the seller's liability to make a refund on the grounds of a breach of the implied conditions in the SGA 1979—UCTA 1977, s6.
The use of such a term in a consumer contract would also be a criminal offence: Consumer Transactions (Restrictions on Statements) Order 1976 (SI 1976 No 1813).)
(g) Indemnities An indemnity clause may be used to achieve the same effect as an exclusion clause.
Indemnities may be used either (1) to transfer liability, where A requires B to give an indemnity against liability which A may incur to C, or (2) to reverse liability, as where B gives A an indemnity against A's own liability to B.
Clearly an indemnity of the second type has the same effect as a simple exclusion of liability.
If B brings a claim against A for breach of contract, A can make a counterclaim for indemnity, and the indemnity will extinguish any liability A incurs.
This has long been recognised, and the courts have tended to construe indemnities in much the same way as exclusion clauses: thus an indemnity will be construed strictly contra proferentem (Canada Steamship Lines v R [1952]AC 192; Smith v S Wales Switchgear Ltd [1978]1 All ER 165).
In addition, indemnities of both types are subject to statutory control under the UCTA 1977.
Section 4 of the Act provides that a party to a contract who deals as a consumer cannot be required to indemnify any other person against any liability that other may incur for negligence or breach of contract, unless the indemnity clause satisfies the test of reasonableness.
This provision applies to indemnities of both types (1) and (2) identified above, and it is irrelevant that the person entitled to the benefit of the indemnity is not a party to the contract in which it appears.
Thus, for instance, a clause in a contract between a retailer and a consumer for the sale of goods which requires the consumer to indemnify the manufacturer against product liability claims brought by third parties injured by the goods would be subject to the reasonableness test under s4.
Section 4 only applies to indemnities given by consumers.
However, the courts have recognised that an indemnity of type (2) above, reversing  liability, acts in the same way as an exclusion.
Thus if the effect of an indemnity is to reverse liability, it will be subject to the same statutory control as if it were an exclusion.
The application of the UCTA 1977 to non-consumer indemnities will depend not merely on the clause, but on the nature of the liability in respect of which it is invoked, as is illustrated by the decisions of the Court of Appeal in Phillips Products Ltd v Hyland [1987]2 All ER 620 and Thompson v T Lohan (Plant Hire) Ltd (JW Hurdiss Ltd, third party)[1987]2 All ER 631.
Both cases involved plant hire contracts on the Contractors Plant Association standard terms which provided in clause 8 that drivers of equipment supplied by the owner were: for all purposes in connection with their employment in the working of the plant to be regarded as the servants or agents of the hirer…who alone shall be responsible for all claims arising in connection with the operation of the plant by the said drivers or operators.
In addition clause 13 required the hirer to: fully and completely indemnify the Owner in respect of all claims by any person whatsoever for injury to person or property caused by or in connection with or arising out of the use of the plant…
In Phillips the driver of an excavator negligently damaged property belonging to the hirer.
The hirer sued the owner of the excavator as vicariously liable for the driver's negligence, and the owner set up clause 8 of the contract as a defence, on the basis that it transferred liability for the driver's actions to the hirer.
The Court of Appeal held that as the effect of clause 8 was to negative a tortious liability which the owner would otherwise incur to the hirer, it was an exclusion of liability, and subject to a test of reasonableness under the UCTA 1977.
In Thompson the driver of the excavator controlled it negligently and killed the plaintiff's husband.
The plaintiff sued the owners, Lohan, as vicariously liable for the driver's negligence, and Lohan claimed an indemnity from Hurdiss, the hirer, relying on clauses 8 and 13.
Hurdiss argued that the clause was ineffective under s2(1) of the UCTA 1977.
The Court of Appeal distinguished Phillips and held that s2(1) was concerned with attempts to restrict or exclude liability to the victim of the negligence.
Clause 8 was therefore effective to transfer liability to Hurdiss.
The result of these decisions is that if the effect of an indemnity or similar provision is to require A to indemnify B against B's own liability to A, the clause will be treated as an exclusion, subject to the UCTA 1977, whereas if the effect of the provision is to require A to indemnify B against B's liability to C, the clause falls outside the provisions of the Act.
Such indemnities, transferring liabilities incurred to third parties, will be particularly useful in cases where a contracting party may incur liability to a person not party to the contract, which therefore cannot be excluded by contract: for instance, a manufacturer might require a distributor or retailer to indemnify it against tortious product liability claims by consumers injured by the product.
The Legal Regulation of Exclusion Clauses: General Considerations
The exclusion of particular duties and liabilities requires the drafter to understand the nature and effect of the duties to be excluded, and the ways in which individual duties can be modified are therefore considered alongside the duties themselves, below.
However, there are a number of general considerations which the drafter must bear in mind when drafting any clause which excludes or limits liability, and it is convenient to consider them here.
In the past, the courts have often been hostile to exclusion clauses, particularly those drawn in wide terms which seek to negate all liabilities of the party relying on the clause.
They therefore developed a number of rules to restrict reliance on exclusion clauses.
Those rules are now supplemented by statutory control under the UCTA 1977.
However, since some clauses are wholly unaffected by the Act, whilst others are subjected to a test of reasonableness, which may be uncertain in its application, the common law rules remain important.
A party who wishes to rely on an exclusion clause can expect that, in the event of a dispute or litigation, its opponent will raise every argument possible, whether common law or statutory, to challenge the effectiveness of the clause.
In the discussion which follows, "exclusion clauses" is used as a generic term to describe all the various types of clause described in Chapter 5, unless the contrary appears.
1 Common law restrictions on exclusion clauses
(a) Incorporation The first requirement for an exclusion clause to be effective at common law is that the clause must be incorporated into the contract.
The rules governing the incorporation of terms have already been considered in Chapter 4.
Those rules were largely developed in cases concerned with exclusion clauses, and they obviously apply here.
(b) Construction The general rules for the construction of contracts apply to exclusion clauses in just the same way as to other clauses.
Thus prima facie the words of exclusion clauses will be given their literal meaning; the court will strive to give effect to the words used, and, where lists are used, the drafter must bear in mind the rules expressio unius est exclusio alterius and that general words in a list will be interpreted ejusdem generis with the specific words.
It has been said that these rules will be applied less stringently to a commercial contract than to other types of document (Henry Boot Construction v Central Lancashire New Town Development Corpn (1980) 15 BLR 8) but the drafter should bear them in mind and, if possible, avoid their application.
Their impact is illustrated by a case in which a clause in a bill of lading excused delay in discharge if (1) the port was inaccessible due to "ice, blockade or interdict" and (2) if the master deemed the port unsafe due to  "war, disturbance or any other cause" .
It was held that the clause did not apply to a delay where the port was not inaccessible but the master deemed the port unsafe due to ice (Tillmanns & Co v SS Knutford Ltd [1908]2 KB 385).
In the past the general rules of construction have been modified in their application to exclusion clauses because, in an effort to restrict the use of wide exclusions, the courts have developed particularly strict methods of construing exclusion clauses.
On occasion the courts have adopted artificially strict interpretations of exclusion clauses in order to deny their effect.
Now that exclusion clauses are subject to statutory control under the UCTA 1977, and the court generally has power to deny reliance on unreasonable clauses, it has been said that "any need for this kind of judicial distortion of the English language has been banished" (Lord Diplock in Photo Production Ltd v Securicor Transport Ltd [1980]AC 827; see also Ailsa Craig Fishing Co Ltd v Malvern Fishing Ltd [1983]1 WLR 964; Geo Mitchell (Chesterhall) Ltd v Finney Lock Seeds Ltd [1983]2 AC 803), and it may be that the courts will adopt a less restrictive approach to exclusions.
However, the drafter would be best advised to assume that the courts will adopt a restrictive interpretation, and draft accordingly.
A number of different rules of construction applicable to exclusion clauses have been identified, but it is probably safe to say that they are all really examples of the general rule that courts will interpret exclusion and similar clauses strictly, contra proferentem, or contrary to the interests of the party who drafted them—normally the person seeking to rely on them.
The party who seeks to rely on an exclusion clause must show that he/she falls within its protection, and if the clause is in any way ambiguous, the clause will be given the meaning least favourable to the interests of the proferens.
Thus the wording of an exclusion must be clear and unambiguous: "if a party wishes to exclude the ordinary consequences that would flow in law from the contract that he is making he must do so in clear terms" (Scrutton LJ in Szymonowski v Beck [1923]1 KB 457).
 "[T]he language of an  exemption clause is prima facie to be construed against the person who drafted it or put it forward…[and]the language of an exemption clause must be sufficiently explicit to disclose the common intention of the parties without straining the language" (Cumming-Bruce LJ in Acme Transport Co Ltd v Betts [1991]1 Lloyd's Rep 131).
This general principle must be qualified: "one must not strive to create ambiguities by strained interpretation" (Lord Wilberforce in Ailsa Craig Fishing Co Ltd v Malvern Fishing Ltd [1983]1 WLR 964).
There are frequent statements to the same effect, especially in cases decided since the passing of the UCTA 1977, but it must be said that in the past the courts have often disregarded such exhortations and adopted strained and artificial interpretations.
Certain other general principles can be extracted from the cases.
Clauses which limit liability will generally be viewed with less hostility than those which exclude it altogether (see Lord Wilberforce in Ailsa Craig Fishing Co Ltd v Malvern Fishing Ltd [1983]1 WLR 964; but note Croudace Construction Ltd v Cawoods Concrete Products Ltd [1978]2 Lloyd's Rep 55 discussed below).
It can be argued that a similar approach should be taken to time limit clauses, on the basis that they do not wholly exclude liability, but require action to be taken swiftly.
However in the past the courts have tended to interpret them strictly, perhaps because if the time limit is not complied with liability is wholly excluded.
It is probably fair to say that the shorter the time limit imposed by the clause, the more strictly it will be interpreted.
As a general rule it may be said that the more serious the breach, the clearer the words needed to exclude liability for it, and that where the court is faced with a choice of two or more interpretations of a clause, it will favour the one which produces the most reasonable result.
Construction of the contract as a whole The weight of academic opinion is that there should be a different approach to clauses which define the liabilities of the parties, whether in positive or negative terms, and those which exclude liability for a breach which has arisen.
Where clauses define the obligations undertaken under the contract, a party who performs in accordance with them is not in breach, and it is argued that the correct approach is for a court to interpret the contract as a whole, to identify extent of the obligations undertaken.
However, in the past the courts have tended to adopt a different approach and first "look at the contract apart from the exempting clauses and see what are the terms, express or implied, which impose an obligation on the party" (Lord Denning in Karsales (Harrow) Ltd v Wallis [1956]1 WLR 936) and only then consider the impact of the exclusion on that liability.
More recently there has been some support for an approach which interprets the contract as a whole but it is by no means unanimous.
For instance, in Photo Productions Ltd v Securicor Transport Ltd [1980]AC 287 a clause in a contract for the provision of security services provided that : under no circumstances will [Securicor]be responsible for any inujurious act or default by any employee…unless such act or default could have been foreseen and avoided by the exercise of due diligence on the part of [Securicor]; nor in any event, shall [Securicor]be held responsible for…any loss suffered by [the client]through fire…
Lord Diplock held that the effect of the clause was to define the primary obligations of Securicor: instead of an absolute undertaking to ensure that visits to the client's premises were made by persons who would exercise reasonable skill and care, they undertook only to exercise due diligence in the employment of staff to make the visits.
They were therefore not in breach unless they failed to exercise due diligence.
However, the other members of the House of Lords adopted a different approach and assumed that Securicor were in breach, subject to the protection of the clause.
The main importance of this difference in approach is in relation to the application of exclusions to cases of fundamental breach, and breach of fundamental term, and in relation to the application of s3 of the UCTA 1977.
Whilst it may be that the approach favoured by Lord Diplock is more conceptually correct, it would be safer for the drafter to assume that, in the event of challenge to the clause, the court will adopt an interpretation which allows it to subject the clause to scrutiny.
(See also Anglo-Continental Holidays Ltd v Typaldos Lines (London) Ltd [1967]2 Lloyd's Rep 61, discussed under (iii) Fundamental breach below.)
However, it is clear that, in deciding what the words used in an exclusion clause mean, the court can and will take account of the other provisions of the contract; the clause must be interpreted in its context.
Contra proferentem construction Exclusion clauses will be interpreted strictly and any ambiguity in the clause will be resolved by the court adopting the meaning least favourable to the interests of the party seeking to rely on the clause.
The drafter can, therefore, minimise the scope for application of the rule by seeking to avoid ambiguity, since it has been said that the court "must not strive to create ambiguities by strained interpretation" (Lord Wilberforce in Ailsa Craig Fishing Co Ltd v Malvern Fishing Ltd [1983]1 WLR 964).
However, experience suggests that legal ingenuity can discover ambiguity even in clauses which appeared to the drafter to be models of clarity.
The drafter therefore may not be able to guarantee that there will be no challenge to the clause on this basis, but he/she should take account of the rule and try to avoid some of the more obvious problems highlighted by decided cases.
It must be borne in mind that, since the construction of any particular clause will depend on the context in which it appears, decisions in previous cases offer guidance on interpretation rather than laying down absolute rules.
(i) Liability for breach of contract.
Exclusion of liability for breach of warranty does not cover breach of a condition (Wallis Son & Wells v Pratt & Haynes [1911]AC 394; Baldry v Marshall [1925]1 KB 260).
In Webster v Higgin [1948]2 All ER 127 a clause which provided that "no  warranty is given" did not prevent a statement which had previously been made being construed as an express warranty.
Exclusion of liability for breach of implied terms does not protect against liability for breach of an express term.
In Andrews Brothers (Bournemouth) Ltd v Singer and Co Ltd [1934]1 KB 17 a contract for the sale of a "new Singer car" included a provision that "all conditions, warranties and liabilities implied by statute common law or otherwise are excluded" .
The clause did not protect the sellers when they delivered a car which was not new; the seller was in breach of an express term.
The significance of this decision is emphasised by the fact that the failure to deliver a new car also put the seller in breach of the implied condition that the goods should comply with their description.
In Beck v Szymonowski [1924]AC 43 a clause which provided that "the goods delivered shall be deemed to be in all respects in accordance with the contract" unless the buyer notified the seller of complaints within a stated period was held not to apply where the seller contracted to sell reels of cotton 200 yards in length but actually supplied reels of only 188 yards: the claim was "not in respect of goods delivered but in respect of goods which are not delivered" (despite the fact that this might have been regarded as a claim that the goods did not comply with their description).
Clauses providing that goods sold "with all faults" will generally be construed as referring to defects which make the goods unmerchantable, or unfit for purpose, but will not cover a case where the goods do not comply with the contract description (Shepherd v Kain (1821) 5 B & A 240).
A clause excluding liability for "consequential loss" has been held not to exclude liability for losses which arise directly and naturally from a breach of contract, under the first head of Hadley v Baxendale (1859) 9 Ex 341.
Such a clause in a contract to supply building materials to a building contractor did not exclude liability for damages payable by the contractor to sub-contractors as a result of delay in delivery (Croudace Construction Ltd v Cawoods Concrete Products Ltd [1978]2 Lloyd's Rep 55).
(ii) Liability for negligence.Decisions of the courts show that there has generally been a reluctance to interpret a clause as excluding liability for negligence, unless clear words are used.
There is a large body of case law on this topic, and the cases are not easy to reconcile.
If the drafter wishes to exclude liability for negligence, the best course is to do so clearly, using the word "negligence" itself.
In Canada Steamship Lines Ltd v R [1952]AC 192 Lord Morton of Henryton suggested three rules, to decide if a clause excludes liability for negligence: 1.
If the clause contains language which expressly exempts the person in whose favour it is made ( "the proferens" ) from the consequences of the negligence of his own servants, effect must be given to that provision.
2.
If there is no express reference to negligence, the court must consider whether the words are wide enough, in their ordinary meaning, to cover  negligence on the part of the servants of the proferens.
If a doubt arises at this point, it must be resolved against the proferens. 3.
If the words used are wide enough for the above purpose, the court must then consider whether "the head of damage may be based on some ground other than negligence" .
The "other ground" must not be so fanciful or remote that the proferens canot be supposed to have desired protection against it; but subject to this qualification…the existence of a possible head of damage other than that of negligence is fatal to the proferens even if the words used are prima facie wide enough to cover negligence.
Thus if the clause does not expressly refer to negligence, the clause may still exclude liability for negligence provided that(1) the wording is capable of covering negligence and (2) there is no other head of liability to which the clause could apply.
This second point is illustrated by the decision in White v John Warwick & Co Ltd [1953]1 WLR 1285 where a contract for the hire of a tricycle contained a clause which provided that "nothing in this agreement shall render the owners liable for any personal injuries to the riders of the machine hired" .
It was held that the clause did not protect the owners against liability for negligence: they could be liable either strictly, for failing to supply a cycle fit for its purpose, or in negligence; it was therefore construed only as covering the strict liability.
Where a party can only be liable if negligent, a clause such as that in White v Warwick ought to be enough to protect against liability, even if parallel liability for failure to take reasonable care could be imposed in tort and contract (Alderslade v Hendon Laundry Ltd [1945]KB 189).
However, despite Lord Morton's words quoted above, in some cases the courts have been prepared to interpret clauses restrictively even where liability could only arise in negligence.
The best known example is Hollier v Rambler Motors (AMC) Ltd [1972]2 QB 71 where a garage took cars for repair on terms that "the company is not responsible for damage caused by fire to customers' cars on the premises" .
The Court of Appeal held that the clause did not apply to a fire caused by negligence, even though the garage could not be liable for fire damage without negligence.
Effectively, therefore, the clause was interpreted simply as a warning that the garage would not be liable unless negligent.
Hollier is an extreme case, but its lesson for the drafter is that if a clause is intended to exclude liability for negligence, it should expressly refer to negligence.
It is safest to use the word "negligence" itself.
In Gillespie Bros & Co Ltd v Roy Bowles (Transport) Ltd [1973]QB 400 the Court of Appeal held that a clause which required one party to indemnify the other against "all claims or demands whatsoever" was sufficient to cover liability for negligence.
However, in Smith v South Wales Switchgear Ltd [1978]1 WLR 165 the House of Lords held that a clause in a contract for services requiring the contractor to indemnify the employer against "any loss, claim or proceedings whatsoever arising out of or in the course of the execution of the order" did not apply to require an indemnity in respect of injuries caused by the employer's negligence.
As Buckley LJ said in Gillespie v Bowles: it is a fundamental consideration in the construction of contracts of this kind that it is inherently improbable that one party to the contract should intend to absolve the other party from the consequences of the latter's own negligence.
The intention to do so must therefore be made perfectly clear, for otherwise the court will consider that the exempted party was only to be free from liability in respect of damage occasioned by causes other than the negligence for which he is answerable.
Although both Gillespie and Smith concerned indemnities the same principles apply to exclusion clauses.
The House of Lords in Smith approved the decision in Gillespie on its facts, but indicated that generally negligence liability will only be excluded if the contract uses the word "negligence" or some synonym for it.
Liability for negligence may also be excluded by a provision imposing a duty on the other party to insure against a particular type of loss (James Archdale & Co v Comservices [1954]1 WLR 459) and such a clause might be used in a contract to install goods or machinery at the employer's premises, requiring the employer, rather than the contractor, to insure the premises against damage caused by fire.
However, the general rule is clear—if liability for negligence is to be excluded, the clause should expressly say so.
(iii) Fundamental breach.As part of the attack on exclusion clauses, in a series of cases in the late 1950s and 1960s, the courts developed the doctrine of fundamental breach.
It has been suggested (see Yates and Hawkins, Standard Business Contracts—Exclusions and Related Devices, Chapter 10) that in fact there were two related, but separate, doctrines: "breach of fundamental term" , and "fundamental breach" .
The first was based on the concept that a contract might contain a fundamental term—a core obligation—so that a failure to perform the fundamental term would amount to a total failure to perform the contract.
The fundamental term was therefore "something which underlines the whole contract so that, if it is not complied with, the performance becomes something totally different from that which the contract contemplates" (Devlin J in Smeaton Hanscomb & Co v Sassoon I Setty & Son & Co [1953]1 WLR 1468).
The classic example of such a breach is the famous example in Chanter v Hopkins (1834) 4 M & W 399: "If a man offers to buy peas of another, and he sends beans, he does not perform his contract" .
Thus under a contract for sale of goods the seller commits a breach of fundamental term if he delivers goods of a wholly different kind to those contracted for.
This is more than a mere breach of the implied condition that goods should comply with the contract description.
However, it can lead to difficult questions in deciding when the goods delivered are so different in kind that their delivery amounts to a breach of fundamental term: for instance, in Geo Mitchell (Chesterhall) Ltd v Finney Lock Seeds Ltd [1983]2 AC 803 the contract was for sale of "winter white cabbage seed" .
The seller delivered cabbage seed of a different type and vastly inferior quality, but the House of Lords held that  this was not a "peas and beans case" so that there was no breach of the fundamental term.
In contrast, in Pinnock Bros v Lewis & Peat [1923]1 KB 690 the seller contracted to sell copra cake for use as cattle food.
The seller delivered copra cake so contaminated with castor beans that it "could not properly be described as copra cake at all" .
The seller therefore was guilty of a breach of the fundamental term.
Similarly in Karsales (Harrow) Ltd v Wallis [1956]2 All ER 266 the seller of a car was guilty of a total failure to perform where the car delivered was in such a poor condition that it was totally incapable of self-propulsion and could not properly be described as a "car" .
The second class of cases, it is suggested, concerns breaches of contract which, although not breaches of a fundamental term, have particularly serious consequences for the innocent party, as in Harbutt's Plasticine Ltd v Wayne Tank & Pump Co Ltd [1970]1 QB 447 where the installation of defective machinery by the defendants caused a fire which destroyed the plaintiffs' premises.
These cases are examples of fundamental breach.
The difference between the two classes of case is that, whereas the innocent party has the option of affirming the contract after a fundamental breach, there is no possibility of affirmation after a breach of fundamental term, since the breach amounts to a total non-performance of the contract.
If the innocent party purports to "accept" such performance, he effectively accepts a new contract.
However, the courts did not recognise a clear cut distinction between the two classes of case.
The courts were generally reluctant to construe an exclusion clause as covering cases of breach of fundamental term or fundamental breach.
This reluctance could be seen as part of the general strict interpretation of exclusion clauses, but in a line of cases it was suggested that there was a rule of law that an exclusion clause could never cover a fundamental breach.
The House of Lords rejected this approach (Suisse Atlantique Société d"Armement Maritime SA v NV Rotterdamsche Kolen Centrale [1967]1 AC 361) but in a series of cases the Court of Appeal effectively resurrected the doctrine in a different form, holding that if the innocent party chose to accept the breach and terminate the contract, termination destroyed the contract including the exclusion clause, therefore preventing reliance on it.
The House of Lords rejected this view in Photo Productions Ltd v Securicor Transport Ltd [1980]AC 827: termination of a contract for breach operates prospectively, not retrospectively.
It terminates the liability of the parties to perform their primary obligations, but has no effect on the secondary obligation to pay damages, which arises before termination and is defined by the terms of the contract.
The position appears to be beyond question as a result of the decision of the House of Lords in Geo Mitchell (Chesterhall) Ltd v Finney Lock Seeds Ltd [1983]2 AC 803, and in cases covered by the UCTA 1977, s9 makes clear that a clause may be judged reasonable, and enforceable, even though the contract has been terminated either by the breach, or by the innocent party in response to the breach.
It therefore appears that an exclusion clause can apply, even to cases of fundamental breach and breach of fundamental term.
However, whether or not it does so is a matter of construction, and it seems equally clear both that a court will be unwilling to interpret a clause as applying to such breaches and that, in the event of a dispute, the party challenging an exclusion clause can be expected to raise the argument that the breach is fundamental and not covered by the exclusion.
Most of the cases decided under the doctrine of fundamental breach have not been overruled, and they can be regarded as illustrating a prima facie presumption of construction that an exclusion is not intended to cover cases of fundamental breach or breach of a fundamental term, and very clear words will be needed to displace that presumption.
In any event, in cases covered by the UCTA 1977, exclusions will be subject to a test of reasonableness if they are effective at all.
A court is unlikely to regard it as reasonable to exclude liability in such cases.
The court will be disclined to construe a clause as excluding liability for deliberate breaches of contract or so as to defeat the whole object of the contract.
Instead "the clause must be limited and modified to the extent necessary to enable effect to be given to the main object and intent of the contract" (per Lord Denning in Sze Hai Tong Bank Ltd v Rambler Cycle Co Ltd [1959]AC 576; see also Alexander v Railway Executive [1951]2 KB 882).
If the drafter wishes to exclude liability in such cases, he/she must therefore ensure that the wording is very clear.
Even then, there may be limits to an exclusion—if it is drawn so widely as to protect a party from all liability, even for total non-performance, its effect may be that the party has promised nothing; there is therefore no contract, or at best only a unilateral one.
The parties cannot have intended such a consequence.
As Lord Wilberforce said in Suisse Atlantique: One may safely say that the parties cannot in a contract have contemplated that the clause should have so wide an ambit as in effect to deprive one party's stipulations of all contractual force: to do so would be to reduce the contract to a mere declaration of intent.
To this extent it may be correct to say that there is a rule of law against the application of an exceptions clause to a particular type of breach…and in Photo Production v Securicor Lord Diplock recognised that the parties are free to modify their contractual obligations "within the limits that the agreement must retain the legal characteristics of a contract" .
A similar result can be obtained by using a clause which allows one party to alter the nature of the performance offered under the contract.
Such a clause has much the same effect as one which excludes liability for breach and in Anglo-Continental Holidays Ltd v Typaldos Lines (London) Ltd [1967]2 Lloyd's Rep 61 Lord Denning MR indicated that he would not be prepared to allow a party to rely on such a clause to change the whole nature of the contract.
No matter how wide the terms of the clause, the courts will limit it and modify it to the extent necessary to enable effect to be given to the main object and intent of the contract.
The case concerned a clause in a holiday contract which provided that "steamers, Sailing Dates, Rates and Itineraries are subject to change without prior notice" .
According to Russell LJ the clause was not an exemption clause, but a clause under which the actual contractual liability may be defined and not one which will excuse from the actual contractual liability.
However, he added that: In the end of the day the approach as to the scope of the clause may not be substantially different and he agreed with Lord Denning in the result, that the clause did not, as a matter of construction, allow the company to alter the whole substance of the contract.
It may therefore be that a clause which wholly negates one party's promise will never be given effect; even if this is not the case, the court will be extremely reluctant to interpret the clause in that way and clear words will be needed to have that effect.
2 Statutory control of exclusion clauses
A wide range of exclusion clauses which may be included in standard terms of trading are now subject to statutory regulation.
Although the most important restrictions on exclusion clauses are those contained in the UCTA 1977, there are important provisions in several different statutes.
The UCTA 1977 regulates clauses in any standard terms which:(a) exclude or limit liability for breach of the implied terms relating to the goods in contracts for the sale or supply of goods (ss6 and 7);(b) exclude or limit liability for losses caused by negligence or breach of a duty of care (s2);(c) exclude or limit liability for other breaches of contract (s3).
In addition, the Act regulates indemnities imposed on a person dealing as a consumer (s4) and on terms in guarantees which exclude liability for negligence in manufacture (s5).
Clauses which seek to exclude or limit liability under the Consumer Protection Act 1987 to a person injured by a defective product are made ineffective by s7 of that Act.
Clauses which seek to exclude or restrict liability for misrepresentation are regulated by s3 of the Misrepresentation Act 1967.
Most of these provisions subject clauses to a test of reasonableness; however, some clauses are made wholly ineffective.
In addition, some clauses are regulated differently according to whether the contract is made with a person dealing as a consumer or with a non-consumer.  (a) Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 The scope of the Act The UCTA 1977 applies to clauses which seek to restrict or exclude "business liability" , which is defined as liability for breach of obligations or duties arising—(a) from things done or to be done…in the course of a business…; or (b) from the occupation of premises used for business purposes of the occupier…
There is one proviso: s6 applies to clauses excluding liability for breach of the implied terms in contracts for the sale of goods and applies to all contracts, including those not made in the course of a business.
However, that will not concern the drafter of a set of standard terms.
There can be no doubt that the liabilities which the drafter might seek to exclude or restrict in standard terms of trading will be "business liabilities" and any exclusions in such standard terms are therefore potentially subject to the Act.
There is an important qualification to the application of the Act.
Section 26 provides that the Act does not apply to "international supply contracts" as defined.
A contract is an international supply contract if three conditions are satisfied:(a) it is a contract for the sale of goods or it is one under, or in pursuance of which, possession or ownership of goods passes; and (b) it is made by parties whose places of business (or habitual residence, if they have no place of business) are in the territories of different states; and (c) either (i) at the time the contract is made, the goods are in the course of carriage, or will be carried, between the territories of two states; or (ii) the acts constituting offer and acceptance were done in the territories of different states; or (iii) the contract provides for the goods to be moved to the territory of a state other than that in which the offer and acceptance took place.
Section 27 supplements s26.
Where the proper law of the contract is the law of the UK only by choice of the parties, the Act's restrictions on exclusion clauses do not apply to the contract.
However, a party cannot evade the Act by a choice of law clause providing for the contract to be governed by the law of some state other than the UK.
The Act applies notwithstanding such a choice of law clause if either (a) such clause "appears to the court or arbitrator or arbiter to have been imposed wholly or mainly for the purpose of enabling the party imposing it to evade the operation of" the Act or (b) one of the parties when making the contract dealt as a consumer, was habitually resident in the UK and "the essential steps necessary for the making of the contract were taken there" .
If drafting terms for a business involved in export trading, these provisions should be borne in mind.
If their conditions are satisfied, the drafter may be able to disregard the Act.
However, it should also be borne in mind that many other contracts have similar legislation governing exclusion and similar clauses.
The drafter should therefore consider the effect of any relevant law in the country with which the client is trading.
Where the Act does apply it seeks to regulate all the different types of exclusion clause which may be found in a contract.
Sections 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7 regulate clauses which purport to exclude or restrict liability—for instance The Seller will not be liable for any loss or damage caused by breach of any express or implied term of this contract or The Seller's liability for any breach of contract shall be limited to the contract price.
However, the ambit of the Act is extended by s13 which provides that to the extent that the Act applies the exclusion or restriction of liability, it also applies to clauses which:(a) make "any liability or its enforcement subject to restrictive or onerous conditions" , such as time limit clauses requiring notification of claims, or commencement of proceedings, within a limited time;(b) exclude or restrict "any right or remedy in respect of the liability" , such as clauses:(i) excluding the right of a buyer to reject goods, terminate a contract or exercise a right of set-off, or (ii) requiring a customer to accept repair or replacement from the supplier;(c) subject "a person to any prejudice in consequence of his pursuing any right or remedy" ;(d) exclude or restrict any rules of evidence or procedure, such as clauses:(i) making certificates of quality conclusive evidence that goods correspond with the contract,(ii) making one party's record of a transaction conclusive evidence of the facts recorded,(iii) requiring certain evidence in order to obtain particular remedies—eg "no refunds without receipt" .
Nevertheless, the section makes clear that an agreement to submit disputes to arbitration is not to be regarded as an exclusion.
Arbitration clauses are therefore not subject to the UCTA 1977 but such clauses are subject to the Consumer Arbitration Act 1988.
In addition, for the purposes of ss2, 5, 6 and 7, "terms and notices which exclude or restrict the relevant obligation or duty" are subject to the same control as clauses which exclude or restrict liability.
Thus, for instance, a  clause which provides that a seller gives no undertaking that the goods are fit for any purpose and purports to exclude the implied term in s14(3) of the SGA 1979, or a term which disclaims any duty of care in negligence, is subject to the Act.
Significantly, however, this provision does not apply to s3 of the Act.
The ambit of the Act has been further expanded by some of the decisions on it.
In Harris v Wyre Forest DC; Smith v Bush [1989]2 All ER 514 the House of Lords rejected an argument that a disclaimer of liability on a surveyor's report prevented a duty of care arising in tort and therefore fell outside the Act; applying s13, the House held that the disclaimer was subject to the Act and could only prevent a duty arising if it satisfied the test of reasonableness.
As indicated earlier, certain types of indemnity clause are specifically regulated by the Act (s4 of the UCTA 1977); in addition, where the effect of an indemnity is to allow the party entitled to the indemnity to escape a liability which would otherwise be incurred to the person giving the indemnity, the clause operates as an exclusion of liability and is subject to the Act (Phillips Products Ltd v Hyland [1987]2 All ER 620).
The nature of the control The Act subjects exclusion clauses to two types of control.
Some types of clause are rendered wholly ineffective by the Act providing that certain types of liability "cannot be excluded or restricted" .
It should be noted that this is often expressed in a shorthand manner by saying that the clause is "void" ; however, this is inaccurate and misleading.
Where the Act prohibits exclusion of a head of liability the clause which seeks to exclude that liability remains valid and can be enforced in relation to other heads of liability, subject to the other provisions of the Act.
(The Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973, which introduced statutory control over exclusion clauses in sale contracts did make certain clauses "void" , and there are provisions making contract terms "void" in other legislation, such as the Consumer Credit Act 1974.)
Other clauses are subject to a test of reasonableness, and are enforceable only to the extent that they are shown to be reasonable.
From the drafter's point of view there is clearly nothing that can be done to save a clause rendered ineffective by the Act; however, where a clause is subject to a test of reasonableness (which will be more common in relation to clauses included in standard terms) the drafter should try to ensure that the clause can satisfy the test.
(i) Liability for negligence.Clauses or notices which seek to exclude or limit liability for loss or damage caused by negligence are covered by s2 of the Act.
 "Negligence" is defined to include breach of (1) any express or implied contractual obligation to exercise reasonable care or skill in the performance of a contract (2) any common law duty to take reasonable care (such as the ordinary duty of care in the tort of negligence) and (3) the common duty of care imposed on occupiers of premises under the Occupiers' Liability Acts 1957 (s1(1)).
A person cannot, by clause or notice, exclude or restrict his liability for death or personal injury caused by negligence (s2(1)).
However, liability for other types of loss—property damage and economic loss—can be excluded provided the term or notice excluding liability satisfies the test of reasonableness (s2(2)).
The fact that a person is aware of a notice or contract term purporting to exclude another's liability for negligence is not to be taken as indicating a voluntary assumption of any risk (s2(3)).
It is therefore possible for a defendant in a negligence action to raise a defence of volenti non fit injuria, but consent to the risk in question cannot be inferred merely from the other party's knowledge of the purported exclusion.
Exclusion of liability for negligence is also restricted by s5 of the Act.
That section applies to terms in guarantees and provides that a person cannot, by reference to a term in a guarantee of goods of a type ordinarily supplied for private use or consumption, exclude or restrict liability for any loss or damage caused by the goods proving defective whilst in consumer use as a result of negligence in manufacture.
Goods are in consumer use when a person is using them, or has them for use, other than exclusively for business purposes.
However, the section does not apply "as between the parties to a contract under or in pursuance of which possession or ownership of the goods passed" .
In other words, the section is aimed at clauses in manufacturers' guarantees given with consumer goods which purport to exclude the manufacturer's liability for negligence in manufacture under Donoghue v Stevenson [1932]AC 562.
It is wider than s2 because where it applies, it prevents exclusion of any liability, whether for personal injury, property damage or economic loss.
However, it has no direct relevance in the context of drafting standard terms.
(ii) Sale and supply of goods.Sections 6 and 7 control clauses which purport to exclude or restrict liability for breach of the statutory implied terms relating to the goods supplied under contracts for the sale and supply of goods.
Section 6 applies to contracts of sale and hire purchase and provides that liability for breach of the implied terms concerned with (1) compliance with description,(2) merchantable quality,(3) fitness for purpose and (4) correspondence with sample can never be excluded or restricted where the buyer deals as a consumer.
In other cases, liability can be excluded or restricted provided that the term satisfies a test of reasonableness.
The implied terms in s12 of the SGA 1979, concerned with the seller's right to sell the goods, can never be excluded or restricted, although s12 implies a reduced obligation in certain cases.
Section 7 imposes similar controls on clauses which seek to exclude the equivalent implied terms in other contracts of supply such as hire, work and materials and barter.
The only difference is that in a contract of hire the implied terms concerned with the "owner's" right to transfer possession of the goods can be excluded if the term satisfies the test of reasonableness.
Since ss6 and 7 differentiate between consumer and non-consumer sales, they create a potential trap for retailers.
A retailer who supplies goods to consumers cannot exclude or restrict liability for breach of the implied  terms, but the retailer's supplier may exclude liability, if the exclusion satisfies the test of reasonableness.
However, a court might be prepared to accept (for instance) that it would be unreasonable for a manufacturer to exclude liability to a retailer who could not exclude liability vis-ρa-vis its customers.
In this context a clause limiting remedies—for example, excluding or limiting the retailer's right to reject the goods, is probably more likely to be reasonable, than a wider clause excluding liability, especially where a total exclusion would have the effect of requiring the retailer to satisfy product liability claims arising where the goods prove defective due to the manufacturer's negligence.
Section 6 creates a second trap for businesses which deal with both consumers and non-consumer customers.
The Consumer Transactions (Restrictions on Statements) Order 1976 (SI 1976 No 1813) makes it a criminal offence to display a notice or supply a document (such as a set of standard terms) containing a notice or term purporting to exclude liability for breach of the statutory implied terms and made ineffective by s6 of the UCTA 1977.
A business which wishes to exclude liability vis-ρa-vis its business customers therefore needs two different sets of terms, if it also deals with consumers.
However, to use two sets of terms is to court confusion: unless the two categories of business are wholly separate, the likelihood is that eventually the wrong set will be used.
This problem is exacerbated by the uncertainty as to the meaning of "deals as a consumer" created by recent case law.
A safer course (assuming that the business wishes to exclude liability where it is permitted to do so—ie in non-consumer cases) is to have one set of terms, including the appropriate exclusion clauses, but to include a provision that the forbidden exclusions do not apply in a case where the buyer deals as a consumer.
For instance: If the Buyer deals as a consumer as defined in s12 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 the following provisions shall not apply and the Buyer's statutory rights under the Sale of Goods Act will be unaffected.
The ambit of the 1976 order has twice been considered by the Divisional Court.
In Hughes v Hall (unreported) it was held that an offence under the order was committed where a car dealer gave the buyer a document which stated that the car was "bought as seen and inspected" .
The effect of the document, it was held, was to prevent the sale being a sale by description and thus exclude the implied condition in s13 of the SGA 1979.
However, the court reached a different conclusion in Cavendish-Woodhouse v Manley (1984) TLR 86 where a consumer who bought furniture was given a document which stated that the furniture was "bought as seen" .
The Divisional Court held that the effect of the clause was not to exclude liability for breach of the terms concerned with merchantability and fitness for purpose in s14 of the SGA 1979.
The court distinguished Hughes but obviously doubted it.
If Hughes is correct (1) the phrase "bought as seen" prevents the sale being by description, and therefore excludes the implied term in s13 but (2) is subject to control under s6 of the UCTA 1977 as, presumably, would be any term which excludes the implied terms by preventing their implication.
(iii) Other breaches of contract.Section 3 applies to clauses which exclude or restrict liability for breach of contract.
It applies where one party "deals as a consumer or on the other's written standard terms of business" .
The meaning of"written standard terms of business's has already been considered and it seems clear that s3 will always apply to terms in standard terms of trading.
Section 3(2) provides that a person dealing with a consumer, or contracting on his/her own written standard terms: cannot by reference to any contract term—(a) when himself in breach of contract, exclude or restrict any liability of his in respect of the breach; or (b) claim to be entitled—(i) to render a contractual performance substantially different from that which was reasonably expected of him, or (ii) in respect of the whole or any part of his contractual obligation, to render no performance at all, except in so far as …the contract term satisfies the requirement of reasonableness.
The ambit of this section is unclear.
It is obviously capable of overlapping other sections of the Act; equally, it is obviously intended to catch exclusions of liability not covered by the other sections of the Act.
It is also clear that clauses which operate after a breach of contract—eg clauses which exclude or limit liability for a breach of contract, or restrict the remedies available for a breach, and time bar clauses applying to claims for breach of contract—are all controlled by this section.
However, it is not clear if clauses which define obligations, and therefore operate by preventing a breach occurring, are caught.
It must be remembered that a clause which restricts or excludes an obligation or duty is not an exclusion clause for the purposes of s3.
For instance, a contract of sale might include a term allowing the seller to alter the delivery date.
If the seller, relying on that term, alters the date for delivery, there is no breach of contract, so that s3(2) (a) cannot apply.
Is the case caught by s3(2) (b)?
It is arguable that it is not, because since the contract allows the seller to vary the delivery date, the seller has performed exactly in accordance with the contract, and the buyer cannot reasonably expect any other peformance.
However, such an interpretation would emasculate the section: for instance, it seems clear that the section was intended to apply to terms such as those commonly found in holiday contracts allowing a tour operator unilaterally to change accommodation and so on .
It is submitted, therefore, that s3 is capable of applying to clauses which define duties, at least where the clause defines the duties in a way contrary to what a reasonable person would expect in the absence of the term in question, and the drafter should assume that it will apply to all clauses which exclude or limit liability for breach of contract, or allow a party to alter the nature of performance (see also the attitude of  Bridge LJ to clauses seeking to avoid liability for misrepresentation in Cremdean Properties Ltd v Nash (1977) 244 EG 547, examined in Chapter 8,2).
It is reasonable to assume that, in view of the doubt about the ambit of the section, a party wishing to escape from a contract will challenge the effectiveness of any clause which appears to be within its ambit unless it looks likely to pass the reasonableness test.
Many of the terms which allow variation of contractual duties will probably satisfy that test, but the drafter should endeavour to ensure that clauses potentially caught by the section are reasonable.
In any case, s3(2) (b)(i) will only apply where the variation from the anticipated performance is 'substantial".
A clause, such as is commonly found in standard terms, providing that the whole of the parties' obligations are defined by the written agreement may also be caught by s3(2) (b) if, in fact, the contract is partly written and partly oral as a result of oral undertakings given alongside the written contract.
A clause would not normally be construed as allowing one party to render no performance at all, as such a clause would undermine the main purpose of the contract.
It is difficult to imagine situations where a clause could be construed in that way at common law and still be judged reasonable under the Act.
However, s3(2) (b)(ii) may apply to other types of clause not normally regarded as exclusions, such as force majeure clauses and clauses giving a contractual right to withhold performance in the event of default by the other party.
Dealing as consumer The Act draws an important distinction between persons who "deal as consumers" and others.
It gives greater protection to consumers than to other contractors.
 "Dealing as consumer" is defined by s12.
A party to a contract "deals as a consumer" in relation to another party if—(a) he neither makes the contract in the course of a business nor holds himself out as doing so; and (b) the other party does make the contract in the course of a business; and (c) in the case of a contract governed by the law of sale of goods or hire-purchase, or by section 7 of this Act [ie other contracts of supply]the goods passing under or in pursuance of the contract are of a type ordinarily supplied for private use or consumption.
The key to "consumer dealing" is therefore whether or not the contract is made "in the course of a business" .
A restrictive interpretation was given to this expression in R & B Customs Brokers Ltd v UDT Finance Ltd [1988]1 All ER 847 where the Court of Appeal held that a purchase is only in the course of business if (a) it is integral to the business or (b) there is some degree of regularity of similar transactions (see also Peter Symons & Co v Cook (1981) 131 NLJ 758; Rasbora Ltd v JCL Marine Ltd [1977]1 Lloyd's Rep 645).
A transaction may be integral if it is a "one-off adventure in the  nature of trade" , as where goods are bought for resale.
However, where the transaction is incidental to the business, it will only be in the course of a business if there is the required degree of regularity.
As a result, on the facts of this case, the plaintiff company was dealing as a consumer, and not buying in the course of a business, when it bought a car for use by its directors.
The car was not bought for resale, and the purchase was incidental to the company's business as a freight forwarder; it was only the second or third car bought by the company and so there was not the required degree of regularity.
One consequence of this decision is to extend the definition of "consumer" and therefore the number of cases where ss6 and 7 of the UCTA 1977 will prevent reliance on an exclusion clause.
A business which sells only to trade customers may nevertheless find that some of its customers are "consumers" .
In cases involving the supply of goods (which is the only case where consumer status makes a difference to the effect of a term in a standard term contract) the definition is, of course, restricted by the third limb of the definition of "consumer" : the buyer only deals as a consumer if the goods are of a type ordinarily supplied for private use or consumption.
However, a wide range of goods could fall within that definition, including motor vehicles, computers and electronic equipment, tools, furniture, furnishings and so on.
A person drafting terms for a business dealing in any goods which might be regarded as falling into this category should bear in mind the R & B Customs Brokers decision, and the Consumer Transactions (Restriction on Statements) Order and draft any exclusions so as to avoid the commission of an offence under the order.
It should be noted that the same definition of "in the course of a business" would appear to be appropriate to the second limb of the definition, concerned with the status of the supplier; the Court of Appeal in R&B relied on decisions concerned with the meaning of supplies "in the course of business" under the Trade Descriptions Acts (see Davies v Sumner [1984]3 All ER 831; Havering LBC v Stephenson [1970]1 WLR 1375).
However, it will presumably be rare that a business can be held not to be acting in the course of business if it sells goods on its standard terms.
Reasonableness Many of the "exclusion clauses" which appear in standard terms of business will be subject to a test of reasonableness.
This is an inherently vague and flexible concept and its uncertainty causes difficulties for the drafter, who cannot say with absolute certainty that any particular clause will be effective.
However, the Act does give some guidance as to how reasonableness is to be assessed.
In relation to a contractual exclusion clause, the test is whether the clause was "a fair and reasonable one to be included" in the contract "having regard to the circumstances which were, or ought reasonably to have been, known to or in the contemplation of the parties when the contract was made" (UCTA 1977, s11(1).
Reasonableness is thus judged in the light of circumstances known and foreseeable at the time the contract was made.
Under the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973, which also imposed  a reasonableness test, reasonableness was judged at the time of the breach.
Cases decided under the 1973 Act may therefore not be a reliable guide to reasonableness under the 1977 Act.
Where liability for negligence is excluded by a notice, the reasonableness of the exclusion depends on whether it would be fair and reasonable to allow reliance on the notice having regard to the circumstances existing at the time liability arose, or would have arisen.
However, in relation to exclusions in standard terms, including exclusion of liability for negligence, the time of assessment is the time when the contract was made.
The burden of proving that a clause satisfies the reasonableness test is on the party who seeks to rely on the clause.
Decided cases suggest that the burden of proving a clause reasonable will often be difficult to discharge.
It must be emphasised that the test is whether the clause was a fair and reasonable one to have been included in the contract in question (see Josef Marton v Southwestern General Property (1982), unreported).
This may cause problems in the context of standard terms: a clause which is reasonable in one particular contract with a particular customer may be unreasonable in the context of a different contract with a different customer.
Where the Act applies a reasonableness test it generally provides that a party cannot exclude or restrict liability "except in so far as the term satisfies the test of reasonableness" (ss2, 3, 4) or that liability can be excluded or restricted "but only in so far as the term satisfies the test of reasonableness" (ss6, 7).
The better view is that this does not allow the court to rewrite a clause: for instance, if the court decides that a clause limiting liability to £100 is unreasonable but that a £200 limit would be reasonable, it cannot substitute the higher figure (see Geo Mitchell (Chesterhall) Ltd v Finney Lock Seeds Ltd [1983]2 AC 803, especially per Lord Bridge).
If the drafter tries to be too ambitious in restricting or excluding liability, he/she may find that the clause is unreasonable and the client is left without protection.
However, if the clause contains two or more restrictions, the court may hold one unreasonable but still allow reliance on the other, provided that the two are severable.
Consider, for instance, the following clause: The Seller shall have no liability in respect of defects in the goods unless the Buyer gives notice of the defects within three days of delivery and the Seller's liability in respect of such defects shall in any case be limited to £100.
If the court finds the time limit unreasonable but the limitation on damages reasonable, it can allow reliance on the latter part of the clause only.
The drafter should therefore draft clauses so as to maximise the chances of severance: the easiest way to do that is to draft separate limitations in separate sub-clauses.
In addition, a clause may be held reasonable in relation to one claim and unreasonable in relation to another.
Suppose that the contract contains a simple time limit clause such as: The Buyer will notify the Seller of any claim it may have against the Seller for breach of contract within three days of delivery and that the seller delivers short of the required quantity and the goods are later found to suffer from a latent defect.
A court could hold the clause reasonable in relation to the claim for short delivery (which would be readily apparent) but not to the claim in respect of latent defects.
However, it may also be that if the clause is drawn so widely as to be capable of applying in unreasonable circumstances, or if it purports to exclude a liability which cannot be excluded under the Act, the court may find it unreasonable to apply it to other circumstances (see Walker v Boyle [1982]1 All ER 634).
Certainly the court can be expected to take a dim view of such clauses.
In addition to the general provisions of s11(1), the Act offers guidelines for dealing with particular types of case.
Schedule 2, for example, lists a number of factors which the court is to take into account in assessing reasonableness under ss6 and 7—ie in relation to clauses excluding liability for breach of the implied terms in contracts for the supply of goods.
It can be expected that the court will consider the guidelines, or factors similar to those in the guidelines, in other cases (see eg Woodman v Photo Trade Processing Ltd (1981), unreported).
The factors which the court is to take into account under Sched 2 are:(a) the strength of the bargaining positions of the parties relative to each other, taking into account (among other things) alternative means by which the customer's requirements could have been met;(b) whether the customer received an inducement to agree to the term, or in accepting it had an opportunity of entering into a similar contract with other persons, but without having to accept a similar term;(c) whether the customer knew or ought reasonably to have known of the existence and extent of the term (having regard, among other things, to any custom of the trade and any previous course of dealing between the parties);(d) where the term excludes or restricts any relevant liability if some condition is not complied with, whether it was reasonable at the time of the contract to expect that compliance with that condition would be practicable;(e) whether the goods were manufactured, processed or adapted to the special order of the customer.
The impact of factor (e) is not clear.
The fact that where goods are designed and manufactured to the buyer's special order the seller will have greater knowledge of the buyer's requirements and the buyer will rely on the seller's skill may make it less reasonable for the seller to exclude or limit liability; on the other, hand, if goods are manufactured to the buyer's special order, it may be more reasonable to expect the buyer to insure against losses.
It is apparent that other factors may also be relevant: for instance, in Stag Line Ltd v Tyne Ship Repair Group Ltd (The Zinnia)[1984]2 Lloyd's Rep  211 Staughton J was inclined to hold the terms in a commercial contract unreasonable "first because they are in such small print that one can barely read them; secondly, the draftsmanship is so convoluted and prolix that one almost needs an LLB to understand them" .
In relation to clauses which impose a monetary limit on damages recoverable in the event of breach of contract, the court is also to take into account:(a) the resources which [the party seeking to rely on the clause]could expect to be available to him for the purpose of meeting the liability should it arise; and (b) how far it was open to him to cover himself by insurance.
(s11(4)) It is likely that these factors, and especially the availability of insurance, will be relevant in most cases where reasonableness is considered, and not merely in relation to clauses which impose a financial limit on damages (Flamar Interocean Ltd v Denmac [1990]1 Lloyd's Rep 434).
There is now a small body of case law illustrating the application of the reasonableness test by the courts.
However, whilst the decided cases may offer some guidance as to the general approach, their precedent value is limited because each case turns on its own circumstances.
Moreover, the evaluation of reasonableness will normally be for the trial judge: an appellate court will rarely interfere unless satisfied that the original decision "proceeded on some erroneous principle or was plainly and obviously wrong" (Geo Mitchell (Chesterhall) Ltd v Finney Lock Seeds Ltd [1983]2 AC 803, per Lord Bridge).
Dicta in Photo Production Ltd v Securicor Transport Ltd [1980]AC 827 suggested that the courts would adopt a generally non-interventionist approach to exclusions in commercial contracts.
However, subsequent cases have shown a greater willingness to judge clauses unreasonable than those dicta might have suggested.
(i) Liability for negligence.In Phillips Products Ltd v Hyland [1987]2 All ER 620 the Court of Appeal upheld a finding that a clause in a plant hire contract requiring the hirer of an excavator to indemnify the owner against liability for loss caused by the driver's negligence, which operated as an exclusion, was unreasonable.
Relevant factors included (1) the hirer's lack of expertise in the plant hire business;(2) that the contract was arranged at short notice and was for a short period of hire; it was therefore difficult for the plaintiff hirers to arrange insurance cover;(3) that the clause was not the subject of negotiation;(4) that the hirers had little or no control over the way the driver did his job.
An exclusion of liability for negligence in a consumer contract was held unreasonable at first instance in Woodman v Photo Trade Processing Ltd (1981), unreported where a clause in a contract for the processing of photographs provided that in the event of loss the processor was only to be liable for the value of the unprocessed material.
Again the terms were in a standard form, and were not negotiated as a result of the imbalance of bargaining power.
A particularly important factor was that the processor  did not offer the customer a choice of paying a higher fee in return for the processor accepting greater liability: such a choice was recommended in an industry code of practice approved by the Office of Fair Trading.
However, in Warren v Truprint [1986]BCLC 344 a clause which did offer a "two-tier service" was held unreasonable: the customer had no choice in relation to the terms, since such terms were universal in the industry, and the contract failed to indicate the extent of extra liability the processor would accept.
The leading case on exclusion of liability for negligence is Smith v Bush; Harris v Wyre Forest DC [1989]2 All ER 514.
The case was not concerned with a standard form contract but with a disclaimer on a surveyor's report which purported to prevent the surveyors incurring a duty of care in tort.
The House of Lords took into account the pattern of the property market and the reasonable expectations of the parties.
In view of the high cost of property, the extent of the risk to a buyer if the survey report was negligent, the fact that the parties were of unequal bargaining power, the relatively low risk to the surveyor, and the fact that the parties would know that the buyer would be unlikely to obtain a second survey report, the clause was held to be unreasonable.
However, in a high risk situation, for instance involving industrial property or property at the higher end of the market, a disclaimer might be reasonable.
(ii) Total exclusion of liability.In general the courts seem reluctant to uphold clauses which totally exclude liability for breaches of contract.
In Rasbora Ltd v JCL Marine Ltd [1977]1 Lloyd's Rep 645 Lawson J held that a clause in a contract for the sale of a motor yacht which excluded all liability in respect of defects could not be relied upon when an electrical fault resulted in the total loss of the boat within 27 hours of delivery.
However, strictly this finding was obiter, since it was held that the sale was a consumer sale and the clause was therefore ineffective.
In addition, the case was decided under the provisions of the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973, under which reasonableness was to be assessed at the time of breach.
It was therefore possible for Lawson J to take into account the nature and effects of the breach.
In contrast, in R & B Customs Brokers Ltd v UDT Finance Ltd [1988]1 All ER 847 a clause in a hire purchase contract purported to exclude all implied terms concerned with description, quality and fitness for purpose.
The Court of Appeal held that the buyer dealt as a consumer, so that the clause was inapplicable; however, Dillon LJ, obiter, suggested that had the buyer not been dealing as a consumer, the clause would have been reasonable because the buyer (1) was "ex hypothesi dealing in the course of business and [the managing director]was not devoid of commercial experience" and (2) the supplier was a hire purchase company, not a dealer, and had never had possession of or inspected the car.
(iii) Limitation of liability.It has been said that the courts tend to view clauses which limit liability more favourably than those which provide for a total exclusion.
As noted above, the factors in s11(4) are relevant to the assessment of the reasonableness of a limitation clause.
In RW Green Ltd v Cade Bros Farm [1978]1 Lloyd's Rep 602 a term in a contract for the sale of  seed potatoes provided that the supplier's liability for "compensation and damages payable under any claim or claims arising out of this contract under whatsoever pretext" was to be limited to a sum not exceeding the contract price.
The court upheld the limitation as reasonable.
A crucial factor in Cade was that the terms were on a standard form prepared by the National Association of Seed Potato Merchants and had been negotiated by the Association with the National Farmers' Union.
The leading case on the application of the reasonableness test to contractual limitations is Geo Mitchell (Chesterhall) Ltd v Finney Lock Seeds Ltd [1983]2 AC 803 where a contract for the sale of winter white cabbage seed contained a clause limiting the seller's liability to the contract price: £210.60.
In fact the seller delivered a different quality of seed altogether; as a result the eventual crop was worthless and the plaintiff farmer suffered losses of around £91,000.
The House of Lords held the clause unreasonable.
Applying the guidelines in Sched 2 to the UCTA 1977, the House found that the plaintiff was aware of the term, having done regular business with the defendants.
However, the term was universal in the trade, so that the plaintiff did not have the option of buying on different terms from other suppliers.
Moreover, unlike the clause in Cade the terms had never been negotiated or agreed by any trade association on behalf of farmers.
In addition, it was found that the breach was caused by the negligence of the defendants, and that it would have been relatively easy for the defendants to insure against potential liability to the plaintiffs.
Crucially, there was evidence that in similar cases the defendants generally did not rely on the clause, but negotiated settlements, which perhaps indicated that the defendants did not regard the clause as reasonable.
(iv) Time limits.In assessing the reasonableness of clauses which require compliance with procedural requirements, such as imposing time limits on notification of claims, the court will consider whether, at the time the contract was made, it was reasonable to expect compliance with the term.
Where such a clause bars a claim if the requirement is not complied with, it may become, in effect, a total exclusion and the court is then likely to take a strict view of it.
In Green v Cade there was a further clause which required buyers to notify claims within three or seven days of delivery.
The clause was unreasonable in the context of a contract for the sale of seed potatoes.
Similarly, in Rees Hough Ltd v Redland Reinforced Plastics (1984) 1 Const LJ 67 a clause in a contract for the sale of piping requiring notification of claims within three months was held unreasonable.
In a case where defects are unlikely to be immediately apparent, a short time limit is unlikely to be reasonable.
A similar approach was taken in Stag Line Ltd v Tyne Ship Repair Group Ltd (The Zinnia)[1984]2 Lloyd's Rep 211.
Staughton J considered (obiter and on a hypothetical basis) the effect of a term in a contract for the sale of a ship which excluded liability unless the buyer gave the supplier a chance to rectify faults and required the buyer to return it to the shipyard for repair.
He felt that such a clause would be unreasonable, since the ship was likely to  break down in circumstances where return to the yard would be impracticable.
(b) Misrepresentation Under the Misrepresentation Act 1967, clauses which exclude or restrict liability for misrepresentation or which exclude or restrict "any remedy available to another party to the contract by reason of such a misrepresentation" are ineffective unless they satisfy the test of reasonableness.
The test of reasonableness is the same as that which applies under s11 of the UCTA.