

Basic concepts
The nature of a takeover
The expression "takeover" is commonly used to refer to any acquisition of a company or business.
However, for our purposes a takeover is a transaction whereby a person or group of people obtains sufficient voting rights in a public company to enable that person or group to control the company.
The term "acquisition" is reserved for any other type of acquisition of a company or business.
Takeover jargon
First, it is necessary to understand some of the jargon used in relation to takeovers.
Acting in concert
See Concert party below.
Agreed bid
Same as Recommended offer.
Associate
This definition is particularly relevant to the disclosure of dealings under Rule 8 of the City Code on Takeovers and Mergers (for definition, see below).
It covers all persons (whether or not acting in concert) who directly or indirectly own or deal in the shares of an offeror company or the target company in an offer and who have (in addition to their nominal interests as shareholders) an interest or potential interest, whether commercial, financial or personal, in the outcome of the offer.
It includes, for instance:
(a) an offeror's or target company's group companies (including 20 per cent associated companies);
(b) the financial and professional advisers to the offeror or target group and persons who control, are controlled by or are under common control with such advisers;
(c) directors of the offeror or target group and their close relatives and related trusts;
(d) the pension funds of the offeror or target group;
(e) any investment company, unit trust or other person whose investments are managed by an associate on a discretionary basis;
(f) in respect of the relevant investment accounts, a person or his concert parties who owns or controls 5 per cent of the offeror or target company; and
(g) any person who has a material trading arrangement with the offeror or target company.
Bid
Same as Offer.
Black knight
An alternative offeror which the target company is prepared to recommend to its shareholders in preference to a hostile bidder.
While not particularly welcome, the black knight is considered the lesser of two evils.
See also White knight.
Blue Book
The book published by the Panel containing the City Code and the SARs.
Cash alternative
If the offeror is offering the target company's shareholders a choice of consideration and one is cash, the cash offer is known as a "cash alternative" .
Cash purchases
For the purposes of the City Code, these include contracts or arrangements where the consideration consists of a debt instrument which can be redeemed in less than three years.
Cash underwritten alternative
Also known as "cash underpinning" and "third party cash alternative" .
The bidder offers its own shares to the shareholders of the target.
It simultaneously arranges for its merchant bank to offer to buy from accepting shareholders who wish to take cash all or a proportion of those shares immediately.
The merchant bank in turn may arrange for sub-underwriters to buy all or some of those shares for which the cash is required.
Cash underwritten alternatives are used where the bidder wishes to give shareholders the option to take cash, but does not have sufficient cash resources of its own or prefers to offer shares for merger accounting or merger relief purposes.
Cash underwritten alternatives are only feasible in an active stock market where there is a demand for the offeror's shares.
The offeror may provide a "top-up" from its own cash resources to supplement the cash underwritten alternative.
CCD
Concentration with a Community dimension.
 "Concentration" is Eurospeak for, broadly, a takeover or merger, but can include a concentrative joint venture.
A CCD is a large transaction which qualifies for consideration under the Merger Regulation (European Council Regulation (EEC) 4064/89).
Takeovers which are not CCDs may be investigated under the national merger control legislation of the appropriate  individual Member State.
In the UK, the principal domestic merger control legislation is contained in the Fair Trading Act 1973.
Chinese Wall
An invisible barrier put up between different departments in a financial organisation, preventing them from discussing matters which could give rise to a conflict of interest.
The City Code or "the Code" 
The City Code on Takeovers and Mergers issued by the Panel.
The Code regulates the conduct of takeovers of all listed and unlisted public companies (and certain categories of private companies) resident in the UK.
It reflects what the City considers to be best practice in the conduct of takeovers.
It is particularly concerned to ensure fair and equal treatment for all shareholders.
Class transactions
Proposed takeovers by companies listed on the London Stock Exchange are classified in the Yellow Book under Classes 1–4, Super Class 1, and very substantial acquisitions or reverse takeovers.
A Super Class 1 transaction (requiring an immediate announcement to the market, a circular to the offeror's shareholders and their prior approval in general meeting) is one where a comparison of the target's assets, profits, gross capital etc with the value of those of the offeror is 25 per cent or more.
Class 1 transactions (requiring an immediate announcement and a circular to shareholders), Class 2 transactions (requiring an announcement only) and Class 3 transactions (requiring an announcement only if listed securities are being offered as consideration) are where the comparisons produce figures of 15 per cent or more, 5 per cent or more and less than 5 per cent respectively.
A Class 4 transaction is one involving a listed company (or any of its group companies) and a connected party (ie a director (including a shadow director), former director within the last 12 months, substantial shareholder (or former substantial shareholder within the last 12 months) or an associate of any of them) and usually requires a circular to shareholders and their prior approval.
A very substantial acquisition or reverse takeover is one involving an unlisted target and where the comparison produces a figure of 100 per cent or more.
It is treated in the same way as a Super Class 1 transaction.
However, the company's listing will be suspended until after shareholders' approval has been obtained and the company will, subject to certain exceptions, be treated as a new applicant for listing.
Competitive offer
A takeover offer made in competition with one or more other offers.
All may be contested or one recommended.
Compulsory purchase
The ability of minority shareholders under CA 1985, s430 to require an offeror to buy their shares once the offeror has obtained 90 per cent of the shares of the target company.
Compulsory sale
The ability of an offeror under CA 1985, s429 to require dissenting minority shareholders to sell their shares to it once it has obtained 90 per cent or more of the shares of the target company for which the offer was made.
Concert party
Persons who, pursuant to an agreement or understanding (whether formal or informal), actively co-operate to obtain or consolidate control of a company by acquiring its shares.
It has particular relevance to the timing restrictions on acquisitions of shares contained in Rule 5 of the City Code and to mandatory offers.
The Code's definition of "acting in concert" presumes that certain categories of persons are acting in concert unless the contrary is established.
The obligation under companies' legislation (CA 1985, ss198-206) to disclose interests in shares in public companies also applies to persons "acting in concert" .
Connected fund manager
A fund manager is connected with an offeror or a target company if he is controlled by, controls or is under the same control as the offeror or the target, or any bank, stockbroker, financial or other professional advisers to the offeror or target, or is an investor in the consortium making the bid.
Connected market-maker
A market-maker is connected with an offeror or a target company in the same way as a connected fund manager.
Consideration shares
Shares in an offeror company offered to the shareholders of the target company as consideration for the sale of their shares in the target.
Contested (or hostile) bid
A takeover bid which is opposed by the board of the target company.
Control
A holding, or aggregate holdings, of shares carrying 30 per cent or more of the voting rights of a company, irrespective of whether the holding or holdings give de facto control.
Court Scheme
A scheme of arrangement under CA 1985, ss425-427.
It may be used to acquire control of a target company as an alternative to a takeover offer.
One advantage is that minority shareholders in the target can be compelled to sell their shares pursuant to the scheme provided the scheme is sanctioned by the court and by a majority of shareholders in number representing 75 per cent in value of those present and voting, in person or by proxy, at the meeting convened to approve the scheme.
This is less than the 90 per cent level of acceptances required for a compulsory sale of minority interests under CA 1985, s429 following a takeover offer.
However, because a Court Scheme requires the co-operation of the target it is not a viable alternative to a hostile bid.
Cross holdings
A defensive tactic whereby two potential targets take a strategic blocking stake in each other, possibly in conjunction with Standstill agreements (see below).
Dawn raid
The build-up of a significant stake in a target company within a matter of hours, giving the board of the target company little time to react or advise its shareholders.
This practice has been restricted by the SARs (see below).
Directors
For the purposes of the Code, "directors" include persons in accordance with whose instructions a director or the directors are accustomed to act.
Exempt fund manager
A person who manages investment accounts on a discretionary basis and is recognised by the Panel as an exempt fund manager for the purposes of the Code.
A person applying for this status must comply with any requirements imposed by the Panel as a condition of its granting the status.
In the case of a connected fund manager exempt status is relevant only where the sole reason for the connection is that the fund manager is controlled by, controls or is under the same control as a financial or other professional adviser (including stockbrokers) to the offeror or target company.
References in the Code to exempt fund managers are construed accordingly.
Exempt market-maker
An exempt market-maker is a person who is either registered as a market-maker with the London Stock Exchange, or is accepted by the Panel as a market-maker, in relation to the relevant securities.
In both cases the person must be registered by the Panel as exempt for the purposes of the Code.
The conditions for exemption are the same as those applying to exempt fund managers.
Dealings by a connected exempt market-maker in a market-making capacity will not normally be considered within the acting in concert presumptions, but dealings in any other capacity will be (see para 7.7 below).
Golden parachute
A provision in an executive director's service agreement which gives him the right to leave the company with a generous financial package, either in the event that he is dismissed prematurely or because a defined event occurs (eg a takeover) which entitles him to be paid a pre-agreed sum.
Golden share
A device commonly used in relation to Government privatisations.
The Government retains a golden (or "master" ) share in the newly-floated company which confers rights restricting other shareholders or potential shareholders from acquiring controlling stakes in the company for a period of years or indefinitely.
Such companies are, as a result, "bid proof" until such time as the Government relinquishes its golden share or the period expires.
Green Book
The booklet published by the London Stock Exchange entitled "Unlisted Securities Market" .
It sets out the requirements governing the admission of shares to the USM and the subsequent obligations of the company, including those relating to takeovers and acquisitions.
Investor Protection Committees (IPCs)
The committees formed by various institutional investors (eg the National Association of Pension Funds (NAPF) and the Association of British Insurers (ABI)).
These committees have issued various guidelines (on such matters as shareholders' pre-emption rights, employee share incentive schemes, and discounts to market price on share issues) which they require companies to follow if the institutions they represent are to be expected to invest in and support them.
The guidelines do not have the force of law but are persuasive given the power of institutional shareholders.
Irrevocable undertaking (commitment)
An agreement whereby a shareholder of the target company binds himself irrevocably to accept a bidder's offer.
Such agreements are often used to achieve a Shut-out (see below).
The definition of Rights over shares (see below) includes irrevocable undertakings; therefore, such agreements are caught by Rule 5 of the City Code and the SARs.
Leveraged buy-out
A takeover of a public company (often a management buy-out) which is financed by a high level of borrowings so that the offeror is left in a highly-geared position.
Very often the target's assets are required to be used as security for the borrowings, which inevitably involves detailed consideration of the financial assistance provisions contained in CA 1985, ss151-155.
Listing particulars
A company which is seeking a listing on the London Stock Exchange is obliged to prepare and publish listing particulars.
Listing particulars contain detailed information about the issuing company, its securities and certain future issues.
The information requirements are determined by the listing rules set out in the Yellow Book which are made by the London Stock Exchange as the competent authority under Part IV of the FSA.
Listing particulars are required to contain all such information as investors and their professional advisers would reasonably require and reasonably expect to find in them for the purpose of making an informed assessment of the assets, liabilities, financial position, profits, losses and prospects of the issuing company and the rights attaching to its securities.
In the context of a takeover, a listed offeror which is offering its own securities as consideration will be required to prepare and publish listing particulars where
(i) shares of an existing class already listed are to be issued which would increase the issued shares of that class by 10 per cent or  more, or (ii) securities of a new class are to be offered as consideration which are to be listed, or (iii) debt securities of any amount are to be offered as consideration which are to be listed.
Loan note alternative
A bidder offering cash may allow accepting shareholders to elect to receive all or a part of their consideration in loan notes of the bidder.
These promise cash at a future date and in the meantime allow shareholders to "roll-over" or "hold-over" any capital gain.
Mandatory offer
A takeover offer required to be made under Rule 9 of the City Code.
An offer must be made if the holding of an offeror and its concert parties reaches 30 per cent or more of the target company's voting rights or, if the holding has already achieved this level, it increases by more than 1 per cent in any period of 12 months.
A mandatory offer is usually seen as something to be avoided because
(a) it must be in cash, at the highest price paid by the offeror or any member of the concert party within the previous 12 months, and
(b) except with the consent of the Panel, must be conditional only upon the offeror obtaining sufficient acceptances to give it more than 50 per cent of the target company's voting rights.
Market purchases
Purchases by the offeror or its concert parties of the target's shares on the London Stock Exchange.
Merger
A merger occurs where two companies combine to form a larger enterprise and where the shareholders in the combined enterprise comprise all, or substantially all, of the shareholders of the two companies.
A merger may be effected by
(a) a recommended share exchange offer by one of the companies for the other, or
(b) by an entirely new company, formed for the purpose, making simultaneous recommended share exchange offers for both companies, or
(c) by a Court Scheme.
A merger is essentially a particular category of takeover; no special distinction is drawn in this book between mergers and takeovers.
Mix and match elections
A particular form of consideration under a takeover offer consisting of fixed pools of each type of consideration (eg shares and cash).
Accepting shareholders are given the option to elect for more of one type to the extent that other accepting shareholders elect for more of the other type.
Model Code
The Model Code for Securities Transactions by Directors of Listed Companies, contained in Chapter 2 of Section 5 of the Yellow Book.
This is a code of conduct for directors of listed companies requiring them not to deal in their own company's shares on short-term considerations or at a time when they are in possession of unpublished price-sensitive information.
In particular, they are required not to deal (save in limited circumstances) during certain "closed periods" , ie two months prior to the preliminary announcement of the company's annual results and the announcement of its half-yearly results.
The London Stock Exchange requires that listed companies adopt rules governing directors' dealings which are at least as strict as those of the Model Code.
Offer
For the purposes of the Code, this expression includes takeover and merger transactions (including reverse takeovers), partial offers, Court Schemes and offers by a parent company for shares in a subsidiary.
The Code may also be of relevance to unitisation proposals which are in competition with an offer to which the Code applies.
Offeror (or bidder)
The maker of a takeover offer.
The definition in the Code includes companies wherever incorporated and individuals wherever resident.
Offeree company
Another expression for the target company.
The expression is something of a misnomer because the offerees are the shareholders of the target company, not the target company itself.
Offer document
The document which contains a takeover offer.
Its contents are governed primarily by the City Code.
Offer period
This starts when the announcement is made of the proposed or possible takeover offer (with or without terms).
It ends on the first closing date or, if later, the date when the offer becomes or is declared unconditional as to acceptances or lapses.
An announcement that holdings of shares carrying 30 per cent or more of a company's voting rights are for sale or that the board is seeking potential offerors is treated as the announcement of a possible offer.
The Panel
The Panel on Takeovers and Mergers.
Paper consideration
Securities in the offeror offered as consideration for the shares in the target.
See Securities exchange offer.
Poison pill
A transaction or set of circumstances engineered by the target to make it unattractive to a bidder to make or proceed with an offer.
Frustrating action of this nature during the course of an offer or when a bid is expected imminently is severely curbed by the Code.
Purchases or other acquisitions of shares
These include purchases of shares assented to an offer.
Recommended offer
A takeover offer which is recommended by the board of the target company.
Reverse takeover
A takeover or acquisition where the acquiring company makes a securities exchange offer to the shareholders of a larger target company.
The result is that the shareholders in the target company become the majority shareholders in the acquiring company.
Rights over shares
For the purposes of the Code and SARs, these include any rights acquired by a person by virtue of an agreement to purchase shares, or an option to acquire shares, or an irrevocable undertaking to accept an offer to be made to him.
A right over a share will only exist if a legally binding arrangement has been made (see Panel Statement 1985/5, 17 February 1989, relating to Marina Development Group plc).
Rules
Rules of the City Code.
Rule 9 bid (or "offer" or "obligation" )
Same as Mandatory offer.
SARs
The Rules Governing Substantial Acquisitions of Shares, contained in the Blue Book.
The primary purpose of the SARs is to restrict the swift build-up of substantial stakes in a target company by dawn raids.
Briefly, they limit the speed with which a person can increase his holding of shares or rights over shares to between 15 and 30 per cent of a company which is listed on the Official List of the London Stock Exchange or the Unlisted Securities Market.
The SARs do not apply to other companies and are therefore less wide in their application than the Code.
Securities exchange offer
The offer of securities by an offeror company to shareholders of the target company in exchange for their shares in the target.
For the purposes of the Code, "securities" excludes loan stock or loan notes unless such stock or notes carry substantially the same rights as any other securities of the offeror in issue or conversion or subscription rights into any such securities or equity share capital of the offeror.
Share alternative
A bidder offering cash may allow accepting shareholders to elect to receive all or a part of their consideration in shares of the bidder.
Shut out
The obtaining in advance of irrevocable commitments to accept a takeover offer so that the result of the offer is a foregone conclusion.
In the UK this practice is only permitted in relation to a Recommended offer.
Standstill agreement
An agreement between a company, or the directors of a company, and a shareholder which restricts both parties from making, or accepting, an offer for the shares of the company, or from  increasing or reducing shareholdings.
Such agreements may cause the parties to act in concert; in cases of doubt the Panel should be consulted.
Super Class 1 transaction
See Class transactions.
Takeover offer (or bid)
An offer made to acquire control of a public company.
Target company
A company which is about to be, or is being, acquired.
Trojan horse
Same as White squire.
Top-up
This occurs where an offeror provides cash out of its own resources to supplement a cash underwritten alternative.
Unconditional as to acceptances
When the acceptance condition (ie acceptance in respect of over 50 per cent of the voting rights in the target) attached to an offer is satisfied, the offer is described as being unconditional as to acceptances.
Unconditional in all respects
This occurs when all the conditions attached to an offer have been satisfied (or waived).
Voluntary offer
A takeover offer which is made voluntarily by the offeror (ie not a mandatory offer).
It may be recommended, contested and/or competitive.
Voting rights
Except for the purposes of Rule 11, the Code defines voting rights as all the voting rights attributable to the share capital of a company which are currently exercisable at a general meeting.
White knight
An alternative offeror, solicited by a target company and recommended by the target's board to its shareholders in preference to a hostile bidder.
See also Black knight.
White squire
Another option to defeat a hostile bidder is to bring in a friendly "white squire" who takes a strategic blocking stake in the target company.
This may be accompanied by a Standstill agreement, sometimes in exchange for a directorship on the target's board.
Whitewash
There are very few exceptions to the obligation to make a mandatory offer when the 30 per cent threshold is reached.
One of these is where the acquisition of shares is approved by a majority of independent shareholders.
Known as a "whitewash" , it is only effective in the case of an issue (not a purchase) of new shares which results in the acquirer or his concert parties obtaining a holding of 30 per cent or more.
It is common to seek a whitewash in a reverse takeover where the shareholders of the target company will end up holding a controlling interest in the acquiring company.
Yellow Book
The book published by the London Stock Exchange entitled "Admission of Securities to Listing" , containing listing rules made by the Exchange as the competent authority under Part IV of the FSA.
The book sets out the rules governing the admission of securities to the Official List (including entry requirements and the content of listing particulars) and the continuing obligations of listed companies (including obligations relating to takeovers and acquisitions).
1.3 What makes public companies vulnerable to takeovers?
A company will be vulnerable to a takeover offer if over 50 per cent of its shares are in the hands of the public and those shares are freely transferable.
In such circumstances, there is nothing that the directors can do to prevent shareholders selling a controlling interest if they so wish.
The vast majority of private companies and many unlisted public companies impose restrictions on the transferability of their shares in their articles of association, thereby limiting the scope for takeover offers.
Accordingly, most of these companies will change hands by way of private contract between the shareholders and the buyer.
Some European jurisdictions (for example, Germany and Holland) permit two-tier board systems.
Despite gaining a simple majority of votes a bidder may still be unable to gain control of the supervisory board with its entrenched powers and consequently be prevented from controlling the management of the company.
He may also be unable to remove employee representatives on the board.
However, under English law, a bidder who acquires over 50 per cent of a company's voting rights will be able to remove its directors and hence control the board (CA 1985, s303).
The London Stock Exchange invariably requires that a company seeking a listing provides in its articles of association that its shares will be free from any restriction on the right of transfer and free from any lien (see the Yellow Book, section 1, chapter 2, para 4 and section 9, chapter 1, para 1.2).
In exceptional circumstances, with the approval of the Exchange, a listed company may take power to disapprove the transfer of shares provided that such powers do not disturb the market (para 4).
The Exchange has done this, for example, in relation to the Government's privatisations, by allowing the Government to retain a "golden" (or "master" ) share in newly privatised companies.
This share confers rights restricting other shareholders or potential shareholders from acquiring controlling stakes in the company for a period of years or indefinitely.
The company is as a result "bid proof" until such time as the Government relinquishes its golden share or the period expires.
While invariably requiring listed companies to have freely transferable securities, the London Stock Exchange does not impose a condition that a controlling interest should be in public hands.
The only requirement in this respect is that at least 25 per cent(10 per cent in respect of USM companies) of the company's shares should be in the hands of the public.
The Exchange discourages the use of equity shares with no or restricted voting rights, so this cannot normally be used as a device to retain control amongst a few shareholders with voting rights.
This was not always the case, however, and one still finds some listed companies with non-voting equity.
Many smaller listed companies are controlled by their directors or their family interests, making it impossible for an outsider to bid for them except by way of an agreed offer which is accepted by the controlling shareholders.
Such companies may be attractive to a prospective bidder though, as the board will be able to deliver control to the bidder through a shut-out (see para 8.2 below) and guarantee a successful offer without abortive costs.
One of the attractions of a listing is that the listed company can raise fresh capital (by rights issues, often underwritten) or finance acquisitions (by rights issues or by vendor placings) using its paper.
Where a company is controlled by its directors, its expansion strategy may outgrow the resources of its directors so that they cannot maintain their percentage holding through a series of costly rights issues or placings, with a consequential dilution of that holding.
In such circumstances, the directors may be faced with the decision to allow control of the company to fall into public hands, with the prospect that one day it will attract the attentions of an unwelcome predator.
Hidden liabilities of the target company
When an offeror successfully completes a takeover bid for a target company it acquires control of the target with all its assets and liabilities, whether disclosed or undisclosed.
The sale of the shares is subject to the caveat emptor(buyer beware) principle; unless the offeror can obtain express warranties and indemnities, or can be considered sufficiently proximate to the target's directors and their advisers to found liability for negligent misstatement (see para 20.1 below), there will be no redress if the target has unforeseen liabilities which make it less valuable than the offeror was led to believe.
All offerors will invariably ask the selling shareholders to represent that they own the shares (or can transfer title) free from encumbrances.
However, this will be seen as a minimum protection only and does not extend to the underlying liabilities of the target.
In the case of a contested bid the offeror can expect little co-operation from the target or its directors.
Therefore, the taking of warranties and indemnities will be a wholly unrealistic expectation.
The offeror will have to depend on publicly-available sources of information and whatever else it can obtain or it is required to be given under the Code (see para 5.8 below).
Quoted companies are subject to outside monitoring and scrutiny by the London Stock Exchange and the market.
They are required to disclose publicly any information which is necessary to avoid the establishment of a false market in their securities and to give their shareholders details of significant transactions affecting the company.
Unquoted companies are not subject to such disclosure requirements and accordingly represent a greater risk.
Moreover, the audit certificate for the target's published accounts is not the comfort it first seems.
It is unlikely that the offeror will be sufficiently proximate to the target's auditors to found liability for negligent misstatement in respect of negligently audited accounts (see para 20.6 below).
An agreed bid may give more scope for a due diligence investigation by the offeror or its accountants before the offeror commits itself.
However, the target's board will usually want appropriate confidentiality undertakings and will be reluctant to disclose sensitive commercial or technical information to an offeror which is a competitor.
The taking of warranties and indemnities will only usually be feasible if the target company is controlled by a small number of director-shareholders who are actively involved in the company's affairs.
In a more widely-held company where the directors have only small shareholdings, they will be reluctant to assume legal liability for the affairs of the target given their modest financial involvement.
Shareholders who hold their shares as an investment without knowledge of the detailed affairs of the company are also unlikely to give warranties or indemnities.
Even warranties and indemnities do not provide complete protection to the offeror, as they depend on the financial resources of the people providing them.
The upshot of all this is that takeovers involve a significant degree of risk for offerors.
That risk can be carefully investigated and assessed but never truly eliminated.
The concept of control
A bidder who acquires over 50 per cent of a company's voting rights will be able to control the composition of its board of directors and hence the management of the company.
A bidder who acquires 75 per cent or more will be able to pass a special resolution and initiate more fundamental changes, such as alterations to the company's memorandum  and articles of association, a change of name, a reduction of share capital and a liquidation.
In practice, where a public company has a wide spread of shareholders, a significant minority shareholding may give the holder a decisive degree of influence over the company's activities.
This has been recognised by the Panel and for many of the purposes of the Code and SARs, "control" is deemed to be the holding of an aggregate of 30 per cent or more of the voting rights of a company.
This is so whether or not de facto control is obtained.
The making of a takeover offer is not the only means of obtaining control of a company.
In recognition of this, the Code regulates other transactions where control can be obtained or consolidated.
Such transactions include Court Schemes, reductions of share capital, purchases by a company of its own shares, reverse takeovers, new issues of shares and the acquisition by a parent company of further shares in its subsidiary.
The Code may also have relevance to unitisation proposals which are in competition with an offer to which the Code applies.
It does not, however, apply to offers for non-voting, non-equity share capital (but does apply to securities convertible into equity share capital).
Acting in concert
This is one of the most important concepts to understand in relation to the Code.
Persons act in concert if, pursuant to an agreement or understanding (whether formal or informal), they actively co-operate to obtain or consolidate control (ie 30 per cent or more of the voting rights) of a company by acquiring its shares.
Dealings by persons who are connected in this fashion (concert parties) are treated as equivalent to the dealings of a single person.
Thus, if a bidder and its merchant bank buy shares in a target company, there is a presumption that they are acting in concert and their purchases will be aggregated.
If together these amount to 30 per cent or more of the target's voting rights there might be a breach of the timing restrictions contained in Rule 5 of the Code, or an obligation might be incurred to make a mandatory offer under Rule 9.
The concert party provisions prevent important Rules of the Code (particularly Rules 5, 6, 9 and 11) being circumvented by dealings in shares being spread amongst a number of parties acting together.
Individual dealings may not cause a Rule to be broken or activated unless or until they are aggregated.
Acquisitions of shares by concert party members can have a direct bearing on the value and form of the consideration to be offered under the bid.
The relevant provisions are in Rules 6 (see paras 7.2.3 and 7.2.4 below) and 11 (see para 7.2.2 below).
The concert party provisions apply equally to the directors of the target and persons acting in concert with them.
For example, as a defensive measure, the directors of the target and their supporters might acquire shares in the target to place those shares beyond the reach of a hostile bidder.
If between them they acquire (when aggregated with their existing holdings of shares) 30 per cent or more of the target's voting rights they might similarly breach Rule 5 or trigger an obligation to make a mandatory offer for the target themselves.
The definition of "acting in concert" contained in the Code presumes that certain categories of persons are acting in concert unless the contrary is established.
The following persons will be presumed to be acting in concert with other persons in the same category:
(a) a company, its parent, subsidiaries and fellow subsidiaries, and their associated companies, and companies of which such companies are associated companies, all with each other(for these purposes a company is associated with another if that other owns or controls 20 per cent or more of its equity share capital);
(b) a company with any of its directors, together with their close relations and related trusts;
(c) a company with any of its pension funds;
(d) a fund manager (including an exempt fund manager) with any investment company, unit trust or other person whose investments are managed by the manager on a discretionary basis, in respect of the relevant investment accounts;
(e) a financial or other professional adviser (including a stockbroker) with its client in respect of the shareholdings of the adviser and persons controlling, controlled by or under the same control as the adviser (except in the capacity of an exempt market-maker (see para 7.7 below)); and
(f) directors of a company which is subject to an offer or where the directors have reason to believe a bona fide offer for their company may be imminent.
It will therefore be important at the outset to establish which persons are likely to be presumed by the Panel to be acting in concert with a party to a takeover.
Ideally, this should be done before any dealings in shares take place.
If the parties are in any doubt they should consult the Panel to establish whether a concert party exists.
The definition is very wide and includes both formal and informal agreements or understandings.
Such understandings may be tacit and will cover the situation where the parties concerned act on a "nod or a wink" .
Note 1 to the definition stipulates that, where the Panel has ruled that a group of persons is acting in concert, it will be necessary for sufficient evidence to be presented to the Panel before it can be accepted that the position no longer exists.
The following should also be noted.
(1) Underwriting arrangements on arm's length commercial terms between the offeror and underwriters and sub-underwriters (eg in respect of a cash underwritten alternative) are not normally considered by the Panel to amount to an agreement or understanding within the meaning of "acting in concert" .
However, certain special features of underwriting arrangements (ie the proportion of the ultimate total liability assumed by an underwriter, the commission structure, or the degree of involvement of the underwriter with the offeror in connection with the offer) may be such as to lead the Panel to conclude that a sufficient level of understanding has been created between the offeror and the underwriter for them to be treated as acting in concert.
The Panel should be consulted in cases of doubt (Note 2 to the definition of "acting in concert" ).
(2) Investors in a consortium will normally be treated as acting in concert with the offeror.
For instance, the offeror may be a newly-formed vehicle company incorporated for the purpose of making the offer.
A management buy-out (see Chapter 21) would be a typical example of a consortium offer.
Where any investor is part of a larger organisation, the Panel should be consulted to establish which other parts of the organisation will also be regarded as acting in concert.
(3) Special rules apply to determine whether connected market-makers and fund managers are acting in concert with the offeror or the target company (see paras 7.7 and 7.8 below).
(4) Standstill agreements (see para 1.2 above) may cause the parties to them to be presumed to be acting in concert and the Panel should be consulted in cases of doubt.
(5) The definition of acting in concert has a special significance in relation to mandatory offers.
The Notes to Rule 9.1 expand on some of the circumstances in which persons will be deemed to be acting in concert for the purposes of Rule 9 (see paras 8.4.5 and 8.4.6 below).
(6) In particular, where a shareholder of the target indicates his support for the target's board against an offer, the Panel is likely to consider that that shareholder and the board form a concert party for the purposes of Rule 9. (7) A difficult problem is the so-called "fan club" .
People may buy shares in a target company simply because it has attracted the attentions of a potential offeror which is known to have a good eye for investment opportunities.
There may be no concerted activity between these people and the offeror at all, yet their dealings may nevertheless attract the  interest of the Panel.
It is all a matter of degree, of course, and much may depend on what communications have in fact passed between the persons concerned.
Associates
Once the offer period has commenced, dealings by the offeror or the target (or any of their associates) in the target's securities and (in the case of a securities exchange offer only) the offeror's securities must generally be disclosed by 12 noon on the business day following the dealing; details of the prices paid for the securities must also be disclosed (Rule 8).
In addition, if any arrangement exists with any offeror, target or associate of either of them in relation to such securities, details of the arrangement must be publicly disclosed whether or not any dealing takes place.
 "Arrangement" for these purposes includes any indemnity or option arrangements, and any agreement or understanding, formal or informal, of whatever nature, relating to such securities which may be an inducement to deal or refrain from dealing.
The definition of "associate" is broader than that of "acting in concert" and is relevant primarily to the obligation to disclose dealings and arrangements during the offer period.
The definition of associate contained in the Code (see para 1.2 above) commences with a general description and then provides a list of persons who will normally be presumed to be associates.
A person who is party to an arrangement (as defined above) with an offeror or target will, by virtue of that arrangement, be an associate of that offeror or target.
The extension of the disclosure obligation to arrangements was imposed as a direct result of criticisms following the Guinness affair.
Particular disclosure rules apply to fund managers and market-makers who are associates.
It is essential that the parties to a takeover bid recognise their associates and that associates recognise their associated status so that the appropriate disclosure obligations can be complied with.
Disclosure may be made by an agent.
However, where more than one person (eg a merchant bank and a stockbroker) agrees to act as the agent of a party to the takeover and his associates for the purpose of making disclosure, particular care must be taken to ensure that the responsibility for disclosure is agreed between the parties and that it is neither overlooked nor duplicated.
Types of takeover
The categories
Takeovers can be divided into six categories:(1) A takeover offer for a public company.
(2) An issue of new shares by the target company resulting in a controlling interest being obtained.
(3) A purchase of own shares (or a reduction of share capital) involving a consolidation of control.
(4) A Scheme of Arrangement under CA 1985, ss425-427 (Court Scheme).
(5) A private company takeover.
(6) A merger of two companies.
Items (2)—(6) are considered below in this chapter with the remainder of this book being devoted to takeover offers under the City Code.
New issues
A person can obtain a controlling interest in a company by means of an issue of new shares in that company rather than by a general offer to acquire the shares already in existence.
The issue may be for cash or in exchange for some other asset (eg a company or business).
An example may be a "rescue" proposal for a moribund company.
The rescuer may be willing to inject new funds into the company by way of a subscription for cash provided he obtains a controlling interest.
The transaction may also take the form of a reverse takeover or a rights issue underwritten by a third party who expects to acquire a controlling interest pursuant to the underwriting.
The following points should be noted:(1) Where a holding of 30 per cent or more is acquired by a person or his concert parties as a result of the new issue, a mandatory offer will be required unless the Whitewash procedure (see para 8.5 below) is  followed.
(Note that a Whitewash is not available where the controlling interest is obtained by means of a purchase connected with a new issue of shares.)(2) Sufficient authorised but unissued share capital and a directors' authority to allot the new shares under CA 1985, s80 will be required.
If the new issue is for cash, shareholders' statutory pre-emption rights (CA 1985, s89) must be honoured or disapplied by a special resolution.
This obligation is repeated in the Yellow Book, Section 5, Chapter 2, para 37(a) in relation to listed companies.
(3) Where the company has institutional shareholders, consultation may be required with the IPCs regarding any disapplication of shareholders' pre-emption rights.
(4) The terms of issue of any convertible securities, options or warrants should be checked to see whether they confer any pre-emption rights or restrictions on new issues.
(5) If a company issuing shares for a non-cash asset is listed, the London Stock Exchange normally requires the acquisition to be approved by its shareholders if it is a Super Class 1 or Class 4 transaction.
Such transactions are explained in paras 17.2.2 and 17.2.6 below.
Similarly, if the company subscribing for new shares is listed, it may require its shareholders' approval if the subscription constitutes a Super Class 1 or Class 4 transaction.
(6) The new issue of shares by a listed company may require listing particulars to be prepared.
(7) Where a bona fide offer has been communicated to the board of the target company, or the board has reason to believe that a bona fide offer may be imminent, the issue of any further shares in the target will (unless it is made pursuant to a contract entered into earlier) constitute frustrating action under Rule 21 (see para 18.2.2.2 below) and will be prohibited unless approved by shareholders in general meeting.
(8) A public company issuing shares for a non-cash asset will require a valuation of that asset pursuant to CA 1985, s103(1) unless the asset is shares in or all the assets (and liabilities) of another company and the acquisition falls within either of the exemptions contained in s103(3) and (5)(see para 5.6 below).
Note that in relation to the exemption of a transfer of assets by a company, the shares must be issued to the shareholders of the transferring company and not the transferring company itself in order to fall within the exemption.
(9) A listed company may have given or made a prior undertaking or statement not to issue further shares in certain circumstances without the approval of shareholders in general meeting (see para 17.6 below).
(10) Directors should act bona fide in good faith in the best interests of the company in issuing new shares and not, for example, to manipulate control of the company.
A new issue of shares made for improper motives is liable to be set aside by the court (see, for example, Hogg v Cramphorn [1967]Ch 254).
Moreover, any new issue by the directors on unfair terms may attract a shareholder's petition under CA 1985, s459 alleging unfairly prejudicial conduct.
Purchase of own shares
A purchase or redemption by a company of its own shares increases the percentage which a remaining block of shares represents and can result in a shareholder or group of shareholders obtaining control of that company.
A purchase or redemption of own shares is not a straightforward transaction as there are statutory procedures (CA 1985, Pt V, chap VII), as well as the requirements of the Code and the Yellow Book and tax implications, to consider.
First, we shall concentrate on the requirements of the Code which are contained in Rule 37.
Rule 37.1 of the Code
Rule 37.1 provides that where a company redeems or purchases its own voting shares, with the result that the directors and any persons acting in concert with them hold 30 per cent or more of the voting rights, then a Rule 9 obligation to make a mandatory offer arises.
However, there is one important exception, namely that the Panel will normally waive the obligation if a Whitewash is obtained (see para 8.5 below).
Notwithstanding a proposed Whitewash, the Panel will not usually waive the Rule 9 obligation if the directors and their concert parties have acquired shares in the knowledge that the company intended to redeem or purchase its own shares.
Any waiver will be invalidated if any purchases are made by the directors and their concert parties between the posting of the circular and the shareholders' meeting.
If a waiver is obtained, it has to be renewed if the shareholders' authority for the purchase or redemption is renewed under CA 1985, ss164-166.
The obligation to make a mandatory offer attaches to the principal member or members of the group of persons who are acting in concert and who obtain or consolidate control; it does not attach to the company itself.
Rule 37.1 does not impose a mandatory bid obligation on a shareholder not acting in concert with the directors unless he purchased shares at a time when he had reason to believe that a redemption or purchase would take place.
It follows that it would not be possible to prejudice an unwelcome shareholder by engineering a proposed buy-out and committing  him to an unwanted mandatory offer obligation.
Redemptions or purchases of non-voting shares are not relevant to Rule 37.1.
Rule 37.2 of the Code
After a buy-in or redemption all shareholders are subject, in making acquisitions of shares in the company, to the provisions of Rule 9.
The limits will be calculated by reference to the consolidated voting capital after the buy-in or redemption.
2.3.3 Rule 37.3 (relationship with takeover offers) and Rule 37.4 A company will not normally be allowed to buy-in or redeem its shares during the offer period if its board has reason to believe that a takeover offer for the company is imminent, except pursuant to a pre-existing contract (Rule 21).
This is so whatever the size of the shareholdings in the company.
However, the buy-in or redemption may be carried out if it is approved by shareholders in general meeting and they have been given details of the offer in the circular.
In any event, if the potential offeror already has a stake in the target company, it is unlikely that the target will wish to buy-in any shares as this will increase the offeror's percentage holding.
Where any buy-in or redemption is permitted during an offer period, there is an obligation to disclose it as a dealing under Rule 8.
The target's circular to shareholders must disclose purchases and redemptions made over the period commencing 12 months prior to the offer period and ending with the latest practicable date prior to the posting of the document.
Similarly, under Rule 37.4, if the offeror buys-in or redeems its own shares, this has to be disclosed as a dealing under Rule 8 and in the offer document in the case of a securities exchange offer.
Defence tactics
A target company may use the power to buy-in its own shares as part of a defensive strategy (see para 18.5.7 below), subject to Rules 21 and 37.3.
A buy-back may be used to mop-up any "loose" shareholdings, return surplus cash to shareholders or to increase the marketability of the target's shares as a consequence of it becoming known that the company itself is a potential purchaser.
Where the target's share price is depressed, a buy-back at market price may produce a modest improvement in earnings per share or asset value per share.
Other matters
The Companies Act 1985 distinguishes between a market and an off-market purchase (s163).
A market purchase is one made on a recognised investment exchange (which includes the London Stock Exchange and the USM), whereas an off-market purchase is one which is not made on a recognised investment exchange (ie by private contract) or is so made but the shares are not subject to a marketing arrangement on that exchange.
Most target companies are likely to make their purchases through the market; however, where a significant shareholder wishes to dispose of his holding, an off-market purchase may be made to prevent the shares falling into the hands of a predator.
2.3.5.1 Market purchase Authorisation The CA 1985 requires a market purchase to be sanctioned by an ordinary resolution (s166(1)).
However, the IPC of the Association of British Insurers (ABI) in its memorandum dated 25 February 1990 requests that such buy-backs should be approved by a special resolution, and most listed companies with ABI members as shareholders are likely to follow that committee's guidelines.
The ABI also requests that, in the circular to shareholders, there should be an undertaking that the authority to buy-in will only be exercised if so to do would result in an increase in earnings per share and is in the best interests of shareholders generally.
In the case of property companies and investment trusts the undertaking should refer to an increase in asset value per share for the remaining shareholders.
A company must have the authority to purchase its own shares in its articles of association (s162(1)).
It should also check whether there are any special restrictions binding on it which would prevent the buy-back (eg in loan or security documents).
The company will need to convene an extraordinary general meeting to pass the ordinary or special resolution (as appropriate) to sanction the purchases.
If the company is listed, the London Stock Exchange (and the ABI if its members are involved) will wish to approve the resolution to be put to shareholders.
The resolution must be filed with the Registrar of Companies within 15 days of the meeting (s166(7)); this is so even if the resolution is an ordinary resolution.
The authority conferred by the resolution may be general for that purpose or limited to the purchase of shares of any particular class or description, and may be unconditional or subject to conditions (s166(2)).
The resolution must stipulate the maximum number of shares authorised to be acquired (s166(3) (a)), which will usually be expressed as a percentage of the existing issued share capital.
The resolution must specify the date on which the authority to make purchases will expire, which cannot be later than 18 months from the date on which the resolution is passed (s166(3) (c) and (4)).
The ABI, however, imposes a shorter time limit.
It requires that the authority should be renewed annually.
This means that it will in practice terminate at the earlier of (i) the next AGM of the company and (ii) the expiry of 12 months after the passing of the resolution.
Termination of the authority does not affect the subsequent completion of contracts of purchase made before the authority expired provided the resolution permits this (s166(5)).
Price and payment for shares As might be expected with an authority to make market purchases, it is not necessary to stipulate a fixed price in the authorising resolution.
However, a minimum and a maximum price must be stated (s166(3) (b)).
This may be a particular sum or a price determined by reference to a formula or other basis (s166(6)).
The price for the shares must be paid out of distributable profits or out of the proceeds of a fresh issue of shares made for the purpose of the buy-back (s160(1) (a)).
A public company cannot purchase its own shares out of capital, but a private company may do so in certain circumstances (s171).
Any premium which is offered on the buy-back must be paid out of distributable profits (s160(1) (b)) except where the buy-back shares were originally issued at a premium.
Here, the proceeds of a fresh issue of shares may be used instead to the extent of the lesser of the company's share premium account (including any premium on the fresh issue) and the amount of the premium on the original issue (in which case the company's share premium account will be reduced by a sum equal to the payment made out of the proceeds of the fresh issue)(s160(2)).
The shares must be fully paid and the purchase price must be paid in cash in full on completion (s159(3)).
Capital redemption reserve The shares which are purchased must be immediately cancelled, which results in a reduction in the company's issued share capital.
However, the authorised share capital of the company will remain the same as it was before the buy-back (s160(4)).
Where the purchase is made out of distributable profits, the company must transfer from its distributable reserves to a "capital redemption reserve" a sum equal to the nominal value of the buy-back shares (s170(1)).
If the shares are purchased wholly or partly out of the proceeds of a fresh issue and the amount of the proceeds is less than the nominal value of the buy-back shares, the difference must be transferred to the capital redemption reserve (s170(2)).
The capital redemption reserve is a non-distributable reserve and represents paid up share capital.
It may, however, be applied in paying up bonus shares (s170(4)).
The transfer is made to avoid a reduction in share capital and, accordingly, to protect creditors.
The reduction in distributable reserves may, of course, affect the company's ability to pay future dividends.
The Yellow Book The London Stock Exchange requires that own-share purchases within any 12-month period of 15 per cent or more of a company's issued share capital must be made either by way of a partial offer or by way of a tender offer at a stated maximum price.
A partial offer is an offer made to all shareholders to buy a proportion of their shares.
A buy-back tender offer occurs where shareholders are invited to offer their shares to the company at a price not exceeding the stated maximum price.
If offers are received in respect of at least the number of shares which the company wishes to purchase, the company will calculate the lowest price (striking price) acceptable to sufficient shareholders to ensure that all the shares required are sold.
The striking price will be paid to those shareholders who offered to sell their shares either at or below that price.
In addition, a buy-back of 15 per cent or more will be treated as a Class 1 transaction (the Yellow Book, Section 5, Chapter 2, para 30.4) and the company will need to comply with the content requirements of a Class 1 circular when seeking its shareholders' approval for the buy-back.
As the company will be using significant cash resources to finance the purchases in such circumstances, the requirement to make a statement as to the adequacy of working capital in the circular (on the basis of the maximum utilisation of the authority and at the highest price—which assumption must be stated) will be of particular concern.
Again, the ABI imposes a more restrictive limit.
It requests that an authority for market purchases should not normally exceed 10 per cent of the company's issued ordinary share capital.
Assuming that a target company is confined to an authority of 10 per cent it will be seen that the directors of the target and their concert parties will need to hold at least 27 per cent before the buy-in to hold 30 per cent afterwards and thereby trigger a Rule 9 obligation.
Purchases below the London Stock Exchange's 15 per cent limit may be made through the market in the ordinary way.
However, the Exchange requires that the price must not exceed a price equal to 5 per cent above the average of the middle market quotations taken from the Daily Official List for the 10 business days before the purchase is made (para 30.4, Chapter 2, Section 5 of the Yellow Book).
Where the company is seeking general authority to purchase shares in the market they must state their intentions regarding the authority granted.
Shareholders must be notified if the company intends to "stand in the market" for a particular period or until such time as a particular number of purchases have been made (para 30.4).
If the company has any securities convertible into or warrants or  options to subscribe for, equity share capital then the buy-back must be sanctioned by extraordinary resolutions at separate class meetings of such holders.
The circular setting out the notice of meeting must set out clearly the effect of the proposed purchases on conversion or subscription rights in terms of attributable assets and earnings (para 30.4).
Where the company has preference share capital, the ABI requests that class meeting consent should be obtained from the preference shareholders.
In this respect, regard will be had to the consequences of the purchases on their capital and dividend covers.
A purchase on the market by way of a "put through" from a Class 4 party (eg a director or substantial shareholder—see para 17.2.6.1 below) must be treated as a Class 4 transaction.
Shareholders' specific authority must be sought (para 30.4).
Prohibiting the purchase of shares The Model Code applies equally to own-share purchases (the Yellow Book, Section 5, Chapter 2, para 44) and so the company should not purchase any shares during any period when the directors would not be free to do so on their own account.
Section 1(7) of the Companies Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985 prohibits the directors of a company from procuring it to purchase its own shares through the market with a view to the making of a profit or the avoidance of a loss (whether for the directors or any other person) at a time when the directors are in possession of unpublished price-sensitive information.
The 25 per cent rule Because it is a continuing requirement for a listing that at least 25 per cent of the company's shares must be in the hands of the public, a listed company must ensure that this percentage will continue in public hands following each market purchase.
Registering details of purchase Details of the purchases must be notified to the Registrar of Companies (s169) and to the London Stock Exchange (the Yellow Book, Section 5, Chapter 2, para 17).
Prescribed particulars of the authority and any exercise of it must be contained in the company's annual report and accounts (the Yellow Book, Section 5, Chapter 2, para 21(p) and CA 1985, Sched 7, Part II).
Taxation The company will be liable to pay stamp duty at 0.5 per cent on the purchase price of the shares, but see para 23.2.5 below as to the proposed abolition of stamp duty.
For tax purposes, the sale by a shareholder to the company through the market is treated like any other market sale, as the shareholder will not be able to distinguish between a sale to the company and any other sale to a third party.
Certain categories of accepting shareholder will be exempt from tax on capital gains (eg pension funds and other tax exempt funds).
An individual who is not resident and ordinarily resident in the UK will, in general, also be outside the charge to capital gains tax.
The market dealer acquiring the shares and selling them to the company is subject to a special tax regime (ICTA 1988, s95).
As far as the company is concerned, the excess of the purchase price over the subscription price for the original shares (including any premium paid on issue) will be treated as a distribution.
Purchases of shares issued as a result of bonus shares and scrip dividends in respect of the original shares are, in general, also treated as distributions and are deemed to be purchased first (ICTA 1988, s211).
To the extent that the purchase price constitutes a distribution, the company will be liable to pay ACT on that part.
The ACT may be offset against the company's liability to mainstream corporation tax in the usual way.
Because the full amount of the price for the shares is deemed to be a capital receipt in each shareholder's hands, the shareholder is not entitled to an ACT credit in respect of the ACT paid by the company.
2.3.5.2 Off-market purchases An off-market purchase, as distinct from a market purchase, must be sanctioned by a special resolution (s164) and will be effected by private contract.
The purchase contract must be available for inspection at the company's registered office for 15 days prior to the EGM and at the EGM (s164(6)).
The resolution authorising the purchase will not be effective if the shareholder proposed to be bought out votes in respect of the resolution and the resolution would not have been passed if he had not done so (s164(5)).
The London Stock Exchange requires that where the authority to buy-in shares relates to specific proposals, the circular to shareholders must state the names of the shareholders who will be parties to the proposed contract, together with all other material terms of the proposal (para 30.4, Chapter 2, Section 5 of the Yellow Book).
Taxation On an off-market purchase the company is treated in the same way in tax matters as for a market purchase: it will have to pay ACT on the distribution element of the purchase price.
However, an individual selling shareholder is treated (subject as mentioned below) as having received a capital element and, to the extent that the company is deemed to have made a distribution, an income element when he is paid the purchase price.
The amount of the distribution element will be taxed as income under Schedule F in the normal way and the shareholder will be entitled to a tax credit in respect of the ACT paid by the company.
The sale will also be treated as a disposal for capital gains tax purposes.
The seller will be deemed to have received proceeds equal to the capital element (that is, exclusive of the income element) which may give rise to a capital gain or, more likely perhaps, an allowable loss.
If the selling shareholder is a dealer in securities these rules will not apply; the purchase price will be taken into account in computing his profits under  Schedule D, Case I and he will not receive a tax credit in respect of the income element.
If the selling shareholder is a corporation, the Revenue takes the view that, because the distribution element is franked investment income and is not charged to corporation tax in the company's hands, the full amount of the sale price should be brought into account in the company's computation of chargeable gains.
As a result, an allowable capital loss is less likely to arise.
Special tax rules may apply in an off-market purchase of shares in an unquoted company (USM companies are treated as unquoted for these purposes) which is a trading company or a holding company of a trading company.
Provided certain conditions are met, the purchase can be treated as a capital transaction so that no part of the purchase price is treated as a distribution in the selling shareholder's hands and the company does not have to account for ACT.
The purchase must either benefit the company's trade (eg a purchase from a dissentient shareholder) or be to fund the payment of inheritance tax.
The relevant rules may be found in ICTA 1988, s219 and Inland Revenue Statement of Practice SP 2/82.
As these matters are not generally relevant to mainstream public company takeovers, no further mention is made about them here.
Court Schemes
Under CA 1985, s425 a company has the power to enter into a compromise or arrangement between itself and its members, or any class of them.
This is provided it is agreed to by a majority in number representing three-fourths in value of the members, or class of members, present and voting either in person or by proxy at the court-convened meeting to approve it and provided the scheme is sanctioned by the court.
The scheme takes effect once the office copy of the court's order is delivered to the Registrar of Companies for registration.
A Court Scheme represents an alternative to a takeover offer as a method of acquiring control of a public company.
It should be noted, however, that it is essentially a scheme between the target company and its members, or a class of them, and accordingly requires the co-operation of the target.
The bidder will usually appear by counsel at the court hearing to give its undertaking to comply with its obligations under the scheme (eg to deliver the consideration to the target's shareholders).
If a Court Scheme is agreed to by the target's shareholders (or a particular class of them) by the requisite majority, and is approved by the court, then it will be binding on all shareholders (or the particular class of them) and the company.
A Court Scheme accordingly represents an alternative method to a compulsory sale under CA 1985, s429 of  compelling dissenting minority shareholders to sell their shares.
The level of majority acceptance required is different in each case.
Because a Court Scheme involves an application to the court for approval it makes it a more time-consuming, expensive and cumbersome procedure than a takeover offer.
For this reason, by far the majority of takeovers proceed by way of a takeover offer.
However, in the right circumstances a Court Scheme can be more attractive; those circumstances are examined, and the advantages and disadvantages of using such a scheme and the procedures involved are explained below.
When is a Court Scheme appropriate?
A Court Scheme is appropriate for the following types of takeover transaction:
(a) a recommended takeover, particularly where the directors of the target also control the company and are able to frustrate any competitive bid;
(b) a management buy-out, particularly where the lenders to the buy-out team wish to use the target's assets as security for their loans without any objection from a minority of the target's shareholders (see para 21.6 below);
(c) a highly-leveraged bid, again because lenders may wish to use the target's assets as security for their loans without minority opposition;
(d) a friendly merger of two companies beneath a new holding company;
(e) an acquisition by a parent company of the shares which it does not own in its subsidiary (this might occur, for example, following a takeover offer where the compulsory sale procedures under s429 could not be used because there were insufficient acceptances —see para 15.5 below);
(f) to demerge a target company (this might be used as a defence tactic (see para 18.5.14 below)).
What is the purpose of using a Court Scheme?
A Court Scheme can be used for the following purposes.
(1) To ensure that the bidder acquires 100 per cent of the target.
As mentioned above, once a Court Scheme is approved by the requisite majority and the court it binds the company and all its members (or the particular class of them).
The consequences and disadvantages of a bidder acquiring less than 100 per cent of the target are explained in para 9.1.2 below and Appendix 2.
In particular, the bidder may wish to  acquire 100 per cent so that the target's assets may be used to help finance the takeover, pursuant to a scheme of authorised financial assistance under CA 1985, s155 without objection from any minority shareholders (see paras 22.1.7 and 22.1.8 below).
(2) Possibly, to authorise financial assistance to be given by the target as part of the Court Scheme under the exemption for schemes of arrangement contained in CA 1985, s153(3) (e)(see para 22.1.5.3 below), which could only otherwise be provided afterwards (with consequent delay).
This is achieved by the bidder procuring the target to be re-registered as a private company and taking advantage of the private company exemption contained in s155. (3) To save stamp duty.
If the scheme does not involve a transfer of shares (see para 2.4.3 below) then the bidder will save 0.5 per cent on the value of the shares in the target acquired by it.
This will cease to be a factor when stamp duty on share transfers is abolished in due course (see para 23.2.5 below).
(4) To overcome legal difficulties which would otherwise be encountered as a result of the bidder offering consideration securities to overseas shareholders because foreign securities laws forbid such an offer document being posted to shareholders in the relevant jurisdiction, or permit it subject to compliance with onerous filing or other obligations (see para 2.4.10 below).
(5) To provide a solution to other legal difficulties which cannot be overcome by the ordinary powers available to a bidder or target company.
Form of the scheme
Typically, a Court Scheme to effect a takeover will involve:
(a) the cancellation of the whole of the issued and paid-up share capital of the target company (or at least that part of the share capital not already owned by the bidder); this will be effected by a reduction of share capital;
(b) in return for the cancellation of the shares of the target's shareholders, the delivery by the bidder to the target's shareholders of the agreed consideration (eg cash and/or securities in the bidder);
(c) the reserve (of the same amount because the share capital is cancelled) created by the reduction of share capital being capitalised and applied in paying up new shares in the target which are issued to the bidder.
The advantage of such a scheme is that, as it does not involve a transfer of the target's shares or an assignment of any interest in them, no stamp duty or stamp duty reserve tax is payable.
It is usual for the Stamp Office to be asked to confirm in advance that the scheme will not attract duty so that the court order may be registered, and thereby become effective, without delay.
The scheme will be submitted for approval of the members (or the particular class) at a special meeting convened by the court pursuant to CA 1985, s425(1).
Because the scheme also involves a reduction of share capital the company will need to follow the procedures for a reduction as set out in ss135-138 of the 1985 Act.
Under s135 a company may, subject to confirmation by the court and if so authorised by its articles, reduce its share capital in any way by special resolution.
Accordingly, the target will usually convene an Extraordinary General Meeting immediately following the court-ordered meeting in order to pass the necessary special resolution.
As part of the petition seeking the sanction of the court for the scheme of arrangement, the target will also apply for the court's order confirming the reduction of capital.
After the hearing of the petition the order sanctioning both the scheme and the reduction of capital will be filed with the Registrar of Companies at which time the reduction will become effective.
The court will normally require the reduction of capital to be advertised.
Where a reduction of share capital of this nature is proposed which does not affect the cash resources of the company, and creditors are not affected because of the subsequent restoration of issued share capital, it is usual for the court to dispense with an enquiry as to creditors.
If, in relation to share transfers, stamp duty and stamp duty reserve tax are abolished, it is likely that reduction schemes will fall into disuse.
The alternative scheme likely to be used will involve the transfer of the existing shares in the target to the bidder (or at least those not already owned by the bidder) by a person nominated by the court to execute transfers on their behalf in return for the delivery to them by the bidder of the agreed consideration.
Such a scheme is simpler as it avoids the necessity for a reduction of share capital.
Advantages of Court Schemes
These are as follows:(1) Once a Court Scheme has been approved by the requisite majority of members and sanctioned by the court it is binding on all the members (or the particular class of them) and the company.
This may be  particularly important to a bidder who wishes, or needs, to acquire 100 per cent of the target (see para 9.1.2 below and Appendix 2).
(2) The scheme has to be approved by the members (or the class of members) in question by a majority in number representing 75 per cent in value of those present and voting in person or by proxy.
The 75 per cent requirement is less than the requirement for 90 per cent acceptances in respect of the shares to which the offer relates in order to effect a compulsory sale by the minority under CA 1985, s429 (see Chapter 14).
This can be an advantage for that reason, particularly if the bidder already owns a significant number of shares in the target which will reduce the pool of shares in respect of which the 75 per cent or 90 per cent threshold must be achieved.
For instance, if a known dissentient minority shareholder holds more than 10 per cent but less than 25 per cent of the target's voting rights, a Court Scheme might succeed in achieving a 100 per cent acquisition where a compulsory sale would fail.
Shareholder apathy tends to work in the bidder's favour because the 75 per cent majority is based on those who actually come to the meeting and vote (or vote by proxy).
However, a large number of small shareholders can frustrate the vote if they form a majority in number (in person or by proxy) at the actual meeting.
Also, for the purposes of the 75 per cent vote, there are disregarded shares held by any person whom the court regards as a promoter of the scheme.
Market purchases by the bidder and persons connected with it may therefore not be advisable and the 75 per cent threshold becomes more difficult to achieve if the promoters already hold significant numbers of shares.
This might occur, for example, in a management buy-out where the directors who wish to take the company private already control the company.
Careful analysis of the shareholding structure is therefore required before deciding to proceed with a Court Scheme.
An alternative method of dealing with a difficult minority might be a reverse takeover offer (see para 4.6 below).
(3) In terms of acquiring 100 per cent control, a Court Scheme can be quicker than relying on compulsory sales under CA 1985, s429 following a takeover offer.
The latter can take up to six months to complete.
Lenders to the bidder who require the target and its subsidiaries to provide authorised financial assistance under CA 1985, s155 (see para 22.1.7 below), without the prospect of minority opposition, may prefer a Court Scheme for this reason, as may the bidder if he is paying for costly bridging finance in the interim.
(4) An offeror will not know whether there is any opposition to the compulsory acquisition of the minority (minority shareholders have the right to object to the court under CA 1985, s430C) until he has acquired 90 per cent of the shares to which the offer relates and served the compulsory sale notices.
Under a Court Scheme, any opposition case  will usually be heard at the hearing of the petition (ie before the bidder is bound to implement the scheme and pay the consideration).
This can be a welcome comfort if it is essential that the bidder acquires 100 per cent of the target.
(5) Because of the exemption for anything done in pursuance of a scheme of arrangement under s153(3) (e), it should in theory be possible for financial assistance proposed to be provided as part of the Court Scheme to be implemented immediately (because the target is bound by the scheme when it becomes effective) without the need to wait for the target to be re-registered as a private company and the private company exemption procedure followed.
However, the scheme only binds the company to which it relates and any financial assistance required from the target's subsidiaries, for instance, will have to be dealt with by the private company exemption method.
Any financial assistance proposed to be given as part of the scheme would need to meet with the approval of the court.
(6) There can be advantages because the scheme binds all the shareholders of the class which has approved it.
First, the bidder does not have to deal with a series of forms of acceptance from accepting shareholders, making sure that they have been completed properly and dealing with any lost share certificates.
Secondly, the bidder is not concerned with third party encumbrances over the shares.
Thirdly, the scheme will bind any shareholders who cannot be traced by the target, although the court will wish to approve the arrangements for dealing with such shareholders (see para 2.4.6 below).
Dealing with untraceable shareholders under the compulsory sale procedures is more troublesome.
If they do not hold more than 10 per cent of the shares to which the offer relates, they can be dealt with under those procedures (the target must hold the consideration on trust for 12 years, after which it must be paid into court with interest, dividends and other accrued benefitsCA 1985, s430(9) and (11)).
However, if untraceable shareholders (plus dissenting shareholders) exceed that percentage and the procedures cannot be implemented by the offeror as a result, the offeror will have to make an application to court under s430C (5) for an order for leave to give notices under s429, despite the fact the 90 per cent threshold has not been reached.
The offeror will need to show that he has been unable to trace the shareholders after reasonable enquiry, that the shares for which acceptances have been received when added to those held by untraceable shareholders amount to not less than the 90 per cent threshold, and that the consideration offered is fair and reasonable.
The court will not make an order unless it considers it just and equitable to do so having regard, in particular, to the number of shareholders who have been traced but who have not accepted the offer.
The 75 per cent threshold requirement under a Court Scheme may consequently give a bidder more flexibility in dealing with untraceable shareholders.
(7) If the scheme is structured so that it does not involve a transfer of shares it is possible to avoid stamp duty (see para 2.4.3 above).
(8) Certain difficulties with posting offer documents to overseas shareholders can be overcome (see para 2.4.10 below).
Disadvantages of Court Schemes
These are as follows:(1) The 75 per cent approval requirement (see above) is greater than the 50+ per cent level of acceptances required to obtain a controlling interest under a conventional offer.
The use of a Court Scheme means that opposition minorities have to muster only just over 25 per cent of the voting rights (or a simple majority in number of shareholders) to frustrate the takeover.
To prevent a controlling interest passing to the offeror under a takeover offer, shareholders holding 50 per cent of the voting rights must reject the offer.
If the bidder is willing to accept minority shareholders, a takeover offer is the easier method of gaining control of the target.
Moreover, experience demonstrates that once over 50 per cent acceptances have been received and the offer has been declared unconditional as to acceptances, the minority (particularly institutional shareholders) often sell.
(2) A Court Scheme is likely to take up to ten weeks to implement after all paperwork has been prepared and agreed.
It may take longer if the timetable is interrupted by a court vacation.
The court sets aside a limited amount of its time for schemes of arrangement which can cause delays depending on the court's workload.
The timetable will need to be agreed with court officials and will be affected by this and also by the fact that petitions are usually only heard on Mondays.
Once the offer document is posted, a takeover offer can become unconditional within four weeks (the first closing date for the offer is 21 days following posting of the offer document); however, the compulsory sale procedure can extend the timetable for obtaining 100 per cent control to up to six months depending on how quickly acceptances of the offer are received.
(3) A takeover offer document can often be despatched within ten days after the offer is announced (and sometimes on the day of announcement if the offeror is well prepared).
However, because of the court timetable, the posting of the scheme document will be delayed for up to three weeks after the announcement.
(4) Owing to court procedures and documents, the longer timetable and the need to engage counsel, a Court Scheme is usually more expensive than a takeover offer both in terms of money and management time.
A scheme may make underwriting costs (particularly in relation to a cash underwritten alternative) prohibitively expensive.
However, this has to be balanced against the saving of stamp duty which a Court Scheme can offer.
(5) Section 425(1) of CA 1985 provides that the court may order a meeting to be held to approve a Court Scheme on the application of the company or any member.
Nevertheless, it has been held that the initial approval of the company is required to the proposed scheme and that the court has no jurisdiction to sanction a scheme without that approval, which may be given either by the board of directors or by the company by an ordinary resolution in general meeting (Re Savoy Hotel Limited [1981]3 All ER 646).
Accordingly, a Court Scheme cannot be used where the bidder's proposal is contested.
(6) In any event, a Court Scheme is unlikely to be a viable proposition if the board of the target company does not co-operate with the bidder.
This is because the target's board will control the timetable for the scheme and its implementation.
In addition, there is nothing to prevent the target's board from withdrawing the scheme prior to the hearing of the petition if circumstances change (for example , a higher competing offer being made).
(7) A Court Scheme is not particularly advisable if the announcement of the proposal is likely to attract the attention of rival bidders.
The announcement of a scheme will put the target company "into play" for a longer period than under a conventional offer (which, as mentioned above, may be declared unconditional up to one month earlier than a scheme can be implemented).
This means that potential competitive bidders will have more time to organise rival bids.
If a competing offer is made, the first bidder will be hampered by the more cumbersome procedures under the Court Scheme.
In particular, while a scheme can be altered to improve the terms for the target's shareholders, it is much easier to post a revised offer document without involving the court.
If the target's directors decide to withdraw the scheme before the hearing of the petition because a more attractive offer is made, this will force the first bidder back to square one.
If he wants to stay in the race he may have no alternative but to abandon his original proposal and announce a rival offer on improved terms.
The upshot of all this is that a Court Scheme may not be a viable proposition if there are likely to be competitive bids.
It is much more likely to succeed where the target's board can speak for control of the company and the board supports the scheme.
(8) The bidder always runs the risk that at the hearing of the petition the court will exercise its discretion not to sanction the scheme even though it has been approved by the requisite minority of members (see para 2.4.7 below).
To some extent this risk can be minimised by following counsel's advice on what the court is likely to find as objectionable and also by ensuring that independent financial advice is available on the merits of the scheme.
(9) Market purchases by the bidder of the target's shares will not result in an advantage, as the court will not usually allow a promoter of a Court Scheme to vote his own shares on the resolution approving the scheme.
Market purchases will simply make the 75 per cent threshold more difficult to achieve.
This is in contrast to the compulsory sale procedures under CA 1985, s429 where, although market purchases made before the posting of the offer document cannot count towards the 90 per cent threshold, purchases afterwards may be counted provided they do not exceed the offer price.
The scheme documents
Assuming that the takeover scheme takes the form described in para 2.4.3 above, it will involve the following principal documents.
(1) An announcement of the bidder's firm intention to proceed with the proposed takeover as required by Rule 2.5 of the City Code (see para 6.3.6 below).
(2) An originating summons for leave to convene the requisite meeting(s) of members (or particular class(es) of them).
(3) An affidavit in support of the originating summons.
This must state the facts and circumstances and explain the need for the scheme.
It will also identify the class(es) of shareholders to which the arrangement relates, the proposed location and chairman of the meeting(s), and the advertisements required.
The affidavit will exhibit the draft scheme document.
(4) A scheme of arrangement setting out the details of the scheme and identifying the steps mentioned in para 2.4.3 above.
If the scheme is to provide for any financial assistance this will be detailed here.
(5) An explanatory statement.
Section 426(1) requires that with every notice summoning the court-ordered meeting there must be sent a statement explaining the effect of the scheme and, in particular, stating any material interests of the company's directors (whether as directors, members or creditors of the company or otherwise) and the effect on these interests of the scheme, insofar as it is different from the effect on the like interests of other persons.
(6) A notice of the court-ordered meeting.
This is the notice convening the relevant meeting of members ordered by the court for approving the scheme.
(7) A notice of the extraordinary general meeting.
This is convened for immediately after the court-ordered meeting to propose a special resolution to reduce the target's share capital and any other required resolutions.
(8) A form of proxy for use at the court-ordered meeting.
This usually (as near as possible) follows the form (if any) specified in the target's articles of association.
(9) A form of advertisement for advertising the notice of meeting.
Advertisements may be required, particularly if there are untraceable shareholders or bearer shares in existence.
(10) An order on originating summons which orders the convening of the meeting(s) of shareholders, directs the target to advertise the notice of meeting(s), appoints the chairman of the meeting(s) and requires him to report the results of the meeting(s) to the court.
(11) A report of the chairman on the court-ordered meeting.
This reports the result of the vote and includes details of: the number and value of the shareholders of the class; those present in person or by proxy; the number and value of the holders of the class who voted for and against the scheme (and whether in person or by proxy); any members who abstained from voting; and particulars of any proxies which were rejected for any reason by the chairman.
In practice, the target's registrars normally act as scrutineers and the chairman relies on their certificate as to the results when reporting to the court.
(12) A print of the special resolution reducing the target's share capital must be filed with the Registrar of Companies within 15 days after the holding of the EGM (CA 1985, s380).
(13) A petition to the court for its sanction of the scheme.
(14) An affidavit in support of the petition is required together with an affidavit for the serving of notices convening the court-ordered meeting (and the separate EGM) and verifying the chairman's report to the court.
(15) An advertisement of petition hearing.
(16) A summons for directions is required to fix the petition hearing date and to order the advertisement of the petition hearing.
(17) An order on summons for directions.
This will direct the petition hearing to be fixed and advertised.
(18) A court order and minute of reduction of capital.
If the petition is successful a court order is drawn up sanctioning the scheme and confirming the reduction of capital.
The order confirming the reduction of capital must be accompanied by a minute  (approved by the court) showing the target's share capital as altered by the order (CA 1985, s138(1)).
(19) An advertisement of reduction of capital as ordered by the court.
(20) The target's memorandum of association with the court order annexed to it (CA 1985, s425(3)).
Points to note in connection with the documents Regard should be had to the following:(1) The City Code and, if either the bidder or the target is listed, the Yellow Book, apply to the scheme as they apply to a takeover offer.
The scheme document must therefore comply with the content requirements of those regulations.
In addition, the bidder may be required to despatch a circular to its own shareholders and, if it is a Super Class 1 or Class 4 transaction, to seek their prior approval to the transaction.
If a listed bidder is proposing to issue its own securities as consideration under the scheme then listing particulars may be required.
If it is proposed that the target should pay any of its directors compensation for loss of office following the implementation of the scheme, then an ordinary resolution of the target may be required to sanction the payments.
These and other matters governing the contents of the scheme document are summarised in Chapter 11. (2) It is usual for one scheme document to be prepared incorporating the scheme, the explanatory statement, the notice of the court-ordered meeting, the notice of any required EGM of the target and the information required by the City Code and the Yellow Book, if applicable.
If the bidder is required to issue listing particulars then, as with an offer document, these can be incorporated either in the scheme document, or in a separate document but despatched with the scheme document.
(3) It is important, if the scheme is to receive the sanction of the court, that the explanatory statement required under s426(2) should fully and fairly explain the effect of the scheme.
This requirement to a large extent overlaps with the Code and Yellow Book requirements on information to be supplied to the target's shareholders.
If the court considers that a matter has not been disclosed and that matter might have affected shareholders' decisions on how to vote, it is unlikely to sanction the scheme (see, for example, Re Jessel Trust Limited [1985]BCLC 119 and Re MB Group plc [1989]5 BCC 684).
The explanatory statement often takes the form of a letter from the financial advisers of the target and the bidder jointly.
It is important that the explanatory statement should remain accurate at the time at which it is voted upon at the court-ordered  meeting.
Any changes which are not disclosed may cause the court not to sanction the scheme if it decides that they would have influenced shareholders on how to vote.
However, minor changes which would not have altered the views of a reasonable shareholder may be disregarded by the court (see Re Minster Assets plc [1985]BCLC 200).
Nevertheless, the parties and their directors should avoid causing any changes in the scheme particulars prior to the court-ordered meeting.
(4) The parties should ensure that the separate EGM is convened and notice of it despatched strictly in accordance with the target's articles of association.
They should also observe the directions of the court in respect of the court-ordered meeting.
(5) It is not necessary that shareholders use the form of proxy despatched to them; any proxy in proper form may be used.
The directors must use any proxies sent to them (Re Dorman Long and Company Limited [1934]1 Ch 365).
(6) The target's registrars are normally asked to swear the affidavit regarding proper despatch of the notices.
In practice, the registrars are often supplied with a draft of the affidavit in advance not only to ensure that they are happy with its contents but also to ensure compliance with the necessary procedures.
(7) The court may, at the hearing of the petition, order the scheme to be modified as a condition of its sanction.
The scheme should therefore be drafted on terms that it can be implemented with any modifications required by the court without the need for approval by a further shareholders' resolution.
Moreover, a scheme cannot be altered after the hearing without the further sanction of the court, even if the target and all the shareholders of the class in question agree to it (see Devi v People's Bank of Northern India Limited [1938]4 All ER 337).
(8) Although a Court Scheme is essentially a compromise or arrangement between the target and its members (or a class of them), the bidder has a vital rôle to play in delivering the consideration and receiving the issue of the new shares.
As mentioned earlier, the bidder binds itself to the scheme by agreeing to appear by counsel at the hearing of the petition and giving the appropriate undertaking.
(9) The court will wish to approve any arrangements to be put in place to deal with untraceable shareholders.
The latter can usually be identified by the target to the court by reason of circulars and other communications being returned undelivered and dividend warrants remaining uncashed.
The court will usually impose a requirement that appropriate attempts are made to trace lost shareholders at reasonable intervals, often by advertisements.
The scheme usually provides that  consideration cheques remaining uncashed after a reasonable period (often six months) will be cancelled and the money transferred to an independent trustee in a separate interest-bearing bank account.
If the monies are not claimed after a further period (usually 6 or 12 years) then the bidder will be released from its payment obligation and the moneys paid back to it.
If the consideration is securities in the bidder, the shares are usually issued to a trustee to hold on behalf of the untraceable shareholders.
If the shares are not claimed after, say, six months they will be sold and the proceeds and dividends paid into a separate bank account to be held by the trustee for the further period of 6 or 12 years.
The terms of the trust will need to be documented and the trustee made a party to the trust deed.
If untraceable shareholders are not a significant problem, it may be possible to dispense with advertisements.
(10) If the target has any convertible securities, options or subscription rights outstanding, Rule 15 of the Code requires the bidder to make an appropriate offer or proposal to the holders to make sure that their interests are safeguarded.
These and other related issues are discussed further in para 10.2 below.
The bidder will, in particular, need to consider the terms of any employee share option schemes.
These commonly give optionholders the right to exercise their options for a fixed period following a scheme of arrangement becoming effective.
The bidder will usually wish to discuss with the target's board the best way of dealing with optionholders (eg cash cancellation and/or roll-over into new options of the bidder).
(11) If new shares are likely to be issued in the target following the date of the scheme document (eg because of option entitlements) then it will be important to ensure that the definition of "scheme shares" (ie the issued shares to which the scheme relates) should include any shares issued between the date of the scheme and the holding of the court-ordered meeting.
New shares may also be issued between the date of the court-ordered meeting and the hearing of the petition to sanction the scheme.
These cause more of a problem as it is thought that a scheme of arrangement under CA 1985, s425 cannot bind a member who did not have an opportunity to be present or represented at the court-ordered meeting.
If that is the case, then the only feasible way of including such shares is if the holders assent them to the scheme by separate undertakings.
(12) The scheme will be expressed to be conditional on the usual conditions (see paras 11.3.2 and 11.3.3 below) appropriately modified including inter alia the passing of any necessary resolutions by the bidder.
(13) If notice of the court-ordered meeting has to be given by advertisement  then the explanatory statement must be set out in full in the advertisement or, as is more likely, notice must be given of where members can obtain a copy free of charge (CA 1985, s426(3) and (5)).
The court's discretion
The court has a discretion at two distinct stages of the procedure:
(a) whether to order a meeting of shareholders to approve the scheme;
(b) whether to sanction the scheme following its approval by the requisite majority of shareholders.
The factors which the court will take into account in deciding whether to approve a scheme of arrangement include the following.
Proposal not supported by target company The court will not call a meeting if the proposal is not supported by the target company, either through its board of directors or by the company in general meeting (see Re Savoy Hotel Ltd, para 2.4.5 above).
Illegal schemes The court will not approve a scheme which is illegal or ultra vires the target company (see, for example, Re Oceanic Steam Navigation Company Ltd [1939]1 Ch 41 and Re St. James' Court Estate Ltd [1944]1 Ch 6).
The target's memorandum and articles should therefore be checked to ensure that the target has the necessary powers to implement the scheme.
If not, they should be altered by special resolution prior to the matter being brought before the court.
The court will not sanction the scheme if the requisite statutory procedures have not been complied with.
Reduction of share capital The court will wish to see that CA 1985, ss135-138 are complied with where the scheme involves a reduction of share capital.
Is the scheme reasonable?
The court will only sanction the scheme if it is reasonable.
In this context, a scheme is reasonable if the proposal is such that an intelligent and honest man, a member of the class concerned and acting in respect of his interest, might reasonably approve (Re Dorman Long and Company Ltd [1934]1 Ch 365).
In practice, the court will place a great deal of reliance on the fact that the financial advisers have recommended shareholders to approve the scheme and that the scheme has been approved by the statutory majority.
It will not do so where the majority have acted in bad faith, or where class interests have not been properly identified and fairly represented (see below), or where it can be demonstrated that the majority voted in favour of the scheme because of their interests as shareholders of another class or as  creditors (see Carruth v ICI [1937]AC 707).
In deciding whether a scheme is reasonable, the court will not necessarily decide against the scheme if it is attempting to achieve what could not be achieved under the compulsory sale procedures of CA 1985, s429 (ie because there is a dissenting minority shareholder who holds more than 10 per cent of the shares to which the offer relates or for some other reason such procedures cannot be used).
See Re National Bank Ltd [1966]1 WLR 819 and Re Hellenic & General Trust Ltd [1975]3 All ER 382.
Opposition to the scheme The court will take into account any objections raised by dissenting shareholders.
A dissenting shareholder should lodge his opposition at the meeting of shareholders and should also appear at the hearing of the petition.
A shareholder who does neither will have to obtain the leave of the court before seeking to challenge an order sanctioning a scheme (Re Securities Insurance Company [1984]2 Ch 410).
Modifying the scheme The court may (possibly following objections) modify the scheme as a condition of its sanction (Re Canning Jarrah Timber Company (Western Australia) Ltd [1900]1 Ch 708).
Identifying separate classes Because a Court Scheme is a compromise or arrangement between the company and its members (or a particular class of them), it is important to identify each separate class so that the correct court-ordered meetings can be convened.
If this is not done, the court may exercise its discretion not to sanction the scheme.
It is for the target company, as the applicant, to ensure that the correct meetings are held.
A "class" for this purpose is not necessarily identified by reference to the category of shares which members hold.
The court will adopt a test of economic reality if appropriate.
The class must consist of persons whose rights are not so dissimilar as to make it impossible for them to consult together with a view to their common interest (Sovereign Life Assurance Co v Dunn [1892]2 QB 573).
In the case of a takeover, the court will regard the bidder and persons connected with him as promoters of the scheme and, accordingly, as having separate interests from other shareholders of the same class (Re Hellenic above).
Accordingly, the bidder should treat his own shares (and those of persons connected with him) as a separate class and should not cast his votes on the resolution approving the scheme.
If shares have different amounts paid up on them they will be regarded as constituting separate classes (Re United Provident Assurance Co Ltd [1910]2 Ch 477).
The explanatory statement As mentioned in para 2.4.6 above, it is important that the explanatory statement fully and fairly explains the scheme.
Any pertinent changes must be notified in good time if the court is to sanction the scheme.
Tax avoidance The court may refuse to approve the scheme if its principal purpose is to avoid tax or stamp duty, but not usually where there are other justifiable reasons for using a scheme of arrangement.
Timetable and procedure
As mentioned earlier, a Court Scheme can take up to ten weeks to implement once the paperwork has been agreed.
The timetable for a scheme is governed primarily by the court rather than by the City Code, but the Panel will wish to be consulted on the overall timetable.
Initially, there will be detailed negotiations between the bidder and the target and their respective advisers on the terms of the takeover and, if appropriate, the decision to proceed by way of a scheme of arrangement.
All the Rules of the City Code which relate to approaching the target, secrecy and announcements (see paras 6.1–6.3 below) will apply.
The bidder will be particularly anxious to keep the discussions confidential to avoid a premature announcement of the bid before the terms of the scheme and the draft scheme document are finalised.
Once the parties have agreed terms and the first drafts of the scheme documents are prepared, the parties will be ready to announce publicly the proposed takeover.
The form of the announcement, as with a takeover offer, will be governed by Rule 2.5 of the Code.
Under Rule 30.1, the scheme document must normally be posted to the target's shareholders within 28 days after the announcement.
However, the Panel will normally show some flexibility over this deadline given that the parties are subject to the timetable imposed by the court.
The procedural steps will be as follows:(1) Announcement of the takeover in accordance with Rule 2.5.
On the same day the target will normally issue the originating summons for leave from the court to order the meeting of shareholders.
(2) The affidavit in support of the originating summons will be sworn and filed in the Companies Court (registrar's office) with the draft scheme document as an exhibit.
(3) Hearing of originating summons.
If the hearing is successful, the registrar will order the convening of the shareholders' meeting.
The draft order, notice of meeting, form of proxy and advertisements will be submitted.
(4) Following this the order, notice of meeting, proxy form and advertisements will be settled in chambers.
(5) The target will despatch the scheme document to its shareholders (incorporating the notices of the court-ordered meeting and of the EGM) together with the requisite proxy forms.
It will  also advertise the notice of the court-ordered meeting in newspapers as directed by the court.
Copies of the newspapers will be lodged in chambers.
If required, the bidder will file its listing particulars with the Registrar of Companies and will despatch a circular to its own shareholders giving details of the proposal and convening an EGM to pass any necessary resolutions.
(6) The court-ordered meeting and the EGM will be held.
The chairman will be particularly careful to gather the requisite information for his report to the court.
He will usually adhere to an agenda approved by the parties' legal advisers to ensure that the proper procedures are followed.
He must ensure that the bidder and persons connected with it do not cast their votes (if any) and that their exclusion is recorded.
Because it is necessary to record the value of members' holdings, the vote must be taken by way of a poll.
Following the meeting, the target will file the special resolution reducing its share capital (subject to confirmation by the court).
(7) At or about this time, the bidder will hold its own EGM and comply with all necessary formalities.
(8) The petition will be presented in chambers, together with the affidavits in support and the chairman's report.
The summons for directions will be issued to fix the hearing date for the petition.
The draft order on the summons for directions and advertisement of the petition hearing will be lodged.
(9) The summons for directions will be heard.
Following this, the petition hearing date will be fixed and the advertisement of the petition hearing settled.
(10) The petition hearing will be advertised in newspapers as directed by the court.
(11) Hearing of the petition.
If the hearing is successful the appropriate order will be made.
(12) The court order will be drawn up and obtained.
(13) The "record date" for the scheme will usually be stated as the business day immediately preceding the date on which the scheme becomes effective.
This will determine those persons holding shares to which the scheme relates to whom the consideration will be posted.
Transfers of shares will not normally be registered after the close of business on the record date.
(14) Subject to the scheme conditions being fulfilled (or waived), the court order and minute of reduction of capital will be filed with the Registrar of Companies and the scheme will become effective.
(15) Thereafter the reduction of capital will be advertised, dealings in any new bidder consideration shares will commence, the bidder will deliver the consideration and the target will annex a copy of the court order to every copy of its memorandum of association (CA 1985, s425(3)).
Penalties for non-compliance
A company (and every officer of it who is in default) which fails to annex to its memorandum of association the court order sanctioning the scheme is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding one-fifth of the statutory maximum (CA 1985, s425(4) and Sched 24).
If the company fails to comply with its obligations under s426 (explanatory statement to members) then it (and every officer of it who is in default) is liable on conviction on indictment to a fine or on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum (CA 1985, s426(6) and Sched 24).
Overseas shareholders
The parties to the scheme will need to check whether the target has any overseas shareholders.
If so, it will be necessary to seek foreign legal advice as to the legality or otherwise of posting the scheme document into the overseas jurisdiction, particularly if new securities in the bidder are being allotted as consideration under the scheme.
If such an allotment would be prohibited by foreign law, or would only be permitted subject to compliance with onerous filing or other obligations, the scheme can be modified in relation to the overseas shareholders in question by providing for the consideration securities to be allotted to an independent trustee who will then sell the securities and account to the shareholders with the net proceeds.
However, treating such shareholders differently may cause the transaction to fall outside the exemption contained in CA 1985, s103(3), thereby imposing a requirement on the bidder to obtain a valuer's report under CA 1985, s103(1) on the value of the non-cash consideration (ie the target's shares) —see para 5.6 below).
An "arrangement" under s103(3) includes a scheme of arrangement under s425, but it must be open to all the shareholders (or all the shareholders of the same class) to take part in it (s103(4)).
US shareholders often cause problems for UK companies because of the stringent requirements of US securities laws.
In particular, it may not be possible to post an offer document into the US without complying with onerous filing requirements.
A Court Scheme offers a solution in this respect; there is an exemption from the registration requirements for a court-approved scheme under the US Securities Act 1933.
However, any  scheme should be checked with the US authorities before proceeding in order to confirm that the exemption will apply.
Taxation
The treatment of the bidder and the target's shareholders is not materially different to their treatment in relation to an offer and so para 23.2 below will be relevant.
The only difference is that a scheme might, as mentioned above, enable the bidder to save stamp duty.
Where it is hoped to offer the target's shareholders "roll-over" or "hold-over" relief on a securities exchange, the bidder will usually find it desirable to obtain advance clearance from the Inland Revenue (see para 23.2.1.4 below).
Private company takeovers
As outlined in para 3.3 below, the City Code applies to takeovers of certain categories of private companies (broadly where the equity share capital has been to some extent publicly held at any time within the ten years prior to the offer).
However, by far the majority of private company acquisitions are concluded by private contract.
This makes sense for two reasons.
First, the company is often owned by a single individual or a group of connected individuals who are advised by the same adviser.
This makes it easy to arrange for the vendor(s) to sign a single acquisition agreement.
Secondly, a private company is not normally subject to public monitoring and accountability in the same way as a listed company and the purchaser will consequently seek detailed warranties and indemnities from the owners of the company in a sale contract.
A purchaser who wishes to acquire a private company will need to consider the following.
The City Code
The categories of private company to which the Code applies are described in para 3.3 below.
Even so, the Panel recognises that the Code may not be appropriate to such companies in every circumstance and is willing to grant dispensations in suitable cases.
The acquisition of the share capital of a private company which is not widely held and is capable of being concluded by private contract will often be considered for a dispensation.
The FSA
Section 57(1) of the FSA stipulates that no person other than an authorised person may issue or cause to be issued an investment advertisement in the UK unless its contents have been approved by an authorised person.
 "Investment advertisement" is widely defined in s57(2) to mean any advertisement inviting persons to enter or offer to enter into an investment agreement or to exercise any rights conferred by an investment to acquire, dispose of, underwrite or convert an investment or containing information calculated to lead directly or indirectly to persons doing so.
 "Investment agreement" is itself widely defined in s44(9) and covers dealings in the shares of a private company.
Circulars despatched to the shareholders of a widely-held private company by a purchaser are therefore likely to come within this definition if they relate to an offer or a potential offer.
Such documents may only be issued as outlined above or if they are exempted.
Two exemptions relevant to private companies are contained in the Financial Services Act 1986 (Investment Advertisements)(Exemptions)(No 2) Order 1988 (SI No 716, arts 4 and 5 (see below)).
SI 1988 No 716, art 5
Article 5(2) provides that the FSA, s57 does not apply to an investment advertisement if the invitation is made, or the information is given, by or on behalf of a body corporate, a partnership, a single individual or a group of connected individuals for the purposes of or with a view to the acquisition or disposal of shares in a company (including a private company) other than an open-ended investment company between parties each of whom is a body corporate, a partnership, a single individual or a group of connected individuals.
The shares concerned must consist of or include shares carrying 75 per cent or more of the voting rights attributable to share capital which are exercisable in all circumstances at any general meeting of the company or, when added to the shares already held by the offeror, carry not less than 75 per cent.
Article 5(1) contains further definitions as follows: "a group of connected individuals" , in relation to the party disposing of shares in the company, means persons each of whom is, or is a close relative of, a director or manager of the company and, in relation to the party acquiring the shares, means persons each of whom is, or is a close relative of, a person who is to be a director or manager of the company; "close relation" means a person's spouse, his children (including, in Northern Ireland, his adopted children) and step-children, his parents and step-parents, his brothers and sisters, and his step-brothers and step-sisters and includes a person acting in the capacity of trustee or personal representative of any such relative; and "single individual" includes two or more persons acting in their capacity as the personal representatives of a single individual.
The shareholding structure of a private company target will therefore need to be carefully considered to ascertain whether the transaction comes within the exemption.
It should be noted that if only one of the shareholders of the company is not connected to a director or manager of the company then the exemption will be unavailable to both the vendors and the purchaser.
Furthermore, the exemption will not apply if less than 75 per cent of the voting rights is involved.
If the exemption does apply, the parties will be able to conclude the acquisition by private contract in the usual way without any need for the documents to be issued or approved by an authorised person.
SI 1988 No 716, art 4
This article is relevant where a private company target is widely held and does not fall within art 5.
It permits a takeover offer to be made for a private company if it is an offer for all the shares in, or all the shares comprised in the equity or non-equity share capital of, that company (other than shares held by the offeror) and the conditions set out in the article are satisfied.
The exemption does not apply if the equity share capital of the private company has been to some extent publicly held at any time within the ten years prior to the offer.
The precise exclusions broadly follow the categories of private company which are within the ambit of the Code, thereby ensuring that art 4 does not overlap to any significant extent with the Code.
The principal conditions which must be satisfied for an offer to fall within art 4 are as follows:
(a) where the offer is for equity share capital and the offeror already holds shares carrying 50 per cent or less of voting rights, it must be conditional on the offeror acquiring more than 50 per cent of the voting rights (when aggregated with the existing holding of the offeror);
(b) the offer must be recommended by all the directors of the target company other than any director who is the offeror or a director of the offeror;
(c) if, at the date of the offer, the offeror holds shares carrying 50 per cent or less of the voting rights attributable to the equity share capital, and the offer is for debentures or for non-equity share capital, the offer must include or be accompanied by an offer made by the offeror for the remainder of the shares comprised in the equity share capital;
(d) the offer must be accompanied by a letter from an independent financial adviser advising the directors of the target on the financial implications of the offer.
There are, in addition, detailed requirements as to the contents of the offer document and the Schedule to the Order should be consulted for these.
If art 4 does not apply to the offer, it will be necessary for it to be issued or approved by an authorised person.
If the offer is within art 4, it will be possible for the offeror to issue the offer document without such approval provided art 4 is complied with.
Mergers
A merger occurs where two companies combine to form a larger enterprise and where the shareholders in the combined enterprise comprise all, or substantially all, of the shareholders of the two companies.
A merger may be effected by:
(a) a recommended share exchange offer by one of the companies for the other;
(b) an entirely new company, formed for the purpose, making simultaneous recommended share exchange offers for both companies.
The latter method may be preferred where, for cosmetic reasons, the parties wish to present the transaction as a "true" merger rather than one party taking over the other; however, it is more unwieldy and expensive and is not often used where there is a risk of a competitive bid being made for either company.
The announcement of the proposed merger (unless shut-outs can be achieved—see para 8.2 below) will bring both companies "into play" and make them vulnerable to a hostile bid.
Both types of transaction may be effected by a Court Scheme; the advantages and disadvantages of these are discussed in para 2.4 above.
A Court Scheme is not a practical option where one or more competitive bids may be made.
Recommended offers are discussed further in para 8.1 below.
Where a new company is used and both of the merging companies are listed, it is not usually a difficult matter to arrange for a listing of the new company's shares to take effect upon completion of the merger.
The regulation of takeover offers
Statutory and other regulations
Takeover offers are regulated primarily by the City Code but are also affected by the Yellow Book (where the acquirer or the target company is listed on the London Stock Exchange) the CA 1985 and the FSA.
The relevant provisions of the Companies Act include:
(a) the compulsory acquisition procedures (ss428-430);
(b) disclosure of interests in shares (ss198-220);
(c) financial assistance (ss151-155);
(d) disclosure and shareholder approval of certain compensation payments to directors (s312);
(e) disclosure and shareholder approval of proposed compensation payments to directors in connection with a takeover (s314);
(f) directors' service contracts to be available for inspection by the company's members (s318);
(g) minority shareholders' actions (including those under s459 (unfairly prejudicial conduct), s54 (objection to the target being re-registered as a private company), s157 (objection to the target providing financial assistance) and s430C (objection to compulsory sale of shares);
(h) merger relief (s131);
(i) acquisition and merger accounting (Sched 4A); and
(j) a valuer's report required in respect of the issue by a public company of shares for a non-cash consideration unless in respect of an exempt transaction (s103).
The relevant provisions of the FSA include:
(a) that offer documents are "investment advertisements" and must be issued or approved by a person authorised to carry on investment business (usually a merchant bank or firm of stockbrokers, s57);
(b) the requirement for listing particulars where listed securities are being offered in connection with the takeover (ss142-157) and  the liability to pay compensation for defective particulars or a failure to publish supplementary listing particulars when required to do so (s150);
(c) similar requirements in relation to offers of unlisted securities (ss158-171); and
(d) s47 (misleading statements and practices).
Takeover offers are also regulated and affected by the SARs; the Fair Trading Act 1973 (references to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission); European Council Regulation (EEC) 4064/89 (merger control); the Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985 (which prohibits a person from dealing in securities which are listed or subject to a marketing arrangement at a time when he is in possession of unpublished price-sensitive information); liability for negligent misstatement and for misrepresentation (both at common law and under the Misrepresentation Act 1967); and Statements of Standard Accounting Practice 22 and 23 (accounting for goodwill and for acquisitions and mergers).
More detailed reference will be made to these provisions later.
The Panel
The Panel makes, publishes and administers the rules for the City Code and the SARs.
The chairman and deputy chairman of the Panel are appointed by the Governor of the Bank of England but the Panel's day-to-day functions are carried out by the Director General and his executive staff who are seconded from the Bank of England and various organisations within the City of London.
The Panel is not a statutory body, which has the advantage of informality, approachability and lack of bureaucracy, but it has no power to impose punishment.
However, the Code is very persuasive for a number of reasons:(1) Any company listed on the London Stock Exchange which does not comply with the Code can have its listing suspended or withdrawn (although the Panel has rarely had to use this sanction and it can have the effect of injuring innocent shareholders).
(2) The London Stock Exchange may, at the request of the Panel, withdraw temporarily the facilities of the market from an offender (for instance, a bidder which wishes to issue its own listed shares as consideration for the bid will be unable to do so if the London Stock Exchange refuses to admit them to listing).
(3) An authorised person under the FSA who breaches or fails to comply with the Code in certain respects can be called to account by his  SRO or RPB and may, in extreme cases, have his membership withdrawn.
(4) The SIB and appropriate SROs have incorporated into their rulebooks so-called "cold-shouldering" rules which require their members conducting investment business not to act in connection with transactions regulated by the Code for persons whom they have reason to believe would not comply with UK practice and standards in takeovers.
The Panel can accordingly request the SIB, the SROs and their members to "cold shoulder" a company that has breached the Code.
The sanction of cold-shouldering was imposed for the first time in relation to Dundee Football Club (see Panel Statement 1992/9) after hearings before the full Panel and the Appeal Committee.
The Panel found that the persons involved in the case were unlikely to comply with the standards expected in the conduct of UK takeovers and consequently reported its conclusions to the SIB, the SROs and RPBs for appropriate action by each of them in the light of their several cold shouldering rules.
Following this the SIB, appropriate SROs and RPBs made announcements to their members regarding the consequent restrictions imposed by these rules in relation to the persons concerned.
(5) The Panel can issue a public censure of the offender which can cause considerable damage to his case in a takeover (particularly if the breach is picked up by and subsequently criticised in the press).
(6) The Panel can also make a report of any wrongdoing to the DTI which may then use its own extensive powers to investigate the matter.
(7) Armed with the threat of the above sanctions, the Panel can require a party to take, or omit to take, such action as it considers just to remedy the effects of a breach of the Code.
This might include the party concerned divesting itself of its shares, complying with the Code (sometimes subject to stricter conditions), allowing concessions under the Code to the other party to the takeover, suspending its voting rights or board appointments in respect of the target and increasing the bid price.
(8) The circle of people actively involved in takeovers in the UK is relatively small and any reputable company or adviser will be keen to preserve his reputation for fair dealing.
This acts as a strong incentive to abide by the Code.
(9) Failure to comply with the Code (which is designed to protect target company shareholders) may lead the court to make an order under CA 1985, s430C, either preventing the offeror from acquiring compulsorily the holdings of non-assenting shareholders under s429 of that Act or specifying terms of acquisition different from those of the offer (see Re Chez Nico (Restaurants) Ltd [1992]BCLC 192).
(10) Similarly, although the requirements of fairness under the Code and CA 1985, s459 do not necessarily coincide, the Code is a helpful guide to the City's views on fairness which the court can take into account when deciding whether a shareholder has been unfairly prejudiced for the purposes of s459 (see Re a Company [1986]BCLC 382).
It should be remembered, however, that s459 is a remedy against other shareholders and controllers of the company concerned and not necessarily against a bidder unless he is or becomes a shareholder.
While the executive staff are usually prompt in dealing with questions relating to the Code the following should be borne in mind:
Obtaining rulings
(a) an informal opinion can be obtained quickly, but the Panel executive will not give a definitive ruling until the views of both parties have been heard;
(b) the rulings of the executive can be appealed by either party or an aggrieved shareholder to the full Panel;
(c) if the Panel proposes to take disciplinary action, a right of appeal lies, in certain circumstances, to an Appeal Committee; and
(d) hearings before the Panel are susceptible to judicial view by the English courts in certain circumstances but the courts have indicated that it would be rare for a Panel decision to be overturned (see below).
Thus, while a ruling of the executive is helpful in determining a particular course of action, it is nevertheless possible that the ruling could be reversed subsequently by the application of the other party to the takeover or, possibly, an aggrieved shareholder.
These are set out in the Introduction to the Code.
In summary:(1) The Panel's procedures are generally informal in order to maintain the maximum flexibility.
(2) Informal opinions on matters relevant to the Code can be obtained from one of the Panel executives.
An executive may be consulted by telephone, letter or in person and he will usually keep notes of any presentations.
Opinions are usually communicated over the telephone and are often given within 24 hours.
(3) Very difficult matters may on occasions be referred to the full Panel without a ruling first from the executive.
(4) If a party wants a definitive ruling from the Panel executive, it will usually only give this if the other party to the takeover has been consulted (which itself is often conducted by telephone).
Any decision of the Panel executive will usually be given to the parties over the telephone.
(5) If one of the parties wishes to challenge a Panel executive ruling and appeal to the full Panel he must usually do so (by written notice to the Panel executive) promptly and not later than one month following the ruling and will usually be asked to set out his case, briefly, in writing.
The matter will be referred to the full Panel for a decision.
(6) A hearing before the full Panel can generally be arranged within four days.
The quorum is five.
There are no formal rules of evidence and generally the parties are not permitted to appear by counsel.
The case of each party is usually presented by a director, merchant banker or solicitor with their written cases having been submitted to each other beforehand.
The executive will also have submitted a written summary of the issues along with its ruling and views.
The Panel can ask questions of the parties who may, in turn, ask questions of each other.
Witnesses may be called.
The proceedings are usually recorded on tape but the recordings (and any transcripts) are not released unless the parties agree.
(7) If the Panel's decision touches on some novel or important issue it will often publish its findings to serve as guidance to third parties.
(8) The Panel executive and the full Panel will respect the confidentiality of the information submitted to it.
Equally, if a party has confidential discussions with the Panel it is expected not to disclose their content, particularly to the press.
If the Panel is satisfied that certain information requested at a full Panel hearing is commercially confidential (such that it would be damaging to reveal it to the other party) then it may permit the first party to be heard alone.
(9) Sometimes aggrieved shareholders of the target may make representations to the Panel executive.
These can be a valuable source of intelligence but frivolous or vexatious cases will be dealt with appropriately.
Shareholders are entitled to appeal a decision of the Panel executive, but usually the full Panel will only receive written representations from the shareholder concerned and will not conduct a hearing.
(10) Because members of the Panel executive and the full Panel are often seconded from merchant banks, stockbrokers, firms of solicitors and accountants they may have to excuse themselves from dealing with any case which involves their employing company or firm.
It is as well for any party approaching the Panel to reveal (if it can) the names of the  parties and advisers involved in the particular transaction to avoid any embarrassment.
(11) There is a right of appeal from a decision of the Panel to an Appeal Committee in four cases, namely:
Panel procedures
(a) where the Panel proposes to take disciplinary action;
(b) where it is alleged that the Panel has acted outside its jurisdiction;
(c) where the Panel has refused or ceased to recognise a person as an exempt market-maker or exempt fund manager; and
(d) in any other case with leave of the Panel.
The Panel will not normally grant leave to appeal against a finding of fact or against a decision of the Panel on the interpretation of the Code.
Notices of appeal must be given within two business days of the Panel's decision.
The Appeal Committee is made up of a Chairman (often a former judge) and two members of the Panel not involved in the decision under appeal.
One of these will, if possible, be a member of the appellant's SRO or other regulatory body.
Proceedings before the Appeal Committee are generally conducted in a similar way to those before the Panel.
New evidence is not usually heard, but if it is material and could not reasonably have been heard by the Panel the Committee may hear it or refer it back to the Panel.
If the appeal is upheld the appellant will be consulted on any statement to be published.
If it is dismissed, the Panel's findings are normally published and its sanctions implemented (having been held in abeyance in the interim), subject to comments from the Appeal Committee.
If any person involved in a takeover is believed to be guilty of breaching the Code, the Panel executive will invite him (or it) to appear before the full Panel with his advisers (if he wishes) to explain his conduct.
He will be advised in writing of the alleged breach and of the matters which the executive will present.
(In some cases, a private reprimand might be appropriate, in which case the matter will go no further.)
In more serious cases, the Panel might decide to impose one of the other sanctions described above.
The Panel will notify the person concerned of its findings, the proposed sanction and of his right of appeal to the Appeal Committee.
The Panel will not take any action until the appeal period of two business days has expired.
If the appellant is dissatisfied with the findings of the Appeal Committee he may, as mentioned below, seek judicial review of the decision in the Courts.
In cases where the person in breach agrees the facts and the disciplinary action suggested by the executive, the executive itself may deal with a disciplinary matter without referring it to the full Panel.
The Panel operates outside the financial services legislation in the UK, although some would like to see it brought within the statutory framework.
The arguments against doing so are that:
Disciplinary hearings
Non-statutory framework
(a) the Code provides wider protection than most statutory frameworks in other countries, which tend to be more rigid;
(b) if the Panel were a statutory body it could find its rulings subject to frequent challenge in the courts with a consequent increase in delaying tactical litigation by the parties to takeovers; and
(c) the flexible and quick response of the Panel in takeover situations would be diminished.
So far these arguments have been accepted by the Government.
As previously mentioned, the Code does not, and does not purport to have, the force of law.
However, it does have a relationship with the law and this is briefly explained below.
Legal standing of the Panel and the Code
The Code is drafted so that it does not impose any obligations on the parties to a takeover and their directors which would place them in conflict with their legal duties.
This is a key factor in preserving the Panel's integrity and independence from the judiciary.
The Code has been recognised by the courts as establishing objective standards of fairness towards minority shareholders which they will take into account when exercising their own discretion under, for example, CA 1985, s430C or s459.
(See para 3.2 above.)
If a takeover does become the subject of civil litigation or criminal proceedings, the Panel will normally suspend publication of any of its own findings which might influence the legal proceedings.
The Panel may nevertheless amend the Code or the SARs in response to criticisms of a party's conduct (see the Guinness case referred to below).
It may also continue with disciplinary proceedings and such a decision, if taken bona fide, will not be subject to judicial review (see R v Panel on Takeovers and Mergers, ex parte Fayed (1992) Financial Times, 14 April).
The Court of Appeal has held that, in the context of criminal proceedings, the Code is sufficiently similar to legislation that its construction is an issue of law and therefore for the judge rather than an issue of fact to be determined by the jury.
There would be the risk of inconsistent findings if the construction of the Code were left to juries (see R v Spens [1991]BCC 140, CA).
The case of R v Panel on Takeovers and Mergers, ex parte Datafin plc [1987]QB 815 established the principle that the Panel is subject to judicial review by the courts.
This was confirmed in R v Panel on Takeovers and Mergers, ex parte Guinness plc [1989]2 WLR 863.
Normally, a body is subject to judicial review if it is the creation of statute and performs public law duties.
While the Panel does not fall squarely within this category of body, its activities are considered by the courts to be sufficiently similar so as to be subject to judicial review.
However, this does not mean that the courts will act as an appeal tribunal in respect of decisions of the Panel.
Judicial review of Panel decisions is much more limited in scope than this.
In particular, the relationship between the Panel and the court is historic rather than contemporaneous (per Lord Donaldson in Datafin at 840).
This means that the court will allow the Panel's contemporaneous decisions to take their course and will only intervene (if at all) later and in retrospect by declaratory orders which would enable the Panel not to repeat any error, and would relieve individuals of the disciplinary consequences of any erroneous finding of a breach of the rules.
The rationale behind this is twofold.
First, the market and third parties have a legitimate expectation to be entitled to rely on the validity of the Panel's rules and decisions, and secondly, contemporaneous judicial review would only increase the possibility of delaying tactical litigation by an unscrupulous party to a bid in order to gain an advantage in the takeover process.
The court will not evaluate the evidence and the finding of facts as an appeal court; that is not the purpose of judicial review.
It will, however, consider whether the Panel has observed the basic rules of natural justice and has observed its own procedural rules and whether it has been guilty of any irrationality or has misdirected itself in law (see Datafin).
In considering any disciplinary action taken by the Panel, the court will always have jurisdiction to intervene and, if necessary, to protect the individual from any abuse of power (see Guinness above).
The City Code
The City Code was introduced in March 1968 as the City's response to mounting criticism from the press and Parliament of the way in which takeovers were being conducted and some of the tactics being used.
As mentioned in para 3.2 above, it does not have the force of law, but it does reflect what the City considers to be best practice in the conduct of takeovers.
The Code regulates the conduct of takeovers for all listed and unlisted public companies resident in the UK, the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man.
A company will be considered resident in one of these territories if it is incorporated there and has its head office and place of management  there.
The Code also applies to offers for private companies so resident where:(1) their equity share capital has been listed on the London Stock Exchange at any time in the ten years before the relevant date;(2) dealings in their equity share capital have been advertised in a newspaper on a regular basis for a continuous period of at least six months in the ten years prior to the relevant date;(3) their equity share capital has been the subject of a marketing arrangement as described in CA 1985, s163(2) (b)(eg on the USM) at any time in the ten years prior to the relevant date; or (4) the company has filed a prospectus for the issue of equity share capital at the Companies Registry at any time in the ten years before the relevant date.
 "Relevant date" is the date of announcement of a proposed or possible offer or the date of some other significant event under the Code.
In addition, the Code extends to companies incorporated in the Republic of Ireland which have a listing or quotation on the London Stock Exchange.
The Panel acknowledges that the application of the Code will not always be relevant and it will therefore be applied flexibly wherever necessary.
Dispensations can be obtained and will usually be given for an acquisition of a company by private contract.
The Code does not apply to offers for non-voting, non-equity share capital unless they are offers required by Rule 15 (securities convertible into equity share capital).
The Code consists of ten General Principles, 38 rules (with numerous sub-rules and notes) and four appendices.
It is accompanied by a schedule of document charges levied by the Panel, the SARs and various disclosure forms.
In addition, it is supplemented from time to time by statements of practice or policy issued by the Panel.
It is important for anyone trying to interpret the rules to read the notes as in many cases these extend the apparent application of particular rules.
Two fundamental points have to be grasped about the Code:(1) It is not a legal document, and points of interpretation are to be referred to the Panel rather than legal advisers (although the offer document itself will be a legal document and expert legal advice will be needed on that and other related matters).
(2) It is not exhaustive and does not purport to cover all the circumstances which can arise in takeover situations.
The parties to a takeover offer are required to observe the spirit as well as the letter of the Code and must accept that the spirit of the Code will apply in areas not specifically covered by any rule.
Equally, the rules can be relaxed where the justice of the case requires.
The Code encourages companies and their advisers to consult the Panel if they are unsure about the interpretation of a particular rule or whether a particular course of action falls within the ambit of the Code.
The General Principles
The Code sets out ten General Principles which form the basis for the detailed rules and notes.
On occasions, some of the rules can appear esoteric when viewed in isolation but can usually be explained by reference to one of the General Principles.
The General Principles are as follows:(1) All shareholders of the same class must be treated equally.
This means that not only must all shareholders of the same class receive the same offer but, for instance, if the offeror subsequently buys shares in the market at a higher price he must increase his offer generally to that higher price.
(2) During an offer neither the offeror nor the board of the target company may provide information to some shareholders which is not made available to all.
This obligation does not, however, apply to information provided to an offeror in confidence by the board of the target company.
(3) The announcement of an offer must only be made by an offeror after the most careful and responsible consideration and when the offeror has every reason to believe that he can and will continue to be able to implement the offer (eg he has the money).
Responsibility in this connection also rests with the offeror's financial adviser.
(4) Shareholders must be given sufficient information and advice to enable them to reach a properly informed decision and in sufficient time to do so.
Relevant information should not be withheld.
(5) All documents to shareholders from the offeror and the board of the target company must be prepared with the highest standards of care and accuracy, as is the case with a prospectus.
(6) The parties to a takeover offer must endeavour to prevent the creation of a false market in the securities of an offeror company or the target company.
Statements must not be made which may mislead shareholders or the market.
(7) Once a bona fide offer has been made or is believed to be imminent, the board of the target company must not take any action which would frustrate that offer or deny shareholders an opportunity to decide on its  merits, unless the action is approved by the shareholders in general meeting.
(8) Rights of control must be exercised in good faith and the oppression of a minority is unacceptable.
(9) The directors of an offeror company and the target company must, in advising their respective shareholders, act in the interests of shareholders taken as a whole and the interests of employees and creditors and not have regard to their own interests or those of their families.
The directors of the target must consider carefully any commitment with an offeror (or anyone else) which would restrict their freedom to advise their shareholders in the future (eg not to consider competitive bids) as such commitments may give rise to conflicts of interest or result in a breach of fiduciary duties.
(10) Where control (ie 30 per cent or more) of a company is acquired by a person or his concert parties a general offer to all other shareholders is required (and this includes the situation where control is consolidated).
If a transaction is contemplated whereby such an obligation will be triggered the person in question must first ensure that he can and will continue to be able to implement such an offer.
As the spirit of the Code prevails over the letter, the General Principles are particularly relevant where a situation is not specifically covered by a rule or a note.
Types of takeover offer
General offer
A general offer is an offer for the entire issued equity share capital of a company.
It is the most common form of takeover offer and the type with which this book is principally concerned.
Partial offer
A partial offer is a takeover offer which is for less than 100 per cent of the voting rights of the target company.
It requires the consent of the Panel.
This will normally be granted where the offer will not result in 30 per cent or more of the voting rights being acquired.
The Panel will not normally grant its consent where the partial offer is for 30 per cent or more in circumstances where the offeror or its concert parties have acquired, selectively or in significant numbers, shares in the target during the previous 12 months (or at any time after the offer was reasonably in contemplation)(Rule 36.2).
Partial offers are not very common in the UK because where the offer is for 30 per cent or more of the voting rights it can only succeed if shareholders holding over 50 per cent of the voting rights of the target company (excluding those held by the offeror and its concert parties) vote in favour of the offer (Rule 36.5).
Approval is normally signified by means of a separate box on the form of acceptance.
The reason for this rule is to prevent a shareholder feeling compelled to accept a partial offer through fear of the offer being successful and his being left in as part of a minority.
This requirement may be waived if over 50 per cent of the target's voting rights are held by one shareholder.
The following points should be noted about partial offers:(1) The offeror and its concert parties must not buy shares in the target during the partial offer period, neither must they, or any new concert parties, purchase shares for a period of 12 months following a successful partial offer without the Panel's consent (Rule 36.3)(although consent  will normally be given where the partial offer has resulted in a holding carrying less than 30 per cent of the voting rights (note 2)).
This is to prevent the offeror from acquiring more shares than he bid for under the partial offer, and shareholders in the target from receiving more favourable treatment from the offeror by selling in the market during the 12 months following the partial bid.
(2) Rule 35.2 provides that the restrictions in Rule 35.1 apply equally following a partial offer which could result in a holding of 30 per cent or more but not in excess of 50 per cent whether or not the offer has become, or been declared, wholly unconditional (see 15.1 and 15.2 below).
(3) The offer must be made to all shareholders of the same class and shareholders must be allowed to accept in full for the relevant percentage of their holdings.
Each shareholder may accept the offer in respect of more than his pro rata entitlement but in the case of competition his acceptance will be scaled down pro rata between those shareholders tendering for the excess (Rule 36.7).
(4) If the target company has more than one class of equity share capital and an offer is made which could result in 30 per cent or more of the voting rights being obtained, a comparable offer must be made for each class (Rule 36.8).
(5) If the partial offer could result in not less than 30 per cent but not more than 50 per cent of the voting rights being obtained, the offer must state the precise number of shares offered for and may not be declared unconditional as to acceptances unless acceptances are received for not less than that number (Rule 36.4).
(6) If over 49 per cent of the voting rights could be obtained, the offer document must contain specific and prominent reference to this and to the fact that if the offer succeeds the offeror will be free, subject to Rule 36.3 (which prohibits purchases during a period of 12 months after the end of the offer period), to acquire further shares without incurring an obligation to make a mandatory offer (Rule 36.6).
(7) It must be a condition of any offer for voting equity share capital which could result in more than 50 per cent of the voting rights being obtained that the offer may not become unconditional as to acceptances unless the offeror has acquired or agreed to acquire more than 50 per cent(Rule 10).
(8) If there are allotted but unissued shares in the target outstanding (eg on provisional allotment letters following a rights issue) the Panel must be consulted.
It is likely that such shares (and their acquisition) will be taken into account for the purposes of the rule (note to Rule 36).
(9) The partial offer document must contain an explanation as to the reason why a full offer is not being made (see para 11.3.5 below).
A comparison of partial offers and tender offers is contained in para 4.8 below.
Voluntary offer
A voluntary offer is a takeover offer which is made voluntarily by the offeror (as distinct from a mandatory offer).
Voluntary offers are explained in more detail in Chapter 9.
Recommended, contested and mandatory offers
These are referred to briefly in para 1.2 above and are explained in more detail in Chapter 8.
Competitive offer
This occurs where general offers are made by two or more separate offerors for the same target company.
One of the offers may be recommended or all may be contested.
Competing offers are described more fully in Chapter 8.
Reverse takeover offer
A reverse takeover offer is one where an offeror company makes a general offer to the shareholders of a larger company to acquire their shares in exchange for new shares in the offeror company, with the shareholders in the larger company becoming the majority shareholders in the offeror company.
It may or may not result in the board of the offeror company retaining control, depending on the voting rights they control and the support they get from the enlarged body of shareholders.
A reverse takeover is one of the situations in which the board of the offeror company must, in accordance with Rule 3.2, obtain competent independent advice on the offer and make that advice known to its shareholders (see para 6.4.2 below).
A reverse takeover offer is, at first sight, curious, because it involves one company taking over another company with much larger resources.
However, it may be used for the following reasons:(1) The smaller company is highly active and acquisitive with motivated management and is seeking to acquire a larger but moribund target company.
Institutional shareholders, for instance, in the larger company may be willing to support the board of the smaller company.
(2) The larger company (which is not listed) wishes to acquire the smaller company (which is listed).
In a friendly merger, the smaller company can agree to make the share exchange offer for the larger company in order to maintain the listing.
However, where a listed company makes a reverse takeover offer for an unlisted company it is required to obtain its shareholders' approval, its listing will be suspended and, subject to one exemption, it will be treated as a new applicant for listing (for a description of the relevant Yellow Book rules see para 17.2.7 below).
(3) The proposal is a friendly merger with the larger company wishing to acquire the smaller company but there is known to be a difficult minority shareholder in the smaller company holding above 10 per cent of the voting rights (or able to muster that level of support against the proposal) which could prevent the larger company implementing the compulsory sale procedures under CA 1985, s429.
There is believed to be no such problem amongst the larger company's shareholders.
Accordingly, it is agreed that the smaller company will make a share exchange offer for the larger company, which, hopefully, will result in 90 per cent acceptances from the larger company's shareholders and the implementation of the compulsory sale procedures, thereby enabling the smaller company to obtain 100 per cent control.
The difficult minority shareholder(s) in the smaller company will be substantially diluted as a consequence of the share exchange.
The disadvantage, of course, is that the dissenting minority may feel sufficiently aggrieved at the proposal that they complain to the Panel (in particular , that General Principle 8 has been contravened which requires that rights of control must be exercised in good faith and that an oppression of the minority is wholly unacceptable) or, alternatively, commence an action under CA 1985, s459 complaining of unfairly prejudicial conduct.
Whether they succeed or not depends on the circumstances.
For instance, if the directors of the smaller company have had to issue consideration shares at a significant discount to the market price in order to persuade shareholders of the larger company to accept the offer the minority may argue that not only have they been diluted unfairly but also that this has resulted in control passing into the hands of third parties and that they are, effectively, investors in an entirely different company without having been given the opportunity to accept an offer or exercise their rights of challenge under CA 1985, s430C.
Against this, the target's controllers and directors will point to the fact that the proposal was sanctioned by a vote of  shareholders (as required by the Yellow Book (see above) and/or the Code (see below)) and that competent independent advice was received on the terms of the offer and made known to shareholders as required under Rule 3.2 of the Code.
An alternative method of compelling minority shareholders to sell their shares in similar circumstances is to use a Court Scheme (see para 2.4 above) if that is appropriate (where the 75 per cent threshold may be easier to achieve than the 90 per cent threshold required for a compulsory sale).
The minority still have a right to object to the court but that opposition is usually known and dealt with before the bidder becomes committed to acquire any shares in the target.
There are various other points which should be noted about a reverse takeover offer:(1) Because it involves a change of control in the smaller company it will be necessary for the transaction to be sanctioned by a vote of the independent shareholders in that company and the "Whitewash" procedure followed (see para 8.5 below).
(2) The smaller company will invariably have to pass an ordinary resolution increasing its authorised share capital and giving its directors authority to allot new shares under CA 1985, s80 in order to give effect to the share exchange (a s89 disapplication will not be necessary as the new share issue will be for a non-cash consideration).
(3) If the larger company has acquired shares in the smaller company prior to the takeover then, following the reverse takeover offer, it will hold shares in its parent company (ie the smaller company) contrary to CA 1985, s23.
There is an exemption contained in s23(5) which applies where the holding was acquired at a time when the prohibition did not apply (ie before the reverse takeover) but subsequently the holder falls within the prohibition (ie on the reverse takeover offer becoming unconditional).
In those circumstances, the holder may continue to be a member of its parent (and receive bonus shares (s23(6))) but it has no right to vote its shares.
In these circumstances, the larger company may dispose of its shares in the market or, possibly, arrange for them to be cancelled either by a reduction of capital or a purchase of own shares.
Tender offer
This is an offer to acquire part of a listed or quoted company's share capital on equal terms to all shareholders.
Strictly speaking, it is not a takeover offer at all, but it forms one of the exceptions to the main prohibition in the SARs (namely, acquiring 10 per cent or more of the target company's voting rights (or rights over shares) in any seven-day  period if the resulting holding is 15 per cent or more).
The reason for the exception is to give all shareholders an opportunity to participate in large share purchase operations.
A tender offer may be used as part of a stakebuilding strategy.
For instance, a potential bidder might be looking to acquire up to 3 per cent of the target's voting rights undetected and then, during the Companies Act disclosure period of two business days, to acquire as many shares as possible to get up to 14.99 per cent (after which the SARs apply).
Thereafter, it may be looking to increase its stake to 29.99 per cent by purchases pursuant to the tender offer which, as mentioned above, are exempt from the SARs.
This sounds fine in theory but tender offers are rarely used in practice.
There are a number of possible reasons for their unpopularity:(1) Shareholders in the target might consider the tender offer to be a prelude to a full bid, possibly on more favourable terms than the tender offer.
They might therefore be fearful of losing out if they accept a tender offer prematurely.
Top-up arrangements are not permitted as part of a tender offer (SAR 4.1(c)) so the buyer could not make up the difference to shareholders who have already sold if a full bid on improved terms is made subsequently.
Shareholders will know that any subsequent bid made within three months (or such longer period as the Panel may require in order to ensure equality of treatment for all shareholders) may not be made on less favourable terms than the tender offer because of Rule 6.1 (see para 7.2.3 below) and, because the buyer will (usually) have acquired 10 per cent of the target's voting rights for cash, any bid within the next 12 months must be for cash (or include a cash alternative) at the highest price paid by the bidder (whether under the tender offer or in respect of market purchases) during the 12-month period in accordance with Rule 11 (see para 7.2.2 below).
This effective "underpinning" of the subsequent bid price is a further incentive to wait and see what happens.
(2) The buyer may attempt to induce shareholders to accept the tender offer (and not "wait and see" ) by expressly stating or implying that he does not intend to make a full bid.
However, if he does this he will not normally be permitted to post such an offer document within 12 months of the date of the statement, unless an offer for the target is announced by a third party within that period (Note 3 on Rule 4.2).
(3) On the other hand, if the buyer says nothing about his future intentions this may merely serve to fuel rumours that a full bid is to be expected.
(4) Rumours of a full bid may have the effect of driving up the target  company's share price.
If this increases above the tender price acceptances of the tender offer are likely to be low.
(5) A tender offer must be for cash which precludes a buyer from offering "roll-over" tax relief to shareholders by means of a securities exchange (see para 23.2.1 below).
(6) Tender offer advertisements are confined to the strict terms of the offer and certain factual statements permitted by SAR 4.
No form of argument or persuasion is allowed (eg criticism of the target's board) and the buyer (and its advisers) may not make any statement or otherwise make public any information in connection with the tender offer which is not already contained in the tender offer advertisement itself.
However, this does not prevent the target's board from criticising the buyer publicly and in circulars to its shareholders.
The various rules relating to tender offers set out in SAR 4 are listed below.
(1) The offer may be made on the London Stock Exchange, or elsewhere subject to the FSA (but the advantage of using the London Stock Exchange is that its procedures are tried and tested).
(2) The offer must be made by paid advertisement in two national newspapers (and the buyer must notify the Quotations Department of the London Stock Exchange and the target company of the terms thereof at least seven days before the tender offer closes).
(3) The buyer (or a person acting for him, usually an authorised person) may also circulate copies of the tender announcement to the offeree company, subject to compliance with the FSA.
A copy must be lodged with the Quotations Department and the Panel at the same time as it is posted to shareholders.
(4) A copy of any circular sent by the board of the offeree company to its shareholders in connection with the tender offer must be lodged with the Panel at the same time as it is posted.
(5) The tender must be for cash, it must treat all shareholders equally and top-up arrangements are not permitted.
(6) Subject as mentioned below, the tender may be at a fixed price (tenders in excess of the number of shares sought being scaled down pro rata), or a maximum price (if the offer is over-subscribed, the striking price will be the lowest price at which the number of shares sought is met, with everyone tendering at or below the striking price receiving that price and if the offer is over-subscribed at the striking price acceptances will be scaled down pro rata or balloted).
If the tender is under-subscribed, every shareholder who tenders will receive the fixed or, as the case may be, maximum price.
(7) There are special provisions which apply to tenders on the London Stock Exchange (reg C7 of the Stock Exchange Regulations), ie the London Stock Exchange normally only permits "maximum price" tenders, all acceptances must be channelled through Stock Exchange Member Firms rather than direct applications from the public, the offer must be kept open for a minimum of eight days, and the London Stock Exchange imposes detailed procedural and content requirements.
(8) The text of the tender advertisement must be cleared with the Quotations Department if the offer is made on the London Stock Exchange but otherwise with the Panel and copies of the final text must be given to both at the same time as they are given to the newspapers.
(9) The number of shares offered for (when aggregated with the existing holdings of shares and rights over shares of the buyer and persons acting by agreement or understanding with him within the meaning of the SARs) must not amount to 30 per cent or more of the voting rights of the company.
Anticipated changes in the share capital prior to the closing date of the tender offer should be taken into account.
(10) The only permissible condition to the offer is that it will fail if tenders totalling less than 1 per cent of the voting rights are received; a higher percentage may be stipulated by the tenderer but the London Stock Exchange does not normally permit a higher figure than 5 per cent for on-Exchange offers.
(11) The buyer must not acquire or dispose of shares (or rights over shares) in the target during the tender offer period other than pursuant to the tender offer.
(12) The result of a tender offer must be announced by 8.30 am on the business day following the close of the tender.
(13) All statements of future intention by the buyer which are proposed to be contained in the tender advertisement must be cleared with the Panel first.
Any such statements must be explicit and unambiguous.
As previously mentioned, if the buyer indicates that he does not intend to make an offer for the company he will not be permitted to post an offer document for 12 months unless a third party announces an offer during that period.
(14) Rule 4.2 of the SARs stipulates the details to be contained in the advertisement which are essentially the terms of the offer, certain factual items and those required under the FSA and rules of the SIB, SROs or RPBs.
The buyer may, if he wishes, compare the value of the tender offer with the market value of the shares offered for.
(15) If a tender offer is made in competition with an offer made under the Code, the Panel must be consulted and consideration will be given to extending the offer period of the Code offer, circulating the tender offer to all shareholders and requiring the buyer to disclose dealings of his and his associates in accordance with Rule 8. 4.8 What is the difference between a partial offer and a tender offer?
A partial offer may, with the consent of the Panel, be made for 30 per cent or more (but less than 100 per cent) of the target's voting rights provided the offeror and its concert parties have not acquired, selectively or in significant numbers, shares in the target during the previous 12 months, or at any time after the partial offer was reasonably in contemplation.
A tender offer, on the other hand, may not be made for 30 per cent or more of a company's voting rights.
To the extent that a partial offer and a tender offer relate to less than 30 per cent of a company's voting rights they cover the same ground.
However, there are a few significant differences:(1) An offeror and its concert parties must not purchase any further shares in the target for 12 months after the end of the offer period except with the consent of the Panel, following a successful partial offer.
Consequently, a partial offer is not particularly useful as part of a stakebuilding programme prior to a full bid.
A buyer under a tender offer, on the other hand, faces no such restriction unless he has stated or implied his intention not to make a full bid.
(2) A partial offer may not be made without the consent of the Panel, although this will usually be forthcoming where the offer is for less than 30 per cent of the company's voting rights.
(3) A partial offer is governed by the Code.
A tender offer is not.
Subject to the modifications described in para 4.2 above, all the provisions of the Code apply to a partial offer including the detailed information and content requirements specified in Rules 19, 20, 23 and 26.
A partial offer document is, therefore, a more time-consuming document to prepare.
It is, however, permitted to include argument and persuasion.
(4) A tender offer advertisement is a less emotive document, being confined to factual information concerning the tender offer.
The buyer is not allowed to say more or, indeed, to respond to criticism and defensive statements of the target's board.
(5) A partial offer must be kept open for at least 21 days (Rule 31.1) whereas an on-Exchange tender offer is only required to be kept open  for eight days.
Consequently, a tender offer gives the board of the target much less time to organise its defences and, given the lack of any argument and persuasion on the part of the buyer in the tender advertisement, no detailed guide as to what it is defending against (defensive statements may simply display the target board's paranoia).
On the other hand, defensive circulars do not have to comply with the Code's information and content requirements and do not have to contain a responsibility statement which gives the target company's board greater latitude (although, of course, it should avoid negligent or misleading statements and defamatory remarks and copies of its circulars must be lodged with the Panel).
(6) A tender offer must be for cash whereas a partial offer may be for securities of the offeror.
The offeror may consequently be able to offer shareholders "roll-over" tax relief if it already holds, or will in consequence of the securities exchange hold, more than 25 per cent of the ordinary share capital of the target (see para 23.2.1 below).
Planning the bid and the status of the offeror
Relevant factors in planning a bid
Planning is an essential prerequisite of any well run takeover offer.
The approach to a particular bid will depend on a number of general factors including the following:
(a) the nature of the shareholdings in the company (including whether control is in the hands of the public or is privately held);
(b) the likelihood of the bid being contested or rival offers being made—it is not unknown for one bid to precipitate another;
(c) the willingness of the offeror to commit itself to the time and expense involved in a contested bid;
(d) if a recommended offer is being sought, whether or not control is being delivered in advance through a 'shut out";
(e) the consideration for the offer (cash, shares, loan notes etc) and, in particular, if a cash offer is required, how this will be financed (company's own resources, bank loans, rights issue, cash underwritten alternative, financial assistance from the target etc).
The extent to which resources are, or should be, made available to improve the offer if necessary should also be considered;
(f) the information available on the target company and its market sector; and
(g) whether the takeover falls within the relevant criteria for reference to a merger control authority (see Chapter 19).
Advisers and professionals
The takeover team should be assembled at an early stage.
It will usually include the following advisers and professionals.
Merchant bank Where the transaction is a private one and does not involve the issue of securities it may be possible to proceed without a merchant bank, although, under the FSA, an authorised person will be needed to approve the offer document.
However, if the offer does involve an issue of shares and/or underwriting, the services of a merchant bank, together with the services of a stockbroker, become essential.
They may also furnish invaluable information on the target company through their analysts and can provide the manpower and support necessary for a contested takeover.
The merchant bank is usually responsible for co-ordinating the transaction and for preparing documentation.
They will also advise on tactical matters, pricing, form of consideration, market purchases and on the City Code.
Stockbrokers Stockbrokers will be required to liaise with the London Stock Exchange on the approval of documentation and any application for listing of the offeror's shares.
They may also arrange sub-underwriting of any cash underwritten alternative and provide valuable feedback on market sentiments regarding the offer.
Solicitors Although the Code is not a legal document, advice will be needed from lawyers who are familiar with its intricate rules and those of the London Stock Exchange.
A firm of solicitors experienced in this work will also be able to advise on the many areas of law which impinge on the conduct of takeover offers.
If underwriters are involved they will usually wish to appoint solicitors to represent their own interests.
Accountants Accountants will normally be required to report on any profit or working capital forecasts as well as to advise on the taxation consequences of the offer, accounting for the takeover and the financing of the bid.
Management consultants These may be engaged for certain specific tasks such as evaluating the bid, developing a post acquisition stategy or helping with submissions to merger control authorities.
Public relations consultants A good firm of financial public relations consultants should be engaged to assist with the takeover.
As well as advising on the strategic focus of the bid in relation to the target's shareholders and the market, the opportunity might be taken to raise the public profile of the offeror generally.
Their role has become more important since the Panel restricted advertisements to factual matters (Rule 19.4).
They will seek to persuade journalists to support their client's case in appropriate newspaper articles.
Receiving agent The offeror will need to appoint a receiving agent who will be responsible for counting and certifying acceptances of the offer.
He must be qualified, and act, in accordance with the receiving agent's  code of practice set out in Appendix 4 to the Code (see para 9.1.10 below).
Valuers If the offeror is planning to use an asset valuation to support his bid then this will need to be accompanied by an opinion of a named independent valuer qualified in accordance with Rule 29 (see para 16.2 below).
Close co-operation between the members of the team is essential, particularly in a contested bid where developments tend to occur rapidly and a quick response is often required.
The target company will also assemble a similar team in a contested bid.
Their job will be to advise on defence tactics and on the acceptability of the offer terms and, possibly, to lobby for a referral of the bid to the appropriate merger control authority.
In a recommended offer, the parties and their advisers will co-operate on a more friendly basis.
Strategy
It will be important to formulate an initial strategy for the bid even if it has to be modified subsequently as a result of changing circumstances.
Relevant matters will include:
(a) the track record of the target company, and particularly any inconsistencies between this and the company's share price performance;
(b) adverse market or press comment both in relation to the target company and the offeror;
(c) if a shut out is not possible, the make-up of the target's shareholder list with particular emphasis on blocks held by directors and their families, the company's advisers and their clients, institutions, employee-shareholders and others who may have some influence on the company;
(d) whether any shares are held by family trusts (trustees may become particularly vulnerable if an offer is made at an attractive price because a refusal to accept may result in allegations of a breach of trust);
(e) the vulnerability or otherwise of the target's board (the offeror will particularly focus on the board's achievements and also on any areas where individual directors could be said to have advantaged themselves at the expense of the company (eg golden parachute arrangements (see para 18.5.12 below));
(f) the liquidity of the market in the target's shares (shareholders who have little prospect of realising their investment may be only too willing to sell to a bidder);
(g) the perceived advantages and disadvantages of the takeover (in a contested bid, the offeror will need to think carefully about what arguments it will put forward in order to persuade the target's shareholders to accept the offer against their board's recommendation and, where it needs its own shareholders' approval, its arguments justifying the proposed bid); and
(h) the likely reaction from the press, the market, politicians, employees, competitors, suppliers and customers.
Timing
Once the basic strategy has been decided the timing of the offer takes on particular significance.
Many factors will influence the timing of the offer including the following:(1) The offeror will not wish to announce a contested bid at a time when the target company is about to announce record results or a greatly increased dividend; research on this possibility will be required.
(2) Equally, an offeror company may not wish to launch a bid if its own results are poor.
(3) Companies are often at their most vulnerable after having completed some major restructuring which has caused profits to dip.
An offeror could strike at a time before the benefits have come through and shareholder loyalty is at its weakest.
(4) If securities in the offeror are being offered to the shareholders of the target company, the offeror's results should be known in order to analyse share price, earnings and dividends and to demonstrate their attractiveness to the target's shareholders.
(5) It will be helpful if the announcement of the offer can coincide with positive public relations coverage for the offeror. (6) Ideally, a bid should not be announced at a time when it will have a reduced impact (eg on a day which is expected to be dominated by other major financial news or company announcements).
(7) The possibility of commencing the offer timetable so that the target has to issue its defence document at a difficult time (eg during a holiday period or a particularly busy time of year for the target) may secure a tactical advantage (see para 13.3.3 below).
(8) A cash offer which falls for acceptance near the end of a fiscal year rather than at the beginning of the next fiscal year will not be particularly popular with accepting shareholders as it will make a significant  difference to the payment date for capital gains tax (see para 23.2.1.1 below).
Price and form of the consideration
A takeover is only worthwhile if it is at a price which makes commercial sense.
The potential benefits must be weighed up against the costs involved and the risk of failure.
The offeror should always have a clear idea of the maximum price he wishes to pay and stick to it.
It is all too easy to pay too much in the heady atmosphere of a contested bid, or to be coerced into making a higher offer (particularly if a competitor arrives on the scene) just to avoid paying abortive costs with nothing to show for the expenditure.
If the offeror wishes to make a recommended bid, then the negotiations over price are likely to proceed in the same way as for any other business acquisition.
If agreement on the price can be reached with the target's board then that will usually secure their recommendation and the offer will be made accordingly.
If the offer is likely to be contested then the offeror will not be able to use the target's board as a barometer to help it set the price.
The offeror and its financial advisers will therefore have to work to a large extent in isolation in determining the right level of consideration.
Where the target is listed an obvious starting point is the market price.
However, one or more of the following factors may also be relevant:
(a) where the market in the target's shares is very liquid, offering the market price offers shareholders nothing more than they could get in any event.
A premium over market price may therefore be necessary to persuade them to sell;
(b) the attractions of the target to the offeror (eg asset value, economies of scale, future performance, pension scene surplus etc) may be such that, in its eyes, the target's shares are worth more than their market price;
(c) investors who hold large blocks of the target's shares may find that if they attempted to sell them in the market at the same time the price would fall.
Accepting an offer at market price may therefore be the only realistic way of realising their investment at its full value.
On the other hand, if the directors hold a controlling interest it may be necessary to pay them a premium for their shareholdings and (because of the requirement of equality of treatment under the Code) for the shareholdings of the minority shareholders;
(d) if the market in the target's shares is illiquid, a small discount to market value may succeed on the basis that market trades are not  a reliable barometer in any event and an offer represents the only feasible exit for investors; and
(e) shareholders who paid a much higher price for their shares than their current market value may simply react emotionally to an offer which would involve them in a loss.
Even though the offer may be a fair one, they may be tempted to retain their shares in the hope that the target's performance will improve and they will recover their position.
A sweetener may therefore be necessary in order to persuade them to sell.
Whatever the circumstances, the consideration offered must appeal to the shareholders of the target.
This is not just a question of the amount but also the form of the consideration.
The commercial objectives of shareholders must be considered, along with the tax effects of different forms of consideration on accepting shareholders (see para 23.2.1 below).
Offering a combination of consideration and amending the terms of or adding alternative consideration during the course of a bid may be considered.
The offeror must also consider the impact of the consideration to be offered on both itself and on the structure of the takeover.
These are complex matters.
A summary of the main choices of consideration and their potential impact on the offeror and accepting shareholders is set out below.
Cash
A cash offer will be necessary where it is expected that some, if not all, shareholders will want to realise their investment.
Acceptance of the offer will constitute a disposal for capital gains tax purposes but this will not concern tax exempt institutions or funds (eg pension funds).
A cash offer may be required in certain circumstances pursuant to the Code (Rule 9 (see para 8.4 below) and Rule 11 (see para 9.2 below)).
The offeror will need to consider how it will find the cash.
This may come from existing reserves, bank facilities, a rights issue or a cash underwritten alternative.
If it is proposed to use the target's assets to help finance the bid, the offeror will need to consider carefully the financial assistance provisions of ss151-155 of the Companies Act 1985 (see para 22.1 below).
Further borrowings may involve a breach of "gearing" (debt-to-equity ratio) covenants in the offeror's articles of association or in loan stock trust deeds or similar documents and these must be checked.
Financing the bid by means of a rights issue or cash underwritten alternative has the advantage of increasing the equity base of the offeror and improving gearing.
Where there are significant family interests in the target, a cash offer (or a cash alternative) may be preferred to enable the family  members to utilise retirement relief, which may not be available if roll-over relief on a share for share exchange applies (see para 23.2.1.5 below).
Ordinary shares
An issue of ordinary shares in the offeror as consideration will permit accepting shareholders to share in future growth (which may be particularly attractive if the offeror is a high-growth company) as well as permitting them to participate in the offeror by holding voting shares.
It should also enable them to obtain "roll-over" relief (see para 23.2.1.2 below) so that any charge to tax on capital gains is deferred until such time as the consideration shares are disposed of.
Ordinary shares do not suffer from some of the disadvantages of qualifying corporate bonds being offered as consideration securities (see para 23.2.1.3 below).
Target shareholders can sometimes be circumspect about accepting ordinary shares in the offeror, particularly if the takeover has been fiercely contested.
The pressured atmosphere surrounding the takeover battle may result in the offeror's shares being valued at a very full price at the time of the offer, but it is a common phenomenon for the share price to fall back after the euphoria has died down.
This downward pressure may be increased by underwriters or accepting shareholders selling offeror shares in the market following the takeover.
A cash alternative may be offered at a lower price than the share offer but such an alternative may be safer if this is likely to happen.
An issue of ordinary shares has some attractions for the offeror.
It means that it can use its paper to finance the bid without using its cash resources or resorting to further borrowing.
It will also increase its equity base and consequently improve its gearing and its ability to borrow further.
In addition, there is no fixed servicing cost as there is with preference shares or loan stock, but a sensible dividend policy will have to be maintained if the offeror is to prevent adverse reaction from shareholders and the market in the future.
Normally, however, ordinary shareholders expect lower yields than preference shareholders and loan stock holders because of their participation rights.
An offer of equity shares may enable the offeror to obtain merger relief under s131 of the Companies Act 1985 (see para 23.1.5 below) and also possibly qualify for merger accounting under SSAP 23 (see para 23.1.6 below).
These treatments can have advantages in relation to the distribution of pre-acquisition profits of the target to the offeror's own shareholders and accounting presentation.
The issue of new ordinary shares can lead to a shift in the balance of power in the offeror.
In some cases, the dilution of the equity may be such that the directors and their supporters no longer own a controlling  interest in the offeror.
This may make the offeror itself vulnerable to a hostile takeover bid in due course.
Ordinary shares issued as consideration represent an investment in the offeror.
In a contested bid, an offeror which offers consideration shares must expect the target's board to turn its attention to the offeror's financial condition and performance in an effort to dissuade shareholders from accepting the offer.
Attacks may be made on the offeror's financial resources, gearing, capital structure, dividend policy, interest burden, profit performance, past history and takeover track record.
To some extent this may be ameliorated by offering a cash alternative to shareholders, but the offeror must be prepared to defend its own financial condition and may even be compelled to issue a profit or dividend forecast in order to buttress its position.
Ordinary shares are not particularly attractive unless the offeror is listed and the new shares will also be admitted to listing.
This will give accepting shareholders a market for their shares when they eventually decide to sell, which is an advantage over unlisted securities.
If the market in the offeror's shares is not particularly liquid then this will be less of a selling point.
On the other hand, an active market in the offeror's shares may help persuade shareholders of a target company which has a less liquid market in its shares to accept a share exchange offer.
Sometimes the reaction to a share exchange offer may be affected by the offeror's conduct during the takeover battle.
If accepting shareholders feel that the offeror has behaved badly, they may well accept a cash offer but feel reluctant to invest on a long-term basis in the offeror.
The attractions of ordinary shares can often depend upon the economic environment and the company's potential for growth.
In periods of rising profits a company which is geared at a low level may not have the growth potential to give ordinary shareholders the returns expected from a more highly-geared company.
The ordinary shareholder will assess his likely participation in the residue of profits of the company after fixed interest and dividend charges have been paid.
However, in recessionary times when equity markets may be weak, interest rates high and profits falling, a company with modest gearing will not have such a high debt servicing cost to deprive ordinary shareholders of dividends.
The decision to accept ordinary shares may therefore often depend on an assessment of the economic situation, the company's gearing level, its capacity for growth and its ability to service its debt.
Preference shares
An offer of preference shares, while not conferring an opportunity to participate in future growth or general voting powers, may have certain  attractions.
Preference shares still enable accepting shareholders to obtain roll-over relief and defer the charge to tax on capital gains but at the same time offer current fixed income in the form of preference dividends.
If they are listed there may also be an active market for them.
In addition, or alternatively, they may be redeemable, thus promising cash from the company at a future date.
Preference shares will usually rank ahead of ordinary shares for dividends and a return of capital but will have limited voting rights relating to such matters as variations of class rights, reductions of share capital, liquidation and amendment of borrowing restrictions.
To the extent that fixed preference dividends are not paid in any year they usually accumulate and are paid out in priority in future years.
Preference shares, particularly redeemable preference shares, are sometimes considered to be more akin to loan stock than share capital.
This is true to some extent but the analogy must not be taken too far as there are some important differences.
First, preference shares may not be issued on a secured basis whereas loan stock can be charged on the offeror's assets and ranks ahead of unsecured creditors (both present and future).
Secondly, even if loan stock is unsecured it will rank equally with the other unsecured creditors.
Preference shareholders receive nothing on a liquidation until all creditors have been paid, although they will rank ahead of ordinary shareholders for a distribution in the winding up.
Thirdly, the obligation to pay loan interest on the due dates creates an immediate debt between the company and the loan stock holder for which he can sue, whereas a preference dividend does not become a debt until it is declared and due.
It is possible to draft preference share rights dispensing with the declaration of preference dividends and compelling the offeror to distribute available distributable profits, but this may not always be desired by the offeror.
A preference shareholder does, however, usually have the right to be paid his dividend before any dividends can be paid to the ordinary shareholders.
Fourthly, loan stock principal and interest can, if necessary, be paid out of the offeror's capital.
Preference dividends, however, can only be paid out of distributable profits.
In addition, if the offeror fails to redeem preference shares on the due date there is no right to damages and an action for specific performance will only be available if it can be established that the offeror has sufficient distributable profits to meet the cost of the redemption (CA 1985, s178).
The offeror cannot be compelled to redeem out of capital.
A loan stock holder is not hampered by such restrictions if his loan stock is not paid on the due date.
Finally, transfers of preference shares attract stamp duty at one half per cent whereas transfers of loan stock are generally exempt (unless the stock is convertible into share capital).
From the offeror's perspective, there may be a number of advantages of issuing preference shares instead of loan stock.
Because the preference  shares rank behind all creditors of the company this will improve the offeror's gearing and its ability to borrow further.
(However, if the preference shares are redeemable this advantage will diminish as the redemption date draws closer).
Preference dividends can be accumulated if there are not sufficient distributable profits or cash to pay them in a particular financial year whereas, as noted above, loan stock obligations are a contractual commitment and must be paid whether the offeror makes profits or not.
Finally, preference shares will not be qualifying corporate bonds and consequently will offer roll-over as distinct from hold-over relief to accepting shareholders (see paras 23.2.1.2 and 23.2.1.3 below).
On the other hand, loan stock has the following advantages to the offeror:
(a) because the rights of preference shareholders are subordinated to those of loan stock holders, preference shareholders normally expect a higher yield to reflect the difference in risk.
Loan stock may, accordingly, have a lower carrying cost;
(b) the interest payable on loan stock is normally deductible by the offeror for corporation tax purposes whereas preference dividends are not.
Although the imputation system of corporation tax means that there is usually only a marginal difference in the tax cost of the two funding methods (if the payer can absorb the ACT against sufficient mainstream corporation tax payable), this is usually in favour of the payment of deductible interest; and
(c) the payment of preference dividends results in an obligation to account for ACT.
This may cause a problem to the offeror if it does not have a sufficient liability to mainstream corporation tax against which to offset the ACT.
In deciding whether to offer loan stock or preference shares the offeror will need to consider the tax position of the institutional shareholders in the target.
Tax-exempt funds are largely untroubled whether they receive dividends or interest.
However, UK corporate investors which are not tax exempt (eg insurance companies) will often prefer, from a tax standpoint, to receive franked dividends.
The reason for this is that the recipient does not have to pay any tax on the dividends received and, in addition, may pay such franked investment income to its own shareholders without paying ACT (such shareholders will nevertheless receive the dividends with the usual basic rate tax credit).
A payment of interest, however, would be charged to corporation tax in the recipient's hands and would attract a liability to pay ACT if it is then distributed to the recipient's own shareholders.
Non tax-exempt institutions will accordingly be attracted by investments which offer them franked investment income which they can use to cover dividend payments to their own shareholders.
Convertible preference shares
Accepting shareholders will be attracted by an offer of preference shares which are convertible into ordinary shares in due course as they will be able to receive current fixed income while at the same time having the prospect of a capital gain in due course.
The respective attributes of ordinary shares and preference shares have already been discussed.
The timing and the terms of conversion will, of course, be critical in determining the attractiveness of this type of security.
Loan stock
Many of the factors which will be taken into account in deciding whether or not to issue consideration loan stock have already been considered and need not be repeated here.
One important point to bear in mind is that non-convertible loan stock will often come within the definition of a "qualifying corporate bond" .
Qualifying corporate bonds, while offering a deferral of the charge to tax on capital gains, have certain disadvantages which are explained at para 23.2.1.3 below.
Loan stock which does not constitute a qualifying corporate bond should confer roll-over relief in the usual way.
The offeror will have a choice of issuing secured, unsecured or subordinated loan stock.
Secured stock has the advantage that a lower yield will be expected because of the lower risk, but it may have an adverse effect upon gearing and the offeror's ability to borrow.
Unsecured loan stock will have a higher carrying cost but less of an impact on the offeror's gearing.
Subordinated loan stock will rank behind all unsecured creditors but ahead of preference shareholders and ordinary shareholders.
It will improve gearing and the offeror's ability to borrow (unsecured creditors will regard it as similar to share capital) but the holders will expect a higher yield to compensate them for their higher risk, although this should be less than that expected for preference share capital.
Short-dated loan stock
A cash offer which falls for acceptance near the end of a fiscal year rather than at the beginning of the next fiscal year will make a significant difference to the payment date for capital gains tax.
A short-dated loan stock may therefore allow accepting shareholders who wish to take cash in the short term to roll-over a disposal to the new fiscal year and take advantage of the later payment date.
Generally speaking the Revenue will not agree to a roll-over in this manner if the loan stock is redeemable earlier than six months from its issue (see para 23.2.1.4 below).
Accepting shareholders will have to wait for their cash for that period.
A commercial rate of interest will usually be paid pending redemption of the stock.
Convertible loan stock
A loan stock convertible into ordinary shares has the advantage that it enables the holder to retain the security of being a creditor if it wishes, while offering a share in capital growth on conversion.
Typically, the stock will convert into ordinary shares at a premium over the market value of the offeror's ordinary shares at the date of issue of the stock.
It should be noted that:
(a) a convertible loan stock does not fall within the definition of a "qualifying corporate bond" as mentioned above (unless it is a deep gain security) and may be attractive for that reason;
(b) if accepting shareholders may be worried that the offeror's share price may fall following the "hype" of a contested takeover battle, the issue of a convertible loan stock instead of ordinary shares may remedy the situation by offering conversion at the current market price of the offeror's shares together with a promise of a minimum cash value at a future date with a commercial yield in the meantime;
(c) the offeror's equity is not diluted until such time as the conversion occurs;
(d) the value of the convertible loan stock will be enhanced if the value of the ordinary shares rises above the conversion price.
If the reverse happens, the value of the loan stock will be assessed on a loan stock basis only.
Much will depend on the conversion terms and the length of the conversion period;
(e) given the conversion rights, a lower interest yield may be acceptable in respect of the stock;
(f) because the stock is convertible, any transfer of it will attract stamp duty at one half of one per cent;
(g) one disadvantage with convertible loan stock is that there can be a tendency for stockholders to convert when profits and share prices are rising (thus diluting the equity profit of existing ordinary shareholders and depriving them of the advantage of the cheaper gearing which such stock provides) and to retain the stock when profits and share prices are falling, thus maintaining the debt burden of the company at a time when it may be least able to service it; and
(h) convertible loan stock which is not quoted on a recognised stock exchange, or is not issued on terms which are reasonably comparable with the terms of quoted convertible stock, can cause a problem as the interest payable on it will fall to be treated for tax purposes as a distribution (ICTA 1988, s209(2) (e)(ii)).
Warrants to subscribe
These are options to subscribe for ordinary shares in the offeror in the future.
The subscription price will be struck by reference to the market value of the offeror's shares at the time of the takeover.
Warrants to subscribe may be attractive to higher rate taxpayers who are looking for an opportunity for capital growth but without current income.
The advantage to the offeror is that the warrants cost nothing and, when they are exercised, the company receives the subscription moneys.
Subscription warrants may be issued as a package with other securities.
For instance, if loan stock is issued with warrants when profits and share prices are rising, the exercise of the warrants will introduce further equity funds into the company whilst maintaining the higher gearing which the loan stock provides (as distinct from convertible loan stock which has the effect of withdrawing the cheaper gearing on conversion into equity).
5.5.9 Mixed packages An offeror can choose to offer a combination of securities in order to make the offer attractive to as many target shareholders as possible.
This may be made, either initially or subsequently, as part of a revised offer.
Mix and match elections
Mix and match elections (see para 1.2 above) may be offered where some shareholders are expected to want to realise their investment and others are expected to want to roll-over their capital gains into new ordinary shares of the offeror.
The advantage to the offeror over a share offer with a cash alternative is that it knows in advance that it will only have to make available fixed pools of each type of consideration.
This may help, for instance, if cash resources are limited.
The mix and match formula ensures that shareholders are treated on an equal basis.
Formula offers
If the consideration for the takeover is calculated by reference to a formula then Appendix 2 of the Code should be consulted.
This contains a formula offers guidance note.
Structuring the takeover
The offeror will need to give careful thought to the structure of the takeover.
There are a number of matters which it will need to take into account:(1) The offeror must consider whether to proceed by way of a takeover offer or a Court Scheme.
The respective merits of each route have already been discussed in para 2.4 above.
(2) It must also be remembered that merger relief under CA 1985, s131, and merger accounting under SSAP 23 and CA 1985, Sched 4A are only available in respect of a takeover involving a share for share exchange (see para 23.1 below).
(3) Building up a stake in the target prior to making an offer or during the course of an offer may be considered.
There are various restrictions and disclosure requirements in relation to such dealings, and dealings may have certain effects on the offer.
These are discussed in Chapter 7.
An important question is whether the offeror or its financial adviser should make purchases and this is discussed in para 7.5 below.
(4) In the case of an offer which, if accepted in full, would result in the offeror holding shares carrying over 50 per cent of the target's voting rights, the condition relating to the level of acceptances required ( "the acceptance condition" ) may be set above the minimum required by Rule 10 (which is over 50 per cent of the target's voting rights).
For instance, the acceptance condition is often set at 90 per cent of the shares to which the offer relates in order to invoke the compulsory sale procedures under CA 1985, s429.
The offeror often reserves the right to waive the higher condition, however, and the consequences of accepting some lower percentage are described in para 9.1.2 below.
The offeror should be clear as to what minimum percentage of the target's share capital it is willing to accept in order to meet its key objectives.
(5) The offeror may wish to use the assets of the target to help pay for the bid or to provide security for the offeror's borrowings.
This will involve a detailed consideration of the financial assistance provisions of CA 1985, ss151-155.
These are discussed in para 22.1 below.
(6) There may be different classes of equity in the target.
Comparable offers will need to be made pursuant to Rule 14 (see para 10.1.1 below).
Consideration should be given as to whether to make an offer for any classes of non-equity share capital (eg listed preference shares).
The offeror may wish to do this if the target would remain technically listed or the offeror would not have sufficient control over the target's assets after the takeover.
(7) If there are any convertible securities, subscription rights or options outstanding in respect of the target's share capital, then an appropriate offer or proposal will need to be made pursuant to Rule 15 to ensure that the interests of the holders of these rights are safeguarded and all documents issued to shareholders must also be issued to the holders of convertibles and options to subscribe relating to shares of the same class (see para 10.2 below).
(8) If it is proposed to use the offeror's paper in order to raise cash for the offer, a cash underwritten alternative or an underwritten rights issue may be used.
A rights issue has the advantage of preserving shareholders' pre-emption rights in respect of a new issue of the offeror's shares, whereas this is not possible with a cash underwritten alternative unless accompanied by an open offer and clawback (see below).
Unless the offer is recommended and a shut-out (see para 8.2 below) is possible (so that the offeror knows in advance that its offer will be successful), the offeror will normally wish to make the rights issue conditional on the offer becoming or being declared wholly unconditional.
A cash underwritten alternative has the advantage that the new shares are issued to the shareholders of the target and, as a consequence, merger relief and, possibly, merger accounting (see para 23.1 below) may be available.
A cash underwritten alternative may also result in lower underwriting costs.
It is usually closed after a limited period, whereas the underwriting of a rights issue, especially where the rights issue is conditional on the success of the offer (because the outcome of the offer is not guaranteed), may result in a longer underwriting commitment period and consequently higher underwriting costs.
An underwriter who may acquire 30 per cent or more of the offeror's voting rights as a result of the underwriting may trigger an obligation to make a mandatory bid unless a Whitewash is obtained, and the Panel should be consulted in such cases.
If an underwriter incurs a Rule 9 obligation unexpectedly, for example as a result of an inability to sub-underwrite all or part of his liability, the Panel should also be consulted (see para 8.5 below).
If a recommended offer is proposed which has not been announced, Note 2 to Rule 2.3 requires the target to request the London Stock Exchange to grant a suspension of the target's listing before the proposed offer is disclosed to any sub-underwriters (see para 6.3.5 below).
In the case of a contested offer, suspension is impracticable and disclosure is permitted to a restricted number of sub-underwriters immediately before the announcement provided they are warned of the confidential nature of the information.
Cash underwritten alternatives are considered in more detail in para 5.12 below.
(9) If the consideration is to include a cash underwritten alternative, it may be necessary for the consideration shares agreed to be purchased  from accepting shareholders by underwriters to be the subject of an offer to the bidder's shareholders on a pre-emptive basis.
Under such an arrangement (known as an open offer and clawback) underwriters agree to purchase the requisite number of consideration shares from accepting shareholders at the agreed price, to the extent that the latter elect to receive cash, subject to the right of the bidder's shareholders to buy such shares at the same price in priority to the underwriters.
Any shares which the bidder's shareholders agree to purchase are then said to be "clawed back" from underwriters.
The bidder's shareholders are offered the new shares pro rata to their existing shareholdings in the bidder, known as an "open offer" .
This is something of a misnomer, as the offer is restricted to existing shareholders of the bidder on a pro rata basis.
The cash to be paid to accepting shareholders will be provided by the bidder's shareholders and the underwriters according to the purchases they make.
The reason for the procedure is that the consideration shares issued by the bidder to accepting shareholders are issued for a non-cash consideration (ie the shares in the target) and accordingly are not required to be offered to the bidder's shareholders under the pre-emption provisions of CA 1985, s89, because that section only applies to new issues for cash.
In reality, however, the issue amounts to a pre-ordained acquisition of new shares for cash by third parties (ie the underwriters).
Accordingly, the open offer and clawback preserves the pre-emption rights of existing shareholders of the bidder.
The expectation of an open offer and clawback from shareholders may be strong where the new shares being issued represent a significant proportion of the existing issued shares of the bidder or are being offered at a significant discount to their current market price.
In its memorandum on "shareholders' pre-emption rights and vendor placings" , issued in February 1989, the IPC of the ABI stated that, in the matter of vendor placings, shareholders are entitled to expect a right of clawback for any issues of significant size or which are offered at more than a very modest discount to market price.
The members of the ABI therefore expect that issues involving more than 10 per cent of issued equity share capital, or a discount greater than 5 per cent, will be placed on a basis which leaves existing shareholders with a right to claw back their pro rata share of the issue if they so wish.
The IPC of the ABI has confirmed that, in principle, it takes a similar view in relation to a cash underwritten alternative.
However, a cash underpinning is not entirely the same thing as a vendor placing because it will not be known exactly how many shares will be the subject of a sale; that will depend on the number of acceptances of the cash underwritten alternative.
Underwriters therefore face two uncertainties.
The first is the extent to which accepting shareholders will elect for the cash underwritten alternative.
The second is the extent to which the offeror's shareholders will take up shares under  the open offer.
This makes the transaction less attractive to underwriters who are looking to invest in the offeror and may explain why, in practice, it is rare to see an open offer being made to shareholders.
Nevertheless, the principle remains and in appropriate cases some negotiation may be necessary with the IPCs to ensure that the absence of an open offer will not prejudice institutional shareholder support for the takeover.
Even if the bidder's shareholders do not include ABI members, the bidder might consider providing an open offer and clawback to its shareholders as a matter of best practice and good shareholder relations, provided underwriters are agreeable.
The London Stock Exchange requires an open offer to remain open for 15 business days.
(10) A valuer's report under CA 1985, s103(1) in respect of shares issued for a non-cash consideration may be necessary.
Section 103(1) provides that a public company must not allot shares for a non-cash consideration unless the consideration has been independently valued under CA 1985, s108, and a copy of the report has been sent to the allottee.
The penalty for breaching the section is that the allottees become liable to pay for the shares allotted to them in cash, with interest at the appropriate rate (CA 1985, s103(6)).
It is therefore very important to ensure that the section is either complied with or that the transaction falls within one of the two available exemptions.
The first exemption, which is most pertinent to takeovers, is contained in s103(3), which provides that a valuer's report is not required where the allotment is made in connection with an arrangement providing for the allotment of shares in the company on terms that the whole or part of the consideration for the shares allotted is to be provided by the transfer to that company (or the cancellation) of all or some of the shares, or of all or some of the shares of a particular class, in another company (with or without the issue to that company of shares, or of shares of any particular class, in that other company).
However, in order to qualify, the arrangement must be open to all the holders of the shares in the other company in question (or, where the arrangement applies only to shares of a particular class, to all the holders of shares in that other company, being holders of shares of that class) to take part in the arrangement (s103(4)).
For these purposes, shares held by the issuing company or any company in its group, or by a nominee of the issuing company or any company in its group, in the other company are disregarded.
Thus, a bidder offering shares in itself as consideration for a takeover will be within the exemption so long as all the shareholders holding shares of the class offered for can take part in the arrangement.
As the Code requires equality of treatment of shareholders this will usually mean that takeovers of UK public companies will fall within the  exemption, which is an important concern to the target's shareholders as they could become liable to pay up the shares in cash if the section is contravened.
However, the exemption might not apply, for example, if an offer is modified so that overseas shareholders in the target are not offered consideration securities because of overseas securities laws which prohibit the offer document being posted to them (or permit the offer to be made but subject to onerous filing requirements).
The treatment of some shareholders on an unequal basis may take the offer outside the exemption and a valuer's report may, accordingly, be required.
 "Arrangement" includes a scheme of arrangement under CA 1985, ss425-427 (s103(7) (a)) and the reference in s103(3) to the new shares being allotted in consideration of the "cancellation" of shares in the other company means that a Court Scheme of the nature described in para 2.4.3 above should fall within the exemption.
The second exemption is contained in s103(5) which provides that a valuer's report is not required where the allotment is made by the company in connection with its proposed merger with another company, ie where one of the companies proposes to acquire all the assets (and liabilities) of the other in exchange for the issue of shares or other securities of that one to shareholders of the other, with or without any cash payment to shareholders.
Thought will need to be given to many matters in structuring and planning a takeover and those outlined above are by no means an exhaustive list.
For the convenience of the reader, there is set out in Appendix 3 a checklist which will serve as a useful reminder of the principal matters to be considered.
Post-acquisition planning
It is all too easy to overlook how the offeror will manage the target after the acquisition.
He should have a clear strategy in this direction to ensure that the perceived benefits of the takeover do in fact materialise.
Obtaining information
As part of the preparation for a bid the offeror will conduct an information-gathering exercise on the target company.
This will be particularly important in relation to contested takeovers where the offeror can expect little co-operation from the board of the target.
Information can be obtained from a variety of sources, including the following:
(a) the Companies Registry and Extel;
(b) annual reports and accounts;
(c) interim financial statements;
(d) previous circulars to shareholders;
(e) documents available for inspection in conjunction with a circular issued to shareholders; and
(f) press cuttings and analysts' reports.
Where it is expected that circulars, advertisements and other public documents will be used as part of the takeover process it will be important that all statements contained in them can be substantiated with adequate fact.
The source of all information should therefore be recorded carefully.
The information obtained will enable the offeror and its advisers to build up a public profile of the target.
It is particularly important that any PR/advertising consultants advising the offeror are made aware of all relevant facts.
Other sources of information
There are other sources of information which should be noted.
(1) In a contested bid (where little co-operation can be expected from the target) the offeror will require a copy of the register of members of the target for the purposes of analysing key shareholdings.
Under CA 1985, s356(3), any person may acquire a copy of a company's register of members subject to paying a prescribed charge.
The copy must be sent within ten days of the day following the request.
(2) Rule 22 and Appendix 4 to the Code impose obligations on the target and its registrar to provide the offeror's receiving agent, following the announcement of an offer, with the target's register of members (in computer-readable form, where practicable) to keep the target's register up-to-date, to provide the offeror's receiving agent with copies of all documents which will result in a change to the last copy register provided to the offeror or its advisers, to permit the offeror's receiving agent access to the target's register at all times during the closing stages of the offer and to register transfers promptly during the offer (see para 12.4 below).
(3) Public companies are required to keep registers of interests notified under CA 1985, ss198-206 (notification of three per cent interests), and of notices given and replies received under s212 of that Act (disclosure of beneficial interests in shares).
Under s219(2) any person may obtain copies of these registers subject to payment of a prescribed charge.
These registers may contain information useful to anyone contemplating a bid for the company.
(4) The offeror's solicitors are normally asked to undertake a review of all publicly available documents (such as memoranda and articles of association, Loan Stock Trust Deeds, material contracts etc) to elicit whether the takeover would constitute a default thereunder, trigger an early repayment of loans or the exercise of options or the documents could in some other way impact on the takeover.
(5) Directors' service agreements of more than 12 months' duration are open for inspection by any shareholder under CA 1985, s318.
A potential offeror or its advisers may accordingly acquire shares in the target and use this right to ascertain the compensation which would be payable to directors of the target if they were dismissed and any golden parachute arrangements (see para 18.5.1 below) which may exist.
(6) Note 3 to Rule 10 provides that once a firm intention to make an offer is announced, the target company must on request provide the offeror as soon as possible with all relevant details of its issued shares and, to the extent not issued, its allotted shares, and details of any conversion or subscription rights or any other rights pursuant to which shares might be allotted or issued unconditionally during the offer period.
The target must immediately notify the offeror of any allotment of or conversion into shares which occurs during the offer period.
(7) Rule 19.7 stipulates that copies of all documents and announcements bearing on an offer and of advertisements and any material released to the press (including any notes to editors) must at the time of release be lodged with the advisers to all other parties to the offer as well as to the Panel.
This ensures that no party to an offer is put at a disadvantage through delay in the release of new information to it.
(8) Under Rule 20.2 of the Code any information (including particulars of shareholders) given by the board of the target to a preferred offeror or potential offeror (but usually only when there has been a public announcement of the existence of the preferred potential offeror) must on request be furnished equally and as promptly to a less welcome but bona fide offeror or potential offeror.
The less welcome offeror has to specify the questions to which it requires answers.
It is not entitled, by asking in general terms, to receive all the information supplied to its competitor.
This tends to lead to extremely lengthy and detailed questionnaires being sent by the offeror to the target company and at regular intervals to learn any relevant information.
Note 2 to Rule 20.2 stipulates that, in the case of a management buy-out or similar transaction, competing offerors should receive the same information as that passed by the target company or the management to external funders of the buy-out.
The Panel expects those directors of the target who are involved in making the offer to co-operate with the  independent directors of the target and its advisers in the assembly of this information.
(9) The Note to Rule 26 stipulates that a copy of each document which is required to be put on display pursuant to that Rule (see para 11.5 below) must, on request, promptly be made available by an offeror or the target to the other party and to any competing offeror or potential offeror.
Consents, approvals and notifications
Before making the offer it will be necessary to identify all the consents, clearances and notifications which will be required in relation to both the target company and the bidder:(1) If the takeover falls within the criteria for possible reference to a merger control authority (eg under the FTA or the Merger Regulation) then confidential guidance might be sought from, or pre-notification required to be made to, the relevant competent authority (see Chapter 19).
Where the combined enterprise would have any significant business activity outside the EEC then overseas merger control regulations and competition law should be considered and appropriate foreign legal advice sought.
(2) If the target is involved in an industry or commercial sector which is specially regulated or controlled (eg newspapers, water and sewerage undertakings, coal and steel, banking, insurance, financial services and broadcasting) then it will be necessary to consider what restrictions apply to any proposed takeover and what notifications should be given and approvals sought.
See para 19.4 below for further information on such matters.
(3) Where the offeror hopes to offer the target's shareholders "roll-over" or "hold-over" relief (see paras 23.2.1.1 and 23.2.1.2 below) on a securities exchange, it is important to remember to apply at an early stage for an Inland Revenue clearance (under TCGA, s138) in connection with the anti-avoidance legislation contained in TCGA, s137 (see para 23.2.1.4 below).
This may be done by the offeror or the target.
The offeror will be particularly keen to do this in order to make the offer attractive to large shareholders (shareholders holding 5 per cent or less are not affected by the anti-avoidance legislation).
(4) If it is proposed that the target, the offeror or any other person will make a payment to one of the target's directors for loss of, or retirement from, office in connection with the takeover, then the payment may need  to be approved by the target's shareholders in general meeting in accordance with CA 1985, s312 or s314 (see para 8.1.5 below).
(5) The offer documents will be investment advertisements for the purposes of FSA 1986, s57 and will need to be issued by or approved by an authorised person, usually the offeror's merchant bank or stockbroker (see para 11.4.2 below).
(6) If the bidder is a listed company then the takeover will require a circular to its shareholders and their approval in general meeting if it is a Super Class 1 or a Class 4 transaction or if it is a reverse takeover of an unlisted company (see para 17.2 below).
If the transaction is Class 1, an announcement and a circular to shareholders is required.
If it is Class 2 an announcement only is required.
No announcement is required in respect of a Class 3 transaction unless the offer involves an issue of securities for which a listing is sought.
Similar, but less onerous, requirements apply to USM companies under the Green Book.
(7) Shareholders' approval and a circular may also be required where a listed company proposes to enter into certain indemnity or similar arrangements outside the ordinary course of business (see para 17.3 below).
(8) If shares in the target are proposed to be sold to the bidder by a director (including a shadow director) of the bidder, or of its parent company, or by a person connected with that director (as defined in CA 1985, s346) and the value of the shares is not less than £2,000 but (subject to that) exceeds £100,000 or 10 per cent of the bidder's asset value, then the arrangement must not be entered into unless it is first approved by an ordinary resolution of the bidder or, as the case may be, its parent company in general meeting (CA 1985, s320).
The section covers similar ground to a Class 4 transaction, but applies to all companies whether listed or not.
Section 320(4) provides an exemption for dealings on a recognised investment exchange (under the FSA) through an independent broker, ie a broker who independently selects the person with whom the transaction is effected.
(9) If the bidder is proposing to offer consideration shares then, unless it already has sufficient authorised but unissued share capital and the appropriate directors' authority to allot such shares, it will need to pass ordinary resolutions increasing its authorised share capital and granting the directors an authority under CA 1985, s80.
This is often the case in relation to listed and quoted companies because the IPC of the ABI has issued guidelines limiting the amount of unissued share capital over which there is a s80 authority to one-third of the existing issued share capital (see its memorandum dated 10 September 1992) and most listed and quoted companies follow these guidelines.
The pre-emption rights  contained in CA 1985, s89 do not apply as the consideration shares will be allotted for a non-cash consideration.
Even if the bidder does have sufficient authorised but unissued share capital and a directors' authority to effect the bid it may nevertheless wish to pass the appropriate resolutions replacing the share capital and authority used in implementing the takeover.
(10) Further borrowings by the bidder to finance the takeover may be prohibited by borrowing restrictions in the bidder's articles of association.
Sometimes, it is permitted to override the borrowing limits with the sanction of an ordinary resolution.
In other cases, the offeror's articles of association may have to be amended, which will require a special resolution.
(11) Where the bidder proposes to issue consideration shares, loan stock or debenture stock which are to be listed it may need to prepare listing particulars (see para 17.1.3 below).
Any new stock will need to be constituted by an appropriate trust deed or loan stock instrument.
Shares of a new class will need to have their rights established by amendments to the bidder's articles of association (which will require a special resolution).
(12) Para 33 of Chapter 2 of Section 5 of the Yellow Book provides that, where an increase of authorised share capital of a listed company is proposed and 10 per cent or more of the voting capital will remain unissued, the circular accompanying the notice of meeting must state that no issue will be made which would effectively alter the control of the company without prior approval of its shareholders in general meeting.
Where such an undertaking has been given, the directors will need to consider whether the transaction in question requires shareholders' approval as a result.
(13) If the cash for the bid is to be raised by a rights issue of the bidder (cash placings to selected shareholders or third parties are strongly resisted by the IPCs without shareholders being offered pre-emption entitlements, particularly if the issue is at a significant discount), then it may be necessary to increase its authorised share capital and directors' authority to implement the rights issue and, if the issue will not comply with the strict statutory requirements of CA 1985, s89, to pass a special resolution to disapply that section.
However, this will not be necessary if the bidder already has in place from its last AGM an authority to issue sufficient shares for the rights issue (without, if necessary, complying with the strict requirements of s89).
(14) Section 104 of CA 1985 requires certain conditions to be met (including an independent valuation and approval by an ordinary resolution of the company) before a public company (formed as such) can (within two years of its being issued with a certificate entitling it to do business under CA 1985, s117) enter into an agreement to acquire a non-cash asset (eg shares in the target) from a subscriber to its memorandum of association which is equal in value to one-tenth or more of the company's nominal share capital issued at the time or before a company is re-registered as a public company can (within two years of the date of re-registration) enter into such an agreement with a person who was a member on the date of re-registration.
If s104 is contravened, the agreement in question is void and the company is entitled to recover the consideration (or an amount equal in value) to the consideration given for the non-cash asset (s105(2)) but, where the consideration for the transfer is an allotment of shares in the company, s105(2) does not apply, and instead the allottee becomes liable to pay to the company an amount equal to the amount treated as paid up (including any premium) on the shares by the transfer of the non-cash asset, with interest at the appropriate rate (s105(3)).
Accordingly, a bidder which is a newly-incorporated or re-registered public company to be used as a vehicle for the takeover should be careful not to contravene s104 if it is to acquire shares in the target from its own subscribers or members (eg in a management buy-out).
(15) If the bidder itself is the subject of a bona fide offer (or the bidder's board has reason to believe that a bona fide offer may be imminent) then under General Principle 7 and Rule 21 (no frustrating action without shareholders' approval) any takeover by the bidder will require the prior approval of its shareholders (see para 18.2.2 below).
(16) The bidder may require consents for the takeover under existing contracts to which it is a party.
Accordingly, commercial contracts (eg joint venture agreements), loan agreements, security documents and trust deeds (eg constituting loan capital) should be checked.
The terms of any convertible securities outstanding may restrict the issue of further share capital by the bidder.
(17) The takeover of the target may cause loan agreements and other contracts which it has entered into to be determinable, or for the other contracting party to be entitled to exercise valuable option or pre-emption rights.
In a recommended takeover, such "change of control" provisions can be investigated and, if necessary, appropriate waivers or consents obtained.
In a hostile bid, this might be more difficult to achieve without the co-operation of the target's board (even if the bidder can identify all the relevant contractual provisions).
The obligation of the target to repay lenders or loan capital in the event of a takeover could result in a dramatic increase in the cost of the bid for the offeror if it has to find the funds itself to enable the target to meet the repayment obligation.
(18) The structure of the takeover (eg a recommended offer or a Court Scheme) may require the consent of preference shareholders, lenders or optionholders or holders of convertible securities in or to the target.
The relevant rights should be checked.
Such rights may also place restrictions on the future running and conduct of the target's business and consideration may have to be given either to modifying these or buying out or repaying the relevant rights or loans.
Advisers' obligations and conflicts of interest
Note 1 to Rule 2.1 requires advisers to draw their clients' attention to the provisions of the Code and to warn them in particular about the obligations of secrecy and restrictions on dealings.
This obligation is repeated in the introduction to the General Principles.
Offerors and target companies can expect to receive formal written advice from their advisers on the more important provisions of the Code and the insider dealing legislation (see para 7.1.1 below).
Note 1 on Rule 19.1 (see para 11.2.1 below) stipulates that financial advisers are responsible to the Panel for guiding their clients and any relevant public relations advisers with regard to any information released during the course of an offer.
Particular areas of sensitivity on which comment must be avoided include future profits and prospects, asset values and the likelihood of the revision of an offer.
In addition, Rule 20.1 (see para 12.2.1 below) provides that particular care must be taken not to release new material in interviews or discussions with the media.
Financial advisers must also be mindful of conflicts of interests, and a guidance note on this topic is contained in Appendix 3 to the Code.
It deals in particular with confidential information and Chinese Walls.
Financial standing of the offeror
The announcement of a firm intention to make an offer for a target company must only be made when the offeror has every reason to believe that it can and will continue to be able to implement the offer (Rule 2.5(a)).
Responsibility in this connection also rests on the financial adviser to the offeror.
Where the offer is for cash or includes an element of cash, the offer document must include confirmation by an appropriate third party (eg the offeror's bank or financial adviser) that the offeror has sufficient resources to satisfy acceptances of the offer in full(although, in exceptional circumstances, with the consent of the Panel, a conditional form of confirmation may be allowed if the provision of cash is subject to the fulfilment of certain conditions)(Rule 24.7).
Under that Rule, the party confirming that the resources are available will not be expected to produce the cash itself provided, in giving the confirmation, it acted responsibly and took all reasonable steps to assure itself that the cash was available.
That person should nevertheless have regard to its potential liability under the general law for negligent misstatement (see Chapter 20).
A similar confirmation is required in any announcement of a mandatory offer (Rule 2.5(c)).
Although such a confirmation does not have to be given in relation to a voluntary offer until the offer document is posted, it is imperative that the necessary investigation work be completed by the financial adviser before the announcement is made, given that the announcement binds the offeror to post the offer document.
A number of further points should be noted:(1) If the financial adviser is acting for a newly-formed bidder (eg an "off-the-shelf" company), the standard of care required of it has a special dimension.
An offer should only be announced once an irrevocable commitment to provide the necessary funds has been received from a person upon whom reliance can reasonably be placed at that time (see Panel Notice 1991/4 of 1 May 1991 in relation to Luirc Corp and Merlin International Properties Ltd).
(2) Except with the consent of the Panel, the offer document must describe how the offer is to be financed, the source of that finance, the names of the principal lenders or arrangers of the finance and, if the financing or any security for it will depend to any significant extent on the business of the target, the arrangements concerned (or a negative statement)(Rule 24.2(d)—see para 11.3.5.7 below).
(3) The offeror should ensure that the terms of its banking facilities are compatible with the terms of the offer and the requirements of the Code (in particular that there is an unconditional commitment to provide the cash resources for the consideration payable if the offer becomes or is declared unconditional).
(4) If a cash underwritten alternative or a rights issue is being used to finance the bid, the underwriting agreement should be in place before the announcement is made and the terms of the agreement should ensure that there is a guaranteed commitment to provide the necessary funds if the offer becomes or is declared unconditional.
(5) If the offeror is listed, and the takeover is a Super Class 1 transaction, then the circular to its shareholders must contain a statement that its group will have sufficient working capital.
If cash forms a substantial part of the consideration, the working capital statement must be supported by a letter of confirmation to the London Stock Exchange  from the offeror's sponsoring member firm (see para 17.2.2.2 below).
A detailed working capital review will be required accordingly.
A Class 1 transaction requires a working capital statement but not a working capital letter.
(6) If the offer is conditional (which it invariably is) the offeror should have every reason to believe that the conditions will be satisfied if he is to comply with the terms of Rule 2.5(a). (7) The board of the target company is entitled to be satisfied that the offeror is, or will be, in a position to implement the offer in full(Rule 1(c)).
It will often seek a comfort letter to that effect from the offeror's financial adviser.
Cash underwritten alternatives
There are two ways in which a bidder generally uses its paper in order to finance a takeover; an underwritten rights issue (see para 5.6 above) or a cash underwritten alternative.
A cash underwritten alternative occurs where the bidder offers its own shares to the shareholders of the target but at the same time arranges for its merchant bank to offer to buy from accepting shareholders, who wish to take cash, all or a proportion of those shares immediately.
The merchant bank in turn may arrange for sub-underwriters to buy all or some of those shares for which the cash is required.
The following should be noted:(1) Cash underwritten alternatives are only feasible in an active stock market where there is a demand for the offeror's shares.
(2) The principal advantage of a cash underwritten alternative over a rights issue is that the new shares in the bidder are allotted to the target's shareholders, in which case merger relief and, possibly, merger accounting may be available (see para 23.1 below).
However, a rights issue preserves the pre-emption rights of the offeror's shareholders.
This is not possible with a cash underwritten alternative unless it is accompanied by an open offer and clawback (see para 5.6 above).
It should be noted that a cash underwritten alternative may result in lower underwriting costs than a rights issue (see para 5.6 above).
(3) If a recommended offer is proposed which has not been announced, Note 2 to Rule 2.3 requires the target to request the London Stock Exchange to grant a suspension of the target's listing before the proposed offer is disclosed to any sub-underwriters (see para 6.3.5 below).
In the case of a contested offer, suspension is impracticable and disclosure is permitted to a restricted number of sub-underwriters  immediately before the announcement, provided they are warned of the confidential nature of the information.
(4) An underwriter who may acquire 30 per cent or more of the bidder's voting rights as a result of the underwriting may trigger an obligation to make a mandatory bid for the offeror and the Panel should be consulted in such cases.
This risk can normally be avoided by following the Whitewash procedure.
If an underwriter incurs a Rule 9 obligation unexpectedly, for example as a result of an inability to sub-underwrite all or part of his liability, the Panel should be consulted (see para 8.5 below).
(5) In order to keep his underwriting costs to a minimum, the bidder will normally wish to shut-off the cash underwritten alternative as soon as practicable.
Rule 33.2 permits an early closing subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions (see para 13.3.18.4 below).
This is often set at 21 days after the posting of the offer document, which coincides with the first closing date of the offer.
The offeror will also wish to post the offer document as soon as possible following the announcement of the offer (see para 13.4.3 below).
Where a cash underwritten alternative has been offered, but closed early to save underwriting costs, the offeror will, in order to take advantage of the compulsory sale procedure, need to find the cash itself in order to pay minority shareholders (see paras 13.4.3 and 13.3.5 below).
(6) The procedure for acceptance of a cash underwritten alternative which is capable of being shut-off early must be prominently stated in relevant documents and acceptance forms.
In particular, the Panel is concerned that it should be made clear in the offer document, acceptance form and subsequent documents whether shareholders must lodge their certificates by the closing date of the cash underwritten alternative in addition to their completed acceptance forms in order to receive cash (see para 11.3.16 below).
(7) There is no reason why a cash underwritten alternative cannot be extended alongside the main offer if the bidder chooses.
This will, however, require negotiation with the underwriters and additional underwriting fees.
The more normal condition is that it will only be available to those shareholders of the target who have accepted both the share offer and the cash alternative not later than the first closing date.
The underwriting agreement will normally impose an obligation on the offeror to notify underwriters at that stage of the numbers of shares they will be required to take up, assuming the offer becomes unconditional.
(8) The offer of the cash underwritten alternative is usually made conditional only upon the main share offer becoming or being declared wholly unconditional in accordance with its terms.
(9) The form of acceptance will normally authorise an appropriate person to execute a transfer, assignment or renunciation of the consideration shares on the accepting shareholder's behalf and authorise the merchant bank to post a cheque to the accepting shareholder (usually at his risk).
(10) Acceptance of the cash underwritten alternative and the consequent disposal of the consideration shares might give rise to a liability to capital gains tax depending on the individual circumstances of the accepting shareholder.
This should be explained in the offer document.
Stamp duty
Because the merchant bank or sub-underwriters are buying existing shares there will normally be a charge to stamp duty or stamp duty reserve tax (SDRT) on the sale.
This cost is often absorbed by the bidder.
Latterly, various schemes have been proposed to avoid this additional layer of stamp duty or SDRT involved in a cash underpinning.
These vary, of course, but the main idea is to create a three-cornered arrangement along the following lines:
(a) the merchant bank covenants to pay cash to accepting shareholders who have validly accepted the share offer but who then also validly accept the cash alternative;
(b) those accepting shareholders who accept the share offer and agree to transfer their shares in the target to the offeror will receive the right to an allotment of shares in the offeror credited as fully paid.
Those who elect to receive cash receive a right to require the shares to be allotted credited as fully paid to a nominated person.
In return for the offeror agreeing to procure that the accepting shareholders are paid the requisite amount of cash, the accepting shareholders exercise their right to nominate the merchant bank, or as it may direct (ie sub-underwriters), as the person to whom the shares are to be allotted; and
(c) the offeror receives a binding commitment from the merchant bank to pay cash to accepting shareholders who elect to receive it in return for the offeror procuring the allotment to the merchant bank (or, as directed, sub-underwriters) of the consideration shares (by means of the nominations received from accepting shareholders).
The main objective of the arrangement is to attempt to avoid any contract (particularly between the merchant bank and an accepting shareholder) for the transfer of chargeable securities (eg shares, an interest in shares or any right to an allotment of shares).
This would, of course, give rise to the obligation to pay stamp duty or SDRT.
In addition, an agreement between an accepting shareholder and the bank to direct the consideration shares to which he is entitled to be allotted to the bank in return for cash could be construed as an equitable assignment of the right to the allotment of the shares (see, for example , Letts v Inland Revenue Commissioners [1956]3 All ER 588) and possibly chargeable.
In possibly solving a problem in relation to stamp duty or SDRT the arrangement may throw up problems in other areas:(1) Section 89(4) of CA 1985 (statutory pre-emption rights) provides that the statutory pre-emption rights do not apply to a particular allotment of equity shares if these are, or are to be, wholly or partly paid up otherwise than in cash.
It could be alleged that, in effect, the underwriter or sub-underwriters are being allotted the shares for cash.
It is at least arguable that this is not the case as the consideration for the allotment of the shares (which are expressed to be credited as fully paid) must be the transfer of the shares in the target, because that is the only consideration which the offeror receives under the arrangement (apart from the merchant bank's commitment to pay cash to accepting shareholders, but that is cancelled by the offeror's commensurate obligation to procure accepting shareholders to authorise the offeror to allot the consideration shares to the merchant bank or as it directs, and so no net benefit flows to the offeror).
It is thought that it is irrelevant what consideration accepting shareholders receive under the arrangement.
(2) Under CA 1985, s131(1) merger relief (see para 23.1.5 below) will be available"…where the issuing company has secured at least a 90 per cent equity holding in another company in pursuance of an arrangement providing for the allotment of equity shares in the issuing company on terms that the consideration for the shares allotted is to be provided (a) by the issue or transfer to the issuing company of equity shares in the other company…
"
 "Arrangement" is widely defined in s131(7) as any agreement, scheme or arrangement and so would seem to encompass the arrangements described above.
If the argument mentioned in relation to s89 is correct in respect of that section then it should be equally applicable to s131(1). (3) Section 103(3) provides that s103(1) (requiring a valuation in respect of shares allotted by a public company for a non-cash consideration) does not apply to  "…the allotment of shares by a company in connection with an arrangement providing for the allotment of shares in that company on terms that the whole or part of the consideration for the shares allotted is to be provided by the transfer to that company (or the cancellation) of all or some of the shares, or of all or some of the shares of a particular class, in another company (with or without the issue to that company of shares, or of shares of any particular class, in that other company)" .
If the issue of the shares is treated as being for cash then s103(1) does not apply in any event.
As far as the exemption in s103(3) is concerned, "arrangement" is again widely defined as any agreement, scheme or arrangement and it is thought that it must be the case that at least part, if not the whole, of the consideration for the shares allotted is the transfer of the shares in the other company (ie the target).
It is early days for these schemes and, because they have not yet been tested in the courts, must come with an appropriate health warning.
Practitioners will no doubt wish to advise their clients accordingly, seek appropriate indemnities where possible and obtain counsel's opinion on particular areas of difficulty.
Identity of the offeror
If the offer or approach is not made by the ultimate offeror or potential offeror, then Rule 1(b) requires that his identity be disclosed at the outset.
In addition, Rule 2.5(b) requires the offeror to be identified in the formal press announcement.
If the offeror is a subsidiary, or a company controlled by a consortium, the offeror should normally expect the Panel to look through the corporation and require disclosure of the ultimate holding company or members of the consortium.
In this respect see para 11.3.5.3 below.
Approaches, secrecy, announcements and independent advice
Making an approach to the target company
Rule 1(a) stipulates that the offer must be put forward in the first instance to the board of the target company or its advisers.
In the case of a hostile bid where the offeror is relying on the element of surprise, the target's board can expect to receive the minimum of warning before the offeror's press announcement (announcing its firm intention to make an offer) is released.
However, notice which is too short is unlikely to comply with the underlying spirit of the Rule.
The timing of an approach must be considered carefully.
As we will see (see para 6.3.4 below), after an approach has been made the obligation to make an announcement falls primarily on the target.
This means that the bidder will lose some control over the secrecy arrangements and may face a premature announcement by the target.
Accordingly, as much preparatory work as possible should be done in advance.
Secrecy
Rule 2.1 stresses the need for absolute secrecy before an announcement is made.
All persons privy to confidential, and particularly price-sensitive, information concerning an offer or proposed offer must treat that information as secret and may pass it to another person only if it is necessary to do so and the other person is made aware of the need for secrecy.
Particular attention must be given to the following:(1) The secrecy obligation is closely linked to Rule 2.2(e) which requires that where more than a very restricted number of people (ie those in the companies concerned who need to know and their immediate advisers) are included in pre-offer negotiations or discussions, then an announcement must be made.
An offeror wishing to approach a wider group (eg where an offeror consortium is being  organised or where irrevocable undertakings are being sought) should consult the Panel.
(2) Note 2 to Rule 2.1 warns companies of the particular risk that price-sensitive information may be leaked during proof printing of documents, and urges every possible precaution to ensure confidentiality.
The use of a good firm of security printers is essential in this respect.
(3) The Panel discourages approaches to suppliers, creditors, customers and trading partners of the target before the bid is announced.
(4) Pre-bid discussions with privileged shareholders (eg institutions) have in the past been forbidden by the Panel on the basis that they contravene General Principle 2 (information should be made available to all shareholders alike).
They may also make such shareholders "insiders" .
(5) Information may be passed from the target to the offeror (and vice versa) provided security is maintained (see Note 1 on Rule 20.1; para 12.2.1.1 below).
(6) As well as ensuring that documents do not fall into the wrong hands, the parties should ensure that any meetings or "due diligence" exercises are conducted discreetly, to avoid rumour and speculation.
Not only is secrecy important in order to comply with the Code, but it is commercially desirable.
Rumour and speculation can affect the target's and the offeror's share prices; upset employees, customers, suppliers and other third parties who deal with the company; and may even force the offeror or the target to make a premature announcement.
Announcements
Press announcements are as important as the formal offer or defence documents which follow.
They must be prepared with the highest standards of care and accuracy.
Once statements are made the Panel will expect the parties to adhere to them.
The rationale behind this is clear; press announcements are designed to provide information which the market will rely upon, and to prevent the creation of a false market.
Types of announcement
Three types of announcement are relevant during the preliminary stages:(1) the "talks are in progress" announcement ( "talks announcement" );(2) the announcement of a firm intention to make an offer;(3) statements of intention not to make an offer.
Circumstances in which an announcement is required
Rule 2.2 stipulates that an announcement must be made in six separate situations:
(a) when a firm intention to make an offer (not subject to any continuing pre-condition) is notified to the board of the target company from a serious source.
If there is any doubt as to whether the proposed offer is serious the Panel should be consulted.
This obligation arises irrespective of the attitude of the board to the offer;
(b) when the offeror triggers a Rule 9 obligation (mandatory offer).
The announcement must not be delayed while full information is obtained; a supplementary announcement can be issued later if necessary;
(c) when following an approach to the target company, the target is the subject of rumour and speculation or there is an untoward movement in its share price;
(d) when, before an approach is made, the target is the subject of rumour and speculation or suffers an untoward movement in its share price and there are reasonable grounds for concluding that it is the potential bidder's actions which have led to the situation.
Such actions may include share purchase operations and inadequate security;
(e) when negotiations or discussions between the offeror and the target are about to be extended beyond a very small group of people (ie the persons in the companies concerned who need to know and their immediate advisers).
An offeror wishing to organise a consortium or irrevocable commitments should consult the Panel;
(f) when a purchaser is being sought for a holding, or aggregate holdings, of shares carrying 30 per cent or more of the voting rights of a company or when the board of a company is seeking potential offerors, and:(i) the company is the subject of rumour and speculation, or (ii) there is an untoward movement in its share price, or (iii) the number of potential purchasers or offerors approached is about to be increased to include more than a very restricted number of people.
Any movement of 10 per cent or more will be regarded as untoward for these purposes (Note to Rule 2.2).
Where such a movement has  occurred, or there has been rumour and speculation, the Panel should be consulted if it is proposed not to make an immediate announcement.
Announcement of a possible offer ( "talks announcement" )
Except in the case of a mandatory offer, until such time as a firm intention to make an offer is notified, a brief announcement that talks are taking place, or that a potential offeror is considering making an offer, will satisfy the obligation under Rule 2.2.
There is no requirement to name the potential offeror, and the announcement may simply be that the talks may or may not lead to an offer being made.
Responsibility for making the announcement
Rule 2.3 clearly sets out the responsibilities for making announcements:
(a) before the board of the target company is approached, the responsibility can lie only with the offeror.
The offeror is obliged to keep a close watch on the target's share price for any signs of untoward movement;
(b) the offeror is also responsible for making the announcement if a requirement to make a mandatory offer is triggered;
(c) following an approach to the board of the target company, which may or may not lead to an offer, the primary responsibility lies with the board of the target, which must accordingly keep a close watch on its share price.
The offeror must not employ any "strong-arm tactics" to prevent the board of the target from making an announcement or requesting a suspension of listing if it thinks it appropriate.
Although Rule 2.3 does not say so, it is thought that a potential offeror ought not to have the responsibility for making an announcement before the target's board is approached if rumour or speculation or an untoward price movement arises because the target's board itself seeks potential offerors, or a shareholder seeks a purchaser for an interest of 30 per cent or more.
The Panel should be consulted in such cases.
Suspension of listing and cash underwritten alternatives
Rule 2.3 stipulates that where the offer is to be recommended, an alternative (if the target is listed) to an announcement is to obtain a temporary suspension from listing followed by an announcement.
This may be desirable to allow more definite proposals to be announced.
The London Stock Exchange will not normally grant a temporary suspension  for more than 48 hours.
The Panel is not sympathetic to delay in making an announcement occasioned by an unsuccessful application for suspension.
Only the company whose shares are to be suspended can make the application.
Note 2 to Rule 2.3 deals with cash underwritten alternatives.
In the case of a recommended offer which will provide a cash alternative by way of underwriting the target company should, assuming no announcement has been made, request the London Stock Exchange to grant a suspension before the proposed offer is disclosed to any sub-underwriters.
In the case of a contested offer, suspension is impracticable and disclosure to a restricted number of sub-underwriters immediately before the announcement is permitted provided they are warned of the confidential nature of the information.
The Yellow Book imposes on listed companies its own obligations regarding secrecy and announcements (see para 17.5 below), which mirror much of what the Code imposes.
Readers should note that a warning announcement (which may be an announcement that the target is having talks which may or may not lead to an offer) or a temporary suspension of listing (pending clarification of the position) may be required.
This will be the case where negotiations or discussions are extended to embrace more than a small group of people or where they are at such an advanced stage that the target is reasonably confident that an offer will be made for its shares; where secrecy cannot be maintained; or if security is breached.
Announcing a firm intention to make an offer
As mentioned earlier, an offeror should announce an offer only after the most careful and responsible consideration.
Such an announcement should not be made until the offeror has every reason to believe that it can and will continue to be able to implement it.
Responsibility in this connection also rests on the financial adviser to the offeror (Rule 2.5(a) and General Principle 3).
Not only does this protect the target's shareholders but it also ensures that the target is not subjected to the disruption caused by frivolous bids or, for example, announcements designed to fuel an increase in the target's share price through the expectation of an offer merely so that the potential offeror can sell its stake in the target at a profit.
An interesting case in point was WM Low's recommended offer for Budgens (Panel Statement 1989/4 of 1 August 1989).
The offer was conditional on the approval of the bidder's shareholders.
The offeror's directors subsequently felt unable to continue to recommend the offer to its shareholders because of differences in expectations over the combined group's financing, and the offer was withdrawn with the consent of  the target and the Panel.
In subsequent disciplinary proceedings, WM Low's financial advisers were criticised for not seeking adequate financial information from the target to satisfy themselves about future financing before the offer was announced.
Clearly, the extent to which the offeror and its financial advisers can satisfy themselves on such matters before the announcement depends on the co-operation which can be expected from the target's board.
In a hostile bid, very little will be forthcoming.
An announcement of a firm intention to make an offer (as distinct from a talks announcement) must contain the following information (Rule 2.5(b)):
(a) the terms of the offer (in sufficient detail to enable the offer to be evaluated);
(b) the conditions (including normal conditions relating to acceptances, listing and increase of capital) to which the offer (or its posting) is subject.
These should be set out almost verbatim as they will appear in the offer document;
(c) the identity of the offeror;
(d) details of existing shareholdings in the target which are owned or controlled by the offeror or its concert parties, or in respect of which the offeror has received irrevocable undertakings, or in respect of which the offeror or any member of its concert parties has obtained an option to purchase;
(e) details of any arrangement of the kind referred to in Note 6(b) of Rule 8 (indemnities and arrangements regarding relevant securities).
The announcement may contain a pre-condition to the posting of the formal offer document, in which case the offer document need not be posted until that condition is satisfied.
However, the Panel will not allow an offeror to rely on a pre-condition indefinitely as this creates uncertainty in the market.
Such pre-conditions might include the verification of financial or other information relating to the target, or merger control authorities taking a certain course of action, or the target complying with its obligations under Rule 20.2 (equality of information to a bona fide competing potential offeror).
However, as mentioned below, such pre-conditions must satisfy the requirements of objectivity in Rule 13.
The Notes to Rule 2.5 impose additional obligations:(1) The language used in announcements must be clear and unambiguous and the word "agreement" must be used with particular care.
Statements which may give a misleading impression regarding proposed courses of action should be avoided.
(2) The Panel accepts that for reasons of secrecy it is not prudent to make enquiries so as to include in an announcement details of the target's shares held by other parts of an adviser's group (the adviser acting in concert with the offeror for these purposes).
In such circumstances details should be obtained as soon as possible after the announcement has been made and the Panel consulted.
If the holdings are significant a further announcement may be required.
(3) The announcement must specify in what circumstances any irrevocable undertakings will cease to be binding (eg on receipt of a higher offer).
(4) The Panel must be consulted before any condition which is not entirely objective is included.
There is a cross-reference to Rule 13 (subjective conditions).
A listed offeror is required under the Yellow Book to make an immediate announcement once the terms of an offer are agreed, except in the case of a Class 3 takeover not involving the issue of listed securities as consideration.
This obligation is often discharged by incorporating the required information (see para 17.2.3 below) in the press announcement of the firm intention to make the offer.
If the press announcement includes a profit forecast then, in accordance with Rule 28.2 (see para 16.1.2 below), the assumptions (including the commercial assumptions) upon which the directors have based their forecast must be stated.
It is important that all the relevant conditions are incorporated in the announcement.
An offeror who later attempts to add a material new condition to the offer document may be required to withdraw it by the Panel (see the Panel Statement of 24 January 1983 on Bassishaw Investments Limited and UDS Property Group plc).
New conditions which are necessary in order to implement a revised offer will, however, be permitted subject to the prior consent of the Panel (see para 13.3.17 below).
Consequences of a firm announcement
After an announcement of a firm intention to make an offer has been made the offeror must, except with the consent of the Panel, proceed with the posting of the offer document (which must occur within 28 days) unless the posting is subject to a specific pre-condition which has not been satisfied (Rules 2.7 and 30.1).
There are three let outs from this obligation:
(a) where there has been a change in circumstances of an exceptional and specific nature (but a change in general economic, industrial  or political circumstances will not justify failure to proceed with an announced offer);
(b) if a competitor has already posted a higher offer;
(c) where the board of the target is about to embark on frustrating action within the meaning of Rule 21 and the Panel consents to the offeror withdrawing for this reason.
Circulation of announcements
Promptly after the first announcement of an offer or possible offer, a copy of the press notice, or a circular summarising the terms and conditions of the offer, must be sent by the target company to the Panel and to its shareholders (Rule 2.6).
Where necessary, the board should explain the implications of the offer.
Not surprisingly, a hostile bidder may find these obligations grudgingly discharged by the board of the target.
A letter dismissing the offer is usually sent out with the details of the offer relegated to an appendix in small type.
Statements of intention not to make an offer
Rule 2.8 stipulates that a person making a statement that he does not intend to make an offer for a company will normally be bound by the terms of that statement.
The statement must be as clear and as unambiguous as possible.
Three points should be noted:(1) Note 1 to the Rule recommends anyone considering making such an announcement to consult the Panel first.
(2) It is generally acceptable to state that an offer will not be made for a particular period of time.
(3) If no time limit is stated, a person will be permitted to change his intention only if the Panel is satisfied that the original announcement was made with due care after proper consideration of all relevant circumstances, and has not misled shareholders or the market.
A change of intention will normally be permitted only when a significant time has elapsed or a material change of circumstances has occurred sufficient to justify the person's change of intention.
Independent advice
Target company
Rule 3.1 provides that the board of the target must obtain competent independent advice on any offer and the substance of that advice must  be made known to its shareholders.
The Panel attaches great importance to professional advice to enable the board to present its views fairly and accurately.
The Notes to the Rule emphasise that independent advice is particularly important in the case of a management buy-out, or where a controlling shareholder or group of controlling shareholders is making the offer.
The responsibility of the adviser will be considerable and his independence from the parties should be beyond question.
Where there is uncertainty about the financial information in the target's most recently published financial statements, any important factors must be highlighted by the board and the financial adviser.
Where the board or the adviser are unable to form a view on or recommend the offer they must set out fully the arguments for and against.
Offeror company
Under Rule 3.2 the board of an offeror company must obtain competent independent advice on any offer which is a reverse takeover or presents the directors with a conflict of interest.
The substance of the advice must be made known to the offeror's shareholders.
The Notes to the Rule expand on the obligation.
Where the offeror is required to obtain independent advice, it should do so before announcing an offer or any revised offer, and the advice should be as to whether or not the making of the offer is in the interests of shareholders.
Shareholders must be given sufficient time to consider the advice before any general meeting held to sanction the offer.
The document containing the advice must contain a Rule 19.2 responsibility statement by the directors.
An offer is a reverse takeover for these purposes where the offeror might as a result need to increase the existing voting equity share capital by more than 100 per cent.
A conflict of interest will exist where:(1) there are significant cross-shareholdings between the offeror company and the target;(2) a number of directors are common to both companies;(3) a person is a substantial shareholder in both companies.
In practice, offerors invariably appoint financial advisers whether or not Rule 3.2 applies.
Disqualified advisers
The Panel will not regard an adviser as independent if he is in the same group as the financial adviser to an offeror, or if he has a significant interest in or financial connection with either an offeror or the target  company of such a kind as to create a conflict of interest (Rule 3.3).
Generally speaking, conflicts of interest cannot be resolved by Chinese Walls.
A person who manages or is part of the same group as the investment manager of an investment trust company will not normally be regarded as an appropriate person to give independent advice in relation to that company.