

An introduction to the language of literature by N.F. Blake, 1990, Macmillan, London, pp. 152 ISBN 0 333 45410 3 (hb), 0 333 45411 1 (pb)
Though relatively short, Blake's book is impressive in scope.
Two texts, Shakespeare's Sonnet 129 and the opening of Jane Austen's Mansfield Park, are analysed in all chapters, except in the one on pragmatics (Chapter 6) and in the conclusion (Chapter 8).
The first chapter deals with sentence structure (clause elements, theme/rheme and topic/comment, and declarative/interrogative/imperative sentence structures), and the second and third with group structure (noun, verb, and adverbial groups).
The fourth looks at vocabulary (borrowings, core words, affixation, compounding, functional shifts and some elementary semantics), and the fifth at sound and rhetorical patterns (types of sound, rhyme, alliteration, assonance, consonance, metre in prose and poetry, and classical rhetorical figures).
The sixth introduces pragmatics (presupposition, speech act theory, the co-operative principle and deixis) and includes an analysis of the changing-of-the-guard scene at the beginning of Hamlet.
The seventh focuses on cohesion (reference, substitution, ellipsis, temporal links, conjunctions and lexical fields), and the concluding chapter applies the above modes of analysis to W.H. Auden's "This lunar beauty" .
This book is intended as a "basic guide to style" (preface) for undergraduates and sixth-formers.
Blake's aim is to introduce linguistic tools and demonstrate that they are of value in the analysis of literary texts.
In general, his presentation of theoretical details is lucid and palatable, and well balanced by judicious use of examples.
His expertise as a Shakespeare scholar is evident in his perceptive analyses of Sonnet 129 and the guard-changing scene in Hamlet.
The book is worth reading for these alone.
My criticisms are mainly concerned with Blake's handling of some major theoretical issues and with certain parts of the book.
Blake often stretches concepts with contentious boundaries into diaphanous holdalls.
Presupposition can be any knowledge that enables us "to understand what is said properly and fully" (p. 84).
This does not bode well for pragmatics which (rather oddly, we might think) consists "of the presuppositions which lie behind utterances…" (p. 104).
Admittedly, these are difficult terms to define.
Levinson, in Pragmatics (1983), spends some thirty pages trying to pin down the term "pragmatics" .
But such broad definitions render the terms vacuous and thus deprive them of analytical value.
According to Blake, one can either subject the text to a total linguistic analysis and then try to select what is relevant, or concentrate one's analysis on significant linguistic features.
The former has the difficulty of selection of what is relevant, for which Blake offers no rationale; the latter has the difficulty of what makes one decide to investigate a particular feature.
He writes: This seems to be an unnecessarily bleak picture.
Theories of foregrounding, both linguistic and cognitive (see, for example, van Peer 1986 or Cook 1990), can help focus the intuitions readers have about a text.
Indeed, for examples of foregrounding sharpening and guiding one's reading of a text one need look no further than Blake's own analysis: "This structure suggests that parallelism and contrast may well form important attributes of the passage" (p. 17); "The end of each line seems a little more powerful as that pattern is disrupted" (p. 27);"The metre used in a poem sets up an expectation on the part of the reader or listener that the pattern will be preserved throughout the poem.
It would make a poem too stereotyped if this did in fact happen and so the metrical pattern will be varied.
When this happens the expectations of the reader are thwarted and the break in the pattern often throws greater emphasis on the words or group where this happens"(p. 75).
This book needs an explicit account of aspects of foregrounding to help readers focus their investigations.
In the introduction, Blake skims over various stylistic approaches and attempts to justify his own.
Teaching a new methodology, he argues, may alienate the reader because it seems remote from what they know and there seems to be no "convenient point of entry" .
He takes his point of departure from traditional grammar, drawing upon his book Traditional English grammar and beyond (1988).
Perhaps he is optimistic in assuming that the students he has targeted will have much in the way of explicit grammatical knowledge; in my experience, first-year British undergraduates have little more than sketchy notions of what nouns and verbs are.
Any methodology is going to seem alien.
Furthermore, I suspect that Blake is influenced in his choice by his misleading view that "most literary language is of necessity language of the past" (p. 5).
This sounds like a criterion for literary language.
What about contemporary literature?
Is the "Domesday Book" literary?
In any case, why does one need traditional grammar to analyse such literary language of the past, if a modern framework can do the job better?
Referring to the writers of the Language in literature series, the jacket proclaims, "As far as possible they avoid technical jargon" .
In the final six pages (pp. 76–82) of the chapter on sound and rhetorical patterns we find cursus planus, cursus tardus, cursus velox, similiter cadens, similiter desinens, and the following list: Anadiplosis, Anaphora, Antanaclasis, Antimetabole, Asyndeton, Epanalepsis, Epistrophe, Epizeuxis, Isocolon, Parison, Paronomasia, Ploce, Polyptoton, Syllepsis, Zeugma.
Many readers, I suspect, will fall by the wayside as we descend into the realms of indigestible rhetorical terminology.
How many times has one ever had recourse to a term like anadiplosis?
One could always spell it out: "The final word or words of a clause or sentence repeated as the first word or words of the next clause or sentence" ; and only use anadiplosis if the regularity of the feature required the economy of a label.
Such terms are best confined to an appendix.
Blake's concluding chapter misfires.
In the introduction he had written in reference to Jakobson and Jones "s" shakespeare's verbal art in Th'expence of spirit "that" There is too much information, not all of which is relevant to a critical understanding of the text"(p. 7).
The final chapter is packed with analytical detail unrelated to an interpretation of This lunar beauty.
Having consumed two lengthy paragraphs of structural information, the reader is assured, "All this provides useful information which we need to keep in mind as we move towards a more linguistic analysis of the poem" .
In good faith, mind bulging with information, the reader staggers on.
By the end of the chapter the reader is smothered with linguistic information, most of which seems to be there merely as evidence for the poem's tone, be it "proverbial" or one of "intimacy" .
Blake does acknowledge "critical overkill" (p. 144), but claims that by applying these various techniques the poem "can be appreciated more fully and critically" (p. 144).
I suspect that Blake, in his enthusiasm to demonstrate all the techniques used in the book, has produced a mechanical exercise in linguistic description that risks killing appreciation.
It is the job of stylistics to relate linguistic description to interpretation in a clear and helpful way.
This book is in general good, but a chapter on foregrounding would have made it so much better.
Some grasp of what the language of literature or style is might have been helpful.
The jacket proclaims a "fresh and original approach" .
This is truer of the discourse chapters (6 and 7) than of the others; perhaps they could have been expanded.
Nevertheless, Blake's achievement in producing digestible theory and illuminating analyses within the confines of such a short book is considerable.
I would recommend it, though suggest one skims the rhetorical terminology (pp. 76–82) and the analysis of This lunar beauty in the concluding chapter.
Jonathan Culpeper Lancaster University, UK