

 "Diffugere nives" : on Englishing Horace
Walter Nash, University of Nottingham, UK
Abstract
There is in English a long tradition of Horatian poetics.
The works of Horace, particularly the Odes, have been used by generation after literary generation, in quotation, in allusion, in imitations, in thematic borrowings, and very commonly in the kind of translation process here called "Englishing" .
 "Englishing" involves the attempt to represent in English the content of a source poem, with a possible equivalence of some salient stylisitic features, but at the same time to relocate the work in the environment of English (or Anglo-American) culture and poetic tradition, with the intention, perhaps, of creating something at once old and quite new, faithful to the past yet relevant to the present.
This article discusses the problems of "Englishing" Horace's "Diffugere nives" (Odes, iv, 7).
The language and phrasing of the Latin text are closely studied, in relationship to several English versions, made in the eighteenth, nineteenth and twentieth centuries, but with fullest reference to a translation by A.E.
Housman, dating from 1897 but not made familiar to a general reading public until the (posthumous) publication, in 1936, of the volume More Poems.
The general tenor of the article is that "Englishing" becomes a personal matter, raising questions of aesthetics and taste not readily accommodated within the framework of a theory of translation.
Keywords: allusion; "Englishing" ; Horace; Housman, A.E.; lyric forms, Greek; metaphor; metres, syllabic; poetry, cultural environment of; prosody and syntax; reading, personal; strophe and quatrain; translation
1 Horace, "Englishing" and translation
It used to be told in Cambridge how that severest of scholars, Professor A.E.
Housman, would lecture on the lyrical poetry of Horace, expounding each text in uncompromising earnest until he reached the seventh ode of the fourth book, "Diffugere nives" .
There, it seemed, commentary was powerless and pointless; he would simply read the text aloud and move on to the next poem.
Ah, how touching, one might think, what a sensitive gesture, what a decent avowal of a perfection that leaves nothing more to be said.
But Housman did in fact say something about "Diffugere nives" — had said it, when the poet in him pre-empted the professor: he translated it into English verse, and in doing so produced a text that in its beauties or its blunders (as perceived by diverse readers) strikingly exemplifies a phenomenon, not exactly translation and not purely creative invention, called by our literary ancestors "Englishing" .
Here is the text of "Diffugere nives" , as printed in the Penguin Classics edition of the Odes (Michie 1964): Now what does this poem tell us?
Apparently, that we only live once, that nothing lasts for ever, that the hours and days and years are rolling inexorably round, that soon we will all be in Hades with yesterday's worthies, and nobody's family connections or talent or good deserts will get them out: so we had better make the most of life while we have it.
A commonplace, in short, but a classic commonplace, a canonic sentiment, one that has taken recurrent shape in European poetry for two thousand years or more.
Anybody who can read the Latin is held by the poem: its hold, however, is in the language, the typical Horation speed — for want of a better word — the eloquent economy of phrase, the loading of the text with allusions and with metaphors overt and covert.
Strip the poem of these stylistic distinctions, attempt a deliberately banal, near-literal prose rendering, and we are left with something like this: This "naked" rendering — in which, however, the text's informing metaphors still lurk — presents the substance of the poem, but necessarily obscures its compositional pattern, which is actually strophic.
The Latin text of 28 lines, set out above, is divisible into seven quatrains, each quatrain — and each couplet within the quatrain — completing a stage in the cumulative tally of meaning.
Here, as in the Odes generally, Horace favours a method of collage or juxtaposition, letting his audience make the semantic connections between images.
In some of the odes, this compositional method has a wayward look, perhaps leaving the modern reader with the suspicion that the poem is structurally flawed.1 It is not particularly troublesome in "Diffugere nives" ; even so, there are throughout the poem points at which a reader needs to take connections on trust, or ventures to read them into the text, because they are not foregrounded or overtly articulated.
An example is the apparent gap or semantic skip between the third and fourth distich, i.e, between , "naked, dares to lead the dance" , and , "expect nothing to last for ever" .
What have naked nymphs to do with mortal expectations?
The connection is implied in the verbs  ( "dare" ) and   ( "hope" , "look for" , "expect" ): "nymphs, being immortal, may dare to do their perennial dance, but you, a mere human, must not hope that the good days will always come round" .
The economy of phrase and the abrupt transitions of a Horatian ode can generally be traced to the demands of an intricate governing metre.
The primary artifice of these poems is prosodic; the metre is an elaborate mechanism that generates — indeed, compels — further elaborations, in syntax and in the lexicon.
The lyrics represent in themselves a kind of translation — a transmutation of poetic forms and rhythms by a poet who could boast of being , "the first to have adapted the Greek lyric style to our native measures" .
The Odes might thus be called (without detracting from their literary value) an experimental workshop of metres.
Alcaeus and Sappho are obvious models, but for some poems Horace turned to more recondite sources, in variants of the so-called Asclepiadean and Archilochean metres.
The pattern of "Diffugere nives" is named First Archilochean, after Archilochos of Paros, a poet who lived, it may be noted, six centuries before Horace was born and a century before Alcaeus and Sappho.
Horace took a long view of excellence; a very rough idea of his aesthetic commitment to the tradition of Greek letters, and some understanding of the initially cool (or possibly baffled) public reception of his Greek-inspired Odes, might be gained if we were to try to imagine one of our own Augustans studiously engaged, while everyone else relied on the staple measure of the heroic couplet, in the production of poems imitating the intricate court metres of the Nordic skald, such as the Drottkvaett, or the Dunhenda.
The Greek forms and rhythms were as exotic and as remote as that.
The First Archilochean is technically defined as a dactylic hexameter followed by a dactylic trimeter catalectic — meaning that the last foot in the second line (the trimeter) is incomplete and is suspended on a (usually) long syllable, with an effect, in recital, comparable with that of a "rest" in music.
To reflect the strophic build-up of the poem presents no great difficulty to a translator; what is extremely difficult is to render into English, a stress-timed language, an idea of a metre based on syllabic timings.
Here is the metrical model of "Diffugere nives" , as presented in its first two lines: In J.B. Leishman's translation (Leishman 1956) this opening couplet is rendered as follows: The strophe continues: Leishman's skill in adapting the metre is much to be commended; there is great ingenuity, particularly in the adaptation of the English ing-forms ( "transforming" , "diminishing" , "hurrying" ) to the dactylic Graeco-Latin rhythms.
But for all the craft of Leishman and others who have attempted the re-creation of Classical syllabic metres, an English mimicry of Latin echoing Greek is not easily sustained.
For the translator this is a more than peripheral inconvenience; the problem of necessary losses and possible compensations, a problem attendant on all translations, begins, in the particular case of Horace, with the poem's rhythms.
Anyone wanting to render him into modern English must reckon with the possibility of having to abandon or in some way replace the metre; and then, where Horatian Latin steps lightly, so lightly, as to the sound of flutes, in comes English with galumphing hoof, trumpeting rhymes.
More than that, the abandonment of syllabic metre means losing the principal stylistic character, the distinctive "key" of the Odes, for it is in metrical subtlety that Horace finds, and recommends to his reader, what Yeats has called "the fascination of what's difficult" ; and it is out of that difficulty that the delicate, devious style of these lyrics uniquely flowers.
Horatian metres both dictate and accommodate Horatian syntax; in every poem there are striking effects of word order which, on the one hand, may be said to have been contrived, or willed by the poet, but on the other can be seen as arising from metrical necessity.
The novice reader, unaccustomed to bearing a word patiently in mind until its partner belatedly arrives, is repeatedly confronted with questions of normality — what is the "normal word order" in poems such as these?
The answer is, that the only norms are normal abnormalities, judged against the usages of prose.
If we can talk of "prose norms" in Latin generally, we will presumably define them as an order of clause elements according to which, in principal declarative clauses at least, the Subject precedes the Object, which is followed by the Verb.
(In linguist's shorthand, Latin is an SOV language; see Coleman 1987.)
The inflexional system of Latin, however, made it freely possible to subvert these norms, for rhetorical effect, to topicalise or focus, or to create the metre-governed structures of poetry.
In all the Odes there is scarcely a strophe, perhaps hardly a line, that does not transmute word order into word mosaic, a deliberate fragmentation that creates for the reader the pleasurable tension of wondering how the sense will be resolved, accompanied by the stimulus of casual associations, as one word runs against another.
Take an example from "Diffugere nives" , the line which signals a crucial moment of counterpoise in the poem:, literally "losses however swift restore heavenly moons" , meaning "swift moons, however, restore heavenly losses" .
Damna "goes with" (as a noun followed by its modifier), with  (as a modifier followed by its noun), sits in mid-line between the adroitly shuffled noun-phrases, and , the word that marks an emphatic turn in the poem, is slipped into focusing position after the first word of the new verse-sentence.
(Note, in the line that follows, a companion emphasis in the pre-posing of nos — "whereas we" , "we by contrast" .)
This typically Horatian conundrum begets English readings that agree slightly to disagree: "Yet the moons are quick to make good their losses in the sky" (a school textbook, Allcroft and Hayes, n.d.);
 "Moons make speed to repair their heavenly losses" (Michie 1964); "While, though, waning moons can mend their celestial losses" (Leishman 1956); "Her losses soon the moon supplies" (Johnson 1784); "But oh, whate'er the sky-led seasons mar, /Moon upon moon rebuilds it with her beams" (Housman 1944); "These wounds of the wheeling skies are healed by the moons in their flying" (Marsh 1940).
If in some of these instances the writer appears to be trying to get more out of a rendering than a rendering will reasonably yield, the reason may be that in Horace's line there is a fortuitous convergence, a hovering ambivalence, of two possible constructions:, "the celestial losses of the moon" , i.e. the moon's waning, and , "swift — i.e. quickly returning — moons" .
Possibly the most striking thing about these variants, however, is the number of renderings of , as "make good" , "repair" , "mend" , "supply" , "rebuild" , "heal" .
The word in the text looks quite straightforward, but the word chosen by the translator tugs the meaning this way or that, gently distorting the text into a shape preferred by one of its readers.
Do I want the moon to "supply her losses" like an efficient steward, or would it be better for her to "heal wounds" , like a surgeon?
The choice may depend on who I am, and even on when I live; Edward Marsh's version — "These wounds of the wheeling skies are healed by the moons in their flying" — was published in wartime, in December 1940 (the year of the Battle of Britain).
To tackle the poem's lexicon, for the purposes of translation, is always to be brought up short by what appear to be the simplest words and expressions.
There are places in which the poet's idiom, conceivably forced by the metre, is elegantly terse, an invitation to the reader to fill in the descriptive gaps.
An example of this is the phrase alien;, literally "earth changes turns" .
Translators in general make uneasy going of this simple assertion: "the changing year renews the plain" (Johnson); "Earth shifts her dress" (Gladstone 1894); "and altered is the fashion of the earth" (Housman); "Earth's livery's changed" (Marsh); "earth's transforming herself" (Leishman); "the earth suffers her Springtime change" (Michie); "the earth shakes and changes" (Raffel 1983).
The significant fact here is that Horace has his metre-bound say in three words; of the renderings quoted, only one is as brief (Leishman), the others running from five words (Raffel) to eight words (Housman).
These expansions, furthermore, introduce ideas no more than potentially implied in the Horatian phrase: "renews the plain" , "fashion" , "suffers" , "shakes" .
It is as though these translators were each construing the poem by supplying a vocabulary reflecting a personal perception of the poet's intention — or perhaps in some cases caught from other translators.
(Gladstone's dress, Housman's fashion and Marsh's livery have no obvious warrant in the Horatian text, but may arise from a common "poetic" idea of Nature as clothing.)
And indeed, the lexicon of "Diffugere nives" lends itself repeatedly to the construction of immanent linkages in the lexicon, a strain of metaphor not overt (like the obvious figure of comae, "tresses" , in the second line) but operating covertly through the potential spread of reference, the semantic leeway, in certain items of vocabulary.
Diffugere, for example, is generally translated in the figurative sense "have dissolved" , "have melted" (with reference to snow), or more directly as "have gone away" , "have departed" , even "have fled" .
As to the last rendering, one of the possible meanings of  is "take flight" , "scatter in all directions" , with reference to the rout of an army.3 Here is a figure less immediately accessible than the apparent metaphor of "dissolving" , "melting" , yet no less consistent with the poet's intentions.
It projects a linkage with , and even with , of which one commentator solemnly remarks "the three Graces were represented as naked, and therefore afraid of chill weather" .
That is undoubtedly true, yet one suspects that there is more to the matter than seasonal facilities for dancing in the nude.
If diffugere signals that winter's troops are on the run — the snows have skeddadled — then the Grace may dare, at least for a brief time of truce, to resume her peaceful pastimes.
Furthermore, this "military" implication of  is consistent with other words in the poem presenting suggestions of a strife and a violence that relentlessly overbear the gentle conviviality of ordinary joys: with , for example, and .
Each of these words involves notions of brute force, even of warfare, allowing the sense of "plunder" , "pillage" , and  the meanings "trample" , "tread under foot" , "put to rout" .
The reader who returns frequently to the poem, and (in the way of obsessive readers) delights in noticing meanings potentially nestling within meanings, will begin to be persuaded, by and by, that these hints of battle and brutality are not to be ignored; yet they remain no more than hints, shadows of meaning cast by a powerful text.
Other words in the poem are important, vitally important, as terms rooted in Roman-ness, in the customs and values of the patriarchal state:.
The poem may be Greek in form, but these words reflect Roman society and politics, and they all elude, to a greater or lesser extent, comprehensive translation.
Heres, for example(in , "the greedy clutches of your heir" ), denotes something perhaps rather less cosy and familial than the English word "heir" ; in many contexts it suggests nothing more than a legal designate with a contractual, post-obituary option on some hapless benefactor's goods and chattels.5 Pietas is a notoriously difficult word to render, "piety" being the last recourse of the weary translator; it involves "integrity" , "probity" , "purity" , "fidelity" , "devotion" , "decency" — a complex of related moral attributes which Romans sought and recognised in the upright man.
This problem word occurs in context with two other words, only marginally less problematic for the translator, in what is arguably the poem's centrally significant couplet: Note the management of emphasis in the hexameter, through the initial  and the final .
J.B. Leishman's translation reads: What the translation misses here is the distinctive highlighting effect of the repeated non, and the focus on  at the end of a line: "" not lineage, not eloquence, not righteousness shall restore you. "" 
The you so pointedly admonished is the addressee of the poem, Torquatus, a representative Roman, fictionally standing in for the reader at large.
Who is Torquatus?
A virtuous man.
What are his qualifications?
He is of good family (genus), he is articulate, with the command of language necessary for the conduct of affairs in political assemblies and the lawcourts (), and he has pietas, meaning active virtue, a strenuous and selfless pursuit of what he believes to be right.
Yet none of these manly, marmoreal features of Roman citizenship is going to save him, Horace warns, from annihilation.
This message is closely linked to a supporting pattern of allusions.
Horace is a highly allusive poet; names of personages real and mythical fill the Odes, and nearly always with something more than a merely decorative intent.
They either function as addressees, marking the important "conversational" or "interpersonal" character of the Odes, or they are figures from the world of gods and heroes.
Horace may or may not have believed in the divinities and demi-gods he poetically invokes (he often deals whimsically with them, and he describes himself as  — not much of a churchgoer) but they were at the very least a cultural property that he held in common with his audience; he could assume that his readers — represented by Torquatus — would take the point if, in developing a theme, he reminded them of a name out of history or legend.
In "Diffugere nives" the names thus shadowing the message with which the poem ends, are Aeneas, Tullus, Ancus, Minos, Diana, Hippolytus, Theseus, Pirithoos.
Aeneas is the pater, the ancestor, the proto-Roman; Tullus and Ancus were early kings of Rome.
These names represent the theme of genus.
Hippolytus, son of Theseus, was put to death at the instigation of his stepmother, Phaedra, whose attempts at seduction he had virtuously resisted.
For his chastity he was a particular favourite of the goddess Diana, who, however, could not save him from death and the everlasting dark.
This legend evokes the theme of pietas, the "piety" of Hippolytus, a dutiful son and a pure soul.
The hero Theseus went down into the underworld to support his friend Pirithous in an attempt to carry off Proserpine, Queen of Hades.
Theseus was allowed to escape, but his intercession, as the prisoner's special friend, could not rescue Pirithous from the awful judgement, the , that he should be chained for ever in Hades, in punishment for his impious enterprise.
Thus  — eloquent pleading in matters of law or politics — is of no consequence when mortals pass beyond the limits of mortality.
The lexicon and the clustering allusions in the second half of the poem confer upon it a gravity, a sadness not wholly predictable from the opening, which seems to herald a piece on the theme of gathering rosebuds, drinking wine, and making the best of the good times before the infernal walls close in.
As a lyric celebration of the coming of spring, "Diffugere nives" very closely resembles an earlier poem, "" , the fourth ode of the first book; resembles it in theme, in imagery, in turns of phrase, even in prosody, for the two poems are the only two examples of Archilochean metre in the Odes.
They might be read in tandem as charming examples of Horace in his most fluently cajoling mood.
Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, not a man to be seduced by charm alone, thought rather little of "Diffugere nives" , coupling it with another poem, the twelfth ode of the fourth book, and dismissing the pair alike as  Frühlingslieder ( "unremarkable spring songs" ), which  Goethe, "" ,( "only remind us, like Goethe of old,"  "and if time goes swiftly by, the seasons come again" ")(1913).
But that judgement is not well considered.
 "Diffugere nives" is a darker poem than Wilamowitz will allow it to be.
It is death-haunted, and it discernibly mourns the , the old ways which Horace valued all his life, and to which, again and again, his verse pays retrospective tribute, until at last he all but confesses that the old ways never were and the good place has not yet been.
Is Horace, at the close of a poem published only a few years before the end of his own life, talking at and through "Torquatus" , talking to Rome, to the culture whose imperial destiny was beginning to seem less and less convincing and whose traditional virtues had become a matter of pious rhetoric?
The question eludes a convincing answer; yet the intuition persists that behind its lyric grace, its elegant melancholia, "Diffugere nives" conceals something close to a political statement of disillusion and regret.
 "Horace died" , says W.R. Johnson (in his foreword to Raffel 1983: ix), "thinking that he had spent most of his life watching the death of freedom and the disintegration of a culture and a civilization that he and many of his generation loved as much as their fathers had loved it." 
The snows of yesteryear have gone; but look, there are chains we cannot strike off.
(The reader may like to ponder the fact that the second word of the poem is nives, and its penultimate word vincula.)
2 Horace, "Englishing" and translation theory
This is certainly a difficult poem for any translator to attempt — but then there is no Horatian lyric that could be called "easy" ; there are besetting problems, concerning metre and form, concerning word order, concerning a lexicon in which patent meanings are shadowed by possibilities of other meanings, concerning the importance of allusion, and above all the Horatian craft that mingles these elements interdependently, in patterns that persist or shift from strophe to strophe.
How is anyone to re-create this elaborate art?
And, after all, what is the use of these poems in modern times?
Do we need this old Graeco-Roman game — like Eliot's Shakespeherian rag, so elegant, so intelligent?
Is it relevant to our literary tradition, our aesthetic sense, our social and psychological concerns?
How may it speak to us, as it was designed to speak to Torquatus the Roman?
At one time — probably at any time between the Restoration and, for a terminal date, the Second World War — those questions might have been rejected by literate folk as quite foolish and empty; because Horace has been, after all, almost an honorary Briton, so pervasive is his cultural presence.
Knowing Horace was once one of the marks of a decent literary education.
Even the dunce might come away from school with a phrase or two —— and the learned have sometimes gone to extraordinary lengths to get him into and out of their systems.
Henry Gunning, a Cambridge don in the eighteenth century, tells of a college fellow who "had Horace at his fingertips" — quite literally, for he committed the Odes to memory by taking the volume to the privy, getting a poem by heart, then tearing out the page for hygienic uses.
Others, not so thoroughgoing, have nonetheless in their own way absorbed Horace, in direct citation, in oblique reflection, in sundry topics and themes, in a stance perceived as Horatian, in accordance with the temper of the times.
(Each age promotes its own Horace.)
Still others have Englished him, following the promptings of their own tastes and aesthetic perceptions.
Here is Dr Johnson's 1784 rendering of the first strophe of "Diffugere nives" (incidentally his only translation from Horace — he evidently found Juvenal more to his creative purpose): And here, 110 years later, is William Ewart Gladstone, at leisure from Prime Ministerial cares and the alternative recreation of tree-felling on his Hawarden estate: But here again, almost a century on, is an American poet and scholar, Burton Raffel: What has happened to Horace's text in the course of these centennial transformations?
It is hardly the same poem; it seems to have meant more than slightly different things to three different people in different ages, if "meaning" involves something more than strict fidelity to content (and even then the texts wander away from the original).
How can this be called "translation" ?
Contemporary theorists have given much detailed attention to the questions of what a translation is, what kinds of translation may be attempted, what goals a translator may set, and how they may be achieved.
A typical theoretical framework is that proposed in the first chapter of Bell (1991), discussing the methodological requirements of translation.
Bell, like other assessors of the translation process (Newmark 1988, 1991: Hatim and Mason 1990) allows for some breadth and diversity of purpose in the translator, and consequently for different translating styles appropriate to different levels of communicative function.
(Bell's general model is provided by Hallidayan linguistics, with its distinctions between the ideational, interpersonal, and textual functions of language.)
Newmark (1991) proposes two major concepts, of "semantic" and "communicative" translation, the one "author-centred" , "faithful" , informative, the other reader-centred "," freer "," effective "; the opposition of" semantic "and" communicative "appears to correspond to the time-honoured distinction between the" literal "and the" free "(or the" creative ", or the" translation in the spirit of the thing").
About literality and freedom in the rendering of poetic texts, however, the applied linguists are not altogether at ease; Hatim and Mason (1990) allude to Roman Jakobson's argument that in a poem "formal aspects of the linguistic code become part of the meaning, so that translation proper is impossible" — in other words, that the only option may be some form of creative equation in which the resources of the target language are searched for equivalents or compensatory balances.
This comes as no news to anyone who has ever tried to render into English verse so much as a strophe of Horace.
His translators over the past two centuries might be divided into literalists, freewheeling creativists, and those — the greater number — who have attempted something in the middle way between Newmark's "semantic" and "communicative" ; those, indeed, who have attempted to "English" him.
 "Englishing" sets store by faithfulness to the content and general structure of the poem; does not oblige the translator to reproduce the prosody of the original, but does require the choice of something considered to be a metrical equivalent; allows the translator some licence in supplying figures, metaphors, etc., in compensation for those too deeply rooted for transplantation from the original language; relates the translation to current notions of poetic language and form (as, for example, Dr Johnson chose to put Horace into rhymed couplets, but C.S. Calverley, a contemporary of Tennyson, considered the "In Memoriam " stanza the most effective equivalent); offers, consequently, something to be considered both as a poem from the original and as an original poem; and attempts, in the widest sense, to place the adopted poem in the nurturing environment of the adoptive culture.
For writer and reader, "Englishing" can involve a play of perceptions, aesthetic, social, purely personal, that put this odd process just a little outside the reach of the translation theorist.
The treatment of Horace's Odes is a particular instance of the way poetic translations are taken personally, by those who make them and those who read them.
Until fairly recently, translations from Horace were not designed to serve the simple informative purpose of telling an inquisitive reader what Horace's writing was like, what sort of thing might be found in his poems, and whether it might be worth learning a little Latin to find out more.
Readers already knew their Horace and writers knew that readers knew.
The writer said, in effect, "Here is my Horace" , and the reader responded, in effect, "This is/is not the Horace that I know" , appraising the performance from the heart as well as the mind, much as a listener might appraise the rendering of a familiar musical work.
All this is involved in "Englishing" , and readers can become quite upset about it — can, in words already used here, take it personally.
3 Horace and Housman's "Englishing" 
That A.E.
Housman took "Diffugere nives" personally, we already know from anecdote — and perhaps might infer from the publishing history of his own Englishing of the poem.
His translation was first published in 1897, in a journal called The Quarto; this was one year after the publication of his A Shropshire Lad, and incidentally a brief three years after the appearance of Gladstone's translation of Horace.
Housman then kept his version by him for the rest of his life, not collecting it in A Shropshire Lad, nor in his Last Poems (1922).
It was left to his brother Laurence to include it in the posthumous More Poems (1936).
The poem is thus curiously "displaced" , a late Victorian work turning up in the crisp 1930s, the Auden decade.
This is the text from More Poems, where it is simply entitled "DIFFUGERE NIVES, Horace: Odes iv 7" : This poem might best be read alongside Gladstone's version published a few years earlier, a conjunction of Victorian styles in which Housman's poem comes off fairly well.
However, it invites location in a rather different cultural environment, the aesthetic world of A Shropshire Lad and the poet's later volumes.
Concerning Housman's lyric style, Andrew Motion has very shrewdly observed: "Housman's poems are built on a series of complex binary structures.
His Shropshire is two places — one real, one imaginary — and his poems speak two langauages — one archaic…one chatty"(Motion 1992).
The point may be illustrated by this quatrain from the lyric "The chestnut casts his flambeaux" : "Pass me the can, lad" ; this bluff talkative address undercuts, with sardonic, deprecating effect, the studied artifice of phrasing in the opening lines.
This is a stylistic device to which Housman quite often and very effectively resorts: make an exquisitely turned phrase, or progresssion of phrases, wrought with all the patient care of the literary craftsman, then disturb it with some wry interjection from the common tongue.
The charm of it hardly ever fails.
But the common tongue is pretty well absent from Housman's version of "Diffugere nives" .
No piquant contrast of styles there, no saving sourness, little sense of the colloquial grimace; all is high artifice and archaism, and the result is a confection of English words in the sweetish dialect, the poesy, of a poem from Motion's imaginary land, The Other Shropshire.
Experience (of classroom and common-room talk) suggests that readers are fairly evenly divided in their judgement of this text.
The young seem disposed not to like it; older people, among them Classical scholars, think better of it, feeling perhaps a greater reverence for the name and nature of Alfred Edward Housman.
But anyone who takes the poem head-on, as though entering upon a piece of hitherto unfamiliar English verse, is bound to be struck by its crazy-paving of little-used or dialect words ( "shaws" ), of samples from the literary lexicon ( "meads" , "unapparelled" ), of old-tyme poetryspeak ( "thou wast not born for aye" ), of dubiously archaic constructions ( "friend thee more"  "steads him nothing" ), of blended or cross-bred idioms ( "pure of stain" ), of literary reminiscences ( "dust and dreams" — a most adroit rendering of , but one that inevitably recalls Shakespeare and "we are such stuff as dreams are made on" ).
The style is artificial, which need not be blameworthy; but the question is how far readers, in their generation, are prepared to tolerate unabashed artifice.
There is something to be said at least for Housman's management of form and structure, his transposition of the general content of his original.
He uses rhymed quatrains in equivalence to the strophic pattern evident in Horace's poem.
The original metre is lost, of course, and with it the lovely lilting pauses at mid-line in the hexameter, and the "rest" at the end of the trimeter; but still the English quatrain scheme answers generally (there is one exception) to the patterning of the Horatian strophe into distich and answering distich.
Housman's version reflects, furthermore, some important turns of emphasis or focal points of procedure in the original text.
 "But oh" may be a somewhat pallid rendering of  (), yet still it signals the crucial turn in the poem's argument.
Similarly the italicised we in the third line of the fourth stanza.
( "Come we where Tullus and good Ancus are" ) obviously matches the marked effect of the pre-posed nos in the Horatian verse ().
Housman pays strict attention to these prosodic and structural emphases, conveying through them the Horatian sense of addressing the imagined bystander.
Note his management of emphatic negatives as he translates the couplet .
He contrives an equivalent emphasis by interpolating a "no" at the beginning of the second line of his couplet: "Not thy long lineage, nor thy golden tongue /No, nor thy righteousness shall friend thee more" .
Thus Housman satisfies those provisions for "Englishing" which demand respect for the original content and the supplying of a prosody which at least conveys the organisation of the source poem and something of its interpersonal accent.
But his choice of verse form has condemned him to the weakness which mars all attempts to match the Horatian strophe with the English quatrain — the weakness of expansion.
All translators and commentators note, as a principal characteristic of the Horatian style, his "compactness" or "compression" .
C.S. Calverley (1901) calls the Horatian strophe "a thing compact," .
Matthew Arnold refers to Horace's "allusive and compressed manner" (In his essay "On translating Homer" ; actually with reference to in Odes, iv,) Gladstone (1894: v) mentions "the necessity of compression" as the particular object of his own translations — which are in places as uncompressed and haplessly spongy as anyone else's.
This peculiar quality of solid, clenched abstraction appears in phrase after phrase — "compactness" dwells within the "" compression "" of Horatian metres; but as soon as a translator attempts to transpose him into English quatrains, things go askew and adrift, because every compression is paid for with an expansion.
There is a nice example in Gladstone's rendering of , "the rivers shrunken pass /And travel to the sea" .
He is able to render  in a "compact" phrase "rivers shrunken" , but has to render  expansively, as "pass…and travel to the sea" (much like Old Father Thames), simply because he needs a rhyme for "tree" .
Housman's style is no less vulnerable to the distortions of the rhymed quatrain.
He, too, expands his phrasing to fit the syllable count or the rhyme.
For , "return" , he gives us "renew their birth" ; for  ( "dare" ) he has "put off their fear" (with a discreet word-play? putting off fear like putting off a garment?); for , "the brief prime of the year" ; for , "then back to wintertide, when nothing stirs" ; for ?, "what tongue has told?" ; for the single word (compression indeed), a clause, "what thy heart has had" ; for , "Diana steads him nothing, he must stay" (rhyming with "take away" ).
The necessity of finding a rhyme plays havoc with the necessity for compression.
This is nowhere more apparent than in the sixth quatrain: "Golden tongue" decently translates , but is purchased with a lame rhyme in "the shades among" .
(Horace in any case says nothing about "the shades" at this point.)
A ludicrous consequence of the inverted word-order is that the syntactic pattern noun + preposition ( "shades among" ) might seem to be repeated at the end of the following line ( "judgment o'er" ), so that instead of understanding a participial construction, "the stern assize and equal judgment being over" (Housman's equivalent for the future perfect ), a guileless reader might construe "When once you descend among the shades, over the stern assize and equal judgment" .
The archaic "o'er" leads to yet another problem of rhyming, solved by "shall friend thee more" , a fairly elaborate rendering of the simple .
The English language itself is structually and hence stylistically less "taut" , less "close-knit" than Latin, and English rhyming quatrains allow for, or presuppose, a relatively open stylistic texture.
This is what foxes the translators, even when they are great scholars and accomplished minor poets like A.E.
Housman.
Let us take one more example from his "Diffugere nives" : the rendering, at the end of the poem, of  as "take away" , making a rhyme with the filler phrase (mentioned above) "he must stay" .
The word may certainly be translated so, and it may suggest a final note of resignation, the pathos of a dying fall.
But is pathos the intended note?
The stronger sense of  is strike off ", wrench loose" , and this is surely the last in a progression of "violent" verbs, beginning with diffugere and going on through  and  before coming to  (or rather,) at the poem's despairing close.
What Housman has given us is a poem quite poignantly suggestive of that sense of private and personal loss that runs through so many of his lyrics; a poem which refers us to the places and voices of The Other Shropshire, where the Graces go, and lads lie untimely in the earth.
His "Englishing" perhaps conveys the message "My Horace, and mine alone" , though he has tried to keep faith with the original text.
It will inevitably happen for some that Housman's Horace is not the reader's Horace, and that readers will grumble and go in search of more and later Englishings — for it seems we must "English" this poet again and again if we are to keep up with him where he stands still, at the end of the first century BC.
And there will always be a sense of impertinence and a sense of compulsion — that we are driven to do what we probably ought not to attempt.
A modern commentator (West 1967) writes, concerning a few hesitantly sketched lines of his own, "This is one man's Horace and so delicate in the Latin that it protests at being made explicit." 
(my italics).
He goes on to say, "But the risk is worth taking to show how rich and suggestive this poetry is." 
That is one view of the matter, the view of "Englishing" as a tribute and a service to the original work.
Another view, possibly the other view, sees "Englishing" as a way of inducing the past to nourish the creativity of the present.
In support of one of these views, James Michie (1964: 9) writes in his translator's preface "It is better that Horace should be" done down "into English than that he should be undone by the gradual disappearance of Latin from our culture" .
Nobody would want to deny that.
On the other hand, Burton Raffel (1983: xxii) writes in his translator's introduction,"The translator must turn his back on the original…in order to be ultimately loyal to it.
He must be free, similarly, in order to be faithful.
If he respects and loves his original…he must liberate it from the boundaries of time, the boundaries of physical change of all sorts, the boundaries of cultural change."
That is also well said.
But then let us add that sometimes, in the very depth of his love, he (sic) may have to resign himself to reading the text and, knowing what he knows, feeling what he feels, passing on in silence.