

Metaphor, simile and cognition in Golding's The Inheritors
Elizabeth Black, University of Edinburgh, UK
Abstract
This article discusses the relationship between underlexicalisation, metaphor and simile in Golding's The Inheritors.
It argues that they are deployed to reflect the developing cognitive and linguistic abilities of the novel's characters.
It is suggested that certain structures, which may appear metaphorical, are best treated as cases of underlexicalisation.
Keywords: Golding, William; The Inheritors; metaphor; simile; underlexicalisation
Introduction
Golding's The Inheritors (1955) is concerned, for much of its length, with the activities of a people at the beginning of their linguistic development.
Language is only one of the ways in which they communicate and, certainly at the beginning of the novel, not the most important.
One of the means Golding exploits most consistently to overcome the obvious difficulties this imposes on a novelist is the use of metaphor and simile.
These devices are deployed to serve a variety of functions: not the least is to create a text which, despite its difficulties, has great sensuous richness.
My present concern, however, is with the contribution of metaphor and simile to the meaning of the novel, and specifically with the ways in which they are deployed to reflect the developing linguistic and intellectual abilities of the characters.
As I hope to show, Golding anticipates some recent findings of scholars on the nature and function of metaphor.
In the last decade, various strands of research have led to re-examination of the role of metaphor in language, and to the suggestion that it is a tool for thought.
Research reported in Paprotté and Dirven (1985) shows that scientific thought is firmly grounded in metaphor.
Lakoff and Johnson (1980), Lakoff (1987), Lakoff and Turner (1989).
develop the view that metaphor is part of the human cognitive system, and thus fundamental to thought.
Their argument is very close to, if not based upon, a weak version of the "Sapir-Whorf hypothesis" which holds that the way people view the world is determined wholly or in part by the structure of their native language, and that concepts encoded in one language need not be encoded in another.
That is, language plays a large part in our construction of "reality" .
Lakoff and Turner distinguish between "conceptual" metaphors, which are part of the language system, and original or "image" metaphors,(which may be based upon conceptual metaphors).
Conceptual metaphors are used unconsciously: they are (? almost) as automatic as grammatical features.
The difficulty readers experience with this novel is partly a result of Golding's strategic use of concept metaphors which forces us to consider some of the ways in which language structures our perceptions of the world.
1.2 Background
The Inheritors is divided into three parts by changes in perspective and narrative voice.
The first, and lengthiest, presents a group of Neanderthal people and their encounter with homo sapiens.
The narrator often uses Lok (the least intellectually acute of the people) as focaliser, and at such times the narrative is conducted in terms appropriate to the character.
The narrator aligns himself with the character by various means, including the use of concept metaphors, syntactic structure (Adriaens 1970, Halliday 1971, Lee 1976) and underlexicalisation (the use of a restricted vocabulary: see Fowler 1981, 1986).
The result is an alien "mind style" (Fowler 1977: 103–13; Fowler 1986: 150–67; Leech and Short 1981: 187–208) which creates the world view of Neanderthal man for the reader.
The people are essentially passive, reliant on Oa, the principle of fecundity.
They perceive parts of their bodies as independent: "Lok's ears spoke to Lok"  "?" "
But Lok was asleep."
(p. 43) .2 They do not distinguish sharply between animate and inanimate: thus "the bush went away" and "a puddle of water lay across the trail" (p. 11) will be interpreted differently by the people and the reader: they attribute volition to such entities, we do not.
They place themselves on the same plane as trees or stones.
This is closely linked to their passivity: it does not occur to them that they could make changes in their world.
They do not share our sense of causality, and so tend to view events as discrete and unrelated.
They are therefore slow to understand the menace of the new people and their weapons.
In passages such as these the narrator appears to be very "limited" (note the distinction made by Genette (1980: 186) between who sees and who speaks).
In the second part of the novel (p. 216–22) the narrator's voice is that of a detached, quasi-scientific observer.
He is apparently unaware of the preceding action, so that the significance of his observations is lost upon him.
The narrator reports: the reader derives the implicatures.
In the final chapter the narrator relates the actions of the new people as they flee from their encounter with the Neanderthalers.
Tuami, the ablest of the new people, their artist and potential leader, is the focaliser.
The prevalence of metaphor and simile is constant though other features of the language change in each of these sections (see Halliday 1971: 354–7).
Some of the linguistic means whereby Golding shows the contrasts between the minds of his characters and ours are explored below.
2 Conceptual metaphors in conflict
One of the means Golding uses to mediate between the peoples"world view and the reader's is a series of metaphors in which inanimates are treated as animate, thus reflecting the people's world view.
This is shown syntactically by the regular occurrence of inanimates in the agentive position with verbs which normally require an animate subject (see Adriaens 1970: 19–22, Lee 1976: 77–84).
It is notable that this feature, which occurs in direct discourse, is also characteristic of the language of the narrator, so that descriptive passages are mimetic of the thought patterns of the characters.
The result is a discourse in which certain expressions, such as "the river had not gone away either or the mountains" (p. 31) must be interpreted as "literally" representing the perceptions of the people, whereas for us they would normally have to be interpreted metaphorically.
The result for the reader is the juxtaposition of two mind sets.
Such structures are Janus-like.
The combination of the narrator's voice with features associated with the characters' thought patterns may be compared to the use of free indirect thought in fictions in which the"voices' of narrator and characters are blended, sometimes almost inextricably.
That effect is captured by Pascal's term dual voice (1977).
In The Inheritors the two"voices' represent incompatible world views.
They are juxtaposed, but must be kept separate: the effect is closer to bifocal vision than a dual voice.
For this reason we are often able to interpret an item both literally and metaphorically.
Near the beginning of the novel we read"Lok's feet were clever.
They saw."
(p. 11).
The reader perhaps accepts "clever feet" as only mildly odd (cf. clever hands), but to attribute sight to a foot is wildly deviant.
The narrator goes on to describe a puddle of water that "lay across the trail" .
This is a dead metaphor in the standard language, and so will attract little notice.
However, as the novel proceeds, it becomes clear that this type of pattern is the norm.
By exploiting features of the standard language, the contrasting conceptual systems of the people and readers are constantly juxtaposed.
Thus"Lok's feet were clever.
They saw"may be interpreted as being (almost) literally true for the people, who regard parts of the body as independent entities, but metaphorical for the reader.
Many descriptions in the novel begin with an item which is only mildly deviant, or a dead metaphor, and then reinvest it with metaphorical value, as in this example: "the slope led up to the gap and the mountain rose before them.
On the left the slope broke off and fell down a cliff to the river."
(p. 23).
Slopes may lead but they do not break off or fall in the standard language.
This is almost an inversion of the procedure examined below in the case of similes which introduce underlexicalised terms used with special meanings in the fiction.
This technique is one of the prominent syntactico-semantic features of the first part of the novel, and it does not disappear in the second and third sections.
Moreover, since the reader has been sensitised to the force of such figures through repeated exposure, they are to an extent foregrounded and so contribute significantly to the meaning.
The occurrence of such constructions in later parts of the novel maintains a stylistic unity, though other features of the style are very different.
At the end of the second section of the novel we find: "the ice crowns of the mountains were a-glitter.
They welcomed the sun."(p. 222).
And in the third part, "Tuami glanced back at the gap through the mountain and saw that it was full of golden light and the sun was sitting in it" .
(p. 228).
The first of these examples is narratorial description, which more readily accommodates linguistic extravagance.
In the second the observations of a character are noted: the metaphor is muted.
Tuami and his people have escaped from the perceived menace of Neanderthal man, whose humanity they do not recognise.
But the thought patterns of the two peoples are similar: links are established between the people and the new people, parallel to links in the action.
In these and other ways the implicatures of the title are developed, suggesting connections between modern man and the Neanderthalers.
The effectiveness of metaphors of the type in which inanimates are treated as animate is shown in passages of narratorial description where they are deployed in a fully developed form, for example in a lengthy passage where the pre-Copernican view of the universe (which still pervades the English language) is exploited and combined with the peoples' perception of animacy in all things: "The moon rose slowly and almost vertically into a sky where there was nothing but a few spilled traces of cloud.
The light crawled down the island and made the pillars of spray full of brightness…"(p. 43).
The texture of the novel is in part created by the juxtaposition of dead metaphors and new ones created by slight adjustments to the normal patterns of the language: "…the sun looked down into the top of the dead tree and breathed warmly on the two people" (p. 142).
The sun is often treated as an animate in English: to refer to its warm breath is to extend the metaphor.
The reader's interpretation is complicated by echoes of poetic use, and appreciation of the development of a topos.
The effect is similar when dead metaphors which treat fire as "devouring" or "consuming" are revived in dialogue, e.g. pages 39, 60, 113.
These characteristics are a most notable feature of the language of the first part of the novel, where the narratorial voice is closely aligned with the people, and Lok is often the focaliser.
Since this section of the novel is the longest, the reader eventually accepts such constructions as the norm.
However, though such metaphors are revived by their context, since they are part of the conceptual system of the people, they are also, as dead metaphors, part of our standard language.
So it is not surprising that they also occur in the second part of the novel.
In this context such formulations have a slightly ambivalent status: "the place where the sun had gone down" (p. 216) or "the water had scooped a bowl out of the rock" (p. 217) are reminiscent of the language of the first part of the novel, but need not, in another context, appear deviant.
On the other hand, "the river…drowned the edge of the terrace" (p. 217), 'stealthily the moonlight moved the blue shadows' (p. 220), and"the procession of stars' (p. 221) are overtly metaphorical in any context.
In this as in other respects (see Halliday 1971: 354) the language of the second part of The Inheritors is an interesting blend of the standard language and the norms established in the text.
Our linguistic habits have preserved, as if in amber, an interpretation of the world which we no longer consciously accept, which is exploited here to suggest a link between our thought patterns and those of Neanderthal man.
In this, as in other ways, we are indeed the inheritors.
Thus, in the first part of the novel Golding contrasts Neanderthal man's world view and the reader's, through the juxtaposition of two different conceptual systems.
It is in the nature of metaphor to present concepts as unanalysed totalities, without making clear the relations between the entities.
Perhaps that is why it so effectively renders the thoughts of a people whose analysis of the world differs so radically from our own.
3 Underlexicalisation and metaphor
A technique which is used to suggest that the people are at a very early stage of linguistic development is underlexicalisation: the use of a restricted vocabulary and the avoidance of terms outside the experience and linguistic resources of the people (see Fowler 1981: 40; 1986: 152–4).
Thus the people have no weapons, so the term stick is used for bow; arrows are twigs; log can denote a fallen tree which serves as a bridge or the canoes of the new people.
Cases of underlexicalisation are clear when a non-specific noun (such as log) is used to refer to something for which a specific word exists in English.
However, other cases are more complex, and it is difficult to decide whether what is at issue is underlexicalisation or metaphor: the mapping of one concept in terms borrowed from another.
Given a suitable context, most items can be interpreted literally.
It is context and convention which determines whether a term will be interpreted literally or metaphorically.
There are times when the borderline between metaphor and underlexicalisation is difficult to establish.
This is not surprising, since metaphor is one way of extending the lexical resources of language.
The word strings for example, refers to elements which maintain the sense of community of the people.
Its connotational range includes love, sympathy, empathy.
It has some of the metaphorical values of ties in the standard language, perhaps reflecting an underlying conceptual metaphor whereby relationships are perceived as bonds.
"The strings were not the ornament of life but its substance.
If they broke, a man would die."
(p. 78).
The word picture has a broader range of meanings, including thought/idea/memory and some kind of non-verbal communication.
It is moot whether it should be treated as metaphor or not.
The term suggests that the memory and reasoning processes of the people are predominantly visual (though picture is also used of other senses); one of the things they have to learn is to make abstractions from such data.
Their ability to 'share"pictures suggests non-verbal, telepathic communication.
(Sometimes this involves a quasi-symbolic element: for example in moments of danger they remember a bear they had seen a cave by the sea (pp. 79, 95, 102, 179, 182).
That picture seems to connote menace.)
Sometimes communication fails: ""  "I do not see this picture"  "" (p. 96) seems to mean "I do not understand" , since it refers to an event which took place before the character's birth.
It can also denote an idea.
Fa, after laboriously carrying water in her cupped hands, has a picture of finding shells with water in them and struggles to understand its relevance.
She cannot communicate it, except possibly to the old woman, who rejects the idea forcibly, ""  "That is a new thing."  "" 
(p. 63).
Their view seems to be that, if Oa had wanted them to have buckets, she would have provided them.
The underlying notion is that the new, and therefore any change, is undesirable.
The term picture in the novel is no doubt related to common metaphorical uses of the word when it is used of ideas, imagination, or memories.
Underlexicalisation is also found when the narrator adumbrates another difference between Neanderthal man and homo sapiens.
At the beginning of the novel the people are unconscious of self, to the extent that parts of the body are treated as independent entities.
Gradually Lok develops self-awareness, and distinguishes between outside Lok and inside Lok (pp. 124, 141).
Outside and inside also seem best treated as cases of underlexicalisation.
Psychologists label these states: Golding has avoided the conventional terms.
Outside and inside are also interesting examples of orientational metaphors.
(Lakoff and Johnson (1980: 14–21) argue that spatial metaphors structure most of our fundamental concepts.
The common use of the prepositions in and out in connection with the mind suggest that it is conceptualised as a container.)
The examples discussed so far seem to be quite clear cases of underlexicalisation.
The narrator uses simple nouns in place of more precise terms, thus suggesting the limited lexicon of his characters.
4 Underlexicalisation, metaphor and simile
A more complex set of examples is discussed in this section.
It consists of a pattern in which simile and metaphor or underlexicalisation are juxtaposed.
It occurs regularly, predominantly in the first part of the novel.
Here, simile seems to be used as an explanatory device for the benefit of the reader to introduce the underlexicalised or metaphorical term.
It is characteristic of "poetic" metaphors that they are not susceptible to paraphrase, because of the freedom allowed to their interpreters.
The examples in this section are Janus-like, in that the reader may interpret them metaphorically but, in the light of the examples in the previous section, it seems to me that we should interpret them as cases of underlexicalisation.
Their purpose is to convey the peoples' mode of perception and suggest their interpretation of phenomena.
When, for example, Lok and Fa hear the laughter of the new people, we are told"the laughter rose like the charm of starlings' (p.152).
A little later, "the starlings charmed again" , where we would say: the people laughed again.
The sound of laughter apparently conjures up starlings for the people.
The narratorial simile guides the reader; its deletion shows the peoples' world-view.
The implicature the people derive seems to be that, if they hear starling-like noises starlings must be there.
This technique can create difficulties for the reader, since the introductory simile is often some distance from the underlexicalised term.
For example, when Lok looks across to the island in the burgeoning spring, a narratorial simile compares the haze of early spring buds to smoke: "there were buds everywhere on the island too, drifts of them like clouds of bright green smoke" (p. 101).
A little later, Lok's interpretation of the scene is rendered without the introductory simile: "a track among the green smoke began to twist and sway down towards the river…
The green smoke steadied or pulsed gently under the wind."
(p. 102).
"The fire blinked again.
Then the flames vanished and a great cloud of white smoke shot up through the green…(p. 103).
The fact that the scene includes a real fire, with white smoke, increases the potential for confusion on the reader's part.
The coalescing of concepts which the reader keeps separate (simile and the item it describes) in the minds of the people is captured by underlexicalisation here, conveyed by the quasi-metaphorical fusion of the entity described and that with which it is compared.
It is the linguistic reflection of a cast of mind which does not sufficiently discriminate between similar sensory data, or recognise the possibility of new stimuli as the source of a sensation.
That this can give rise to erroneous inferences with potentially disastrous consequences is shown when Lok nearly falls to his death over a cliff because he smells smoke.
His reasoning seems to be that where there is smoke, there must be the old woman (who carries their fire): therefore it must be safe for him to follow (pp. 26–7).
The incident adumbrates an attitude of mind which is mirrored in the linguistic techniques exploited later in the novel.
In this way the confusions and limitations of the people are demonstrated, together with their reliance upon senses which are more fully developed and exploited than our own.
Because items like 'starlings' and "green smoke" have single referents they are readily susceptible to paraphrase.
It therefore seems most appropriate to treat them as cases of underlexicalisation, together with terms like "log" or "picture" discussed above.
They do not exhibit the semantic indeterminacy characteristic of poetic metaphors.
The introductory narratorial simile provides essential guidance to the reader; its disappearance reminds us that the peoples' limited linguistic resources do not permit comparison.
The language suggests a partial fusion between entities (implicitly identified) in the minds of the people.
The result of this technique is the creation of nonce meanings within the fiction.
That this technique has the effect of mirroring the minds of the people is confirmed by the contrasts between two passages which describe Lok and Tuami when they are exhausted.
After the terrible night when Lok and Fa have dared to cross to the island in an attempt to rescue the abducted children, Lok's feelings are described: "there was stuffed inside the bones of his head the white flock of the autumn creepers, their seeds were in his nose, making him yawn and sneeze" (p. 134).
This use of "flock" occurring well into the novel, also seems to be a clear case of underlexicalisation.
The existential sentence strongly suggests that there is nothing metaphorical about this experience for Lok.
The reader may interpret the "flock" metaphorically, but by doing so he distances himself from the character.
The textual space separating the first from later instances of the item "flock" shows the attentiveness required of the reader (pp. 135, 145, 163, 169).
In the third part of the novel, when Tuami (the ablest of the new people) is the focaliser, the account of the result of his sleepless night exploits a different technique.
He thinks: "I am like a pool…some tide has filled me, the sand is swirling, the waters are obscured and strange things are creeping out of the cracks and crannies in my mind" (p. 227).
The narrator comments: "the sand was swirling in Tuami's brain" (p. 229) and,"Tuami, his head full of swirling sand, tried to think…(p. 231).
Tuami is a master of simile, and having compared his mind to a pool he can then add metaphorical sand and tide and strange creatures.
However, after the initial account of his feelings, the narrator uses 'sand "in much the same way as" flock"in the passage describing Lok: it too seems closer to underlexicalisation than to metaphor.
The passage exemplifies the distancing effect of simile, and the more sensuous effect of metaphor.
Free direct thought is deployed to show the conscious workings of the mind of an introspective man, a technique less appropriate for Lok, whose consciousness of self only begins to develop in the course of the action; narrator's report of thought act or free indirect thought is used for him.
The way in which the term 'sand"is picked up and used without explanation is characteristic of this novel, which demands the closeness of reading more usually required of verse.
As with other terms discussed here, the reader is required to remember contextual meanings created earlier in the fiction.
In sum, the development of special meanings for certain items, sometimes verging on the metaphorical, is a feature of the novel.
Since, however, the interpretation of these items is strictly controlled, and since they are susceptible to paraphrase, it is unsatisfactory to analyse them as metaphor.
It seems more elegant, and closer to the linguistic facts of the case, to treat them as cases of underlexicalisation.
5 Metaphor and thought
Recent research on metaphor suggests that, far from being merely a poetic ornament, it is fundamental to thought.
It juxtaposes two entities: it does not necessarily spell out connections between them.
Hoffman (1985: 345) reports experiments which 'suggest that the psychologically "" deepest "" level of thought is neither linguistic nor perceptual-imaginal, but something abstract, with metaphor mediating between the images and the concepts."
This accords well with the role of metaphor in this novel.
Metaphor is free to the extent that it is suggestive and inexplicit; in simile comparison is explicit.
That is why metaphor is so useful to communicate the experiential world of the people to the reader.
(see also Dirven and Paprotté 1985: vii-ix).
6 Simile and metaphor
The deployment of metaphor and simile in The Inheritors suggests that the people are not yet capable of developing their ideas, because of their limited analytic abilities.
When they begin to make distinctions, a powerful tool for thought becomes available to them.
Metaphor and simile are used to chart the development of Lok when he is forced by circumstance into leadership: a role for which he is unprepared and unsuitable.
In a crucial explanatory passage the narrator tells us: This marks a great step in Lok's intellectual development.
The narrator shows the extent to which underlexicalisation hampered Lok's thinking.
 "Like" is a tool which enables Lok to make explicit distinctions.
 "Like" permits the discrimination between similarity and identity.
It is a step towards analysis.
The capacity to make explicit what may be implicit in the kind of metaphor I have termed underlexicalisation permits the recognition of differences which may be as significant as the similarities.
When Lok acquires this tool, he goes on to compare the new people to things he is familiar with, noting their menace, power, and sheer attractiveness by comparing them to a famished wolf, the waterfall, honey and Oa.
In fact, Lok has made comparisons before this, when, as on this occasion, he was struggling to express his understanding of the new people: ""  "He changes shape like a bear in a cave"  "" and "" "He is like a cat and he is not like a cat.
He is also like, like… "" "(p. 95–6).
It may be that these cases are an authorial slip; but the point seems to be that Lok is shown painfully developing analytic skills.
The old woman reflects ""  "Now, is like when the fire flew away and ate up all the trees'" "(p. 93).
These comparisons are essentially descriptive, emotive rather than analytic.
They carry quasi-symbolic meaning: bears, cats and forest fires are objects of fear to the people and so convey their recognition of the power and danger of the new people.
Nevertheless, they represent the first steps toward a more analytic mode of thought.
7 Simile, metaphor and thought
A strong link is thus suggested between the development of language and thinking.
Golding's account of Lok's development links the analytic component of simile to thought and seems to suggest that metaphor may be the result of inadequate vocabulary, limited knowledge or the inability to separate entities and perceive them discretely.
Thus my suggestion that many of the structures in the novel which may appear metaphorical should be treated as examples of underlexicalisation seems to be supported by the argument implied by the novel.
Another interesting feature of the deployment of simile and metaphor in The Inheritors may be explained in this context.
As has been noted, simile is sometimes used as an explanatory device.
When the marker of comparison is deleted, the text reflects the perceptions of the people, as on the occasion when Lok and Fa hear an echo, and the narrator reports"their words had flown away from them like a flock of birds that circled and multiplied mysteriously…they stood…while the birds flew farther and farther away…(p. 81).
The reader interprets this as "the echo died away" , but is aware that the sound has conjured up birds for the people.
Golding's technique in such passages is almost a reversal of the procedure which marks such a great step in the development of Lok's reasoning capacity.
That is, whereas Lok is freed from quasi-metaphorical thought patterns and learns to use comparison, separating concepts and seeing them independently, the reader is shown the comparison first, then, with the deletion of like the peoples' view is represented.
The fictional technique, by inverting Lok's experience as his reasoning ability develops, clarifies the nature of these devices and suggests the power of simile and metaphor as intellectual tools.
It is interesting that recent research has come to the same conclusions as Golding as to the usefulness of such modes of thought: The deployment of simile, underlexicalisation and metaphor thus makes a major contribution to the exposition of the novel's thematic concern with the linked development of thought and language in the people.
One implication of the strategic use of metaphor in this novel is, on the highest level, a statement about the mental endowments of the people, and the ways in which their interpretive skills differ from our own.
In addition, of course , each metaphor possesses an immediate, local value, in the creation and maintenance of the people's world view, and enriching the texture of the novel.
Golding's procedure suggests that simile requires greater clarity of thought and expression than metaphor.
Therefore in The Inheritors simile is linked to more explicit processes of reasoning, and metaphor is associated with a less analytical mental state.
8 Conclusion
The theme of the novel is expounded partly through the development of the linguistic and mental skills of the people.
Underlexicalisation and metaphor are shown to be inadequate for the development of analytical reasoning skills.
With the acquisition of like as a tool, the peoples' capacity for thinking is enhanced.
But this brings with it the potential for change, allowing them to become agents instead of passively relying on Oa.
So the potential for evil is introduced into their world.
It is not meeting the new people which destroys the people: they carry the seeds of change within themselves.
Change is essential for survival, though the price is loss of innocence.
It may be that their meeting with the new people hastens change, but it is perceptible almost from the beginning.
They are a small group, hardly viable when the story begins.
Fa's intelligence might in any circumstances have turned her into a leader, and this too would have broken their social convention: "" "A man for pictures.
A woman for Oa "" "(p. 117).
Thus language and action together reflect the theme of the novel: the price of the highest achievements of mankind is his potential for evil.
In this article I have tried to show the relationship between underlexicalisation, metaphor and simile, the way in which they shade into each other, and the ways in which Golding manipulates linguistic patterns to reflect the developing intellectual abilities of his characters.
My suggestion that some"metaphors' in The Inheritors be treated as cases of underlexicalisation rather than metaphor, so splitting off underlexicalisation from metaphor proper, clarifies Golding's procedure and permits an analysis which captures more precisely the nature of the fiction.