

Rebirth of Rhetoric: Essays in Language, Culture and Education edited by R. Andrews, 1992, Routledge, London, pp. 224 ISBN 0 415 06261 6 (hb), 0 415 06262 4 (pb)
Studies of rhetoric are now becoming more frequent in a variety of fields, but perhaps most often in studies of science.
The present collection examines processes of education, and provides a diverse range of methods and topics with an introductory essay covering some wider issues.
Standing in the background is Aristotle, with a good measure of Derrida and Barthes.
Unfortunately, limits of space dictate that I cannot discuss all of the essays in the book.
Douglas Hesse's essay follows the introduction and provides a discussion of the interconnections between Aristotle's Rhetoric and Poetics.
One of the central ideas here is that persuasion through the use of enthymemes relies on what is expected, habitual and assumed, and not on truth, reality, or the way things ought to be.
The process of persuasion also happens in time, making use of narrative and plot with enthymemes acting as a kind of beginning, or first event.
As a result, both poetics and rhetoric make use of narrative structure.
This is an interesting essay which repays close attention.
Pam Gilbert's essay begins by noting the pedagogic metaphor which links "writing" with "voice" , a metaphor which"construes writing practices as personal, individualistic and expressive activities, not as socially learned cultural practices' (p. 68).
It is as if writing is seen as the inferior side of a dichotomy with speech, as if it were missing something which needs to be put back.
As a result, spoken discourse comes to be regarded as more honest and truthful.
And yet, both systems rely equally on the process of differentiation in order to make meaning, therefore the impression of greater immediacy and reality is an illusion.
But the assumption that speech is primary and superior is exactly the sort of leap made when literary discourse is scoured for authorial intention; the personal voice is expected to validate the description of experience.
It is perhaps more appropriate to regard the personal/subjective and objective forms of discourse merely as different forms of textual practice: putting "voice" into text is just a stylistic convention.
Such a turn emphasises textual production as a social practice within an institutional context — a view of discourse obscured by stressing a connection between voice, honesty and reality.
This is an important argument with practical consequences.
The chaper by Deborah Berrill begins by reviewing the suggestion that undergraduates are relatively egocentric in their thinking and writing.
The term, of course, comes from Piaget, who argued that children passed through a developmental stage during which they were unable to take the point of view of another.
The difference with Vygotsky's views on this issue is handled well.
The points are illustrated by quoting extensively from undergraduate essays.
This is interesting material.
However there remains a distinction between claiming that undergraduates don "t display alternative points of view, and claiming that they can" t do so.
The latter claim was made by Piaget about much younger children, so it could reasonably be asked what function such a stylistic device serves for older students.
Another chapter by Andrews, "Narrative, argument and rhetoric" , examines stories composed by school children using provided sets of pictures.
Particularly interesting here is his discussion of the distinction between argument and narrative: the first being used to create difference, the second to allow closure.
It is argued that children are quite aware of the elements of discourse, are able to argue, and to rearrange the sequence of their stories.
Unfortunately, rhetoric is left out of the discussion until the final paragraph in which a promise is made of things to come.
Patsy Stoneman provides a brilliant intertextual account of Wuthering Heights.
What is interesting here is the way in which aspects of the novel are broken down, separated from the narrative conventions of the novel and used for different purposes.
Stoneman examines the transformations in Monty Python, films by William Wyler and Luis Bunuel, a play by Davison, and Urquhart's novel, Changing Heaven.
In each, the rhetoric of the novel is dislocated and unhinged, even rewritten.
Jerry Booth's essay on weather forecasts gives an analysis of such things as titles, type, maps and camera movements in a cross-cultural study of British, Spanish and French television broadcasts.
While little of what he has to say relates directly to rhetoric, the account of the similarities across cultures shows what structural components are required for such a broadcast to be taken seriously; to attempt alternatives is to undermine the force of the predictions.
Much the same could be said of academic journals, for example, in which the development of a particular format contributes to the authority of any one article.
The final essay, by Prudence Black and Stephen Muecke, gives an account of a moment in fashion history: the appearance of the mini-skirt in Melbourne in 1965.
Up for analysis here is a photograph of the event, an image which managed to scandalise one section of the audience while seducing the other: it was a moment of transgression.
While it is a sociological question to ask about the way this came about, the image itself played an important role, one which is given an excellent analysis here.
I have not discussed the essays by d"Auzac, Asher, Frowe, McGonigal, Seitz and Gibson, but I recommend them to the reader's attention.
Overall, as with many collections, the quality of work presented here is fairly mixed.
However, there is plenty of very interesting material in this volume and, while this book is only part of the process, one could certainly agree that the field of rhetoric has been reborn.
John Soyland University of Lancaster, UK