

Getting on with what you should be doing that can only see a few people doing that who are actually getting on with what they should have been doing while you are waiting.
Now you know that this lesson's particularly difficult for me to be here on time.
I come from one room to a from a long er way a way to another room.
So I expect you to have the things out and .
Right let's get straight on  


See if you can answer my question.
Phillip.






So what did my question mean?
What was I asking you Kieran?
What day is it is it today.
What day is it today.
Good.
And the answer is it's Wednesday.
What do you think my question means first of all, Richard?
What date is it today.
Good boy, well done you remembered that very well.
What date is it today?
Now we've only done this one or two times.
Let me help you .
We start off with the same two words every time.
Can anybody remember what those two words are?
What do we begin with?
Kieran.
The number what it is today .
Well we start we start we do put the number in but we start off with .
Now we have the number and today is the twelfth so we've got to think of number twelve.
Christopher.


And now we simply have to think of the name of the French month.
Louise just put your pen down and join with this please.
Katrina.






Look at the board please I want all eyes on the board.
Let's try another date.
Who'd like to tell me when their birthday is?
When's your birthday Jo Josephine?
July.
Oh yeah, what's the date?
Well just tell me in English first of all and then 
July.
we'll work it out.
What July though?
Fifteenth the second the third.
Fifth.
The fifth.
All right so which two words are we going to start with?
Now all you have to do is think of number five for me, cos you just say the number.
And what's July in French?


All right now before we do any more dates put your hands down and we'll have a few more birthday dates in a bit.
But I need to practice with you counting up to thirty one.
Why do I need to practice that with you counting numbers up to thirty one?
Christopher?
So you can tell date properly.
That's right.
Because some months have got thirty one days in other months have got thirty days in and one month has only got twenty eight days in and twenty nine in a leap year.
Let's see who remembers this little rhyme, it's not a French rhyme but it is a rhyme that you may have heard before.
Thirty days hath September April June and November all the rest have thirty one except for February alone which has twenty eight days clear and twenty nine in each leap year.
So these are the months that only have thirty days, September April June and November.
Those are days months with thirty days.
So all the other months have thirty one.
So put your hands up, how many days has January, this month?
Thirty one.
Now children am I right in thinking that when Mrs  came in and took some lessons with you when I was on a course that she taught you how to count up to thirty?
No.
You haven't been you haven't done that with Mrs .
Right well that's something we need to do now.
So we need to practice our numbers from twenty up to thirty one.
So let's start and let's count aloud up to twenty to start with shall we?


Well I'm going to put twenty there where we've put the tens and I'm going to start shh .
Twenty one it's easy to remember.
Put your hand up if you can tell me number one in French.
Easy-peasy.
Well twenty one French people say  Twenty and one twenty and one.
Now twenty two is  So they don't say twenty and two it's only on the ones like twenty one thirty one forty one that you say twenty and one thirty and one.
For the rest it's just like English numbers they say  So hands up who can work out what twenty three will be.
Hands up don't call out please.
Richard.


Who'd like to tell me what twenty four will be?
Stacey.


Good girl.
Who can tell me what twenty five will be?
Lee.


All right.
I think more people are getting the idea of this now.
Who'd like to tell me what twenty six will be, remember you're saying  and then the num next number?
Jody.


Come on nearly everybody ought to be able to work this one out now.
Eleanor.


That's lovely.
Can you all tell me together what twenty eight will be?


So twenty nine will be?


You've got it well done that's lovely.
Now thirty is a new number.
Thirty is 


Excuse me.
So, can anybody work out what thirty one will be.
Remember that  is twenty and twenty one is  is thirty so what will thirty one be, Steven?


Good boy.
Who can put their hand up and tell me the next number?
Who can tell me thirty two?
Gemma?


Who can tell me the next number.
I'm looking for somebody who hasn't had their hand up this lesson, Jennifer?
I'll do it.
Well let's see if you can do this one then.


Right if you can do it join in, put your hand up.
Who can tell me what thirty four will be, Adam?


Who'd like to tell me what thirty five will be?
Donna can you do this one for me?
What's the number five?
Have you forgotten that one.
You help her with Katrina.


No that's  Who'd like to tell me thirty six?
Christopher.


Phillip?


Right.
You can all do this next one together.


Now I have gone beyond thirty one because I just wanted to show you the way it goes and it's easy.
There obviously aren't more than thirty one days in a month  but we'll just practice then counting from twenty now and we'll stop at thirty nine 


All right now that we can do numbers up to thirty one, let's see if we can do a few more dates.
Turn your chairs round so you're looking at this board.
Hands up if you remember what two words we're going to begin our answer with.
Kendal would you like to bring your chair over.
Rachael can you see the board from where you're sitting.
If you can't bring your chair over.
Kendal just bring your chair over.
Come round and see the board.
What are the two words please Louise?
Well look at this board look at my first two I've done here as an example.






Okay, now let's have somebody else's birthday.
Katrina?
Twenty eighth of December.
Right let's see if we can work this out together.
She said it's the twenty eighth and the month is December.
So we think of number twenty eight first of all.
Stacey?


And the month was December.
Who'd like to tell me that?
Steven.


Listen then repeat.
Jennifer I don't want to see the back your head any more.
I know you're doing your French work sheet but turn round and put that down now.
It's time to do this work.


Much better.
Who'd like to, Kieran tell me your birthday.


Well done Kieran he had already worked his out good boy.
Can anybody else do that?
Can anybody else think of their birthday in French?
Jody.
Well let's help Jody then.
Twenty ninth of December.
Right what's twenty nine children?
Hands up if you know twenty nine.
Michael?


Good boy.
And it's the same month as that again.


Who's birthday was this.
Was that yours Kieran?
That's not far off now is it?
It will be your birthday very soon.
Jennifer?


Ah is it the first of the month?
Right, well good.
I'm glad there's somebody's come up with that one because that's the only time that you say something a little bit different from the number itself.
When it is the first day, put your hands down while we're ex while I'm explaining this, when you say when it's the first day of any month whether it's the first of February or the first of April or the first of December, instead of say  you say this word you say  for the first of the month 


And when you write it as a number it's the only time that you ever put any little letters next to it.
The rest of the time you just put the normal number.
But for the first of the month you have these two letters E R.
All right against the number one.
What does that word remind you of?
Does it remind you of  excuse me, does it remind you of a word in English at all?
Michael.
Premiere.
Yes it's like premiere isn't it like in football the Premiere League which is the first the top league.
Or if somebody has a premiere it means it's the first time that they do something.
Because it's a word that we've borrowed from the french word.
We've taken it from their language and we use it in ours now meaning first.
Richard?


Put your hands up, tell me what date Richard's birthday is.
What date is Richard's birthday?
Phillip.
Twenty ninth of July.
The twenty ninth of July good.
Now I hope you're paying attention because later, next lesson I'm going to give you a little test on these dates a little listening quiz and if you get full marks on that then you get a house point for it.
So I do hope that you are taking notice and learning how to do your dates.
Louise.


Right what date is Louise's birthday please.
What date is Louise's birthday?
Come on I'd like to see a few more hands up here.
That's not a hard one.
Michael?
Not quite sure?
Lee.
Eleventh of August.
The eleventh of August.
You can do the next one all right.
Do you want to tell me your birthday?
Do you want to tell me in English then we'll help you.
Twenty seventh of September.
Come on who can help Stacey.
Twenty seven, think of your numbers.
Twenty seven.
Christopher.


September?
You can tell me September can't you?


Now I'm not going to do any more now because I want to play a birthday game with you now okay?
So can you move your chairs so that you can stand up quickly.
I think because you've been very good today we'll play a numbers game as well if we've got time.
Right.
What's up Christopher?
didn't carry on that game that we were playing before.
Did we not finish that one?
No  
Was it a game where you had numbers and you had to stand up and say your number?
Oh I'm sorry there are children shouting out and you know that you don't do that.
If you want to ask me something or tell me about something you put your hand up and wait for me to ask you.
Phillip?
We finished it  
I'm sure we did of course but there's no reason why if we get on that we shouldn't start another one okay.
Here we go then.
You remember what to do don't you?
Ready.
I'm going faster now are you ready?


What happened, did we knock the fork off?
The arm worked off and it fell down.
All right okay.
Now then will you go back to your own proper seats now and I'm going to give you a number.
You have to remember your number.
That's a very good idea.
Tell you what we'll do that next time because I want to practice some numbers now.
Now then can you go back and sit over at your table?
Right.
Now then the faster that we can do this the faster we get on with the game, so you sit quietly please.
Oh one or two people don't seem to understand quietly.
I want to count how many there are today here today.
Count with me.


Well that's an odd number so that means there will be ten in one team and eleven in another team and the ten team someone will have to go twice.
So remember your number please and unless I tell you to move stay where you're sitting.
Right good.
Now Jennifer if you'll just move your chair over to this side.
Who's the best one at numbers in this, I think Kieran.
Right so will you be  as well, so you're .
Now you know the game so I don't need to spend a lot time.
When I call out your num oh dear,thank you.
When I call out your number you jump up and you say, if you are  and I say  you say .
If I say .
Let's just make sure you all know your numbers so .
Joe just put your hand up now just put your hand up I'm just seeing that you remember your number.
you're number one aren't you?
No just put your hand up remember what I say.
Is it you Donna?
That's right now.
This side of the room .
Come on  be ready.
Well he if he was the right one, it was not  it was  okay.
So you were first anyway so that's this one.
Shh.
Yes Eleanor stood up but Lee said it first okay.
Come on A team let's see you really going for it.
Oh.
Well, let's just do let's just do two more and see if the As  can can catch up and then we'll carry it on I haven't finished yet, we'll carry the game on and remember the score.
Both together both together so the scores are so far  close.
I am waiting and it is not a time for you to be chatting.
You should be putting your French folders away now please.
Standing without talking behind your table.
I am still waiting.
 
