

General Principles
The petition for divorce is nowadays rarely contested by the respondent.
By contrast, the future of the matrimonial home is often a keenly fought issue for it is usually the major capital asset possessed either jointly by the parties to the marriage or by one of them.
The importance of the matrimonial home has been recognised increasingly by the legislature.
Since the first edition of this book both the Matrimonial Homes (Co-ownership) Bill introduced in the House of Lords in 1980 (which would have made provision for statutory co-ownership of the matrimonial home) and the Land Registration of Law of Property Bill (affecting the practice that has grown up following the case of Williams & Glyn's Bank Ltd v Boland)[1981]AC 487) have failed.
However since that date parliament has passed the Matrimonial Homes and Property Act 1981, the Matrimonial Homes Act 1983 and the Matrimonial and Family Proceedings Act 1984.
Faced with legislation on this scale, the bias towards the "clean break" encouraged by the courts and the Matrimonial and Family Proceedings Act 1984 and the trend of increased home ownership, it is apparent that orders and arrangements concerning the matrimonial home can only increase.
1 The scope of this book
The first edition of this book assumed a conveyance or transfer of the matrimonial home following a court order or agreement in matrimonial proceedings.
Whilst this edition still primarily addresses that situation it also deals with the conveyance of the matrimonial home in other situations, for instance the insolvency of the husband (see Chapter 10) and, following his death, a claim by the wife against his estate.
In its treatment of matrimonial conveyancing, this book is not concerned with the merits of the spouses' respective claims nor with the proceedings in connection with those claims.
It deals with the necessary conveyancing following the making of a court order or agreement between the parties relating to the matrimonial home and with the disentangling of life policies should that be necessary.
The book is not confined to the needs of the conveyancing practitioner, however; it is thought that the divorce practitioner should also have knowledge of the different types of conveyance which may be ordered by the court or agreed between the parties and the points which should be taken into account at that time, the protective measures that might be taken before the conveyance is concluded and the documentation that may be required in dealing with life policies.
In the precedents which follow the husband is treated as the transferor or conveying party, since this is the more common case, although no discrimination is intended!
This chapter touches on various points of which the practitioner should be aware, which may usefully serve as a reminder of items to be considered outside the drafting of the conveyance or transfer itself.
2 The advantage of a court order
Although agreement may be reached between the parties as to the future of the matrimonial home, it is strongly advised that such agreement be embodied in a "consent order" of the court; if the court does not have the power directly to make an order under the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 (for instance in relation to repairs to property held subject to certain conditions and in relation to payment of premiums of life assurance policies) the same effect can be achieved by formulating the obligations of each party as undertakings given to the court (see Livesey v Jenkins [1985]1 All ER 106 and Salter, Matrimonial Consent Orders and Agreements, 2nd edn, Longman 1991).
Indeed, because of the court's limited power, the policy of ultimate caution must be for the terms of any conveyancing documentation to be agreed between the respective solicitors before the consent order is applied for.
Such an order has inheritance tax advantages (if dissolution of the marriage has taken place), a saving in the HM Land Registry  fees is available (see Chapter 3 and generally) and, as any financial provision can be expressed in the order to be in full and final settlement of the wife's claims (see Chapter 11), it is less likely to be upset than an agreement between the parties not carried into a "consent order" (see for instance Dinch v Dinch [1987]1 WLR 252 where the court refused to make a further order on the grounds that the consent order had conclusively determined the rights of the parties in the matrimonial home).
A court order avoids the repayment of the discount on the transfer of a former council house (see further this chapter) and it is only by court order (with the agreement of the parties) that future claims against the estate of one party to the former marriage can be barred out (see Chapter 11).
3 Property subject to a mortgage
In many cases a mortgage will affect the property, and depending upon the terms of the court order or agreement the requirements of the mortgagee should be observed.
An application for a property adjustment order is required to identify the land, specify whether the property concerned is registered or unregistered (and, if the former, its title number), and give particulars (as far as known to the applicant) of the mortgage (for example the mortgage account number and the full names of the mortgagor(s))(Family Proceedings Rules 1991 (SI No 1247) r2.59(2)).
A copy of the prescribed Form M11 or M13 (as the case may be) is required to be sent to the mortgagee (r2.59(4)).
It is, of course, not legally necessary for a mortgagee to be joined in a conveyance of the equity in the property; however, without the title documents a conveyance of an unregistered title subject to a mortgage from husband to wife cannot be safely undertaken.
No such problems prevent such a conveyance where registered title is involved since office copy entries of the title can be obtained and the transfer once executed by the husband and wife can be lodged at HM Land Registry.
In the latter case, the registrar is bound to register the transfer as he holds the land certificate (in contrast to the charge certificate, which is held by the mortgagee) unless there is a restriction on the proprietorship register requiring the consent of the mortgagee to such transfer.
More commonly, however, one party to the original mortgage is to be released or another party added, and in these cases it is necessary for the mortgagee concerned to be a party to the document (unless separate deeds of release and covenant are executed).
The terms of the mortgage may in any event require that the mortgagee be joined as a party to any document affecting the property subject to the charge in its favour, and in registered conveyancing there may be a restriction to this effect on the proprietorship register.
In practice, therefore, where a mortgage affects the property the mortgagee will be a party to the conveyance or transfer.
Some mortgagees have standard clauses that they require to be inserted in the conveyance or transfer of the property charged in their favour and some mortgagees require to approve the draft document, whilst others (for instance, the Halifax Building Society) delegate the task of drafting to the mortgagee's solicitor with a few suggested (but by no means mandatory) clauses.
It is therefore advisable to check the particular mortgagee's requirements before finalising any documentation.
Regard must be had to the decision in Williams & Glyn's Bank Ltd v Boland [1981]AC 487.
The case highlighted the difficulty facing a mortgagee when a person other than its borrower lives at the mortgaged premises, for such person, as confirmed by this case, may have rights or interests in that property (although the principles of the case are not being so strictly applied as was first thought—see Bristol & West Building Society v Henning [1985]2 All ER 606 and Midland Bank Ltd v Dobson (1985) NLJ 26 July, 251).
Most mortgagees have required specific consent from such persons to the taking of a charge by the mortgagee over the property or where they consent to a transfer of the property subject to the mortgage, coupled with confirmation from such persons that their rights are postponed to those of the mortgagee under its mortgage.
Many mortgagees have issued standard forms of consent for completion in such circumstances (and see Precedent 11).
If the mortgage is additionally secured by the assignment of a life policy, then the future of that policy must be sorted out.
If the matrimonial home is to be transferred to the sole name of the wife the mortgagee may be content to re-assign a life policy on the life of the husband to him, the mortgage on the property reverting to  a repayment mortgage.
Alternatively the benefit of the policy may pass to the wife, subject to charge.
This is dealt with more fully in Chapter 9.
4 Tax
It is a fact of modern legal practice that the tax aspects of every transaction should be considered.
This book does not claim to treat this topic exhaustively but focuses attention on the major heads of charge as a reminder of the possible tax consequences of transactions covered in this book (see Chapter 2).
Each case will of course depend on its facts; regard should be had to any possible tax consequences before the court order or agreement between the parties is finalised.
5 Council Tax
The 4th edition of this book commented briefly on the Community Charge introduced by the Local Government Finance Act 1988.
The charge or poll tax as it was commonly called was abolished as from 31 March 1993.
(Local Government Finance Act 1992, Sched 14).
With effect from 1 April 1993 a dwelling will be subject to the Council Tax and the full amount is payable where there are two or more adult residents.
The liable person will normally be the resident who owns the property (s75); joint owners are jointly liable as is the resident spouse of a liable person (s77).
If there is only one adult resident, a discount of 25 per cent can be claimed (s79); it is important therefore that if husband and wife cease to live together each of them should notify the local authority that separation has taken place so as to end joint liability and for the remaining resident spouse to claim the discount (if applicable).
6 Insolvency
Practitioners will be aware that transactions at an undervalue can be put aside (Insolvency Act 1986, s339) if the transferor is adjudged bankrupt within two years of the transaction or if he becomes bankrupt within five years of the transaction and was  insolvent at that time or was insolvent by reason of it (s341).
It is difficult to say whether or not a transfer of a house by the husband to the wife in, for instance, a "clean break" is "less in money or money's worth than the value in money or money's worth of the consideration provided" (s339(3) (c)) so there is always a risk that a conveyance or transfer following the court order or agreement may be attacked by a husband's trustee in bankruptcy and the wife cannot be absolutely safe until the five year period has expired.
There is nothing in the Act to confer immunity on a conveyance or transfer carried out to comply with a court order, but the existence of the wife's right to financial relief against her husband may provide sufficient value to prevent the transaction being at an undervalue within the context of the Insolvency Act 1986 (see Berry and Bailey, Bankruptcy Law and Practice Butterworths 1987, p294).
In Re Abbott (a bankrupt)[1983]Ch 45 (a case decided before the Insolvency Act 1986) a wife's petition for divorce sought an order transferring the jointly owned matrimonial home to her.
Agreement was reached and a consent order subsequently made to the effect that the house should be sold and that the husband should pay the wife a lump sum of £9,000 from his share of the proceeds of sale.
On the husband's bankruptcy within two years of the consent order, the Trustee sought to recover £9,000 from the wife, that sum being the amount in excess of the value of her half share in the house.
The Court held that she was a purchaser for valuable consideration, the consideration being the withdrawal of a bona fide claim to a property adjustment order.
It was thought that amending legislation would be introduced (Practical Lawyer, June 1990, p11) but until it is, in addition to the risk of the conveyance or transfer with respect to the matrimonial home being set aside, the wife may find it difficult to sell the property (although the Law Society takes the view that there is "very little risk that a Court would exercise its powers to deprive an innocent owner of his title." 
See Law Society's Gazette 5 February 1992, p13).
One could attempt to limit the "period of difficulty" to the two years by having a declaration of solvency (if applicable) sworn by the husband at the same time as he makes the conveyance (see Chapter 10, Precedent 81) and hope that that is acceptable to a prospective purchaser from the wife between the expiry of the two years and five year period.
There is the further difficulty that mortgagees, in circumstances where there might have been a conveyance or transfer at less than full consideration (whatever that is in a matrimonial context), are requiring indemnity insurance to protect the mortgagee for an amount equal to the advance (see Halifax Building Society practice notes 1992 paras 22 and 25).
Insurers usually require a Statutory Declaration as to the solvency of the transferor husband at the time of the conveyance so the practitioner must consider whether or not it is practical to ask for this at the time of the conveyance (see further Chapter 10).
As far as registered land is concerned, HM Land Registry have confirmed that in their view, a transfer of property made in order to comply with a property adjustment order falls within the scope of s339.
This practice is under review (Law Society's Gazette, 25 January 1989).
Presently, no entry relating to the section will be entered on the register if the land is already registered because a transferee of registered land made under a disposition without valuable consideration is subject to minor interests (such as rights of creditors)(see Land Registration Act 1925 ss20(4) and 23(5)).
Although the practice appears to vary, an entry may be entered on the proprietorship register, however, in the following form: Note: The land having been acquired under a voluntary conveyance dated made by [donor]the registered title is subject to the provisions of section 339 Insolvency Act 1986 if there is a purchase at an undervalue of unregistered land in a compulsory registration area.
A prospective purchaser would presumably be hesitant to proceed in such circumstances without adequate insurance protection.
7 Practice of HM Land Registry
Rule 74 of the Land Registration Rules 1925 (SR & O 1925 No 1093)(set out in full in Ruoff and Roper, Registered Conveyancing, Looseleaf edn, Sweet and Maxwell, 1991) specifies that the forms set out in the Schedule to those Rules shall be used where appropriate to the particular transaction concerned.
Where no form is prescribed for a transaction, or a prescribed form cannot be conveniently adapted, r75 provides that the  instrument shall be in such form as the registrar shall direct or allow but shall follow the approved forms as nearly as possible.
It will be appreciated that this rule gives the registrar a wide discretion.
The forms set out in this book follow the prescribed forms as nearly as circumstances permit and it is thought that they will be acceptable to HM Land Registry.
HM Land Registry fees are mentioned throughout the book.
It will be readily appreciated that these can be subject to change.
8 Class F Land Charge (or Notice if registered land)
No book relating to matrimonial home conveyancing would be complete without mention of the Class F Land Charge, or its registered land equivalent.
Although the registration of the charge precedes the situation covered in this book, and is thus more within the ambit of the practitioner advising in the initial stages of matrimonial proceedings than the conveyancer, a reminder of the requirements and consequences of registration is relevant.
The Matrimonial Homes Act 1983, which has almost entirely replaced the Matrimonial Homes Act 1967 which introduced the Class F Land Charge, gives a spouse who is not entitled to occupy a dwelling house by virtue of a beneficial estate or interest or contract, the right (if in occupation) not to be evicted or excluded therefrom except by order of the court and the right (if not in occupation) with the leave of the court to enter into and occupy the dwelling house.
Such a right is protected by registration of a Class F Land Charge or a Notice at HM Land Registry if the matrimonial home has registered title.
Registration at HM Land Registry is required to be made in Form 99 (The Land Registration (Matrimonial Homes) Rules 1990 SI No 1360)(no fee required); an official search of the index map at HM Land Registry (Form 96) will need to be made to see if the land is registered unless the position is known without doubt.
(Fee £8.00The Land Registration Fees Order 1992 (SI No 2089.)
An alternative procedure which appears to be acceptable to HM Land Registry is to apply for office copies of the registered title (Form 109); this incurs the same fee (£8) as an index map search, and following the Land Registration (Open Register) Rules 1991 it is not necessary to specify the name of the proprietor; if the land is not registered the application will be rejected, but if it is registered the receipt of office copies gives the opportunity to check the charges register for mortgages.
Strictly one should specify if one is requiring the freehold or leasehold title, but in practice to tick both boxes seems to work (unless the position is obvious, such as with a flat).
As far as registered title is concerned, the land certificate need not be produced (Land Registration Act 1925, s64(5) added by Matrimonial Homes and Property Act 1981, s4(1)).
There is no fee payable for the registration of a notice under the Matrimonial Homes Act 1983 (Land Registration Fees Order 1992 (SI No 2089), Sched 4, exemption 4).
It is important to appreciate that the Matrimonial Homes Act 1983 only applies to a dwelling house which has been the matrimonial home (s1(10)).
Thus if husband and wife live together in one house, a Class F Land Charge or Notice cannot effectively be registered against a house owned solely by the husband and in which he has installed his mistress.
A Class F Land Charge or Notice is binding on a husband's trustee in bankruptcy, subject to the provisions of the Matrimonial Homes Act (Insolvency Act 1986, s336).
The rights of occupation come to an end on the death of the other spouse or on the termination of the marriage (s2(4)) unless the court has ordered otherwise.
Thus the production of a death certificate, decree absolute or other court order should ensure the cancellation of the land charge (s5(1)) or notice.
(HM Land Registry Form 202.)
In a disputed property case, because the Class F effectively comes to an end on the issue of the decree absolute protective steps mentioned in the next section should be taken.
It should be appreciated that if one party to the marriage has no wish to occupy the matrimonial home that party is not entitled to register a Class F Land Charge against the owner (see Barnett v Hassett [1981]1 WLR 1385 where the husband left the wife's house and did not wish to occupy it).
It should be remembered that any contract for sale which provides for the purchaser to obtain vacant possession on completion now implies a provision that the vendor will procure before completion the cancellation of a registered Class F Land  Charge (Matrimonial Homes Act 1983, s4(1)).
Notwithstanding this provision, it is often of some reassurance to a purchaser from the husband if the wife is joined as a party to the contract or to a separate consent to sale form; this confirms that she knows that vacant possession is to be given and the land charge is to be cancelled and can contain a specific release by the wife of her rights in the property as from the date of sale.
Negotiations between the husband and wife will often have been on the basis that the wife's solicitors will hand over an application for cancellation of the land charge (Form K13 or application for the cancellation of the notice if registered land Form 202) on completion in return for one-half of the net proceeds of sale (or whatever other figure is agreed).
Any such application must be signed by the wife (see the negligence case of Holmes v Kennard (1984) 128 SJ 854) if her rights of occupation have not otherwise come to an end.
Form K13 and HM Land Registry Form 202 makes provision for this.
9 Protection of the wife's position before completion of conveyance to her or lodging of transfer for registration
To avoid the husband making a sale or charging the property (standing in his sole name) in the period between the decree absolute (when the Class F protection ceasessee above) and the completion of the conveyance to the wife or lodging of the transfer at HM Land Registry:(a) Unregistered Land A pending action under s5 of the Land Charges Act 1972 (fee £1.00) should be registered by or on behalf of the wife (in Form K3) provided the divorce petition has contained a request for a transfer of real property under s24 of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973; such a registration survives the decree absolute (see Whittingham v Whittingham [1978]2 WLR 936 and Perez-Adamson v Perez-Rivas [1987]2 WLR 500).
The pending action land charge should effectively stop the husband dealing with the property until completion of the conveyance in the wife's favour has taken place and she is in receipt of the title deeds, for any purchaser or mortgagee will be put on notice by the entry at HM Land Charges Registry.
It is too late to register a pending action if a bankruptcy petition has been presented against the husband; in Re Flint (1992) The Times 16 July it was held that a transfer of the matrimonial home by order of the court in matrimonial proceedings to the wife in the period between the presentation of a bankruptcy petition against the husband and the bankruptcy order was void.
(b) Registered Land A caution should be lodged at HM Land Registry (Fee £40, Land Registration Fees Order 1992 (SI No 2089), Sched 3, Pt II).
Form 63 requires a statutory declaration (in Form 14) by either the cautioner or her solicitor disclosing the nature of the cautioner's interest.
i) In the case where a court order has not yet been made, the nature of the cautioner's interest may be shown as: the former wife of the registered proprietor having made application for a property adjustment order under s24 Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 by proceedings in the [Manchester]County Court between [husband]and [wife]bearing number of matter ii) In the case where the court order in favour of the wife has been made, but the transfer has not yet been executed and lodged in HM Land Registry and no earlier caution has been registered this might be: the registered proprietor [husband]has been ordered to transfer all his estate and interest in the property to [wife]by an order made in the [Manchester]County Court dated in proceedings between [husband]and [wife]bearing number of matter Unless a caution is registered there is risk; before lodging the transfer the wife's solicitor will make a Form 94C search, but such search does not confer priority for the registration of any dealing (Land Registration (Official Searches) Rules 1990 (SI No 1361), r9).
Some practitioners make a Form 94A search which gives priority in favour of a purchaser, taking the view that the wife is the equivalent of a purchaser.
HM Land Registry have indicated that this priority might fail in the event of the lodging of a valid charge by the husband's mortgagee, as strictly the wife is not, in their view, a purchaser for valuable consideration.
10 Former council houses
A good number of people have purchased the houses in which they live from the Local Authority or New Town Development Corporations under the provisions of the Housing Act 1985.
The disposal of such dwelling house within three years (Housing and Planning Act 1986, s2(3)) from the date of purchase "triggers" repayment of the discount on the proportion still outstanding by reference to the number of years since purchase but s160(1) (c) of the Act, specifically exempts from the repayment provisions disposals in pursuance of an order under s24 of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973, where continued occupation is envisaged (see R v Rushmoor Borough Council ex p Barrett [1987]1 All ER 353).
Thus an order of the court that a former council house or New Town Development House be transferred to one party of the marriage will not necessitate at the time of the transfer repayment of the discount or any part of it allowable at the time of purchase.
Liability to repay the discount is secured by the registration of a notice or caution at HM Land Registry (Housing Act 1985, s156) and any transfer to the wife will of course be subject to such notice or caution.
The question of unregistered land does not arise because any such purchase is subject to compulsory registration of title (Housing Act 1985, s154).
11 Execution of documents
Section 1 of the Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989 specifies that if an instrument is to be a deed, this must be clear on the face of it, and that the requirement for individuals to seal is abolished.
Sealing after that date does not invalidate the deed; the presence of a seal is merely superfluous to the requirements for execution.
Section 130 of the Companies Act 1989 contains corresponding provisions relating to the sealing of deeds by companies registered under the Companies Acts.
The Land Registration (Execution of Deeds) Rules 1990 (SI No 1010) introduced the present Form 19 (transfer of freehold land) in the Schedule to the Land Registration Rules 1925.
All other deeds relating to registered land are required to follow the same form of execution as Form 19.
12 Legal Aid Statutory Charge
Under s16 of the Legal Aid Act 1988, if the Legal Aid Board suffers a deficiency in respect of an assisted person's proceedings (ie they have paid more to the assisted person's legal advisers than they have received by way of costs from the other side and from contributions paid) the statutory charge may attach to money or property "recovered" or "preserved" that has been "in issue" in the course of proceedings.
Periodical payments of maintenance escape the statutory charge as does the first £2,500 of any money or property preserved or recovered (Civil Legal Aid (General) Regulations 1989, reg 94).
Hence, if a lump sum is recovered over £2,500 the charge will attach to the balance and the Legal Aid Board can seek immediate repayment of its deficiency from that.
If, however, the court order specifies that the lump sum is to be used for the purpose of purchasing a home for the assisted person or her dependants enforcement of the charge can be postponed (Civil Legal Aid (General) Regulations 1989, reg 96).
Similarly if the property recovered or preserved is to be used as a home for the assisted person or her dependants enforcement of the charge can also be postponed.
As to the certificate to be contained in the Court Order to obtain such postponement see Practice Direction [1991]1 WLR 955.
In each case the Legal Aid Board will register a land charge on the former matrimonial home or the home bought with the lump sum:(a) Unregistered land The Board will register a Class B land charge within the meaning of the Land Charges Act 1972, s2 (reg 95).
(b) Registered land The Board will register either a substantive charge or a notice or caution, depending upon the practice of the individual Board.
This might be as follows: "Caution in favour of the Legal Aid Board of registered on" .
If the charge is registered after 1 December 1988 the charge, if postponed, will carry simple interest presently at the rate of 10.5 per cent per annum(reg 97).
Normally the charge will be repaid when the property is sold  but the Board has a discretion to transfer it to a substitute property in certain limited circumstances (see reg 98).
Correspondence concerning redemption or transfer should be addressed to Legal Aid Accounts Department, Land Charge Section 12 Roger St, London WC1N 2JL quoting the full name and address of the assisted person, civil legal aid certificate number, title number or land charge department reference number (Law Society's Gazette No 17, 6 May 1992).
The Tax Aspects
The practitioner acting for the husband should consider the tax effect of any transfer of the matrimonial home, or interest therein, to the other party to the marriage, and upon whom the burden of any taxation is to fall.
In all circumstances relating to tax matters it must be appreciated that each set of facts is to be looked at separately.
The contents of this chapter cannot describe the tax position on each transfer; they can only draw attention to the possible heads of charge and reliefs available in respect of each of them.
1 Mortgage interest relief
In considering the payment of income maintenance, regard should be had to any mortgage interest which has to be paid if the matrimonial home is retained and to the most tax advantageous method of payment for both husband and wife.
Interest paid under a mortgage is allowable for tax relief if at the time the interest is paid:(i) the loan was taken out to purchase property in the UK; and (ii) the person claiming the relief owed an interest in the property and uses it "wholly or to a substantial extent" as his or her only or main residence (Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988, ss354 and 355 as amended by Finance Act 1988, s44(1)).
Thus, if there is an outright transfer of the matrimonial home to the wife subject to the existing mortgage (see Chapters 3, 4 and 7) or the matrimonial home is held on certain terms and conditions (see Chapter 6) then the occupant wife should be made responsible for the mortgage payments (the husband would not be using  the house as his only or main residence and so would not be eligible for interest relief).
The relief is only available up to £30,000 per residence (Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988, s367(5); Finance Act 1990, s71).
See further Whitehouse and Stuart-Buttle, Revenue Law (10th edn, Butterworth, pp656, 673).
The Finance Act 1993 introduces limits on the relief effective from 6 April 1994.
2 Capital gains tax
Prima facie if a disposal of the former matrimonial home or an interest therein occurs, there is a charge to capital gains tax.
It is important therefore to have a look at the reliefs and exemptions that may be available.
The rate of tax on chargeable gains is that which results from adding the gain to the individual's total income.
The gain may be taxed at the basic rate of income tax therefore or at the higher rate.
A non-resident is not liable to capital gains tax (see further Revenue Law, p317).
(a) Spouses living together There is no charge to capital gains tax on a transfer of assets between husband and wife provided that they have been living together in the year of assessment in which the transfer takes place (Taxation of Chargeable Gains Act 1992)( "TCGA 1992" ), s58.
This continues to apply notwithstanding the introduction of independent taxation from 6 April 1990.
Usually a husband and wife are regarded as living together if they are not separated under a court order or a deed of separation or separated in such circumstances as are likely to prove permanent (Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988, s282).
The Revenue treat the separation as likely to be permanent if the parties have been living apart for one year (Pinson on Revenue Law, 17th edn, para 38–04).
In many cases the husband and wife will be living apart at the time of the court order, or at a time when agreement is reached between them concerning the former matrimonial home, in circumstances that are likely to prove permanent.
Indeed the parties may in any event no longer be husband and wife.
Prima facie, therefore, a charge to capital gains tax will arise on any  transfer by the husband to the wife of the former matrimonial home or of his share or interest in it.
(b) Only or main residence Relief from any liability to capital gains tax on any transfer should be available in most cases because the former matrimonial home will have been the only or main residence of both the husband and the wife.
Section 222 of the TCGA 1992, provides that gains accruing on the disposal of, or an interest in, a dwelling house which is or has been an individual's only or main residence (together with garden or grounds of up to half a hectare in extent or other extent appropriate for the reasonable enjoyment of the residence according to the size and character of the dwelling house) throughout the period of ownership (but disregarding the last 36 months of that period (TCGA 1992, s223) are exempt from capital gains tax.
As to the inclusion of other properties (eg a gardener's cottage) within the exemption see Lewis v Rook [1992]1 WLR 662.
It is clear therefore that a sale of the former matrimonial home within 36 months of the husband leaving it, or a transfer of his interest in it to the wife within that period, will not incur any charge to capital gains tax.
It will be otherwise if a sale or transfer takes place when the husband left the home at least 36 months ago or the husband has acquired another residence.
In this case, only a proportion of the gain will be exempt by reference to the period of actual occupation and to the last 36 months of ownership.
The balance will be subject to capital gains tax.
As an example, if there is a gain on the sale of a property owned equally for fifteen years, occupied for the first ten years by both husband and wife and for the last five years by only the wife, there is complete exemption on the one-half share occupied by the wife throughout, and a chargeable gain to the extent of two-fifteenths of the gain on the other half (the chargeable years being the five years after occupation had ceased less the 36 months).
This brings us to consideration of the extra-statutory concession.
(c) Extra-statutory concession D6 This concession happily can exempt the whole gain resulting from the disposal from a charge to capital gains tax even if the  conveyance or transfer to the wife takes place 36 months after the husband has left the former matrimonial home.
It is quoted in full: 6 Private residence exception: separated couples Where a married couple separate or are divorced and one partner ceases to occupy the matrimonial home and subsequently as part of a financial settlement disposes of the home, or an interest in it, to the other partner the home may be regarded for the purposes of Sections [222 to 224 of TCGA 1992]101 to 103 as continuing to be a residence of the transferring partner from the date his or her occupation ceases until the date of transfer, provided that it has throughout this period been the other partner's only or main residence.
Thus, where a husband leaves the matrimonial home while still owning it, the usual capital gains tax exemption or relief for a taxpayer's only or main residence would be given on the subsequent transfer to the wife, provided she has continued to live in the house and the husband has not elected that some other house should be treated for capital gains tax purposes as his main residence for this period.
The wording of the concession would seem to suggest that if the husband moves out of the matrimonial home and makes no election that his new home is his main residence then he need do nothing further, since on any subsequent transfer of the former matrimonial home to his former wife the principal private dwelling house exemption will be available (provided she has continued to live there).
The Revenue are of the view that a taxpayer's home (even if a rented flat) can be his main residence even if he does not own it.
If a taxpayer has two residences he can elect which of them is to be treated as his main residence (s222(5)) for the purpose of the exemption and notwithstanding the terms of the above concession the husband can avoid difficulty if he makes a positive election.
If the husband elects that his "new" home is to be treated as his main residence, then the disposal to the wife of the former matrimonial home (or his interest in it) will give rise to a charge to capital gains tax; this will be on the gain accruing in respect of the period from when the matrimonial home ceased to be his main residence until the date of the court order or date of agreement between the parties.
Section 222(5) (a) contains a time-limit of two  years during which the election as to main residence can be made and if an election is not made within the period the question of which is the main residence is determined by the Inspector of Taxes, subject to the usual right of appeal.
By making a positive election the husband avoids the Inspector making a determination under s222(5) (b) as to which is the husband's main residence and avoids the necessity for an appeal and having to claim the benefit of the concession.
In practice a great deal of discretion is exercised by the Revenue with regard to this section, but to avoid an unexpected tax liability in relation to the transfer by the husband of the former matrimonial home to the wife the husband is well advised to consider making his election within the two-year period.
A cautionary note should be added: the separated wife may be in possession of the fomer matrimonial home and wish to move house.
If she does so and the husband purchases the replacement house for her, and she occupies it on the same terms, a subsequent transfer to her of that house will not be within the terms of the concession (see p18) because that house will never have been a matrimonial home.
A charge to capital gains tax could therefore arise unless the provisions of the TCGA 1992, s225, apply (as to which see Chapter 6, p100).
(d) Other reliefs The above has been concerned with the only or main residence or the husband's interest therein being transferred absolutely to the wife.
A transfer of other real property, such as the holiday home to the wife, will give rise to a capital gains liability if at the time of the transfer, as is more than likely, the parties are separated in such circumstances as are likely to prove permanent or are separated under a court order (see p16)(see, for example, Aspden v Hildesley [1982]1 WLR 264 where a transfer of property which had never been the husband's main residence was made to the wife six years after the parties separated).
Assuming that a capital gains tax liability is likely to arise, prima facie this will fall upon the husband as the conveying party or transferor; this potential liability should be taken into account, but regard should be had to other reliefs:(i) "Hold-over" relief—Since the restriction of this relief by the Finance Act 1989, s124 it is only likely to be  available in business property transfer situations (such as a guest house or nursing home)(see TCGA 1992, s165).
The potential liability would pass to the wife as transferee; to agree to elect for "hold over" cannot necessarily be to her advantage.
(ii) Annual exemptionThis is £5,800 in the tax year 1992/93 (TCGA 1992, s3 and Capital Gains Tax (Annual Exempt Amount) Order 1992 (SI No 626)).
(iii) Indexation allowanceAs from 31 March 1982 or later acquisition date, the acquisition cost of the matrimonial home is to be increased in line with the Retail Prices Index (TCGA 1992, s53).
The potential liability where the former matrimonial home is settled upon certain trusts is considered in Chapter 6.
3 Inheritance tax
If both husband and wife are domiciled in the United Kingdom, any transfer of assets between them is exempt from any charge to inheritance tax (Inheritance Tax Act 1984, s18(1) formerly the Capital Transfer Tax Act 1984).
Further, a disposition between the separated spouses will rank as a transfer between the spouses; so that the exemption is still available, as there is no requirement (in contrast to the capital gains tax legislationsee p16) that the spouses shall be living together.
Thus, as long as the marriage between the husband and wife (assuming them both to be domiciled in the UK) is not dissolved, transfer of property between them will not incur a liability to inheritance tax.
The marriage is not finally dissolved until the decree is made absolute; thus, transfers of property in the period between the decree nisi and the decree absolute from husband to wife incur no inheritance tax liability.
Once the marriage is dissolved, prima facie there is a charge to inheritance tax on a transfer of property between husband and wife unless the disposition is not intended to confer gratuitous benefit on either person and is made between persons not connected with each other(Inheritance Tax Act 1984, s10(1)).
A former husband and wife are not "connected persons" (see TCGA 1992, s286(2), and Inheritance Tax Act 1984, s270).
It will be recalled that all transfers of property ordered by the  court take effect only after the decree absolute (Matrimonial Causes Act 1973, s24(3)), at which time the exemption relating to a transfer between husband and wife is not applicable.
In most cases, however, a transfer of property from the former husband to the former wife will fall within the provisions of s10(1) mentioned above and the Inland Revenue have issued a Press Statement (see Orange Tax Handbook 1992/93, Butterworths, IHT Statements of Practice, E12) to this effect: Transfer of money or property pursuant to an Order of the Court in consequence of a Decree of Divorce or nullity of marriage will in general be regarded as exempt from Inheritance Tax as transactions at arm's length which are not intended to confer any gratuitous benefit.
If it can be shown, therefore, that a transfer of property takes place to satisfy the claim of the former wife (ie that there is no gratuitous benefit intended) there should be no charge on the transfer to inheritance tax.
Similarly if the house is transferred upon certain terms and conditions (see Chapter 6) s11 of the Inheritance Tax Act 1984 should relieve the transfer from charge (see p99) on the basis that it is for the maintenance of the other party to the marriage.
The safest course, in view of the Revenue's Statement, must be either to complete the transfer (if by agreement) before the marriage is dissolved or to have the transfer made the subject of a court order and so usually fall within the provisions of s10(1).
A sale by a former husband to the former wife of property or his interest therein should incur no inheritance tax liability if at full value, but if a sale takes place at an under value on the basis that a benefit is intended this is a transfer of value for inheritance tax purposes.
Following the Finance Act 1986 this would be a potentially exempt transfer and only subject to a charge to inheritance tax if the husband transferor dies within seven years of the date of the transfer (Finance Act 1986, Sched 19, Pt I, para 1 inserting s3(A) Inheritance Tax Act 1984).
In the event of the death of the husband within the seven year period, the liability to inheritance tax falls upon the transferee wife (Inheritance Tax Act 1984, s199) although if not paid within 12 months the husband's personal representatives can be liable (s199(2)).
The husband should take an indemnity from the wife to protect his estate in the event of such liability arising.
4 Stamp duty
It is often forgotten why it is necessary to stamp conveyances or transfers with stamp duty.
Section 14(4) of the Stamp Act 1891, in effect provides that an instrument not sufficiently stamped shall not be available as evidence in any civil proceedings.
Thus, in unregistered conveyancing unless a conveyance or other document of title is properly stamped, it cannot be used to assert title to land or defend that title if attacked by others.
For this reason any purchaser will wish to see that all documents in the chain of title are properly stamped.
In respect of registered land, a transferee will not be concerned with the amount of stamp duty imposed on documents prior to the transfer to him; the registrar is under a duty to check the sufficiency of the stamping on a document affecting registered land (Stamp Act 1891, s17), so that an instrument cannot be registered at HM Land Registry unless correctly stamped.
Section 12 of the Stamp Act 1891 allows any person to submit a document for adjudication to the Adjudication Section of the Inland Revenue Stamp Office.
If there is doubt, therefore, as to whether or not a document should be stamped, and if so with what duty, the safest course is to submit it for adjudication.
The executed document, together with a plain copy of it, must be submitted.
Adjudication is generally conclusive as to the sufficiency of the stamp duty, so that objection cannot be taken either in court proceedings or by any purchaser (Stamp Act 1891, s12(5)).
In the case of a conveyance on sale (or assignment of a lease by way of sale) a "PD" stamp is necessary as well, to show that particulars of the transaction have been delivered to the Inland Revenue (Finance Act 1931, s28).
(a) The reliefs Section 83 of the Finance Act 1985 made very significant changes to the stamping of documents executed on or after 26 March 1985 where property is conveyed or transferred from one party to a marriage to the other.
The section relates to any instrument that:(i) is executed in pursuance of an order of a court made on granting in respect of the parties a decree of divorce, nullity of marriage or judicial separation, or  (ii) is executed in pursuance of an order of a court which is made in connection with the dissolution or annulment of the marriage or the parties' judicial separation and which is made at any time after the granting of such a decree, or (iii) is executed at any time in pursuance of an agreement of the parties made in contemplation of or otherwise in connection with the dissolution or annulment of the marriage or their judicial separation.
The section specified that stamp duty of 50p was payable on such an instrument.
Even that can be avoided following the coming into force on 1 May 1987 of The Stamp Duty (Exempt Instruments) Regulations 1987 (SI No 516).
These provide that if the appropriate certificate is included as part of the instrument or is endorsed thereon, then no stamp duty is payable.
The certificate must be signed by the transferor (which it will be if included in the conveyance/transfer) or by his solicitors or duly authorised agent.
Category H of the Regulations relates to: The conveyance or transfer of property within section 83(1) of the Finance Act 1985 (transfers in connection with divorce etc).
Thus, in general, most "matrimonial conveyances" should not incur any liability to stamp duty whatever the value of the property conveyed or transferred.
(b) Assuming the mortgage debt In the past practitioners have had considerable difficulty where the transferee wife took over property subject to a mortgage liability.
Prima facie, this raised a liability to stamp duty under s57 of the Stamp Act 1891 according to the value of the debt assumed by the transferee.
The Inland Revenue has now clarified the position (Statement of Practice SP6/90 dated 27 April 1990):(i) this section does not affect conveyances or transfers which fall within s83 of the Finance Act 1985 and Category H above;(ii) if on a conveyance or transfer of property subject to a debt (not within the provisions of s83) the transferee covenants (either in the instrument or separately) to  pay the debt or indemnify the transferor in respect thereof such covenant constitutes valuable consideration and establishes the transaction as a sale for stamp duty purposes.
Where no express covenant is given by the transferee, the Revenue takes the view that one is implied unless a contrary intention is shown (and may always be implied where property was previously in joint names with both parties jointly liable on the mortgage).
Thus, unless s83 above applies, a mortgaged property transferred from one spouse to another or into joint names will incur a charge to stamp duty unless it is clear that the transferor alone remains liable for the debt.
Similarly, a transfer of mortgaged property from joint names to one name alone is likely to incur a liability for stamp duty, although the Revenue's practice would be to charge duty on the proportion of debt assumed by the transferee (usually one half).
In a non husband and wife situation (ie where no other reliefs are available) the mortgage debt assumed will be added to the consideration paid to arrive at the total amount subject to stamp duty.
(c) The charge If the conveyance or transfer does not fall within the provisions of s83, one is thrown back on the previous stamp duty position:(i) conveyance or transfer on sale This incurs a charge to ad valorem stamp duty at 1 per cent unless the conveyance can be certified at £60,000 or less (see below)(Finance Act 1984, s109 and Finance Act 1993); or (ii) conveyance or transfer "of any other kind" In such a case fixed stamp duty of 50p is payable unless the instrument can be certified as being one within The Stamp Duty (Exempt Instruments) Regulations 1987 (SI No 516).
(d) The hybrid situation It is sometimes agreed between the parties to a marriage that the matrimonial home (or the husband's interest therein) be transferred to the wife and a third party (eg a new husbandsee Chapter 5).
This is, in essence, a truncation of two separate transactions (a transfer to the wife followed by her subsequent  transfer to herself and the third party) each of which could be the subject of a certificate under The Stamp Duty (Exempt Instruments) Regulations 1987 (SI No 516)(Categories H and L respectively).
However, the truncated conveyance would not then be "an instrument by which property is conveyed or transferred from one party to a marriage to the other" within the Finance Act 1985, s83 and therefore could not be certified by the husband as being within category "H" of the Regulations.
The situation would therefore be as set out in section (c) above and adjudication is advised.
(e) Examples Set out below are various categories of conveyance/transfers and how they should be dealt with for stamp duty purposes:(i) Conveyance or transfer pursuant to court order—no monetary consideration (Eg Precedents 1, 2, 7, 8, 15 and 16) Provided this contains the following certificate (it is suggested as part of the instrument) no stamp duty is payable.
Adjudication is not necessary: It is certified that this instrument falls within category H in the Schedule to The Stamp Duty (Exempt Instruments) Regulations 1987. (ii) Conveyance or transfer by the husband to the wife, by agreement (ie not pursuant to court order) —no monetary consideration Provided this meets the requirements of the Finance Act 1985, s83(1) (c)(see above) and provided the certificate in (i) above is contained in the instrument, no stamp duty is payable.
Adjudication is not necessary.
(iii) Conveyance or transfer pursuant to court order or by agreement—wife paying some consideration to husband (Eg Precedents 56 and 57) If by order of the court (or by agreement) and within the  provisions of s83 (above) then provided the certificate in (i) above is contained in the instrument, no stamp duty is payable.
Adjudication is not necessary.
(iv) Conveyance or transfer pursuant to court order with husband being released from the mortgage (wife assuming liability)(Eg Precedents 5, 6, 19 and 20) It was this type of conveyance which caused the most difficulty prior to the passing of the Finance Act 1985 because the Stamp Act 1891, s57 triggered a charge to stamp duty (see above).
Happily, such a conveyance falls within the provisions of s83 (above) and with the addition of the exemption certificate (see (i) above) no charge to stamp duty arises.
(v) Conveyance or transfer by husband to wife (or a third party) for consideration (no element of gift)(Eg Precedents 9, 10, 17, 18, 34 to 39) Such a conveyance if not falling within the provisions of s83 (above)(ie not made in connection with the divorce) and not containing an element of gift requires the conventional stamp duty certificate, if the consideration is under £60,000.
It is hereby certified that the transaction hereby effected does not form part of a larger transaction or of a series of transactions in respect of which the amount or value or the aggregate amount or value of the consideration exceeds £60,000.
If the consideration is in excess of this figure, then no certificate is required and ad valorem stamp duty at the rate of 1 per cent of the consideration will be payable.
It must not be forgotten that if the wife or third party is assuming the mortgage debt, so that the husband is released, the amount of the debt assumed in addition to the cash consideration will be subject to stamp duty (Stamp Act 1891, s57).
(vi) Conveyance or transfer by husband to wife, not within s83, with element of gift—no monetary consideration Although hardly within the circumstances mentioned in this book, such a conveyance does avoid a charge to stamp duty by virtue of the Regulations and provided that it is a conveyance or transfer of property operating as a voluntary disposition inter vivos for no consideration in money or money's worth nor any consideration referred to in s57 of the Stamp Act 1891 (conveyance in consideration of a debt etc).
The certificate to be contained in the instrument would be: It is certified that this instrument falls within category L in The Schedule to The Stamp Duty (Exempt Instruments) Regulations 1987 The instrument so certified does not require adjudication.
(vii) Conveyance or transfer to trustees (by Court order or by agreement) with no consideration (Eg Precedents 46 to 49) Such a conveyance or transfer falls outside the provisions of s83 (above) as it is not a conveyance or transfer from one party to a marriage to the other.
Certificate H is not applicable.
Although the document creates a settlement (see p99) Certificate L is not applicable because it is not a voluntary disposition.
The document will thus be a conveyance or transfer "of any other kind" (see p24) and stamp duty of 50p is payable; practitioners may prefer to submit the document to the Inland Revenue Adjudication Section.
Home in Husband's Name—Conveyance to Wife
This chapter deals with the situation where the matrimonial home is in the sole name of the husband, with the home being either free from any mortgage charge or subject to a mortgage debt.
The court may order the husband to convey or transfer the home to the wife absolutely in the following manner: It is ordered that the Respondent shall transfer as beneficial owner to the Petitioner absolutely within 28 days from the date of this Order the property at 1 Blackacre Drive, Blackacre.
Chapter 6 deals with those cases where the home is in the husband's sole name and the husband is ordered to make a conveyance upon certain terms or settle the matrimonial home upon certain trusts.
The risk of the husband dealing with the property in the period between the court order and completion of the conveyance to the wife or lodgment of the transfer to her at HM Land Registry has already been mentioned (see above p10) and practitioners will no doubt have taken protective steps accordingly.
1 Procedure
As the house is in the husband's sole name, the husband's solicitors will have possession of the title deeds unless there is a mortgage.
If there is a bank or building society mortgage the husband's solicitors should be able to obtain the title deeds from the mortgagee.
Some solicitors acting for the husband may take a robust view to save their clients costs and, following the court order, may  merely dispatch the title deeds to the wife's solicitors on the basis that the husband has no further interest in them and that they will receive a conveyance for execution by the husband in due course.
In unregistered conveyancing this is not satisfactory, as the husband's solicitors cannot (unless they have taken an abstract) check on receiving the conveyance for execution if proper indemnities are proferred in respect of any covenants and other matters to which the property is subject.
It is considered more satisfactory to adhere to the conventional conveyancing procedure so that the husband's solicitors will submit an epitome of title to the wife's solicitors or (in the case of registered land) office copy entries of the registered title.
Obtaining office copy entries (as opposed to furnishing merely a copy of the registered title) is advisable as it reveals at an early stage whether or not there is a second charge which may not have been disclosed to the husband's solicitors.
In the case of a matrimonial home which does not have registered title, it would seem to be accepted practice to assume that the title was properly investigated at the time of the husband's purchase, so that all the husband's solicitors need to abstract to the wife's solicitors is the conveyance to the husband, any mortgage, any "sales-off" (or other transactions affecting the title), and details of the covenants affecting the property.
Following the receipt of the epitome of title or office copy entries, the wife's solicitors will submit a draft conveyance or transfer to the husband's solicitors and engross the same after approval.
Although the court order should specify a time-limit in which the conveyance must be completed (so that compliance can be enforced—see Chapter 8) such time-limit is rarely adhered to in practice.
There can be no incentive for an embittered husband to execute the conveyance quickly.
If a more than reasonable time has elapsed since the engrossed conveyance or transfer was submitted for execution by the husband, then the steps set out in Chapter 8 are a guide as to the procedure to be followed before application is made to the court asking the court to execute the conveyance or transfer on behalf of the husband.
For the reason that there can so often be delay in obtaining the husband's signature, it is recommended that only once the documentation has been agreed and executed should a "completion date" be arranged so that the wife's solicitors can make the  necessary searches against the husband in HM Land Charges Registry or HM Land Registry (as the case may be).
In the latter case (unless the wife is purchasing the property or the mortgagee is advancing monies when the ordinary search Form 94A is appropriate) a search on Form 94C should be made, although such a search does not confer priority for the registration of any dealing (Land Registration (Official Searches) Rules 1990 (SI No 1361), r9) and in contrast to Form 94A requires a fee of £8 (Land Registration Fees Order 1992).
If the property is being charged by way of mortgage by the wife then priority can be obtained by the mortgagee's solicitors making the usual Form 94A Search on behalf of the mortgagee, which gives a priority period of 30 working days (Land Registration (Official Searches) Rules 1990 (SI No 1361), r3).
2 Covenants for title
(a) Unregistered land
The question as to what covenants for title should be implied in the conveyance may be in issue.
Clearly, if the court orders the conveyance, or if the conveyance is by agreement to satisfy the claim of the wife, it will be inappropriate for the husband to convey "as settlor" since the conveyance is not a voluntary disposition or settlement; for this to be an effective covenant the conveying party must not only be expressed to convey as "settlor" , he must actually be a settlor (see Fay v Miller Wilkins & Co [1941]Ch 360, although Emmet on Title (19th edn, Longman, para 14.003) expresses doubts concerning this decision).
It is tempting to adopt the view that the husband should convey "as trustee" , thus implying that he himself has not incumbered the property (see Law of Property Act 1925, s76(1) (f), Sched 2, Pt VI).
Section 76(1) (f) "LPA 1925" , specifies that the covenant set out in Sched 2, Pt VI, is implied when the conveyance is made under an order of the court.
Few standard conveyancing textbooks mention, let alone discuss, the covenant implied in a conveyance made under "an order of the court" and there is a suggestion by reason of the heading to Part VI that such a covenant is only to be used where the court orders a conveyance on behalf of a person suffering under a disability.
One is led to the conclusion therefore that the husband should convey as beneficial owner; he is very often conveying the former matrimonial home as part of an agreement whereby the wife releases her rights to further claims for capital, and as such he could be said to be receiving valuable consideration from her and it is established that a vendor selling under compulsion should stand in the same position as a contractual purchaser under an open contract (see Re King [1962]1 WLR 632 and Emmet on Title above).
If the wife was a purchaser for money, she would insist on the husband conveying as "beneficial owner" , and there seems no good reason therefore why she should not receive the benefit of these implied covenants when taking a conveyance of the matrimonial home from the husband by order of the court or by way of final agreement between them.
It is, therefore, recommended that such covenant be insisted upon.
It may be helpful to recall that the "beneficial owner" covenants imply:(i) Full power to conveythe vendor has a good right to convey the whole property and interest agreed to be conveyed.
(ii) Quiet enjoyment—the purchaser shall have quiet enjoyment of the land.
(iii) Freedom from incumbrancesthe land shall be enjoyed free from any incumbrances other than those subject to which the conveyance is expressly made.
(iv) Further assurancethe vendor will execute such assurances and do such things as are necessary to cure any defect in the conveyance.
As the "beneficial owner" covenants are only implied where there is valuable consideration (see LPA 1925, s76(1) (a)) Clause 2 set out in Precedent 1 below should be expressly incorporated in the conveyance if there is no cash payment.
In an assignment of unregistered leasehold land for valuable consideration a covenant by the assignor as "beneficial owner" implies (in addition to the freehold beneficial owner covenants) that the lease is valid, that the rent has been paid and the covenants and conditions of the lease have been observed and performed (LPA 1925, s76(1) (b)) with a separate covenant being implied that the assignee will pay the rent, observe and perform  the covenants and conditions in the lease and indemnify the assignor in respect thereof (LPA 1925, s77(1) (c)).
Unless there is valuable consideration (as on sale) the beneficial owner covenants (just as in the case of the conveyance of freeholds) will have to be expressly incorporated in the assignment.
Express mention of the beneficial owner covenants will imply on the part of the assignor that the terms of the lease with regard to maintenance, decoration and repair have been complied with; this may not be so especially if the husband has been absent from the property for some time (see generally Butler v Mountview Estates [1951]2 KB 563).
Whilst, prima facie, the wife could sue the husband on this implied covenant if the leasehold covenants have not been complied with, it is likely (in view of the fact that she must have known the state and condition of the property) that the husband could have the assignment rectified to exclude this covenant; far better therefore, if applicable, to exclude this part of the beneficial owner covenant ab initio .
(See Precedent 3.)(b) Registered land In the case of registered land (whether freehold or leasehold) the wording of r76 of the Land Registration Rules 1925 (SR & O 1925 No 1093) suggests that if the husband is expressed to convey as "beneficial owner" (whether or not there is any consideration) these covenants for title will be implied.
The position cannot be regarded as free from doubt and it is therefore recommended that the express provision set out in Precedent 2 be incorporated in the transfer.
A transfer of registered land made otherwise than for valuable consideration is subject to all minor interests (see Land Registration Act 1925, ss20(4) and 23(5)); the taking of the express "beneficial owner" covenants gives the wife the additional protection that if in fact the property is subject to any claim or demand not previously revealed, not only would any right of action in respect thereof against the husband be better founded, but the implied covenant for further assurance (implied in the beneficial owner covenants but not in the covenant as "trustee" ) will require the husband to execute and do all assurances and things necessary for further assuring the subject matter of the transfer.
(See Dunning v Sykes [1987]Ch 287 and Ruoff and Roper, Registered Conveyancing Looseleaf edn, Sweet and Maxwell, 1991, £16.05).
It will be appreciated that no reference to the implied covenants will appear on the register (see r76).
Should any question arise, however, the Registrar has a discretion (under Land Registration Rules 1925, r290(1)) to allow inspection of the filed transfer and it is understood that such discretion would be exercised if any difficulty could be resolved by production of the filed transfer.
In respect of registered leaseholds s24 of the Land Registration Act 1925 implies on a transfer similar covenants to those in unregistered conveyancing, namely that the transferor has paid the rent and observed and performed the covenants of the lease and that the transferee will pay future rent, observe and perform the leasehold covenants and keep the transferor indemnified in respect thereof.
In order that the transferor be relieved from liability in respect of lack of repair prior to the transfer (see p32) express mention to that effect should be made in the transfer, a copy of which might prudently be retained to avoid asking the registrar to exercise his discretion under r290 above.
3 Where the property is subject to a mortgage
(a) First mortgage only The court may order that: The Respondent shall as beneficial owner transfer to the Petitioner absolutely within 28 days from the date of this Order the property at 1 Blackacre Drive, Blackacre, subject to the existing mortgage in favour of the Blackacre Building Society.
Alternatively, agreement to this effect may be reached between the husband and the wife and embodied in a "consent" order (as to the advantages of which, see Chapter 1).
In such a case, the husband will, if possible, wish to be released by the mortgagee from the future liability under the mortgage rather than rely upon an indemnity from the wife, and although the mortgagee should be aware of the proceedings between the parties by virtue of the notification required to be made to it under r2.59(4) of the Family Proceedings Rules 1991 (see p3), a formal application will doubtless have to be made by the husband for a release.
It must be remembered that a court cannot order a mortgagee to agree to a conveyance or transfer subject to mortgage, nor can it order a mortgagee to release a party from the mortgage covenants.
If the wife's level of income is sufficient, the mortgagee will probably consent to the release of the husband from liability under the mortgage so long as the wife covenants to assume this and, depending upon the practice of the mortgagee, will specify what clauses it requires in the appropriate conveyance or transfer.
Some mortgagees insist on approving the draft conveyance or transfer and regard must therefore be had to the practice of each mortgagee.
The release of the husband from his obligations under the mortgage (as in Precedent 5) will not release him from the covenants for title implied under s76(1) of the Law of Property Act 1925 by his having charged the property as beneficial owner (The Conveyancer, 1982, p252); this lack of complete release however is necessary for the mortgagee so that it still has the covenant for further assurance in the event that a defect in title becomes apparent and some mortgagees insist on a specific covenant to this effect.
If the mortgagee will not consent to the husband being released from the mortgage, then the husband will have to be content with an indemnity from the wife (see Precedents 7 and 8).
Strictly, as far as unregistered conveyancing is concerned, there is no need for the mortgagee to be a party to the conveyance if it is not releasing the husband from liability.
In practice most mortgagees require to join in the conveyance.
It is obviously in the husband's interest that the mortgagee receives a covenant from the wife to observe and perform the terms of the mortgage as this will put the mortgagee on further notice as to the primary responsibility notwithstanding that the husband is not released.
The exact terms of the covenant to be given should be checked with the mortgagee concerned.
If the title to the matrimonial home is registered, then a consent to the transfer will be required from the mortgagee if a restriction to this effect has been entered on the register.
Owing to the provisions of Williams & Glyn's Bank Ltd v Boland and Williams & Glyn's Bank Ltd v Brown [1981]AC 487 it would be prudent to obtain the consent to the conveyance from any other occupier of the matrimonial home aged 18 years or more, coupled with confirmation from such occupier that he or she is agreeable to the rights of the mortgagee taking priority over  his or her rights in the property or its proceeds of sale.
Most building societies have produced standard forms of consent.
(See Precedent 11.)
It is suggested that the conveyance be prepared and executed in duplicate so that the husband has a record of the terms of the indemnity given to him by the wife.
As far as registered land is concerned r110 of the Land Registration Rules 1925 covers the position: On a transfer of land subject to a charge or other incumbrance appearing on the register…covenants by either party to pay the money owing and to indemnify the other party may be added to the instrument of transfer and may be noted on the register.
Application to this effect should therefore be included in the transfer (see Precedent 8).
The entry will be placed on the Proprietorship Register and will read: Note: The transfer to the proprietor contains a covenant by her with [Husband]to pay the monies secured by Charge No 1 and to indemnify him from all claims and demands in respect thereof.
It is not necessary for the building society to be joined as a party to a registered land transfer where it is only receiving the benefit of a covenant to observe and perform the terms of the mortgage by the wife (and not releasing the husband) because it can enforce the covenant without being a party (Chelsea and Walham Green Building Society v Armstrong [1951]Ch 853).
It is suggested, however, that the building society be joined so that it is specifically aware of the terms of the transfer.
As in unregistered conveyancing it is probably advisable that the husband keeps a duplicate or certified copy of the transfer to the wife so that he has a record of the terms of indemnity given to him by the wife.
(b) Where in addition there is a second charge If the former matrimonial home to be conveyed or transferred to the wife is subject to both a first and second charge it may be that whilst the first mortgagee is prepared to release the husband, upon having a direct covenant by the wife, the second mortgagee is not so agreeable.
It is obviously to the husband's advantage in  such circumstances to seek to persuade the first mortgagee to offer the wife a further advance of sufficient amount to repay the second charge.
That failing, there can be a conveyance between the husband and wife, to which the first mortgagee is a party, to release the husband from liability under the first mortgage and take a covenant to observe and perform the same from the wife who will also covenant with the husband to indemnify him in respect of the second mortgage.
The second mortgagee should also be a party to receive the additional covenant of the wife.
Alternatively, there can be a conveyance between the husband and the wife to which the first mortgagee is a party (as above) and a deed of covenant from the wife in favour of the second mortgagee to observe and perform the terms of the second mortgage, containing an indemnity in favour of the husband in respect thereof.
In the first case, the conveyance should be prepared and executed in triplicate (or there should be examined copies) so that the original is held by the first mortgagee, the husband has a record of the indemnity and release given and the second mortgagee also has a record of the transfer.
In the second case, there will need to be an original and a duplicate (or examined copy) of each document so that the husband has a record of the release from the first mortgage and of the indemnity given him in respect of the second mortgage.
As far as registered conveyancing is concerned, there seems no reason why the transfer should not be prepared and executed in triplicate (or an original with examined copies), the original transfer being lodged at HM Land Registry, the duplicate being held with the second charge certificate and the third being retained by the husband as evidence of his release from the first mortgage and of the indemnity in respect of the second mortgage.
Rule 110 of the Land Registration Rules 1925 will be applicable (see p35).
4 Steps to be taken following completion of the conveyance or transfer
(a) Stamp duty No "PD Form" is required unless there has been a conveyance on sale (eg Precedents 9 and 10).
If the consideration is less than £60,000 and the property already has registered title, the PD Form should be sent to HM Land Registry with the application for registration of the transfer.
(The Stamp Duty (Exempt Instruments) Regulations 1985 (SI No 1688).)
The precedents in this chapter (with the exception of Precedents 9 and 10 which are not following a court order) should not attract a charge to stamp duty as a result of The Stamp Duty (Exempt Instruments) Regulations 1987 (SI No 516)(see Chapter 2 generally as to stamp duty).
(b) Cancellation at HM Land Charges Registry or Land Registry
No doubt as the matrimonial home was in the husband's sole name the wife will have registered her right of occupation by way of a Class F Land Charge or (if registered title) a notice under the terms of the Matrimonial Homes Act 1983.
Although such charge comes to an end by termination of the marriage following the decree absolute, the charge has probably not been cancelled and this should be done at HM Land Charges Registry (Form K13 fee £1) or at HM Land Registry (Form 202 accompanied by a certified copy of the decree absoluteno fee Land Registration Fees Order 1992, Sched 4, Pt II, para (9)).
Any pending action registered at HM Land Charges Registry should be cancelled (Form K11fee £1.00, Land Charges Fees Rules 1990); any caution registered at HM Land Registry should also be cancelled (Form 71no fee; para (9) above.
(c) Court order and completion of abstract It is recommended that a copy of the original court order marked as examined against the original be lodged with the title documents.
If the court order refers to matters other than the matrimonial home it is no doubt better to keep these extraneous matters private and to prepare an abstract (and mark the same as examined against the original order) of the relevant part of the court order.
A certified copy of the court order (or examined abstract) will be required by HM Land Registry when the transfer is lodged for registration.
Where in registered land a new covenant is given by the wife to the building society a certified copy of the transfer containing the covenant should be lodged with the deeds so that the building  society has a proper record there of the wife's liability, the transfer incorporating the covenant itself being retained at the Land Registry.
(d) First registration of title Although the property may be in an area subject to compulsory registration of title, no application for registration is required when the property is conveyed following a court order as the conveyance has not been one following sale (Land Registration Act 1925, s123).
If the conveyance is one of sale, then registration is compulsory.
(e) HM Land Registry fees Where the transfer between husband and wife does not involve consideration (eg transfer following agreement between the spouses or pursuant to a court order) then art 2(5) of the Land Registration Fees Order 1992 will applyfees are based on the value of the land concerned after deducting therefrom the amount secured by any registered charges.
Provided the transfer is of the matrimonial home made pursuant to an order of the court, advantage can be taken of Abatement 2(i).
Sched 4, Pt I, reducing the fee payable to one-fifth subject to a minimum of £40.
It is simplest to mention the amount of the mortgage debt in the transfer as is done in Precedents 6, 8 and 10.
The solicitor lodging the application may specify the value of the property transferred either by letter or on HM Land Registry Form A4.
Where the transfer between husband and wife is one on sale, the fee is calculated in accordance with Scale A, of the 1992 Fee Order on the amount of the consideration.
(f) Insurance If the property is free from mortgage, the wife should effect her own insurance cover following completion of the conveyance or transfer to her.
If the property is subject to mortgage and the mortgagee concerned has effected cover, confirmation that the name of the insured has been changed to that of the wife should be obtained from the mortgagee.  (g) Leasehold The requirements of the lease as to registration of any assignment with the lessor should be observed.
PRECEDENTS
Home in Joint Names—Conveyance to Wife
This chapter deals with the situation where the matrimonial home is held in the joint names of the husband and the wife, either as beneficial joint tenants or as tenants in common.
The home may be subject to a mortgage or free from charge.
The court may order the husband to convey or transfer his interest in the home to the wife absolutely in the following manner: It is ordered that the Respondent shall transfer to the Petitioner absolutely within 28 days from the date of this Order all his estate and interest in the property 1 Blackacre Drive, Blackacre [subject to the existing Mortgage to the Blackacre Building Society, the Petitioner indemnifying the Respondent against all claims in respect thereof].
Alternatively agreement may be reached between the husband and wife for some monetary payment so that the husband may keep the house in which case the consent order may be: It is ordered that the Respondent shall within 28 days from the date of this Order pay to the Petitioner the sum of £ and It is ordered that on receipt of the said sum of £the Petitioner do transfer all her estate and interest in the property at 1 Blackacre Drive, Blackacre to the Respondent.
Chapter 6 deals with those cases where the husband is ordered to convey or transfer his interest in the matrimonial home upon certain terms or settle the same upon certain trusts.
1 Severance
Dealing with the interest of one party in joint property would be incomplete without mention of the doctrine of severance.
Just as solicitors acting for the wife, where the matrimonial home stands in the husband's sole name, will have given advice concerning the registration of a Class F Land Charge or a notice (if registered land); so, where the home stands in the joint names of husband and wife as beneficial joint tenants, will they have advised on severance of that joint tenancy in order to prevent the husband acquiring the whole property by operation of law in the event of the wife's death before the determination of the matrimonial proceedings (see Barton v Morris [1985]2 All ER 1032).
The husband's advisers will also have regard to the advantages of severance whilst matrimonial proceedings are pending.
If severance of the joint tenancy takes place, it should be coupled with the making of a new will by the party severing the joint tenancy to deal with "the severed share" .
Although such will does not defeat the claim of the other spouse under the provisions of the Inheritance (Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975, if reasonable provision is not made for that spouse, it might be of "persuasive" use to the court in proceedings under that Act in deciding whether or not to award the surviving spouse a limited interest (eg until remarriage) or an absolute interest in the deceased's share of the matrimonial home.
It was previously thought that severance, where no shares are agreed, operated to create a tenancy in common in equal shares (see Megarry and Wade, Real Property 5th edn, Stevens, 1984, p430 and R v Porter [1990]1 WLR 1260 where the Court of Appeal held that in a joint venture, in the absence of any evidence, the Court was entitled to assume equal sharing).
Goodman v Gallant [1986]1 All ER 311 held that in the absence of any claim for rectification or rescission of the original conveyance, evidence could not be subsequently given in support of an unequal divison following severance.
However Springette v Defoe [1992]Fam Law 459 (which was not a case between husband and wife) decided that where there had been no discussion between the parties about their respective beneficial interests, the Court could not infer an intention of equal shares; the shares were presumed to be in proportion to their  respective contributions.
The Court would have to determine the shares (see Gissing v Gissing [1971]AC 886).
In the light of this it seems that severance is beneficial in that it stops one party acquiring the whole property in the event of the other's death, but the actual shares of the parties would have to await determination by the Court (or agreement).
The procedure for severance differs depending upon whether title to the matrimonial home is registered or not.
(a) Unregistered land Section 36(2) of the Law of Property Act 1925 provides for severance of a joint tenancy either by:(i) a notice in writing given by one joint tenant to the other; or (ii) the doing of such other acts or things as would, in the case of personal estate, have been effectual to sever the tenancy in equity.
The mere issue of matrimonial proceedings for a property adjustment order does not automatically sever a joint tenancy (Harris v Goddard [1983]1 WLR 1203) but the issue of proceedings under s17 of the Married Women's Property Act 1882 can cause severance to occur (Re Draper's Conveyance [1969]1 Ch 486) as does the bankruptcy of one of the parties (Re Gorman (a bankrupt)[1990]1 WLR 616).
The husband and wife may agree that the joint tenancy should be severed but if so they should properly evidence that fact.
In Nielson-Jones v Fedden [1975]Ch 222 it was held that it was not sufficient for the husband and wife to sign a memorandum to the effect that the husband was to have a free hand to sell the property and use the money to buy a new house for himself although in Burgess v Rawnsley [1975]Ch 429 it was held that a beneficial joint tenancy was severed by the oral agreement of one joint tenant to sell her share in the property to the other even though that agreement was not specifically enforceable.
Service of a notice of severance (see Precedent 12) would appear to be effective to sever the joint tenancy if properly addressed to the other joint tenant and received at the property concerned.
It would appear not to matter that the party to whom the notice is addressed does not acknowledge receipt nor even if the party  addressed never actually receives the notice itself (see Re 88 Berkeley Road, London NW9; Rickwood v Turnsek [1971]Ch 648, and generally as to methods of severance, Conveyancer NS, 1976, vol 40, p77).
If the joint tenancy is severed by agreement then the notice of severance or declaration of trust which would have the same effect (see precedent in Kelly's Draftsman, 15th edn, Butterworths, 1986, p673) should specify in what proportions or shares the equitable interests of the former beneficial joint tenants are to be held.
If however the shares of each party have never been determined, then at least proper service of the notice of severance ensures that severance has taken place with the advantage as mentioned earlier (see p51).
Whilst the notice itself may be sufficient to sever the beneficial joint tenancy, to prevent a conveyance by the survivor either through ignorance or fraud it would be prudent to endorse a memorandum on the last conveyance to the effect that severance has taken place.
This should be sufficient to put a purchaser on notice so that he insists on paying the purchase monies to two trustees or a trust corporation so as to obtain a good receipt (Law of Property Act 1925, s27).
In the absence of such memorandum or the registration of a petition or receiving order in bankruptcy against any of the joint tenants in HM Land Charges Registry, a purchaser of the legal estate is entitled to treat the survivor as solely and beneficially interested if that survivor is expressed to convey a beneficial owner or if the conveyance includes a statement that such survivor is solely and beneficially interested in the legal estate (Law of Property (Joint Tenants) Act 1964).
(b) Registered land The position in relation to registered land, while workable, is not wholly satisfactory.
Section 74 of the Land Registration Act 1925 provides that, as far as possible, references to trusts shall be excluded from the register.
A notice of severance or declaration of trust whilst being effective in equity, would have no effect on the register unless it was completed by an application to register a restriction so that the register shows that the survivor of the former two joint tenants is no longer able to give a valid receipt for capital monies (see Precedent 14).
Such application (because the property is registered in the joint names of the husband and  wife) requires the signatures of both husband and wife and the submission of the land certificate to the registry.
Application will be in Form 75 as required by the Land Registry Rules 1925 (SR & O 1925 No 1093), r235 (see Precedent 14).
Severance results in the obligatory entry of a Form 62 restriction under Land Registration Act 1925, s63; such Registration incurs no fee (Land Registration Fees Order 1992 (SI No 2089).
If, however, one of the joint proprietors refuses to join in the application to register a restriction, the party giving the notice should apply to HM Land Registry for a restriction to be entered on the basis of his application alone (see Key and Elphinstone's Precedents in Conveyancing, 15th edn, Sweet and Maxwell, 1954, vol 3, p264) again using Form 75.
The registrar will probably require to be satisfied that severance has actually taken place.
In the writer's experience it will be sufficient to lodge with the application:(i) an explanation as to why the application has not been signed by both proprietors (eg the parties are separated and the husband refuses to reply);(ii) a copy of the notice of severance; and (iii) a certificate of posting of the notice and confirmation of delivery.
If the other joint tenant has refused to join in an application to register a restriction then doubtless also there will be difficulty about lodging the land certificate.
If in fact a charge is already registered then as the land certificate is already notionally deposited at the registry no difficulty would appear to occur and registration can take place.
Where no charge is registered, the registrar, if otherwise prepared to accept the application, may well be prepared to register the restriction without the land certificate provided he is satisfied that severance has taken place (see Ruoff and Roper, Registered Conveyancing, Looseleaf edn, Sweet and Maxwell, 1991, 39.21).
It will be appreciated that the registration of a restriction does not specify the shares in which the net proceeds of sale of the property are to be held; so (if agreement) there should be a document (such as a declaration of trust) specifying those shares.
However, registration of a restriction protects the share of any  deceased former joint tenant whilst the future of the matrimonial home is being clarified.
2 Procedure
Neither the husband nor the wife is solely entitled to hold the title deeds to the matrimonial home in joint names; but, if either party does hold the title deeds, then that party does, of course, hold them as trustee for both the husband and the wife.
Assuming that the husband will be the conveying party or transferor, it would seem appropriate that his solicitors should be allowed custody of the title deeds and act, in effect, as the "vendor's solicitors" .
It is felt that the conventional conveyancing procedure should be adhered to for the reasons stated in Chapter 3.
As the property was purchased jointly for the husband and the wife, it would seem unreasonable for the wife's solicitors to insist on a full abstract of title and investigation thereof.
It must be assumed that the title was properly investigated at the time of the purchase by the husband and wife.
It is suggested, therefore, that the husband's solicitors should submit to the wife's solicitors merely a copy of the last conveyance, together with a copy of any mortgage affecting the property and memoranda of any "sales-off" or other documents affecting the legal title.
In the case of registered land, sufficient particulars of the title or office copy entries of the registered title can be supplied to enable the wife's solicitors to draw a transfer.
Where the husband is not legally represented or has disappeared, then obviously the wife's solicitors should have complete conduct of the conveyancing and in these circumstances the wife's solicitors may have already asked the court to give an order to this effect (see Chapter 8).
This should have the result that the title deeds will be released by any mortgagee to the wife's solicitors alone without the consent of the husband.
In such circumstances the wife's solicitors will draw the conveyance or transfer by reference to the original title deeds in their hands.
Although the court order may specify a time-limit in which the conveyance or transfer must be completed, this is rarely adhered to.
If an unreasonable time has elapsed and the husband refuses  or fails to execute the conveyance or transfer, application can be made to the court (see Chapter 8).
For the reason that there can so often be delay in obtaining the husband's signature, it is recommended that only once the documentation has been agreed and executed is a "completion date" arranged so that the wife's solicitors may (in the case of unregistered title) make a search against the husband at HM Land Charges Registry.
In the case of registered title, if the wife is purchasing the husband's interest in the property, a search in usual form (Form 94A) at HM Land Registry is appropriate; otherwise a search should be made on Form 94C, although as the wife is a trustee of the legal estate with the husband, this search can be of little value, particularly as it confers no priority (Land Registration (Official Searches) Rules 1990 (SI No 1361), r9).
As often as not, however, a mortgagee will be involved and priority can be obtained by the mortgagee's solicitors making a Form 94A search.
3 Form of conveyance or transfer
(a) Unregistered land Where the husband and wife are beneficial joint tenants there are two methods by which the matrimonial home may be vested in the wife alone:(i) the husband can release his interest in the legal estate to the wife (Law of Property Act 1925, s36(2)); or (ii) the husband and the wife can convey the legal estate to the wife alone (Law of Property Act 1925, s72(4)).
Method (i) has been criticised (see Parker, Modern Conveyancing Precedents, Butterworths, 1964) but has stood the test of time (see Kelly's Draftsmancurrent 15th and earlier editions).
It has been found in practice to be easy to explain to the lay client and easy for such a client to comprehend.
So far as a tenant in common is concerned however, he or she cannot release an undivided half share, as a tenant in common is solely seised of his or her respective interest.
In this case, assuming that the trustees of the legal estate are tenants in common of the whole of the equity (as would usually be the case where husband and wife are concerned) a conveyance by the husband and the wife, as trustees of the legal estate, to the wife  alone is the appropriate document.
Whilst the conveyance will vest the legal estate in the wife, there should be an assignment by the husband to the wife of his equitable interest as well.
So far as unregistered conveyancing is concerned, both transactions can take place in one document (see Precedent 27).
(b) Registered land The rule of keeping the equities off the title is strictly enforced in registered conveyancing.
Section 74 of the Land Registration Act 1925, provides that no person dealing with a registered estate or charge is to be affected with notice of a trust.
Thus, since neither the registry nor persons dealing with the registered estate can have notice of any trust a release by one joint tenant to another is inappropriate (in contrast to unregistered conveyancing) to transfer the registered estate, and a transfer from the husband and the wife to the wife alone is the appropriate document.
Strictly the transfer should contain no reference to the husband's beneficial interest in the matrimonial home; this is a minor interest and will disappear with the alteration of the register (see Key and Elphinstone's Precedents in Conveyancing, 15th edn, vol 3, p449, and Hallett's Conveyancing Precedents, Sweet and Maxwell, 1965, p1286).
Such a transfer will be appropriate whether the property was held by the husband and wife as beneficial joint tenants or as tenants in common: in the latter case, as the transfer to the husband and wife will not have contained a declaration to the effect that the survivor of them could give a good receipt for capital monies, a restriction will have automatically been entered on the register to the effect that no disposition by a sole proprietor of the land (not being a trust corporation) under which capital money arises is to be registered except under an order of the registrar or of the court (Land Registration Act 1925, s58(3) and Land Registration Rules 1925, r213 as amended by Land Registration Rules 1989 (SI No 801)).
When the property is transferred to the wife alone for her own absolute use, it is necessary, therefore, to appy to the registrar to remove this restriction (see Precedent 29).
No fee is payable (Land Registration Fee Order 1992 (SI No 2089) Sched 4, Pt II).
As the transfer deals only with the legal estate, it can be argued that there should properly be a release off the register by the  husband of his equitable interest in the matrimonial home to the wife.
In practice such a release is rarely prepared, the parties being satisfied with the evidence of the court order and the transfer itself.
Any purchaser from the wife is not concerned with this, as he is merely interested to check that the wife alone has power to transfer the property to him.
4 Covenants for title
Whilst the husband and wife as owners of the legal estate can make a conveyance or transfer as trustees to the wife alone as discussed in the previous section, there seems no good reason, when the husband conveys or releases his beneficial interest to the wife, why she should not receive the benefit of the "beneficial owner" covenants (see Chapter 3).
As the beneficial owner covenants are only implied where there is valuable consideration, the covenants (in the absence of such consideration) should be expressly incorporated by reference thereto in the conveyance or transfer.
5 Where the property is subject to a mortgage
Although it may be agreed, or the court may order, that the matrimonial home be conveyed or transferred to the wife alone subject to the existing mortgage, the mortgagee may not be willing to release the husband therefrom.
In such case there will be a conveyance or transfer to the wife alone subject to the existing mortgage with the husband taking an indemnity in respect thereof from the wife.
It will be recalled (see Chapter 3, p35) that in the case of registered land, application under r110 of the Land Registration Rules 1925 should be made to note this indemnity on the Register.
The advantages of having the conveyance or transfer containing the indemnity executed in duplicate have already been noted (see Chapter 3, p35).
If however, the mortgagee is prepared to rely on the wife's covenant, the husband can be released from liability by the mortgagee, with the wife alone remaining liable.
This may take place subsequent to the conveyance or transfer to the wife, so that a separate deed of release is required in favour of the husband (see Precedents 32 and 33).
No stamp duty is payable on the deed (which should be prepared in duplicate so that the husband has evidence of his release).
If it is required to register this release at HM Land Registry (and that depends on the practice by the mortgagee) the original (plus copy) should be sent (together with fee of £40) to HM Land Registry who would note on the Charges Register that the charge had been varied.
The wife will have already covenanted with the mortgagee in the original mortgage to repay the mortgage debt, and there is no need therefore for her to covenant further; surprisingly some mortgagees do, however, require this.
Regard must therefore be had to the practice of each mortgagee in circumstances of this nature.
Regard must also be had to Williams & Glyn's Bank Ltd v Boland [1981]AC 487 and the necessity for any consents to mortgage from those in occupation (see p31 and Precedent 11).
It will be appreciated that if the conveyance or transfer is one of sale between the husband and wife as part of the matrimonial settlement, it can be advantageous for the purposes of stamp duty, inheritance tax and land registry fees to recite the amount of the mortgage debt and also to have a valuer's report.
For stamp duty purposes, the consideration is increased to the extent that the husband's mortgage liability is released although this is not relevant if the transaction falls within s83 Finance Act 1985 (see further Chapter 2).
6 Steps to be taken following the completion of the conveyance or transfer
(a) Stamp duty A PD Form is required only if there has been a conveyance or transfer on sale (eg Precedent 17).
If the consideration is less than £60,000 and the property already has registered title, the PD Form should be sent to HM Land Registry with the application for registration of the transfer (see The Stamp Duty (Exempt Instruments) Regulations 1985 (SI No 1688)).
Generally no stamp duty will be payable unless the conveyance is one on sale (or taking over of a mortgage liability) not resulting from a court order or agreement made in connection with the divorce (see Chapter 2).
(b) Court order and completion of abstract In the case of registered land, a certified copy of the court order, or abstract thereof marked as examined against the original, should be delivered with the application to HM Land Registry for registration of the transfer.
In the case of unregistered land, a copy of the court order marked as examined against the original, or an abstract of the relevant portion of the order marked as examined against the original, should be placed with the title documents.
(c) First registration of title Unless there is a conveyance of the whole (ie not just the husband's share or interest) of the property in the title, application for first registration of title in an area of compulsory registration is not necessary (Land Registration Act 1925, s123).
Therefore even though the wife may buy the husband's share (see Precedents 17 and 21), no application for first registration is required.
(d) HM Land Registry fees Where the transfer is one on sale, the fees are based on the amount of the consideration in accordance with Scale A Land Registration Fees Order 1992 (SI No 2089).
Where the wife does not purchase the husband's interest, fees are based on the equivalent proportion of the value of the land which is the subject of the dealing after deducting therefrom an equivalent proportion of the amount secured on the land (by way of mortgage) and the fees can be ascertained from Scale A in Sched 1.
Further, Sched 4, Pt I, Abatement 2(i), which will reduce the fee payable to one-fifth (subject to a minimum of £40), is available if claimed provided the transfer is made pursuant to an order of the court and is of the matrimonial home.
The value of the land may be evidenced by a statement from the solicitors lodging the application, which should specify the value of the property transferred.
In practice this is either a letter or a statement of value on HM Land Registry Form A4. (e) Insurance Insurance of the property should be placed in the name of the wife alone, the husband's name being deleted from the policy.
Otherwise, in the event of a claim the insurance company may insist on receiving the signature of both husband and wife before monies are paid out, and the husband's whereabouts at that time may not be known.
Mortgagees should be reminded accordingly.
(f) Leasehold The requirements of the lease as to registration of any assignment with the lessor should be observed.
PRECEDENTS
Conveyance of Husband's Interest to New Husband
This chapter deals principally with the situation where the husband and the wife hold the matrimonial home in their joint names (whether as beneficial joint tenants or as tenants in common) and, as a result of property adjustments, the husband's interest in the home is conveyed or transferred to the wife's new husband or friend.
The expression "new husband" used in this chapter will include another person, whether the wife is married to him or not.
With the court having ordered the husband's interest to be conveyed or transferred to the wife, or agreement to that effect having been reached, it may be that the wife requests or desires that the house be conveyed or transferred to herself and her new husband.
Alternatively, the new husband may agree to purchase the husband's interest therein.
In either event, particular regard will have to be had to the capital gains tax, inheritance tax and stamp duty implications of such a transaction, and whilst these are dealt with more fully in Chapter 2, the following points are mentioned as an aide-méemoire:(i) If the new husband purchases the husband's interest in the house, is this for full value and on the basis of an arm's length transaction?
If not, there could be a potential liability for inheritance tax.
(ii) If the wife becomes entitled to the whole house and requests that the matrimonial home be conveyed or transferred to herself and her "new husband" (to whom she is not married), is the wife making a gift for inheritance tax purposes to the "new husband" ?(iii) The Inland Revenue capital gains tax concession mentioned  in Chapter 2 may not be available (on a strict interpretation of its wording) to the former husband if he conveys or transfers his interest in his former principal private residence to someone other than his spouse or ex-spouse. (iv) A conveyance to someone other than a party to the marriage will not attract the stamp duty relief of s83 of the Finance Act 1985,(see p22) but if it is a voluntary disposition, exemption L of The Stamp Duty (Exempt Instruments) Regulations 1987 (SI No 516)(Chapter 2) will apply.
In view of the stamp duty implications, the wife should consider taking the conveyance herself and subsequently conveying to herself and the new husband.
The potential threat of the conveyance to the wife and new husband being put aside if the sale to the new husband could be considered to be at an undervalue must be borne in mind (see p5 and Insolvency Act 1986, s339).
1 Procedure
(a) Is the wife entitled to have the house conveyed/transferred to herself and new husband?
If the court has ordered the husband (or the husband has agreed) to convey or transfer his interest in the former matrimonial home to the wife, there is no reason why he should agree, at the request of the wife, to convey or transfer it to herself and her new husband.
If he does not so agree, then the Precedents in Chapters 3 and 4 are appropriate, and it is up to the wife to make a further conveyance or deed of gift once the property is vested in herself alone.
Suitable precedents can be found in Kelly's Draftsman, 15th edn, Butterworths, 1986, or in the Encyclopedia of Forms and Precedents, 5th edn, Butterworths, 1989, Vol 17.
If the wife and new husband are purchasing the husband's share or interest in the property for full value, then usual sale and purchase considerations apply.
If, however, it is agreed that the wife should purchase the husband's share and interest, and in reality the purchase monies are being provided by the new husband, then if the husband refuses to convey his interest in the  house to the wife and the new husband, it is suggested that the wife takes the conveyance/transfer in her sole name as nominee and makes a subsequent conveyance to herself and the new husband.
This latter conveyance (for which there is a suitable precedent which can be adapted from Kelly's Draftsman, 15th edn, p655) will require stamp duty of 50p and the production of the original conveyance to the wife.
(b) Contract Where the arrangement is agreed between the parties, the practitioner must consider whether or not it is desirable to have a binding contract.
If the husband is purchasing a house for himself with the proceeds of sale of his interest in the matrimonial home, then, as he will have to commit himself to a contract in respect of his purchase, it is suggested that there should be a contract relating to the sale of his interest in the matrimonial home so that he is fully safeguarded.
This should ensure an adherence to a timetable which otherwise might be lacking in the case of an agreement between the parties not supported by a binding contract.
(c) Conduct of the conveyancing It is appropriate for the husband's solicitors to obtain the title deeds so that they may act as vendor's solicitors.
It is envisaged that the wife and the new husband will have a solicitor who acts for both of them.
Whilst the new husband is entitled to have the title investigated fully (at his own cost), in a case where the house is already in the joint names of the husband and wife, it is thought that, in practice, the new husband will rely upon the title at the time of the conveyance to the husband and the wife having been properly investigated.
In the case of unregistered title the husband's solicitors will, therefore, submit a copy of the last conveyance, mortgage (if any), any sales-off or other transactions, together with copies of any covenants referred to in the last conveyance, to the new husband's solicitors who will themselves submit a draft conveyance.
In the case of registered title, office copy entries of the registered title can be supplied to enable the wife's and new husband's solicitors to draw the relevant transfer.
Unless there is a contract governing the transaction, it is suggested that when the conveyance or transfer has been executed by all parties a completion date should be arranged so that the necessary searches can be made by reference to that date and the matter completed.
In the case of unregistered title, a search at HM Land Charges Registry against both the husband and the wife should be made, whilst a Form 94A Search is appropriate in the case of registered land (except in the case of Precedent 41 when a Form 94C Search is appropriate.
It will be recalled that this does not confer priority (see Chapter 3, p30)).
2 Covenants for title
The husband, even in the absence of valuable consideration, should assign his share or interest in the matrimonial home as "beneficial owner" for the reasons set out in Chapter 3.
The effect of the "beneficial owner" covenants in respect of leasehold property is also mentioned in Chapter 3.
Where the wife takes the conveyance and requires it to be conveyed to herself and the new husband, she should convey as "trustee" (thus implying that she herself has not encumbered the property) as she has never had the legal title vested in her absolutely.
3 Form of the conveyance or transfer
(a) Unregistered land Recitals to a conveyance can be very useful, not only to describe briefly the reason for the deed but also to recite additional information which, owing to the provisions of s45(6) of the Law of Property Act 1925 (the section providing that a recital 20 years' old shall be sufficient evidence of the truth of the fact recited unless proved to the contrary), might not be readily available later (for instance, because a copy marriage certificate is mislaid or was not abstracted).
With this in mind, it may be prudent if the wife has remarried to recite details of that marriage (as in Precedent 34).
If the joint tenancy between the husband and wife has been severed, it will have been possible for the husband to mortgage his  own share or settle it upon certain trusts.
Although the wife, as the other trustee of the conveyance, should have received notice of any incumbrance (see Dearle v Hall (1828) 3 Russ 1), it is as well if the conveyance to the wife and new husband contains a recital that the property is free from incumbrances (assuming this to be so) to stop any requisitions on a later sale and also to direct the parties' attention to any incumbrances if there have been such.
Although all that is required, where the new husband is acquiring the husband's interest, is an assignment of the husband's equitable interest, this is plainly impracticable as neither the new husband nor the wife will wish the husband to continue to have any interest at all in the property.
The precedents which follow, therefore, contain not only an assignment of the husband's equitable interest in the property but also a conveyance of the legal estate to new trustees.
Where the wife and new husband are to hold as beneficial joint tenants it is not strictly necessary to incorporate an express power of sale and purport to extend the powers of the trustees of the conveyance in the conveyance since the Law of Property Act 1925 (ss35 and 36) already implies that they will hold upon the "statutory trusts" .
However, if it is thought that the joint tenancy might be severed (and there might be good matrimonial or tax planning reasons for this) it is preferable to include the enlargement of powers as in Precedent 34 for otherwise the trustees of the conveyance may not have power to mortgage or charge the property (see Perpetuities and Accumulations Act 1964, s8).
(b) Registered land The approved Land Registry transfer (Form 19 JP) can be adapted to meet the situations covered in this chapter.
So far as the wife and new husband are concerned, in contrast to unregistered title it is not necessary to declare that the registered proprietors have the powers of an absolute owner in dealing with the registered land.
Sections 18 and 21 of the Land Registration Act 1925 provide that a registered proprietor can exercise all powers of disposition unless there be some entry on the register to the contrary.
It will be recalled (see Chapter 4, p53) that the registrar is not affected with notice of any trust and that references to trusts are  excluded from the register so far as possible (Land Registration Act 1925, s74).
Unless the registrar is instructed to the contrary, a transfer to the wife and new husband will result in the registration of a restriction to the effect that no disposition by a sole proprietor of the land (not being a trust corporation) under which capital money arises is to be registered except under an order of the Registrar or of the Court (ie the survivor of the wife and new husband cannot give a good receipt for capital monies)(Land Registration Act 1925, s58(3) and Land Registration Rules 1925 (SR & O 1925 No 1093, r213 as amended by Land Registration Rules 1989, SI No 801)).
If in effect, therefore, the wife and new husband wish to hold the property as beneficial joint tenants, they must make the declaration contained in Precedent 35.
However it is suggested (see Newsletter Issue 1/93, Sweet and Maxwell) that the cases of Huntingdon v Hobbs [1992]EGCS 38 and Springette v Defoe [1992]Fam Law 459 show that as between the co-owners the Court will not regard the simple statement that the survivor can give a good receipt in the printed Form 19 (JP) as decisive of the existence of a beneficial joint tenancy; thus the additional wording to the declaration (see Precedent 35, clause 2).
If the wife and new husband wish to hold as tenants in common, then it must be remembered that the register will not show their respective shares and they should make a separate declaration (which will be off the register) as to these, and this will be evidence at a later date should their shares be in dispute (for instance with the trustee in bankruptcy of either party).
If the transfer refers to the shares of the tenants in common, it is thought that this is unobjectionable to the registrar, although no note of the shares will appear on the register.
The registrar does have a discretion to allow inspection of a filed transfer (Land Registration Rules 1925, r290(1)); but it is obviously better either to have a duplicate of the transfer or a separate declaration of trust so that exercise of the discretion does not have to be requested.
This would in any event take time.
4 Where the property is subject to a mortgage
If the property is subject to a mortgage, then if the new husband's financial status is acceptable to the mortgagee it will doubtless be prepared to release the husband's covenant in return for receiving  a similar covenant from the new husband.
The exact requirements of the mortgagee to be contained in the conveyance or transfer should be ascertained.
The necessity of obtaining consent to transfer subject to a mortgage from any other occupier of the matrimonial home aged 18 years or over should not be overlooked (Williams & Glyn's Bank Ltd v Boland [1981]AC 487).
(See Precedent 11.)
If the new husband's financial status is not acceptable to the mortgagee, so that the mortgagee is only prepared to agree to a conveyance of the property to the wife and new husband if the husband remains liable under the original mortgage, then it would seem reasonable for the husband to comply only with the terms of the court order or matrimonial agreement (to which of course the new husband is not a party) and not to convey/transfer to the wife and the new husband.
If the husband is prepared to remain liable under the mortgage he should remain a trustee of the legal estate (which could stand in the names of the husband, the wife and new husband) so that he will know the state of the mortgage account and so that a further advance or a second charge cannot be created without his consent.
In a case where the husband owns the house alone, subject to mortgage, and the wife and new husband decide to buy him out, the most usual procedure would be for the conveyance to the wife and new husband to take place contemporaneously with the redemption of the existing mortgage and the taking of the new mortgage.
5 Steps to be taken following the completion of the conveyance or transfer
(a) Stamp duty Where there has been a conveyance or transfer on sale a PD Form will be required; if the consideration is less than £60,000 and the property already has registered title, the PD Form should be sent to HM Land Registry with the application for registration of the transfer (the Stamp Duty (Exempt Instruments) Regulations 1985 (SI No 1688)).
None of the conveyances which are the subject of this chapter fall within the provisions of s83 of the Finance Act 1985 for they  are not conveyances from one party to the marriage to the other.
For those conveyances on sale where the consideration (including any mortgage debt assumed) is less than £60,000, a certificate of value will be required (see Chapter 2).
Where this figure is exceeded ad valorem stamp duty will be payable.
Precedents 40 to 43 are a hybrid between the relief under s83 and heading L (Voluntary Disposition) of The Stamp Duty (Exempt Instruments) Regulations 1987 (SI No 516) and it is suggested that the document should be submitted for adjudication.
No stamp duty should be payable because of these reliefs but the Regulations do not provide for a hybrid certificate.
In contrast, Precedents 44 and 45 should contain two certificates (depending on the consideration) as they include a conveyance by court order to the wife and a sale.
No stamp duty will be payable if the consideration for the latter is less than £60,000. (b) Completion of the abstract In those cases where it is recited that the wife has married the new husband, a marked copy of the marriage certificate or marked abstract thereof should be placed with the title documents (Precedents 34 and 38).
Generally speaking, any recital must be supported by proof of a marked or examined copy of the document giving rise to the recital.
Thus, a marked copy of the court order or an abstract thereof marked as examined against the original should be lodged either within the deeds or at HM Land Registry in the circumstances of Precedents 40 to 43.
Where in registered land a new covenant is given by the new husband to the mortgagee, the mortgagee may require a certified copy of the transfer containing the covenant to be lodged with the deeds so that it has a proper record of the liability of the new husband, the transfer incorporating the covenant itself being at the Land Registry.
(c) First registration of title Generally, an application for first registration of title, even when the land is in a compulsory area, will not be required unless the conveyance has been one of sale of the whole of the property (Land Registration Act 1925, s123).
(See also Ruoff and Roper, Registered Conveyancing, Looseleaf edn, 1991, 11–07.)(d) HM Land Registry fees The purchase by the new husband of the husband's share in the former matrimonial home is a dealing for value within the Land Registration Fees Order 1992 (SI No 2089) and fees under Article 2, Scale A, of the Fee Order will be payable on the amount or value of the consideration.
However, where the transfer is pursuant to a court order or does not otherwise involve consideration.
Abatement 2 of Sched 4, Pt I will be applicable thus reducing the fee to one-fifth with a minimum of £40,(see Chapter 3, p38).
The value of the land should be specified by the solicitor lodging the application to the Land Registry by letter or on Form A4. (e) Registered land-adjudication If adjudication for stamp duty purposes appears necessary (see (a) above) one must bear in mind that the time taken would usually exceed the priority period provided by the new husband's Land Registry search.
The transfer should, therefore, first be sent (with a certified copy) to HM Land Registry with a written request for its immediate return for adjudication purposes and an undertaking that as soon as it has been adjudicated it will be relodged.
In these circumstances, an applicant will not lose his priority (Land Registration Rules 1925, r95).
The Land Registry will return the original transfer so that it can be lodged with the adjudication section of the Stamp Office within the thirty-day lodging period.
(f) Insurance The appropriate changes should be made to delete the husband's name from the policy and add that of the new husband.
PRECEDENTS
Home to be Held on Certain Terms and Conditions
Whether the matrimonial home is held in the joint names of the husband and wife on trust for sale or is in the name of the husband alone, it is not unusual for the court to order that the house be retained but upon certain terms and conditions.
Such an order may be made so as to ensure that there is a home for the children of the marriage.
It may recognise that once the youngest child has left home the wife may again be able to take up gainful employment but that until that time she should be provided with a home rent free.
It may also recognise that the husband should be entitled to a financial stake in the matrimonial home, such stake being made available to him at the end of the period specified in the court order or at a time previously agreed between the parties.
A typical court order (in this case the matrimonial home being in the husband's sole name) might be as follows: It is ordered that the Respondent do transfer the property known as 1 Blackacre Drive, Blackacre, to himself and the Petitioner (or to other trustees) to hold the same as to 60% for himself and as to 40% for the Petitioner.
The Petitioner shall have the occupation of the property for herself and the children of the family to the exclusion of the Respondent upon the conditions set out in the form of the draft declaration of trust annexed.
The property is not to be sold until:(i)(a) the youngest child attains the age of eighteen years or (b) the youngest child shall cease full time education whichever is the later or (ii) the death of the Petitioner or (iii) the Petitioner shall remarry whichever shall first occur  The above type of order is commonly known as a Mesher order (after Mesher v Mesher and Hall [1980]1 All ER 126), and whilst it has been criticised (see Mortimer v Mortimer [1986]2 FLR 315) the court is still of the view that such an order might provide the best solution (see Clutton v Clutton (1990) Times, 14 November).
1 Comment on the Mesher order
Whilst this type of order is fairly common, it must be appreciated that it has defects as compared with an outright transfer of the matrimonial home to the wife.
Certain facts need to be considered:(i) Repairs—The court cannot expressly order a party to pay for or contribute towards the cost of repairs to the house the subject of the court order because its powers are limited to ordering periodical payments and lump sums.
The preamble to the court order might indicate that it is made (for example) on the basis that the wife will keep the property in good repair; this is certainly "persuasive" in the event of a row.
Or, in the case of a consent order, the wife might undertake to pay for repairs.
It is in the interests of both husband and wife that agreement be reached as to the responsibility for maintenance and repairs.
In the absence of any agreement, or undertaking, then probably out of necessity the wife will have to pay for repairs, and explore the possibility when the trust comes to an end of applying to the court (under "liberty to apply" ) for a variation of the division of the sale proceeds so that she is reimbursed.
In Harvey v Harvey [1987]1 FLR 67 the house was held by husband and wife as trustees with provision for postponement of sale.
The husband refused to cooperate in obtaining a second mortgage and improvement grant to deal with necessary repairs, and the court ordered the appointment of a Receiver of the husband's interest limited to those purposes.
(ii) Changing house—Most court orders relate to a specific property and do not make provision for the wife moving house and occupying another property upon similar terms and conditions.
In the absence of any provision  concerning this in the court order, the agreement/ declaration of trust made by the parties should seek to cover this.
(iii) Ending of the court order period—In practice, problems are now beginning to appear when one of the specified events happens (eg the youngest child attaining 18 years), for many court orders have provided who should pay outgoings and mortgage payments during the "trust period" but made no provision thereafter during the period whilst the house is being sold.
Again, this is something that should be covered in any agreement or declaration of trust.
Practitioners will also be aware of the difficulty in getting the wife out so that the husband can obtain his share of the proceeds of sale (see Crosthwaite v Crosthwaite [1989]2 FLR 86).
(iv) Charging Clause—Specific provision should be made for this in the court order as the trustees (particularly if there are infants) cannot give themselves power to charge in the declaration of trust without authority.
(v) Does there need to be a conveyance/transfer?
Where agreement has been reached between the parties that the former matrimonial home be held upon terms similar to those set out in the court order it has been known (in a natural desire to save costs) for the agreement to remain based on correspondence between the parties or their solicitors, no other documentation being prepared.
This is not satisfactory.
If the former matrimonial home was in the husband's sole name, then in the event of his death the wife has to prove her interest in it, and the correspondence will have to be unearthed to prove to the capital taxes office that, although the house is in the husband's sole name, his estate would not be beneficially entitled to the whole of the proceeds of sale.
Further, a sale of the house in such circumstances cannot be arranged until a grant of representation to the husband's estate is obtained.
The registration of a Class F Land Charge against the husband is not sufficient protection as the death of the estate owner brings this protection to an end (Matrimonial Homes Act 1983, s2(4)).
If it is the wife who dies, her personal representatives may not be aware of her interest in the house or may have difficulty in  producing proof of the same, much to the detriment of her estate.
Similar difficulties can occur if the former matrimonial home was in the names of husband and wife as beneficial joint tenants, for on the death of either it would appear to a purchaser that the survivor had the right to sell (Law of Property (Joint Tenants) Act 1964, s1(1)).
In the event of the insolvency of either party, one would wish to be able to prove beyond doubt to a trustee in bankruptcy the interests of the parties in the property.
Where a court order is made, it is not sufficient for a copy of that to be placed with the title deeds with nothing further being done, for the court order can be misplaced or removed.
In each case, therefore, the agreement between the parties or the court order should be properly carried into effect by way of a conveyance, severance, transfer or declaration of trust, the form of which is the subject of this chapter.
As we have seen, the declaration of trust can deal with matters outside the court order, as long as both parties agree.
2 Procedure
Unless monetary payment is to pass from the wife to the husband (for instance, as in a case where the house is in the husband's sole name and the husband and wife agree that it is to be transferred to husband and wife and held by them upon certain trusts provided the wife pays the husband a sum of moneysee Chapter 7), when the husband may require such money for his own purchase of another property, a contract between the parties would appear to be unnecessary.
A court order enables either party to go back to the court if unreasonable delay in carrying out the terms of the order is experienced, and if there is to be a conveyance of the matrimonal home following an agreement between the husband and the wife (not incorporated into a court order) it is always open to either party to make application to the court at any time.
If the house was formerly in the sole name of the husband it would be quite appropriate for the wife's solicitors to insist on a full abstract of title commencing with a good root of title (although in practice it seems to be accepted that the title was properly investigated at the time of the husband's purchase); but in the case of a house already in joint names it is thought that this  could be dispensed with, the wife's solicitor assuming that a proper investigation of title to the property was made at the time when the house was purchased by the husband and the wife.
The court may have ordered one party's solicitor to conduct the conveyancing; but if not so, it would seem appropriate (assuming the husband to be the conveyancing or transferring party) for the husband's solicitors, if the house is in the sole name or even if it is in the joint names of the husband and wife, to deliver to the wife's solicitors an epitome of title consisting of a copy of the last conveyance, copy of any mortgage, copies of any documents relating to "sales-off" or other transactions affecting the property and copies of any covenants affecting the same.
In the case of registered land, sufficient particulars of title or office copy entries of the same should be supplied to the wife's solicitors.
It would then be for the wife's solicitors to draft the relevant conveyance/ transfer and declaration of trust (as appropriate) and submit these to the husband's solicitors.
Once the documentation is agreed it is suggested that a "completion date" should be arranged so that the relevant searches can be made (see Chapter 3, p30) and any payment of monies requisitioned in time for the "completion date" .
3 Covenants for title
If the property is in the husband's sole name and is being conveyed to trustees (whether or not the trustees are to be himself and his wife or outside parties) upon the terms of the court order or the terms of the agreement reached between husband and wife, there seems no good reason, as mentioned in Chapter 3, why the husband should not convey "as beneficial owner" .
As beneficial owner covenants are only implied where there is valuable consideration, the covenants (in the absence of such consideration) should be expressly incorporated by reference thereto in the conveyance or transfer.
4 Tax considerations
Chapter 2 has outlined the relevant tax provisions to be considered when the husband is disposing of his share or interest in the matrimonial home.
In the cases that followed (ie the disposal  of the whole of the matrimonial home to the wife (Chapter 3); a conveyance of the husband's interest in the matrimonial home to the wife (Chapter 4); and the conveyance of the husband's interest in the matrimonial home to a third party (Chapter 5)), once the husband had disposed of his interest no further tax considerations applied so far as the husband was concerned (unless there was an element of gift involved in the conveyance not at arm's length and the husband died within seven years, thus bringing in a charge to inheritance tax).
In the situations covered in this chapter, however, the husband is retaining an interest in the matrimonial home until the happening of a certain event.
One must, therefore, bear in mind the tax which may become chargeable on the happening of such event.
The creation of different interests in the matrimonial home (eg the right of the wife to have occupation thereof until the youngest child attains 18 years or until her death) would appear to create a settlement both for capital gains tax and inheritance tax purposes (Booth v Ellard [1980]1 WLR 1443).
(a) Creation of the settlement It is unlikely that the creation of the settlement will incur any liability to inheritance tax as being a transfer for value (Inheritance Tax Act 1984, s3).
Firstly, if the decree absolute of divorce has not been pronounced the parties are still husband and wife (Fender v St John-Mildmay [1938]AC 1); and we have seen that transfers between them (provided they are both domiciled in the UK) are exempt from a charge to inheritance tax (see Chapter 2, p20) even if they are living apart.
Secondly, s11 of the Inheritance Tax Act 1984 provides that a disposition is not a transfer for value for inheritance tax if made by one party to the marriage for the maintenance of the other party.
This section gives relief in respect of a disposition made on the occasion of the dissolution of the marriage or if it varies a disposition made on that occasion.
There is no definition of "maintenance" in the Act.
Thirdly, if the marriage is dissolved the disposition may be one where no gratuitous benefit is intended (see Inheritance Tax Act 1984, s10) as it is to settle the claim of the former spouse (see Chapter 2, p20).
It is thought that, if the capital gains tax concession mentioned  in Chapter 2 would apply should the husband have transferred the whole of his interest in the matrimonial home to the wife absolutely, it will also apply in these circumstances.
No capital gains tax would, therefore, be incurred on the creation of the settlement.
(Whitehouse and Stuart-Buttle, Revenue Law, 10th edn, Butterworths, para 37.74, supports this view.)(b) Termination of the settlement When the wife's interest in possession ceases (eg when the youngest child becomes 18 years of age) there should be no charge to inheritance tax on that part of the settled property that reverts back to the husband (Inheritance Tax Act 1984, s53(3)) nor on that part which the wife receives (s53(2)).
If however, the husband dies before the wife (ie whilst her right of occupation subsists) his reversionary interest in the proceeds of sale is not excluded property and there will be a charge to inheritance tax (Inheritance Tax Act 1984, s48(1)).
As far as capital gains tax is concerned, it is considered that the gain referrable to the wife's share in the house will be free from a charge to capital gains tax if the house throughout the term of the settlement has been the wife's only or main residence (Taxation of Chargeable Gains Act 1992, s222).
The husband would appear to be liable to capital gains tax on any increase in value of his share of the former matrimonial home between the date of the transfer into settlement and the date of the deferred sale.
(The husband will not have occupied the property as his only or main residence nor is there a disposal between spousessee Chapter 2.)
However, the position is open to doubt where the husband has not elected that some other house should be treated for capital gains tax purposes as his main residence for the period.
If the Revenue accept that the court order or agreement between the parties created a settlement on the ground that the interests of the beneficiaries are not of the same quality as the wife has a right of occupation (see Booth v Ellard [1980]1 WLR 1443) Taxation of Chargeable Gains Act, 1992, s225 provides that the gain accruing to a trustee on the disposal of settled property shall in effect be free from capital gains tax where during the period of ownership the house has been the only or main residence of the person entitled to occupy it under the terms of the settlement.
It is thought that this might give relief to the husband for capital gains  tax for the period from when the settlement is established (ie the court order or when the agreement between the parties was finalised) until its termination, but the application of this section to such a situation is not wholly clear.
(See Whitehouse and Stuart Buttle, Revenue Law, 10th edn, Butterworths, 37.78.)
5 Form of the conveyance or transfer
(a) Unregistered land If the house is in the husband's sole name it should be conveyed, for reasons mentioned earlier, to trustees who can be himself and the wife, or himself and an outsider, or not less than two outsiders (often one being nominated by the husband and one by the wife).
If the house is already in the joint names of the husband and the wife, then such tenancy, if held as beneficial joint tenants, should be severed and a memorandum of severance should be endorsed on the conveyance to the husband and wife (see Precedent 51).
It is important to put a purchaser on notice that he will only get a good receipt if he pays any purchase money to two trustees or to a trust corporation (Law of Property Act 1925, s27).
Following the spirit of the 1925 property legislation, the trusts relating to the house should be kept off the title.
If the house is placed in the names of outsider trustees, then a separate declaration of trust should be made by them to evidence the terms upon which they hold the property.
This is probably not necessary if the house is to be held by the husband and the wife as trustees upon the terms of a court order (which will be sufficient evidence in itself), but it is strongly advised if the house is to be held by the husband and the wife as trustees upon the terms of an agreement reached between them.
Any potential problems will hopefully be settled whilst the terms of the declaration of trust are being agreed.
As both the husband and the wife have an interest in the property, each should be provided with a copy of any declaration of trust.
Section 36 of the Trustee Act 1925 allows a surviving trustee to appoint a new trustee to replace (for instance) a trustee who has died.
To protect both the husband and the wife (and their respective estates) any conveyance and declaration of trust might provide that any trustee appointed to replace the husband or wife  should be appointed by their respective personal representatives.
It would be prudent, to avoid argument, to have this expressly mentioned in any court order.
(b) Registered land Any reference to a trust will be excluded from the register (Land Registration Act 1925, s74).
Therefore, a transfer from the husband to husband and wife "to hold upon the trusts of a declaration of trust of even date" may be rejected by the registrar, for its wording puts him on notice of a trust the terms of which he does not know.
The legal title should be protected by the machinery provided by the Land Registration Acts, whilst the trusts should be contained in a separate declaration of trust made by the registered proprietors.
Where land is transferred to two or more proprietors, then (in the absence of a request for its exclusion) the registrar will automatically register a restriction to the effect that a disposition by a sole proprietor of land (not being a trust corporation) under which capital money arises will not be registered except under an order of the registrar or of the court (Land Registration Act 1925, s58(3), Land Registration Rules 1925 (SR & O 1925 No 1093, r213) and Land Registration Rules 1989, r6).
It is probably better to go further than this, for the husband may die and the wife (by virtue of Trustee Act 1925, s36) could appoint a new trustee malleable to her wishes and to the detriment of the husband's estate.
It is, therefore, suggested that application be made to the registrar to enter a restriction under which no disposition is to be registered after the death of one of the proprietors without the consent of the personal representatives of the deceased proprietor (see Precedent 47).
As in unregistered conveyancing, it would avoid argument if this is specifically mentioned in any court order.
This additional restriction relates to any disposition and not just to those where capital monies arise.
(Land Registration Rules 1989,(SI No 801) r6.)
Obviously there must be evidence outside the registry of the trusts affecting the former matrimonial home and the declaration of trust set out at Precedent 50 is appropriate both for registered and unregistered land.
Each trustee should have a copy.
6 Contents of the declaration of trust
The declaration of trust referred to in the previous section should contain not only the trusts upon which the former matrimonial home is held but in addition clauses relating to:(i) Repairs—Outside trustees will particularly wish to ensure that they are under no obligation to see to the maintenance and repair of the property, and under no liability in respect of lack of maintenance and repair (see p95).
(ii) Changing house—See p95. (iii) Charging clause—If any of the trustees are professional people (such as a solicitor) or such a trustee is likely to be appointed in the future, the trust document should contain the usual charging clause.
(see p96) If the trust is of the former matrimonial home alone, there will be no available cash out of which fees can be paid.
During the life of the trust, it is unlikely that a professional trustee will actually have to do anything.
The charging clause will enable him to collect fees at the end of the trust.
The alternative, if it is contemplated that fees will be incurred during the life of the trust, is to take a separate deed of covenant from the husband and the wife, or either of them, whereby they or one of them agree to discharge the fees concerned.
(iv) Infants—If a child (or children) of husband and wife is to be a beneficiary at the end of the trust and is likely to be an infant at that time, the trustees should perhaps be given power to pay the child's share of the proceeds to the parent or guardian.
The Trustee Act 1925, ss31-32, should be extended (see Williams on Wills 6th edn, Butterworths, 1987, vol 2, p1267 and 1275) if monies are to be retained until such child or children come of age, so that the trustees have flexibility in their use of both income and capital of a child's share of the trust fund, as should the power of investment so that it is not limited by the Trustee Investments Act 1961. (v) Insurance—Section 19(1) of the Trustee Act 1925 limits a trustee's power to insure to insurance against fire to three-quarters of the value of the property; as the  trustees will probably not have any cash, the occupier wife should be made responsible for insurance.
(see p106).
7 Where the property is subject to a mortgage
In spite of the trusts imposed on the former matrimonial home or its proceeds of sale, the husband may remain liable in respect of any mortgage secured thereon, the intent being in effect that this should be deducted from or charged on his equitable share.
Thus, if the house has to be conveyed or transferred to the husband and the wife as trustees, the building society will probably require the wife to covenant with the society in respect of the mortgage and the wife will require an indemnity from the husband in respect thereof.
If the house is already in the joint names of the husband and wife subject to a mortgage and the husband alone is to assume liability, then again the wife will require an indemnity from the husband.
It is not likely that the mortgagee will release the wife as one of the owners of the legal estate from liability under the mortgage.
Such indemnity can be contained in the declaration of trust to be made by the husband and the wife.
The necessity of obtaining consents to transfers subject to a mortgage from occupiers of the matrimonial home aged 18 years and over must not be overlooked in view of the effect of Williams & Glyn's Bank Ltd v Boland [1981]AC 487.
(See Precedent 11.)
8 Steps to be taken following the completion of the conveyance or transfer and declaration of trust
(a) Stamp duty Because it is considered that a settlement is created by each of the transactions contemplated in this chapter (see p99) the documents concerned should be lodged (together with a copy thereof) for adjudication.
The conveyance not being one of sale and not exactly within the provisions of the exempt regulations (see Chapter 2), stamp duty of 50p only will be payable (see p24).
A similar amount will be payable on any declaration of trust.
No "PD Form" will be required as there has been no conveyance or transfer on sale.
If the title is registered, any transfer should first be lodged at HM Land Registry (see Chapter 5, p82, and Land Registration Rules 1925, r95).
(b) Cancellation at HM Land Charges Registry or Land Registry Any Class F Land Charge should be cancelled (Form K13fee £1) as should any equivalent notice at HM Land Registry (Form 202, copy of decree absolute, no fee).
Similarly it will be appropriate to cancel any pending action land charge (Form K11—fee £1) or any caution at the Land Registry (Form 71—no fee).
(f) Insurance If the matrimonial home is in the sole name of the husband then it is best to change the insurance arrangements once agreement is reached or the court order made; the husband may neglect or to be unnecessary where the property already stands in the joint names of husband and wife and a separate declaration of trust is made.
The copy of the court order should be kept with the declaration of trust.
Similarly, where the transfer has been pursuant to a court order, a certified copy of the order or marked abstract of the relevent portion should be lodged at HM Land Registry with the application for transfer.
(d) First registration of title Unless any money is paid, such that there is a conveyance on sale of the whole of the property, it is not thought that any of the transactions in this chapter will involve a compulsory application for first registration of title (Land Registration Act 1925, s123).
(e) HM Land Registry fees The transfers in this chapter fall within the Land Registration Fees Order 1992 (SI No 2089).
Fees are payable, on the basis of Sched 1, scale A, on the value of the land less charges secured thereon if there is a transfer of the whole and in the case of a disposition of only a share in the land on the equivalent proportion of the value of the land which is the subject of the dealing, after deducting therefrom an equivalent proportion of the amount secured on the land (by way of mortgage).
Abatement 2(i) in   
Deferred Charges and Adjustment between Husband and Wife of their Interests
There are many adjustments that can be made to the interests of the husband and wife in the matrimonial home.
It can be conveyed or transferred to one of them alone (see Chapters 3 and 4) or the rights of the husband can be postponed until the happening of a specified event (see Chapter 6).
Similarly, the interest of one party can be increased (for instance, where the husband and wife hold the property as tenants in common and it is agreed, or ordered by the court, that the wife's share should be increased).
Agreement should be reached on responsibility for repairs and insurance.
More commonly, the parties (or the court) may consider that the matrimonial home should stand in the sole name of the wife but that the husband should be compensated by the payment of cash, or (if cash is not available) that the husband should have a charge on the property for a fixed amount (as opposed to an interest in the equityas to which see Chapter 6), the calling in of the charge being deferred until a specific time or happening of a specified event (eg death of wife, remarriage of wife or youngest child attaining the age of eighteen years).
Such an order, sometimes known as a Browne v Pritchard order (Browne v Pritchard [1975]1 WLR 1366), might look as follows: It is ordered that the Respondent shall within 28 days transfer to the Petitioner the property known as 1 Blackacre Drive Blackacre and that the Petitioner shall thereupon execute a Legal Charge of the said property in favour of the Respondent in the form of the draft annexed to secure the sum of  £10,000 and that the said charge shall provide that the statutory power of sale thereunder shall be deemed to arise on the death or remarriage of the Petitioner or upon 10th January 1999 whichever is the earlier.
From the husband's point of view it is obviously more satisfactory to have repayment of the mortgage on a fixed date or on the happening of a specified event (such as remarriage of the wife) if earlier rather than have repayment of his charge postponed until sale of the property.
In this latter event, unless he is to receive a reasonable rate of interest on the monies outstanding, the monies received on repayment of the charge could be worth very little in purchasing power by the time they are received.
Recognising this, it is not unusual for the court to make an order that the property be transferred to the wife, but with a charge in favour of the husband equivalent to a percentage of the net proceeds of sale with the calling in of the charge deferred until the happening of one of the "specified events" .
While the house in the wife's sole name with a fixed charge in favour of the husband facilitates the wife's control of the property, this does not offer her the flexibility to move house that might be incorporated when the house is held by trustees until a specified event (see Chapter 6).
It is not appropriate to incorporate provisions to transfer the charge to another house in the original charge, as the charge relates to a specific property, and such provision should be contained in the consent order; such flexibility can of course raise difficulties particularly if the wife wishes to move down market and release some funds (without repaying the husband) as this thereby reduces the husband's security, especially if he only has the security of a second charge.
Very few court orders, whereby the husband is to take a charge over the former matrimonial home, contain details of the specific provisions to be contained in such charge.
There is no reason why a consent order should not incorporate a draft legal charge.
If the parties cannot agree on the terms of the mortgage, application can always be made to the court who will settle the terms of the mortgage or direct that conveyancing counsel be appointed by the court to do so.
In view of the disadvantages of the husband having a fixed sum tied up in property at a time of depreciating money values, practitioners might be advised to consider including in the mortgage a  provision to the effect that any capital sum received by the wife during the currency of the mortgage (for example, by way of inheritance or pools win) should be paid to the husband by way of reduction of the mortgage debt.
It is suggested that such provision be specifically mentioned in the court order as it is unlikely to be accepted voluntarily.
Conversely, unless the charge so specifies, there is no limitation on the wife redeeming the mortgage early (Popat v Popat [1991]2 FLR 163).
1 Conduct of the conveyancing
Unless any cash payment is passing which is required by the husband for the purchase of another property, a contract would appear to be unnecessary and is certainly not required if the transaction is to be carried out following a court order (whether by consent or otherwise) as application can always be made to the court for the terms of the order to be carried out (see Chapter 8).
As the wife is "the acquiring party" it is appropriate that her solicitors should draw the appropriate conveyance or transfer and the husband's solicitors should, therefore, deliver a copy of the last conveyance, copies of any covenants affecting the title and copies of all "sales-off" or other documents affecting the title since the last conveyance.
In the case of registered title, office copy entries should be submitted to the wife's solicitors.
If the husband is to take a mortgage over the former matrimonial home, then, following usual conveyancing practice, his solicitors should draft and submit this to the wife's solicitors.
If the house was formerly in the sole name of the husband, it would be appropriate for the wife's solicitors to insist on a full abstract of title commencing with a good root of title, although it seems to be accepted in practice that the title was properly investigated at the time of the husband's purchase.
If the house is already in the joint names of the husband and wife, it is usual to accept that the title was properly investigated at the time of purchase.
Once the documentation is complete, it is suggested that a "completion date" be agreed, so that the necessary searches can be made (see Chapter 3, p30) and monies requisitioned by reference to that date.
2 Covenants for title
There seems no good reason for the husband to be able to claim that he should not convey as "beneficial owner" and the wife's solicitors should therefore insist that he so conveys (see Chapter 3).
3 Tax considerations
So far as the transfer of the property or the whole or part of the husband's share in it to the wife is concerned, the provisions set out in Chapter 2 apply and for the reasons there mentioned there is unlikely to be a liability for capital gains tax or inheritance tax.
Similarly the creation of a charge for a fixed amount in favour of the husband, and the repayment of that charge, would not appear to involve any liability for capital gains tax (Taxation of Chargeable Gains Act 1992, s251 provides that there is no charge to capital gains tax on repayment of a debt to a creditor) or inheritance tax.
If the charge on the property in favour of the husband is not for a fixed amount but is expressed to be equivalent, for example, to one third of the net proceeds of sale, then the husband has acquired a chargeable asset (Marren v Ingles [1980]1 WLR 983) and payment of the capital sum by way of redemption of the charge would appear to be a disposal for capital gains tax purposes (TCGA 1992, s22).
One would deduct from the amount received the value of the charge at the date the charge was executed in order to arrive at the taxable gain and claim other reliefs (see Chapter 2).
It is not thought that repayment of this type of charge would result in any charge to inheritance tax, as there is not a disposition intended to confer gratuitous benefit (Inheritance Tax Act 1984, s10).
4 Form of the conveyance or transfer
(a) Unregistered land If the house already stands in the joint names of the husband and wife as beneficial joint tenants and the wife is to have a specific interest therein, then the tenancy should be severed and a declaration of trust made (see Chapter 6).
If, however, the  husband and wife already hold as tenants in common, and there is to be an adjustment in the extent of their respective interests, then, so far as the legal title is concerned, no alteration needs to be made.
Any purchaser is already on notice that to get a good receipt he will have to pay purchase money to two trustees or a trust corporation (Law of Property Act 1925, s27).
However, the change in the equitable interests must be evidenced.
To lodge a copy of the court order with the title deeds may be sufficient, but to be strictly formal a deed of assignment should be made.
It is suggested that copies (or duplicates) be held by both husband and wife so as to evidence the extent of their respective interests.
On any assignment of an equitable interest, notice should be given to the trustees of the legal estate (Dearle v Hall (1828) 3 Russ 1); but if the husband and wife are the trustees this is academic.
Notice should be given if the trustees of the legal estate are persons other than the husband or wife.
For the reasons mentioned in Chapter 6, the parties should be advised to agree how replacement trustees of the legal estate should be appointed, rather than the surviving trustee be left with this power (Trustee Act 1925, s36).
Such provision can be in a separate deed between the parties (to be lodged with the deeds).
Agreement should also be reached as to responsibility for maintenance, repairs and insurance of the property (see Precedent 53).
So far as a transfer to the wife coupled with a deferred charge in favour of the husband is concerned, this should proceed by way of a conveyance/transfer (see Chapters 3 and 4) followed by a separate charge (see Precedent 62).
(b) Registered land If the husband and wife hold as tenants in common, a restriction will already be on the register to the effect that a disposition by a sole proprietor of land (not being a trust corporation) under which capital money arises will not be registered except under an order of the Registrar or the Court (Land Registration Act 1925, s58(3), Land Registration Rules 1925, r213 and Land Registration Rules 1989, r6).
This restriction should be extended to protect the interest of the estate of either party by entering the further restriction set out in Precedent 52.
In addition, of course , there should be a Memorandum off the  register or declaration of trust (see Precedent 53) as to the shares in the net proceeds of sale of each party, and obligations as to repair and maintenance.
(c) Property held by husband and wife and a third party In circumstances where the husband is to convey his interest in the house to the wife, little needs to be done to the legal title other than for the husband to retire as a trustee; the wife and third party (possibly her mother) will be left holding the legal estate, the beneficial interests being "behind the curtain" .
Section 39 Trustee Act 1925 provides that where a trustee desires to be discharged from the trust and where after his discharge there will be either a trust corporation or at least two individuals to act as trustees, then if the trustee by deed declares that he desires to be discharged and his co-trustees consent, he shall be deemed to have retired from the trust.
(See Precedents 67 and 69.)
The husband's beneficial interest will be dealt with by an assignment (Precedent 68).
5 Where the property is subject to a mortgage
If the matrimonial home is already subject to a mortgage then the requirements of the mortgagees will have to be ascertained prior to a conveyance or transfer and if, although the house is to remain in joint names, liability for the mortgage payments is to be assumed by one party, an indemnity to the other party will have to be included in the declaration of trust (see Precedent 54).
If the property is subject to a first mortgage and is, for instance, to be conveyed from the husband to the wife, subject to a charge being given in favour of the husband to secure a fixed sum, the husband will have to be satisfied with the security of a second charge, notice of which should be served on the first mortgagee.
(See Precedent 64.)
It is not unknown for practitioners in a case where a second mortgage is to be given to incorporate the terms of that second mortgage in the conveyance to the wife.
This is not wholly satisfactory, as often the terms of the second mortgage are not sufficiently clear for the husband to enforce them; it necessitates a separate form of receipt on redemption; and it leaves the husband effectively without any title documents (as these are held by the first mortgagee) although he can of course have marked abstracts.
Where the property is to be transferred subject to a mortgage, or where a new mortgage is to be created, it will be necessary to obtain consents to such transactions from any occupants of the property aged eighteen years or over (following the case of Williams & Glyn's Bank Ltd v Boland [1981]AC 487).
(See Precedent 11.)
6 Steps to be taken following the completion of the conveyance or transfer
(a) Stamp duty The circumstances envisaged in this chapter fall within s83 of the Finance Act 1985 (see Chapter 2) and a certificate that the instrument falls within Category H of the Schedule to the Stamp Duty (Exempt Instruments) Regulations 1987 (SI No 516) can be given so that no stamp duty is payable.
A mortgage is not subject to stamp duty, the charge having been abolished (Finance Act 1971, s64).
A deed of appointment of new trustees (see Precedent 67) is also exempt from Stamp Duty).
Exemption A of the Stamp Duty (Exempt Instruments) Regulations 1987 will apply to Precedents 67 and 69 where, in contrast to Precedent 67, there is an actual transfer of land.
(b) Cancellation and registration at HM Land Registry: notices If the former matrimonial home has been in the sole name of the husband, then on completion of the various transactions the Class F Land Charge (or notice if registered land) should be cancelled.
Similarly, any registration of a pending action should be cancelled.
If any charge is given in favour of the husband and is subsequent to a first mortgage, then the husband should register a Class C(i) Land Charge (puisne mortgage) against the former wife and serve notice of the second charge on the first mortgagee (see Precedent 64).
As far as registered land is concerned, the second mortgage will be registered automatically against the title on the lodging of the application for registration.
A second charge certificate will be issued to the husband, and the Land Registry will serve notice of the second charge on the first mortgagee (Land Registration Act 1925, s30 as amended by Law of Property (Amendment) Act  1926, s5) where the first charge was made for securing further advances (in addition to the original advance).
The cautious practitioner might in any event serve notice of the second charge on the first mortgagee (see Precedent 64).
(c) Court order and completion of the abstract In the case of unregistered land a copy of the court order or abstract thereof, marked as examined against the original, should be placed with the title documents.
In the case of registered land, a copy of the court order, marked as examined against the original, or an abstract of the relevant portion of the order so marked should be delivered with the application for registration of the transfer to HM Land Registry.
(d) First registration of title Although the property may be in an area subject to compulsory registration of title no application is required unless the conveyance is one of sale (Land Registration Act 1925, s123).
Even when equality money is paid by the wife (see Precedent 57) to the husband, the transaction would not appear to make registration compulsory as the dealing cannot be described as a sale.
(See Ruoff and Roper, Registered Conveyancing, 1991 11.07.)
If however doubts exist as to the application of the compulsory provisions, it is clearly wise to apply for registration ex abundante cautela. (e) HM Land Registry fees The registration or modification of a restriction (see p121) will incur a fee of £40 (Land Registration Fees Order 1992 (SI No 2089)) although no fee is payable if the application is accompanied by an application upon which a scale fee is payable.
Unless the transfer is for a monetary consideration (in which case fees under Article 2, Scale A of the Order are payable) fees will be based, by virtue of art 2(5) of the Order, on the equivalent proportion of the value of the land the subject of the dealing after deduction therefrom of the equivalent proportion of the amount secured on the land.
The value of the land may be evidenced by a statement from the solicitors lodging the application (either by letter or on HM Land Registry Form A4).
If claimed, and provided the transfer is made pursuant to an  order of the court, advantage can be taken of Sched 4, Abatement 2(i) of the Order reducing the fee to one fifth with a minimum fee of £40.
Where a charge is given over registered land (eg Precedents 61 and 63), Scale 4 of the Fee Order will apply by reference to the amount of the charge.
However, where a charge is delivered together with an application to register a transfer involving monetary consideration or before the application is completed, Sched 4, Abatement 1, provides that no fee is payable for the registration of the charge.
(f) Insurance If the property passes to the wife alone, the insurance policy should be effected in her name.
If the husband's name remained there, this could cause difficulties in respect of any claim as his receipt might be required.
If there is a mortgage granted in the husband's favour on the property, it is probably best either that the policy be in the names of the husband and wife, or (more properly) in the wife's sole name, but with the husband's interest as mortgagee noted thereon.
(g) Leasehold Notice of assignment of leasehold property should be given to the lessor who should also be given details of any mortgagee so that, in the event of non-payment of rent, the mortgagee can be approached for payment, thus avoiding forfeiture of the lease.
PRECEDENTS