

Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
Five firms involved in maintenance work on the Severn Bridge have been accused of ignoring dangerous faults on a gantry which collapsed, killing two workmen.
Their trial, on Health and Safety charges has been told that they knew the gantry was unsafe but did nothing about it.
WESLEY SMITH
The men died when the thirty eight ton gantry fell a hundred feet from the underside of the bridge two years ago.
The court heard that a simple safety device which would have prevented the tragedy, wasn't properly fitted.
The firms deny the charges.
From Bristol Crown Court, Mark Kiff reports.
SEPTEMBER 1990
BRISTOL
Voice over
The accident which cost the two men their lives happened on the Severn Bridge in September 1990.
The men were working on a maintenance gantry suspended beneath the bridge when the gantry collapsed throwing the men more than a hundred feet into the river below.
The workmen who died were Robin Phelps from Brockweir in Gloucestershire and Eric Sullivan from Tintern in Gwent.
A third man, Mark Seaton, who survived the fall was at Bristol Crown Court to give evidence.
The Health and Safety Exectuive allegtes that five companies…
John Laing Construction andn John Laing Services…the gantry manufacturers Secalt and Tirfor plus the consulting engineering partenrship Flint and Neil knew the gantry was dangerous before the accident and breached regulations under the Health and Safety Act.
In court the prosecution said the accident happened because two out of four locking pins weren't properly secured.
Also the warning system was wholly inadequate.
The companies deny the charges.
The trial is expected to last up to six weeks.
A farmer who's been banned from keeping livestock for fifteen years has denied breaking the court order.
Colin French has already been convicted dozens of times for cruelty.
If he loses this case he could face a jail sentence.
Gareth Furby reports.
BUCKINGHAM
5 MARCH 1991/WINSLOW/Buckinghamshire
A man has been arrested by police investigating a stabbing in Hereford.
HEREFORD
The body of Martyn Joseph Willians was discovered on Great Western Way in the Newton Farm area of Hereford yesterday morning.
The twenty nine year old, who was from Whitestone, near Hereford, had been stabbed.
Detectives have now found a knife they were looking for and a motorbike which was seen nearby.
Meanwhile, a nineteen year old has appeared in court charged with murder and attempted murder.
NORTHAMPTON
Donald Allison, who was twenty-nine, died from stab wounds and Gary Caswell, who's twenty-five, was seriously injured outside the Thorpelands Toby Hotel in Northampton.
Nicholas Hyde, who's from Midfield Court in Northampton, was remanded in custody for a week.
The singer Frankie Vaughan says he's on the mend, but lucky to be alive after a two-hour emergency operation.
Doctors say they're delighted with the recovery of the veteran performer.
He'd ruptured a vital artery and could have died if he'd gone on stage one more time.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
OXFORD
FRANKIE VAUGHAN/Singer
STEPHEN WESTABY/Consultant Surgeon
STELLA VAUGHAN/Wife
Subdued, tired, and recovering from two and a half hours of surgery Frankie Vaughan still knew how to make an entrance.
But after so many years in showbusiness it wasn't surprising.
He wanted his fans to know he was on the mend.
Male speaker
I can't wait to start singing again.
I'll even be doing the high kicks Frankie is known throughout the entertainment business as an energetic performer using dance routines and high kicks.
He was taken ill two weeks ago towards the end of a summer season in Blackpool.
It was discovered he'd ruptured his aortic artery…the most important blood vessel in the body.
So he booked in at the John Radcliffe Cardiac Unit…close to his home in Marlow.
Male speaker
Frank was keen to carry on with his commitments in Blackpool…particularly with the Labour Party conference, he didn't want to let them down.
But we told him he stood a very real chance of not surviving if he went back on stage againy
Voice over
He's also a keen golfer taking part regularly in showbusiness tournaments…in fact it was on the golf course in Blackpool that he first discovered he was ill.
Male speaker
I was sitting on a timebomb.
They quickly saw that and had me in the theatre the next day.
they saved my life.
It was very close
Voice over
The sixty-four-year old singer's wife Stella admits she's not looking forward to having him home.
Female speaker
No I'm not.
The thing isFrank can never admit to himself that he's ill.
I.m nervous of him overdoing it.
I'd much rather he stayed here being looked after by Mr Westaby
Now he hopes to be home by the weekend…and even working by Christmas.
Our rugby action today comes not from Gloucester…they had the weekend off…but from Swindon…and its rugby league…yes believe it or not we do play the game here in the south…and yesterday it was the local derby…
Swindon Bulldogs against the Oxford Sharks…
Mark Kiff reports.
NORMAN KIDBY/Oxford Sharks
NEIL GREENWOOD/Swindon Bulldogs
Voice over
Up north they call rugby league a man's game.
The term among Rugby Union fanatics is not so polite.
But in Oxford and Swindon at least there are signs that the traditional rivalries between the 2 games are beginning to change.
Many players are playing Union on Saturday and League on Sunday.
2 clubs are leading the way; the Oxford Sharks and the Swindon Bulldogs, playing here in the dark shorts.
Yesterday they met at Swindon in the league.
Norman Kidby says rugby league is a tougher game.
Many players are involved in both games; Rugby League and Rugby Union.
Neil Greenwood says Rugby League is a better game than Union.
This is the first year either side has played in the London League.
The standard, although amateur, is high.
Many of the capital's teams are full of New Zealanders and Australians.
Yesterday there was local pride at stake.
In the end, the Swindon Bulldogs bite proved too fierce for even the Oxford Sharks.
The 'dogs ran in 10 tries to 2 by the Sharks to finish as winners by 52 points to 12.
Disappointment for Oxford, joy for Swindon and perhaps a few more converts to Rugby League.
and there's a new league season underway in ice hockey…
The Oxford City Stars suffered a setback with two defeats at the weekend…
But across in Swindon…there was a full house for another local derby…the Wildcats against the Milton Keynes Kings 
Voice over
The Swindon Wildcats and the Kings from Milton Keynes Kings are old rivals.
Later this month they meet in the semi-finals of the Autumnm Trophy.
So Last night's league match at the Link Centre in Swindon was curtain up on a dress rehearsal.
It was the Kings who drew early blood racing into an eight two lead.
Both teams have strenghtened their squads for this season and are looking for promotion…both look a good bet too…
In the second period the Wildcats came back strongly, clawing back the deficit…but not enough to stop the Milton Keynes Kings from crowning their day with a 12-8 victory
The car that Rover killed off eleven years ago is about to be relaunched.
The MGRV8, an updated MG to be built at Cowley, will make its debut at next week's motor show.
Tomorrow we'll have exclusive pictures of the RV8 on the road, but tonight we look at the background to the car that refused to die.
Here's Richard Barnett.
1960s COMMERCIAL
RON GAMMONS MG Enthusiast
JACK BELLINGER Factory Manager
Voice over
The MGB was first launched exactly 30 years ago.
At just over £900 on the road, it made sports car motoring affordable.
And it had a top speed of around 105mph, at a time when most family saloons were struggling to reach 70mph.
Over the next 19 years, the MG factory in Abingdon turned out half a million MGBs, making it the most successful sports car ever.
Then in 1981 came the bombshell.
The Abingdon factory was to close as part of cutbacks being made by British Leyland.
Despite the outcry from MG enthusiasts all over the world, the last MGB came off the production line in October 1981.
But the car lived on as a classic.
This scene in America is typical of meetings of MG enthusiasts determined not to let the marque die.
Ron Gammons has raced and rallied MGBs for 30 years.
So what's the special appeal of the car.
Male speaker
It's a 2-seater and sporty and brings back memories of youth.
Voice over
In 1988 the worldwide loyalty to the MG prompted British Motor Heritage, a Rover subsidiary, to make complete bodies for the MGB to help owners restore rusty cars.
More than £2,000 MGB bodyshells have been built at the Faringdon factory.
It was the beginning of the rebirth of Britain's best loved sports car.
And now in a U turn unique in motoring history, Rover is to make the MGB once more.
The bodyshells for the new MGRV8 will be built at Faringdon.
Male speaker
It's a compliment that Rover have asked the Faringdon factory to build the new bodyshells.
It will safeguard jobs for at least 3 years.
Voice over
Tomorrow night we'll show exclusive pictures of the MG RV8 on the road and ask why Rover is to bring back the car it killed off over a decade ago.
Five injured in London pub bomb
Five people have been injured in a bomb explosion at a pub in London's Covent Garden.
Police say a warning was deliberately misleading.
Lucas to shed 2
The engineering firm, Lucas, is to shed more than two thousand jobs.
Lamont defends moving Sterling out of ERM
The Chancellor has appeared before the Commons Treasury committee to defend moving Sterling out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
Report claims smoking kills 12 every hour
A new report claims that twelve people die each hour as a result of smoking, at a cost to hospitals of four hundred and thirty-seven million pounds.
Government outlines plans for rail franchises
The Government has outlined franchise plans for a privatised rail network which is planned to come into effect after nineteen ninety-four.
Experts claim it will lead to a fares war.
FTSE up 16
The hundred shares index closed up sixteen points at twenty-five, fifty-seven point two.
The pound is up at one dollar, seventy, but down at two marks, fifty-one.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A housing charity wants repossessed homes to be made available for people who are forced to sleep on the streets.
Increasing numbers of houses are falling empty because their owners can't pay the mortgage.
Now the government's being called on to allow councils to buy repossessed houses and rent them out.Simon Garrett reports.
BLETCHLEY/Buckinghamshire
JEAN LAWRENCE/Neighbour
IAN SMEDLEY/Former House Owner
HELENE VANCLIFF/Shelter
Voice over
It's smashed and derelict.
This 2-bedroomed family house has been repossessed twice.
Previously a council house bought by its owners; it's now prey to vandals and a danger to inquisitive children.
One thing it isn't, is a home.
Female speaker
It would mean more than my greatest wish to have a family living next door in time for Christmas.
They could be very happy, it's a quiet street; it is a paradise.
Voice over
The Lawrence's lie awake at night waiting for the sounds of breaking glass from next door.
Less than a mile away, Ian Smedley is also waiting; for the date he and his wife must leave their 3-bedroomed house.
Male speaker
My wife lost her job; she was the main earner and basically from then on it was downward slide.
We couldn't afford the mortgage.
We sorted out what we could pay, we did try to pay it but they still repossessed
Voice over
The housing charity, Shelter, now wants the Government to let local authorities spend the money raised from selling council houses to buy back repossessed ones.
They're beginning a postcard campaign to pressure the Department of Environment.
Female speaker
It makes perfect economic sense.
It takes properties off the housing market and might encoureage it to pick up.
It also makes sense for homeless families who are stuck in one room to develop as a family in a proper way
Voice over
An Environment Department spokesman said:
’ Housing Associations are now the main provider of social housing, not local authorities.
Councils can spend a quarter of their capital receipts from council house sales however they want.
The rest is used to pay off debt.
Changing the rules could increase rents and community charge levels.’
Little comfort for the Smedleys;
Male speaker
To be priority you have to have children or be disabled.
You need to rate eighty or ninety points to be priority.
We've got six
Voice over
As house prices continue to fall and repossessions rise, there are presently 2 empty houses in Milton Keynes for every homeless family.
Undergraduates could soon find themselves billeted within the walls of a Victorian jail.
Their college is negotiating to convert the prison building to provide accomodation for students.
Ian Maclaren reports.
OXFORD
Dr JOHN BARRON/Master/St Peter's College
Voice over
If all goes to plan, the forbidding walls of Oxford Prison could soon be housing undergraduates from St Peter's College.
It's already sparked off comments about students and grey cells.
Representatives from St Peter's have carried out a detailed inspection.
They say it would allow them to provide the extra accomodation needed to to house all their 300 undergraduates and are prepared to spend £5million buying and converting the building.
Inmates were hanged in Oxford Jail in the past.
The 144 cells are now used as an overspill for Wormwood Scrubs.
The Home Office is due to close the prison in 2 years time, with the building being passed on to Oxfordshire County Council for a nominal £9,000.
St Peter's College plan to go into partnership with Oxford and Oxfordshire Museum, who want to occupy the older prison buildings.
Students, who face paying rent at around £55 a week in the private sector, seem to like the idea.
If the project goes ahead, the first students could be housed in the prison, in 3 years time.
In part two: Seventh time lucky.
An away win at last for Oxford United.
The Royal Seal: A Princess at racing's newest castle.
And a car is born!
The motoring legend that wouldn't die.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
PAUL REECE/Oxford United
Voice over
A new two million pound stable complex…reckoned to be the biggest and best ever built in this country was officially opened in the Cotswolds today by the Princess Royal…
Jackdaws Castle is the new home…the new base for Gloucestershire's top racing trainer David Nicholson 
DAVID NICHOLSON/Trainer
COLIN SMITH/Ford Farm Racing
Voice over
There was no red carpet; no Royal protocol for the Princess today, as she's one of the team.
The Princess was taught to race by David Nicholson.
She still rides out with them when she can and it was her horse Cannon Class which was the first winner from the new stables last week, so who better to make the official opening.
Jackdaws Castle replaces the old yard at nearby Condicote where David Nicholson trained over 800 winners in 30 years, so why move after so much success.
The castle, built on the site of an old quarry, has cost just under £2million.
It's more a racing town.
There are houses for the staff, a hostel for the stable lads, kitchens and rest rooms and everything a race horse could want.
There are 80 boxes; watered and all-weather gallops.
It's the finest complex national hunt racing has ever seen; a new company Ford Farm racing has been set up to run it.
The man behind that is local businessman Colin Smith.
If you've ever kept a diary, you'll know the importance of keeping the contents secret.
But three ordinary people with very different lifestyles are about to display theirs in public.
They've been making VIDEO diaries, which go on show next month.
KAREN THOMPSON/Swindon
LESLEY HARRISON/Video Diarist
KEVIN SMITH/Video Diarist
’ BANKSEY’/Video Diarist
Take Three people at a special time in their life, or with a personal story to tell…then equip them with a video camera.
This is exactly what Thamesdown media Arts have done in order to create the SWINDON DIARIES.
For lesley harrison the significant event of her year recorded on video was the trip to two Romanian Hospitals with a group of student nurses.
Her anxiety about the visit disappeared once she became acclimatized to the appaling conditions confronting her.
33 year old Lesley who's taking a'levels at Swindon College says the diary's proved an invaluable record and the Romanians she met were intrigued.
She says they were bowled over by the video.
In contrast Kevin Smith who has Downs Syndrome and learning diffuclties articulates a sensitive relationship with his friend david through dance…
He's never made a film before and is pleased with what he's achieved.
But was it diffcult?
He says only at first it was all new to me.
There's a dance culture and lifestyle in Swindon bubbling under the surface just waiting for recognition.
Richard Banks, who's known as Banksey, is at the centre of’ Hip Hop’and a central figure at Stone Youth group.
He says people shouldn't look down on us because of the way we dress.
His diary chases round the town catching up with friends at wherever they are…
Work on these three diverse accounts of life is almost complete.
The project's cost around three thousand pounds And at a public screening in November The Swindon Diaries are almost certain to give people a new perspective on the town.
The actor Edward Fox is about to make his first appearance at the Cheltenham Festival of Literature for twenty years.
Tonight he'll recite extracts from the work of American writers who went to Paris after the first world war.
He says it's a period that appeals to him because it was both sophisticated and wicked.
CLARE LAFFERTY Cheltenham
EDWARD FOX Actor
CLIVE CONWAY’ Americans in Paris’
Voice over
The man most famous for his role in Edward and Mrs Simpson is appearing in a programme called’ Americans in Paris’.
He'll read extracts from the works of American writers who travelled to Paris after the first world war.
It's a period that fascinates Edward Fox.
North American Literature is the main theme of this years festival.
Tonight's performance will feature the work of some of Americas best known writers…and its finest musicians.
It's the second time that Edward Fox has appeared at the festival.
Fans of Mr Fox hope they don't have to wait another twebty years to see him here again.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Record
A former RAF servicewoman has won compensation of thirty three thousand pounds after being discharged for getting pregnant.
It's the highest award in Britain for sex discrimination.
Man dies in Belfast ambush
A man was shot dead and three others injured when gunmen fired as they arrived for work in East Belfast.
The victims were all Catholics.
More England fans held
Three more England supporters have been arrested in Amsterdam.
Thirty others have already been deported for drunkeness and violence.
FTSE down 7
The hundred shares index closed down seven point five points at three thousand and ninety four point seven.
The pound is up at one dollar fifty three and down at two marks forty four.
Three police forces have joined together to buy a one and a half million pound helicopter.
They admit it's expensive, but say that by sharing the aircraft between them it should provide value for money.
Company Video/JESSICA FOWLE/Reporting
Supt TREVOR FINCH/Northamptonshire Police
Police Video
DAVID LEWIS/McAlpine Helicopters
Voice over
The latest weapon in the increasingly high-tech armoury of the police.
This Twin Squirrel helicopter is identical to the one being manufactured for joint use by the Northamptonshire, Leicestershire and Warwickshire forces.
New home office regulations mean that by pooling their resources the new East Midlands Air Support Unit can afford the latest and most powerful model on the market.
Male speaker
If you talk about crime traffic and the rapid response capabilities we need, particularly themore major crimes like armed robberies that is something air support will give the 3 forces.
Voice over
The helicopter is fitted with equipment including an airborne PA system, a night sun beam and a thermal imaging camera.
By detecting heat this can provide a picture that would be impossible to detect with just the human eye.
It can be used to find missing people and in the Thames Valley area the system spotted party-goers gathering for an illegal rave in Buckinghamshire.
Any material gathered on board the craft can either be recorded and saved as evidence or can be transmitted directly to the police control room.
Growing demand for such equipment is good news for the helicopter's distributors McAlpine based at Kidlington in Oxfordshire.
Male speaker
There are 43 police forces in the UK.
Currently 16 of them operate aircraft.
This is the first time 3 forces have gone into a joint exercise from the outset and I think we'll see that example spread right across the country to the extent where eventually the whole country will be given police air support.
Voice over
The Air Support Unit will take delivery of its new helicopter next Spring.
Still to come on Central News, living with back pain.
Hello again.
At some time in our lives most of us will experience back pain — for some the consequences can be devastating.
This week has been designated National Back Pain week, to highlight the serious physical and emotional problems that so many people suffer.
ERIKA BARNES/Bucknell
CLAIRE CARLTON/Back Pain Sufferer
ALEC PENNEY/Back Pain Sufferer
CHRIS WEED/Chartered Physiotherapist
Voice over
The joy and the pain of playing with her child.
Claire Carlton can't pick up and hug her two year old son.
She's been in agony with a long term back disorder.
Female speaker
It's an agonising burning, which goes down my buttocks and sciatic nerve.
I couldn't cope with the muscle cramps.
The only thing for the cramps is valium.
So I would lie upstairs drifting from pain to the drugs.
Voice over
After spells in a wheelchair and weeks of lying in bed, Claire's just had an operation.
She hopes it'll rid her of the physical and emotional pain.
Female speaker
The day to day management of looking after kids and a back is horrendous.
Leo, he's 2, he wants me to pick him up.
He gets cross and goes to someone who can.
That's upsetting.
Voice over
Claire receives regular physiotheraphy at St Luke's Hospital in Oxford.
In the pool, the pain is washed away.
The exercises will help protect and strengthen her back in the future.
Alec Penney was once an active sportsman.
Ironically, the exercise he did to keep him fit, has caused his back injury.
He's had to give up his job because of the pain.
Therapy is now his full time occupation.
The agony lives with him, almost every moment of his day.
Male speaker
I've had to retire.
I've cut my social life.
It's expensive to be sick.
It affects your personality.
You become less tolerant and frustrated.
Voice over
The message of back pain week is a familiar one.
Prevention is better than cure.
But if it's a cure you need, seek qualified help.
Male speaker
Everyone needs to take a different approach.
Employees need to look at better ergonomic furniture.
Employees need to look at their own health and take regular exercise.
Voice over
Claire and Alec are two of many millions of back pain sufferers.
Their injuries have changed and taken over their lives.
But they're driven to make the best of the future.
Male speaker
It's most important to begin living a little, without pain.
If you wake and go to bed in pain, it affects your personality.
Voice over
Reporter asks: What do you hope for the future.
Female speaker
Just a normal life.
You feel you're leaning on people.
I'd like to think I'll get better.
God, I hope I'll get better.
Voice over
A couple whose home was vandalised by squatters are now facing a bill of thousands of pounds for repairs.
The squatters daubed graffiti on the walls, smashed fittings and stole some furniture.
The house was up for sale- the estate agents say the case has highlighted the need for a change in the law.
KATE GARRAWAY/Oxford
RUTH DANIELS/House Owner
DAVID DANIELS/House Owner
Voice over
Ruth and David Daniels were looking forward to returning to their house after a year working abroad.
But when they arrived what they got was far from a welcome home.
Squatters had moved into their house and a sign on the window legally barred them from entering.
Inside their home had been devasted.
When the Daniels contacted the police they were horrifed to learn they had no powers to evict the squatters.
As the law stands the squatters had legal rights to live in their home as long as they had not forced entry.
The Daniels had to pay to go to court to get them out.
Now they want the law changed.
A spokesman for estate agents Buckell and Ballard whgo found the intruders during a routine security check said it was a very isolated incident and very unfortunate, but it does illustrate a need for a change in the law.
The Daniels believe it'll cost them thousands to clean and repair their home.
Much of their furniture has been stolen along with their fridge.
They had planned to move and the house had already been sold.
Now they say the sales likely to fall through along with their hope for the future.
They say they have been innocent victims in a crime for which the law says they must also be punished.
The continuing bad weather is causing serious problems for farmers.
Many are unable to harvest potato crops because their fields are waterlogged, and they're having to delay sowing winter crops.
Rainfall in October could reach record levels — more rain has fallen in the first two weeks than usually falls in the entire month.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Reporting
BILL HOMEWARD/Farmer
EMMA JESSON/Central Weather Department
DAVID COOK/Thames Water
Voice over
The last twelve months has seen a dramatic turnaround in the local climate.
The drought of the previous three years has dissolved into into a huge downpour and now there's more of a worry about being too much rather than not enough water.
October alone has seen more than an inch over the monthly average…and it's not half way through the month yet.
Hardest hit are the farmers.
Potato farmers everywhere arec having trouble with reports of only thirty per cent of the crop being gathered so far.
The rain has really struck in the last six weeks.
September had twenty per cent above average and both the National Rivers Authority and Thames Water say underground reserves are at or above average.
It's a complete turnaround from last year when reserves were lower than they had ever been recorded, standpipes were in the streets, and some rivers had run dry, notably at Bourton on the Water.
The River Thames got so low at Wallingford archeologists uncovered a submerged bronze age jetty.
But ahortly after the heavens opened and the river level rose so high the work had to be abandoned.
Weather experts say it was a relatively dry winter which makes the water recovery all the more remarkable.
The water companies are heaving a sigh of relief.
They no longer have to ration or spread their resources.
Meanwhile the National Rivers Authority has another problem on its hands.
There's a danger of flooding if the river levels continuen rising.
Shopkeepers are warning that if the trend towards out-of-town superstores continues, a town's high street shops will have to close.
A public inquiry is considering plans for a third supermarket — opponents say it's the last thing the town needs.
KEN GOODWIN/Stroud
MALCOLM MONKMAN/Trader
MIKE MUSTON/Stroud District Council
MARTIN ROBESON/J Sainsbury PLC
EILEEN HALLIDAY/Protestor
Voice over
Malcolm Monkman has been a trader in Stroud for the past ten years.
He says that if Sainsbury's is allowed to build a supermarket on the outskirts of town it'll be the end of many small business in the town.
He says that if people spend money in Supermarkets they haven't got any left for smaller shops.
Stroud District Council has turned down three applications from superstore companies which want to build in Stroud.
The town already has a Tesco's superstore as well as a Waitrose which is just being built.
The Sainsbury's application is the latest to go to appeal at a public inquiry.
He says that there are conservation reasons for not granting this application.
But Sainsbury's say that another store would not harm local traders.
He says that the site will serve Stroud well and won't cause problems for local traders.
But it's not just local traders who are against new supermarkets.
One of the most vociferous opponents to the Sainsbury's scheme is Eileen Halliday.
She lives nextdoor to the site which the company wants to develop.
She refused to sell her cottage to the developers, and now could face having a car park ramp at the bottom of her garden.
She says that she had hoped to spend her last years in peace and quiet.
That may not be.
We'll see.
Sainsbury's says it's carried out a survey and found that eighty three percent of those asked want a new supermarket in Stroud.
But most people we spoke to were against.
She says that there are already enough stores.
She says that it will harm local shops.
She says that there are enough superstores already.
She says she welcomes a new Sainsbury's
The public inquiry is expected to last a week, but a final decision won't be taken for several months.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
GARETH FURBY
TIM HURST/Bristol
JACKIE MAY/Tanya's Mother
Voice over
Jonathan Probyn, from Longney in Gloucestershire, was led away from court this afternoon knowing he faces a retrial.
He has consistently denied murdering his estranged wife Tanya Probyn in September last year.
Her body was found in the back of her car when it was recovered from the River Severn, six days after she disappeared.
Before the car was discovered, Probyn made a television appeal for his wife to come forward.
He told police they'd rowed and she'd walked out.
His trial for murder began at Bristol Crown Court six days ago, but was brought to halt by Mr Justice Hutchison today, the day scheduled for the start of Probyn's defence.
The prosecution have said Tanya was killed by Probyn the day before a court hearing for custody of their two children, and he caused her car to drop beneath the waters of the River Severn.
Every day during the trial Tanya Probyn's mother, Mrs Jackie May, has listened to witnesses, and gave evidence herself about a row between her daughter and Probyn.
She was in court to hear the judge order a retrial.
Probyn has told the police his estranged wife left his house at Longney after they'd had a row, and listened tape recordings of a conversation between herself and her new boyfriend.
That was the last time he saw her.
Probyn is being held in custody pending a new trial.
An insurance wrangle is holding up compensation payments for the families of five young people killed in a road crash.
The accident happened two years ago — the victims families say it's time the insurers paid up, so they can get on with the rest of their lives.
13 September 1991 ROBIN POWELL Swindon
ANDY BARNES Victim's Father
BYRON CARRON Families' Lawyer
Voice over
It was in September 1991 that 5 young people died when a speeding car went out of control and hit a bench on the side of Akers Way in Swindon.
2 years on, Sean Gooch is serving a 5-year jail term for causing death by reckless driving, a sentence upheld at the Appeal Court last week.
But the relatives of those who died, like Andy Barnes who lost his 15-year-old daughter Paula, are still waiting for compensation.
Gooch wasn't insured, but Tony Gallagher whose car Gooch hit, was.
Gallagher was found guilty of careless driving, but his insurers, the Norwich Union, insist he can't be held liable for what happened.
And the Milton Keynes-based Motor Insurers' Bureau, which is responsible for compensation when a driver's uninsured, says that it won't pay up either because Gooch wasn't wholly to blame.
The families' lawyer says it's time the matter was sorted out.
The law states that if the insured driver's held to be just one per cent responsible, then his insurers have to pay.
In a statement, the MIB stressed that Gooch and Gallagher have both been convicted of serious driving offences, though opinions differ as to the degree of responisbility of each driver.
The Norwich Union told us it had nothing else to add.
But Andy Barnes warns that while the insurers argue, innocent relatives are suffering financial hardship…some have had to move, other have taken long periods off work.
Despite the apparent deadlock, the lawyers say it's not a matter of whether the families will be compensated, but when.
30
British Coal has confirmed that it's to shed thirty thousand jobs as it closes more than thirty pits due to a fall in demand.
Arthur Scargill calls for strike action
The leader of the National Union of Mineworkers, Arthur Scargill, has called for strike action to stop the closures.
Heseltine announces
The President of Board of Trade, Michael Heseltine, has announced a one billion pound programme to support coal field communities hit by closures.
1
It's feared that the death toll in the Cairo earthquake has risen to at least a thousand.
FTSE up 27
The hundred shares index closed up twenty-seven point five at twenty-five, eighty-four point seven.
The pound is up at one dollar, seventy-two and up at two marks, fifty-three.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
An escaped prisoner who faces charges of disposing of the body of a Swindon man, has given himself up.
Tyrone Evans, who's twenty-eight, spent four days on the run after escaping from Sutton magistrates court.
He gave himself up at High Down Prison, in London.
He's charged with dismembering and disposing of the body of Stephen Davison, from Swindon,
REIGATE/Surrey
Roadside spot checks on car pollution have begun to make sure drivers are sticking to new laws on exhaust fumes.
Drivers whose vehicles give off more poisonous chemicals than are allowed have ten days to clean up their act.
Simon Garrett reports 
OXFORD
STEWART MITCHELL/Vehicle Inspectorate
ALISON DUNTHORNE/Oxford City Council
Voice over
Rush hour in Oxford and this taxi driver's been told his exhaust pollution's too high.
Male speaker
For a vehicle on short journeys, it's not quite acceptable.
He needs to check his engine settings.
Voice over
The chemicals monitored in the exhaust test are carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons.
Experts say they cause unseen damage to the environment and to people.
Female speaker
People who already have breathing problems are badly affected if pollution levels are high when they come into the city centre.
Voice over
Environmentalists reckon Government limits for exhaust levels are too low.
Most drivers pass the spot check, not so this Volkswagen.
Female speaker
I'm glad they're doing it.
The car's only just been serviced so I'll take it back to the garage.
My small daughter was with me in town and she complained about the smell, so it should be done.
Voice over
Most drivers seem happy to be tested.
Male speaker
We recycle everything we can and work in an environmentally friendly way, so I think these tests should be done on a regular basis.
Male speaker
I think it's a good idea.
It's only just been serviced so I would have had something to say if there'd been a problem.
Female speaker
It runs on unleaded, so hopefully that helps too.
Voice over
Drivers over the pollution limit get 10 days to put things right and take an MOT test, or their vehicles have to come off the road.
Cancer specialists have joined forces to improve the treatment of sick children.
Four times as many children with cancer will now be treated at a new centre, which will also help with vital research.
Gargy Patel reports.
OXFORD
GILL GARDINER/Mother
Dr CHRIS MITCHELL/Child Cancer Specialist
GAYNOR YOUNG/ Specialist Nurse
Voice over
The unit brings together a specialist team of doctors, nurses, community workers and play therapists.
Consultants say most children with cancer have a good chance of recovery, but this new service, costing £750,000 a year, aims to improve treatment and research and cut down on the time spent on the ward.
The rooms are equipped with bathrooms and convertible sofas for parents who want to stay with their children.
For the staff, working closer together helps families and staff cope with the trauma of cancer.
Alison is now a day patient.
She still has another year of injections and tablets before she's fully recovered.
With the new cancer service, more children like Alison can look forward to the best treatment available.
A ten thousand pound reward is being offered for the recovery of six rare birds which were stolen from a bird sanctuary.
Their owner believes they were stolen for a private collector abroad.
Clare Lafferty reports.
BOURTON on the WATER/Gloucestershire
RICHARD HILL/Birdland
Voice over
BIRDS
The birds, four Buffon Macaws and two Ledbetter cockatoos were stolen from this cage.
The thieves broke into Birdland in Bourton on the Water at night.
By the time the burglar alarms had alerted staff the birds were gone.
The loss has hit the owners hard.
Police believe the birds were stolen to order by specialist thieves who'll sell them to a private collector abroad.
Exotic birds are big business.
It's estimated that half a million pounds worth have been smuggled out of the country already this year.
The six from Birdland could be sold for as much as forty two thousand pounds.
Birdland is now offering a reward for the safe return of the birds and the conviction of the thieves.
With hundreds of thousands of pounds worth of other rare breeds there, managers are also taking steps to improve security.
They hope the presence of guard dogs and security patrols will deter other thieves.n
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
BUCKINGHAM
ANGELA WRIGHT/Neighbour
ROSE MORBEY/Former Neighbour
Ch Insp DOUG DAVIDSON/RSPCA
’ CHRIS’/Animal Rights Activist
Voice over
Colin French walked out of court this afternoon — flanked by police for his ownprotection — but in less than a month he could be behind bars.
Last year after a catalogue of neglect was uncovered on his Buckinghamshire farm he was banned from keeping livestock for fifteen years.
But when the inspectors went back earlier this year, they counted five hundred and fifty eight animals still on his farm.
And these pictures were taken only yesterday.
French augued in court that following the ban his aunt Miriam Carter had taken custody of all the livestock.
But the magistrates didn't believe him.
The verdict brought relief for some neighbours who said they'd seen too many animals suffer over the years.
She says she's seen animals left to die.
She says it make her mad that they should be locked away and left to starve.
And for RSPCA inspectors, who found cattle on the farm so weak they had to be shot on the spot, it was an important victory.
He says it's no use having a ban if it can't be enforced.
Colin French has a record for animal cruelty dating back to 1988.
His home has been firebombed by the Animal Liberation Front.
And a man who described himself as an animal right activist, but insisted that he shouldn't be idenfied, watched today's court case closely.
He says he thinks the case has taken far too long and too many animals have suffered.
The farm stockman Phillip Luff waso convicted on two counts of breaking a five year ban on keeping livestock, and fined two hundred pounds.
But Colin French now facing the prospect of jail…because last November he was given a six month prison sentence suspended for two years.
The magistrates have now called a pre-sentence report -- and he'll be summoned back to court for sentencing on November the Ninth.
A man has appeared in court accused of murder, forty eight hours after the discovery of a body beside a cycle track.
He was remanded in custody for a week.
Tim Hurst reports 
HEREFORD
Voice over
The court appearance, at Hereford, follows the discovery of a man's body on Sunday morning beside a cycle track in the city.
He'd been stabbed.
Police made a fingertip search of the area and appealled for witnesses.
The dead man has been named as Martyn Joseph Whillians, who was 29.
He is understood to have been on his way home from a nightclub when he died.
A village has paid tribute to two American airmen who died when their jet crashed just after take off.
It's thought the pilots stayed in the plane as long as possible to steer it away from a row of houses.
At a special memorial service, villagers said the crew would always be remembered as heroes.
Gargy Patel reports.
UPPER HEYFORD/Oxfordshire
PADDY QUINN/Parish Council
Capt CASEY MAHON/USAF
Canon HEWITT WILSON/St
Voice over
A fire has destroyed a motor caravan factory in the Cotswolds.
It took a hundred firefighters more than four hours to bring it under control.
Richard Barnett reports:
WILLERSEY/Gloucestershire
CHARLES TREVELYAN/Production Director
GARY GODSON/Gloucestershire Fire and Rescue
Voice over
Firefighters were still at the Auto Sleepers factory today investigating the cause of the fire which destroyed a whole production line and a number of caravans.
The company is the largest builder of motorcaravans in Britain, producing a thousand vehicles a year at its Cotswold factory.
Charles Trevelyan is a member of the family who run the firm.
Male speaker
It has destroyed a whole production line and nine caravans.
But production has been switched to another factory.
Voice over
At the height of the fire last night, more than 100 firefighters were tackling the flames.
Male speaker
It was very dangerous to fight the fire because of the heat, smoke and fumes.
Voice over
The fire has cut production by half, but the firm says it's determined to get output back to normal as soon as possible.
An airline is to change its flying procedures after one of its aircraft almost crashed in Oxford.
The British Midland ATP aircraft carrying fifty nine passengers iced up and plunged thirty five hundred feet from the sky above Cowley last year.The pilot eventually regained control, but the official report into the incident concludes that the airline's advice NOT to apply full power to get out of such a dive, was inappropriate.
Welcome back.
Ostriches could soon be a common sight in the countryside, as farmers search for profitable ways to diversify.
The RSPCA has received so many calls for advice on ostrich farming that its now drawn up guidelines to ensure they're farmed humanely.
ABI DONALD/Wescote
VINCE TYACK/Ostrich Farmer
Dr BRIAN BERTRAM/Ostrich Expert
ALASTAIR MEWS/RSPCA
Voice over
The inquisitive ostrich, not the easiest bird to rear but ostrich farming is becoming big business.
In this country there are nearly three hundred birds being bred on farms and it's increasing.
As farmers are forced to look for ways to diversify, ostrich farming is tipped as being one of the growth areas, and Vince Tyack was one of the first farmers to take up the initiative.
Male speaker
I went to Africa in '88 to find a diversification and we came back with this idea.
It took 2 years to put it in place but I've had 26 birds on the place.
Voice over
There's money to be made in ostrich farming, one breeding pair can fetch as much as 15 thousand pounds.
That sort of money is attracting a lot of farmers, but it has also made the RSPCA concerned about the welfare of the birds.
In order to prevent the kind of abuse of animals which has happened in other areas of livestock production the RSPCA commissioned Doctor Brian Bertram, an expert on ostriches to look into how to farm the birds humanely.
Male speaker
I think it's vital that any animal we hold in captivity, wild or otherwise is looked after properly and that it's well done and for that you need help and guidance and you also need minimum standards to ensure it's done well.
And it certainly can be done well and I beleive with these standards it will be done well.
Voice over
The guidelines include recommendations on how to ensure the tropical birds are well cared for in a temperate climate, that they have a proper diet, and are protected from illness and injury.
The RSPCA is also concerned that the birds are allowed enough freedom to behave naturally…that's natural apparently.
The RSPCA's standards are being welcomed by the British Domestic Ostrich Association which is asking farmers throughout the country to adopt the recommendations.
Male speaker
I think it's a great start to make sure we can help ostrich farmers and others to understand the difficulties of ostrich farming and to make sure these birds are properly protected.
Voice over
So far the birds in this country are being reared solely for sale as breeding pairs, but it's hoped in the next few years the stock will be large enough to sell the birds for their meat.
The RSPCA hopes it has acted quickly enough to prevent the abuse of this new type of farm animal.
Archivists have embarked on a three year project to meet the growing public demand for access to ancient documents.
They're restoring seventy-five thousand wills before putting them on microfilm.
JESSICA FOWLE/Gloucester
NICK BERKELEY/Conservator
DEBBIE ALLEN/Conservator
Voice over
Archivist reads: I give to Henry my eldest son my broad loom in the shop with my rapier and dagger and a physic book called the Breviary of Health.
A slice of Gloucestershire life in the year sixteen twenty one.
Here in a vault at the county's record office are kept seventy five thousand wills dating as as far back as fifteen forty one.
Their attention to the minor details of everyday life paints a far more vivid picture of bygone days than any history book.
People are encouraged to look at the wills but constant handling was putting them in jeopardy.
Now all that is to change.
Male speaker
The intention is to preserve these original documents for posterity by microfilming them and then providing the microfilm for public use.
Voice over
But there's more to it than simply committing the documents to microfiche.
First the conservators have to clean and repair them.
Damp, bookworms and even hungry rats have all taken their toll.
Female speaker
Rats like eating paper and parchment.
In the past people's houses weren't so secure so they got in easily.
Voice over
It's fiddly and time-consuming work.
Male speaker
It can be frustrating sometimes if you can see an end result you're aiming for and have difficulty getting there.
The important thing is not to panic or become impatient because that way you could damage the document.
Voice over
And a professional tip.
If you want your hand written words of wisdom saved for posterity use quality paper and permanent ink.
Anything written with biro on cheap paper will quickly rot away creating yet more work for the conservators.
The latest beauty craze to sweep America is now available here.
It involves putting make up UNDER the skin, using a special probe.
The result is made up eyebrows or lip lines that last for at least a year — but it doesn't come cheap.
STEPHANIE REEVE Swindon
JOAN BURKE Beauty Therapist
JACKIE O'SHAUGHNESSY Client
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Record payout for wrongful arrest
Voice over
The West Midlands police have paid a record seventy thousand pounds for wrongful arrest to Paul Dandy, who was accused of robbery.
Tests showed his confession had been tampered with.
England fans rampage again
More than two hundred and fifty England fans have been arrested in Rotterdam, prior to tonights match against Holland.
Dutch police have already charged eleven fans and deported nearly two hundred.
Pensions face
Pensioners face a rise of only one pound a week from next April, the smallest increase for years.
It's because payments are automatically linked to inflation, which now stands at one point eight per cent.
FTSE down 13
The hundred shares index closed down thirteen point eight at three thousand and eighty point nine.
The pound is down at one dollar fifty two and down at two marks forty four.
Prison officers have warned there could be riots in Britain's jails if plans for drug testing inmates go ahead.
The Home Secretary Michael Howard told last week's Tory Party conference that he wanted to introduce drug tests.
But prison officers say it would be impossible to enforce.
RON ADAMS Prison Officers' Association
JOHN THOMAS-FERRAND Prison Governor
Voice over
The Government's new get tough policy has brought a cool response from the prison service, especially the Home Secretary's remakrs on drug testing.
Last week at the Conservative conference Mr Howard said prison life should not be a picnic.
And he said drug taking should be stamped out.
But at one of Britain's newest jails staff say it's not practical to test inmates.
They say any attempt to do at Bullingdon could lead to rioting.
He says there's European legislation which prevents this.
If this was to change he thinks the reaction would be violent.
Prison visitors seemed to acknowledge that drug taking among inmates is widespread.
But the prison Governor says it would be possible to take tests onb a voluntary basis.
One of Britain's most senior judges has attacked plans to send more people to jail.
Lord Justice Woolf said this would be a shocking waste of resources.
The prisons have not so far been told what Mr Howard's plans for more austerity in jail are likely to mean.
Neither have they been told to test prisoners for drugs.
A disabled teenager who's being treated by a Russian physiotherapist has been told his trainer must go home because his visa has run out.
Stephen Dent's family have applied for an extension to Roman Rudyayev's visa because he's achieved remarkable results with their son.
RUTH DENT Mother
ROMAN RUDYAYEV Physiotherpist
Voice over
Stephen Dent has been in a wheel chair since an accident seven years ago, which left him paralysed from the waist down.
Last year he spent three months in a special rehabilatation clinic in Moscow, and his mobility improved drmatically.
Now one of the Russian physiotherapists has come to their home in Lydbrook in the Forest of Dean to work intensively with Stephen.
The daily treatment involves hours of stretching and excercising with weights.
Roman Rody-yev has acieved remarkable results with other patients, some have even learned to walk again.
After just one month Stephen has more movement in his legs than ever before…
Roman was hoping to treat Stephen for six months, but an application to the extension of his visa has just been turned down.
For Stephen's mother it's a devasting blow.
The Dent's have appealed to their local MP in the hope he can reverse the decision.
Otherwise Roman must leave within ten days and Stephen will never know what he might have achieved.
A jury has been told that a prisoner who threw hot oil at prison officers during a disturbance at a jail was serving a life sentence for killing a policeman.
The court heard Charles McGhee was convicted of murder after shooting an off-duty policeman during an armed robbery.
An eighty four year old man who's had his house broken into seven times says he now fears for his safety.
Friends of Professor Leopold Cor, who's also deaf, say the burglaries are affecting his health.
The police say they're doing all they can to catch the culprits.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Gloucester
Prof LEOPOLD KOHR/Burglary Victim
MANNING FARRELL/Friend
Det Chf Insp TERRY MOORE/Gloucestershire Police
ANDREW GAULSTONE/Centre Manager
Voice over
Professor Leopold Kohr clears up after another burglary at his home just outside Gloucester.
In the last year his house has been broken into seven times, and burglars have tried to break in on at least another four occasions.
Now the Professor, who's originally from Austria says he's worried for his safety.
Professor Kohr's friends say the woory is affecting his health.
The police have not yet been able to find the people responsible for the raids on Professor Kohr's house.
They can't ensure it won't happen again.
It's not just the old the burglars are targetting.
This centre for people with special needs has been broken into four times in nine days.
Professor Kohr was writing a book on his specialist topic, philosophy.
But his work has been destroyed so many times in the rads that he's now giving up.
He hopes the burglars will do the same.
Still to come on Central News, new guidelines for a big business.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
GARETH FURBY
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
SWINDON
APRIL FILLON-PAYOUX/John's Wife
Dr PETER TURNBULL/John's GP
Voice over
Doctors didn't expect John Fillon-Payoux to survive.
He suffered serious head injuries when he was hit by a car when crossing the road at the Magic Roundabout in Swindon in February 1992.
Now the motorist who hit him, 20 year old Gavin Soutar from Park North, has successfully appealed against his sentence for driving without due care and attention.
His one and half thousand pound fine was halved.
His disqualification period reduced by 6 months and the court costs waived.
John's wife April is horrified.
Female speaker
I think it's absolutely disgusting.
What I would like is Gavin John
Voice over
Soutar to change on of his days for one of the days John has to spend here.
John's now looked after at a specialist nursing home in Dorset, and undergoes regular physiotherapy at Bournemouth general hospital.
He can hardly talk, almost certainly can't see and although he was at the funeral probably doesn't even realise that his son died in another road accident six months after his.
Male speaker
I'm afraid that John's disabilities are multiple and affect every aspect of his life.
They are severe and have a devastating effect on his personality, his physical well-being and his mental state.
I fear that his disabilities will be permanent.
Female speaker
20 months later he's still alive but to me he's just living.
Everything is done for him.
He's totally dependant.
Voice over
April's pursuing compensation though no amount of mony can make up for what she's lost.
Female speaker
There's no way you can come to terms with it.
You don't just lose a husband, you lose a friend, a lover, a bank accountant, the whole lot.
We're going to get a bit of John back but I'm never going to have a husband again.
I'll never come to terms with it.
Voice over
The other children have now left home but April still works in Swindon.
One day she hopes to move to the South Coast to be with John.
She says he'll never be coming home.
Parts of the region are on flood alert after more torrential rain.
One village is under several feet of water in places, exactly ten years after the last flood there.
The National Rivers Authority says the situation will get worse before it gets better.
ERIKA BARNES/Wendlebury
MANDY GROVES/Flood Victim
LESLEY BOND/Resident
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
JOHN DORA/National Rivers Authority
JOHN KELLEY/Oxon Emergency Planning Officer
Voice over
A rude awakening this morning as water flooded into this house at Wendlebury in North Oxfordshire.
The sandbags were too late to rescue it.
Female speaker
We came down and realised there was water coming through the back door and the walls.
Voice over
The pub is bailing out too.
Surrounded by water, the Red Lion is like an island and sometimes you have to resort to more adventurous modes of transport to get that lunchtime drink.
The reason — the drainage ditches flooded and water overflowed down the main street.
It's not the first time it's happened here.
Female speaker
It happened exactly 10 years ago to the day.
Voice over
Elsewhere the effects of the torrential rain are even more dramatic.
The water level of the River Thames at Abingdon has risen 14’ in the past few days.
The National Rivers Authority has issued a yellow warning — that means there is some danger of flooding here.
Male speaker
It could be a problem if there's a blockage.
If the rain continues then the rivers could swell and burst the banks.
Voice over
So gangs of workers are out full time, clearing potential trouble spots in rivers, streams and ditches, to reduce the risk of flooding.
But the dangers will be greater as the week progresses.
Emergency planners are keeping a close watch on the forecasts in case they have to roll into action.
Male speaker
We look at evacuation, recovery phase, possessions insurance, for weeks and months after the flooding.
Voice over
But today, the flooding was limited to a few rural spots where roads were closed and even the main railway line between Swindon and Bristol was under water.
But the warning tonight is that, with more severe weather forecast, it'll get worse before it gets better.
Two detectives accused of altering a suspect's statement to conceal the fact that he'd been unlawfully arrested have been cleared of conspiracy to pervert the course of justice.
LIBRARY PICTURES/LUTON/Bedfordshire
Detective Chief Inspector John Leicester Finch and Detective Constable Robert Turner had been on trial for eighteen days at Luton Crown Court.
It was alleged that they unlawfully arrested Llewellyn Lovelace in Milton Keynes six years ago, and then altered his statement to make it look as if he had come forward voluntarily.
But the jury accepted that a page of the statement had been substituted for legitimate reasons.
An urgent warning's been issued to owners of a make of lawnmower with a potentially lethal fault.
Trading Standards officers say anyone using the mower risks electrocution.
They've been withdrawn from sale, but its feared other mowers with similar cabling could still be available in shops around Britain.
Liz Hannam reports.
OXFORD
DEBBIE DENT/Oxon Trading Standards
BLEWBURY/Oxfordshire
GEOFF HOWARD/Honda
Voice over
This mower which has been on sale in Britain for the past 3 years is potentially deadly.
If it's disconnected at the handle bare terminals are left exposed.
The problem was discovered when a woman bought a mower from the West Garden Machinery Shop at Blewbury near Didcot.
Honda immediately withdrew the two affected models — the HR-EL 171 and 172 and has contacted all its 4,500 owners warning them not to use the machine until a solution is found.
But although the mowers have been withdrawn, trading standards officers are worried that the cabling, which is made by Schulte in Germany, may be fitted on other mowers.
Trading Standards were able to get these mowers withdrawm immediately.
But they fear that next year it will be more difficult to take such action, when European Safety Standards, less stringent than Britain's, come into force.
And just a reminder of the model numbers of the two Honda mowers
They're HR-EL one seven one and one seven two.
That's HR-EL one seven one and one seven two.
Victims of meningitis have been sharing their experiences to help make people more aware of the disease.
It can strike young and old alike…and it can be a killer.
Those who survive can be affected for the rest of their lives.
Erika Barnes reports.
TEWKESBURY/Gloucestershire
IAN MARTIN/Father
STROUD/Gloucestershire
MARY OLPIN/Meningitis Victim
Dr IAN NEALE/GP
STEVE JONES/CHRISTINE JONES
Voice over
Gary Martin from Tewksbury is three years old and profoundly deaf.
Scared for life by Meningitis.
Male speaker
It all started when he was eleven months old.
Over 48 hours we saw four doctors.
The fifth took him straight to hospital.
Voice over
But Meningitis doesn't just claim the young…
Mary Olpin from Stroud had just retired when she contracted the disease.
Tinitus in her ears is the only physical reminder of the violent illness…which left her unconscious and close to death.
Female speaker
I was in hospital three weeks, when I got home I was uselss.
I lay in bed.
I was so tired.
Voice over
In both these cases doctors had difficulty diagnosing the disease which is the result of inflammed brain tissue.
Now the Stroud based Meningitis Trust is pushing a special awareness week to ensure doctors and patients alike are better informed.
Male speaker
An individual GP probably gets to see only a few cases of Meningitis in his career.
Occasionally the symptoms are severe.
With a headache, neck stiffness, difficulty with light, then the diagnosis is clear.
Voice over
Research continues into the causes and cures of Meningitis.
A vaccine was recently launched to protect against one type of the disease…
HIB.
But that won't stop the many other bacterial and viral forms.
The Meningitis Trust has produced a video to raise awareness of Meningitis.
It tells the story of Steve and Christine Jones in Oxfordshire whose baby daughter died from the disease.
They say: The morning she died, a neighbour came round and cried her eyes out.
It was good for us.
The Jones's family are now rebuilding their lives, but hope better awareness of Meningitis with mean others won't suffer their pain.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
PARKEND/Gloucestershire
KEITH WAGSTAFF/NRA
ROBIN HADDOCK/Stonemason
STUART CHARTERS/JR Crompton Ltd
ED LUSTY/Parish Councillor
Voice over
A thick black slick now covers parts of Cannop brook, where once the water flowed clear.
The toxic chemical cocktail has killed virtually every living thing along several miles of the stream.
It's not yet known exactly what the chemicals are, but no-one is taking any chances.
The chemicals were dumped by the driver of a tanker parked in this lay-by.
The acrid smelling substance flowed through a culvert into the brook, with devestating results.
The National rivers authority, which is co-ordinating the clean up, says the culprit must be caught.
He says that it's environmental vandalism.
Workers from a nearby stone mill may have unwittingly seen the chemicals being dumped.
He says that he say the tanker driver pacing up and down by his parked lorry.
Downstream at Lydney, Cromptons, Europe's biggest supplier of paper for teabags, was forced to stop production.
It extracts thousands of gallons of water from the river.
He says they're offering a reward for information leading to the conviction of the culprit.
People are being advised to stay away until the fumes have dispersed.
For those living nearby the pollution is a tragedy.
He says he's disgusted by the smell and effects of the pollution.
The National Rivers Authority says the clear up will take several days and will cost thousands of pounds.
The real price though, has been paid by the wildlife which once lived in Cannop brook.
Relatives of a British cook jailed in Iraq have accused the Foreign Office of not doing enough to try to free him.
Paul Ride has been jailed for seven years for illegally entering the country.
His brother-in-law is now asking people to send letters of protest direct to the Iraqi government.
Gareth Furby reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
DAVID CHANDLER/Brother-in-law
Voice over
Paul Ride was working for a catering company in Kuwait -- but was arrested and jailed earlier this year after apparently straying accross the border into Iraq.
His brother-in-law David Chandler lives in Swindon:
He says he was just in the wrong place at the wrong time.
Last weekend an American Chad Hall, who was also arrested close to the border was released by the Iraqis after just three days in jail.
David Chandler is now accusing the British Foreign office of not doing enough to secure his brother in law's release.
He says the Americans have got the diplomacy right so why can we.
He's now organising a letter writing campaign, and wants people to send a specially prepared letter of protest direct to the Iraqi Government.
He hopes it will annoy Saddam Hussein so he'll say I've had enough and send him back.
Tonight the Foreign Office insisted it was doing everything in its power to secure Paul Ride's early release.
His brother in law hopes their efforts will not be in vain.
A coroner has recorded verdicts of accidental death on a family of three killed when their car crashed head on into a tanker.
He said exactly what happened would never be known, but two children in their car may have distracted their father who was driving.
Kim Barnes reports.
22 JUNE 1992/LONGCOT/Oxfordshire
OXFORD
Voice over
The accident was one of the worst on the A420 which has seen a catalogue of crashes and a safety campaign from residents.
Richard Marchant, his wife Ann and their son Wayne who was 2, all died instantly.
Mr Marchant's 6 year old step-daughter, Michelle O'Donnell survived the crash.
The family had just picked her up from hospital in Oxford and were taking her home to Swindon.
Today at the inquest into the family's deaths, the driver in the car behind, Stephen Marsh, said their Ford Escort just carried straight on across a bend on the road near Longcot, for no obvious reason.
It ploughed into a diesel tanker.
Earlier he said he'd seen the driver leaning across to the left, perhaps to adjust a radio and that the children were fairly active in the back.
The tanker driver, Derrick Worrell from Bath told the coroner he saw the car coming straight at him on the wrong side of the white line.
He realised it was not going to brake.
A pathologist told the court the couple died from multilpe injuries and Wayne from a fractured skull.
6 year old Michelle is now being looked after by grandparents.
In rcording a verdict of accidental death the coroner Nicholas Gardiner said what caused the driver to take the action he died will never be known.
He may have been distracted, but there was no evidence of this.
It was tragic, but nevertheless an accident.
A faulty electricity meter is being blamed for starting a house fire which left six people in hospital.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
The fire damaged the ground floor of the terraced house in Milton Keynes early this morning.
Two adults, a twelve year-old girl, and three boys aged two, seven, and nine, needed treatment after inhaling smoke.It's thought the meter under the car port of the house caught fire.
A newspaper seller has become a father…at the age of 78.
Jim Wagstaffe says at first he was shocked…and then delighted by the news that his wife was expecting.
Richard Barnett reports:
SWINDON
JIM WAGSTAFF Father
JAN WAGSTAFF Mother
Voice over
There was a big smile on Jim Wagstaff's face as he arrived in the Maternity Ward at the Princess Margaret Hospital in Swindon.
And with good reason.
At the age of 78, he's father to 2 day old baby, Peter James Wagstaff.
Jim and his wife Jan have been married for 18 years and the baby came as something of a surprise.
Male speaker
He didn't speak for ten minutes when his wife said she was expecting.
But he's delighted.
Female speaker
She's thrilled with the baby.
Voice over
Jim has been a newspaper seller in Swindon for 25 years and now for the first time in his life, he's made the front page.
He's certainly got something to shout about.
And in case you couldn't quite work out what Jim's message was, the billboard says it all.
EC rejects request for
The European Community has turned down a request from the British Government for nearly twenty-five million pounds to assist coal-mining regions affected by pit closures.
Willis calls emergency meeting on pit closures
The Trades Union Congress Leader, Norman Willis, has called an emergency meeting of the TUC general council to discuss tactics following the job losses.
More tremors hit Cairo
More earth tremors have hit Cairo impeding the relief effort following the major earthquake.
FTSE down 10
The hundred shares index closed down ten points at twenty-five, seventy-four point seven.
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy-one and down at two marks, fifty.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A vote of no confidence was passed on the government last night, despite the efforts of two high ranking cabinet ministers to sway the debate.
But it wasn't for real…the students of the Oxford University Union were getting their new season under way.
Mike Rowbottom was there 
OXFORD
MICHAEL FOOT/Former Labour Leader
JOHN PATTEN/Education Secretary
CHRIS SMITH/Shadow Environment Secretary
DONALD DEWAR/Shadow Social Security Secretary
PETER LILLEY/Social Security Secretary
Voice over
The future of the nation didn't depend upon it, but The Oxford Union can still be a harrowing experience for the most seasoned of political performers.
And so it was for Former Labour Leader Michael Foot and front bench spokesmen, Chris Smith and Donald Dewar as they slugged it out with John Patten and Peter Lilley.
The Motion was one of no confidence in the Government.
Male speaker
Perhaps the rage and common decency of the British people will vent itself in the near future where it has not in the past and finally get this Government out and replace it with a more caring one.
Voice over
John Patten, counting his blessings that he is not yet a Treasury Minister, opted to avoid the economy altogether and put his faith in education, as befits an Oxford fellow.
Male speaker
In 1995, one in 3 qualified youing people will go to University; that is the measure of the this Government's commitment to higher education.
Voice over
Chris Smith, Labour's Shadow Environment Secretary believed the country's problem came not from the last few weeks, but the previous 13 years.
Male speaker
The fact that theGovernment created the weakness in the economy, that's the main charge of incompetence.
Voice over
Donald Dewar saw no future for the Government.
Male speaker
This Government is bankrupt of ideas and it is motivated by one thing, the need to survive.
Voice over
Peter Lilley, in the absence of anything new, believed the Government should stick to its familiar policy.
Male speaker
We must continue to keep down inflation and watch our monetary policy.
Voice over
Afterwards, despite the gravity of the subject, the speakers were pleased with the event.
Male speaker
The debate was good and I'm looking forward to the result very much.
Male speaker
The standard of debate was very good.
There's a good crop coming through.
Voice over
But the Government was left with a lot to think about.
They went down 400 votes to 170.
They can only hopes it's not repeated in the Commons.
Frank Bruno appears at Wembley this Saturday in his latest fight on the comeback trail.
His South African challenger's been training in London, Bruno' been limbering up in Leicestershire.
Today the two men met halfway, and Simon Garrett was there 
NORTHAMPTON
FRANK BRUNO
PIERRE COETZER
MORRIS WOOLF/Boxing Writer
Voice over
Head-to-head; Frank Bruno and Pierre Coetzer.
They met in Northampton for the first time ever before Saturday's offical world heavyweight title eliminator.
Before they get the chance to push eachother around in the ring, the 2 men have to put up with equally undignified treatment from the nation's press.
Male speaker
All the hoop-la surrounding the pre-fight, is it something you dread?
Male speaker
You got to get on and do it.
You do all the interviews the promoter wants.
It's all part of the business.
Voice over
Bruno's been training hard for this fight in Leicester.
Some of his past opponents, like Joe Bugner in 1987, haven't been up to scratch.
South African, Pierre Coetzer says he's not just there for the payout.
Male speaker
Definitely not, no.
I'm here to fight.
It's the biggest thing for me.
I want a shot at the world title and the only way I can get it, is to beat Frank on Saturday night and that's what I'm here for.
Voice over
Bruno knows he's facing a tough opponant.
He's studied videos from throughout Coetzer's career.
Male speaker
It takes a lot.
It's not just boxing and brute strength you've got to do your homework.
He's a very good durable sort of fighter, but I've got the power the technology and the tools to beat him.
Voice over
Boxing experts say Bruno, desparate for a third world title challenge, has never been better prepared.
Male speaker
He looks more confident now than I've ever seen him.
He said at the reception today’ I will win’instead of’If I win,’which is what he's always said before.
Male speaker
I'm on a roll at the moment I feel nice and good, well balanced and I'm stinging.
Voice over
Coetzer must draw that sting to stand any chance of survival on Saturday.
A new historical theory has been put forward which could turn the entire legend of King Arthur on its head.
It seems that Arthur, and his Knights of the Round Table lived in GLOUCESTERSHIRE, and NOT Glastonbury, which has always purported to be the REAL Camelot.
But the people of Glastonbury aren't going to surrender their king without a fight, as Clare Lafferty reports.
GLASTONBURY/Somerset
EASTCOMBE/Gloucestershire
RON FLETCHER/King Arthur Expert
GEOFFREY ASHE/King Arthur Expert
Voice over
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
GARETH FURBY
Today the branch chairman said that had Mr Taylor tried again, he might have faced a similar rebellion.
CLARE LAFFERTY/London
JOHN TAYLOR/Ex Conservative Candidate
CHRIS SMITH/Ex Press Officer
KEN BUCKLAND/Conservative Association Chair
Voice over
John Taylor says he thought long and hard before deciding not to stand for the Conservatives in Cheltenham again.
When he first became the candidate more than two years ago it caused considerable controversy.
A rebel group of Tories challenged his position and there were allegations of racism.
Mr Taylor denies that the question of race had any bearing on his decision.
The man who assisted John Taylor in his election campaign says he's saddened by the announcement.
The chair of the town's Copnservative Association says had Mr Taylor applied to become a candidate again, another rebel group might have formed.
People in Cheltenham weren't surprised to hear the news.
Mr Taylor has been asked to be a candidate in other constituencies.
So there's still a chance that he'll become the Conservatives' first black MP.
An S-A-S officer who led a mission to prevent the Gulf conflict spreading throughout the Middle East has revealed for the first time what happened behind enemy lines.
He's written a book describing how eight S-A-S men helped destroy Iraqi missiles aimed at Israel.
Only five of them returned home alive.
March 1991/BRIZE NORTON/Oxfordshire
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
ANDY McNAB/Author
Voice over
The end of the Gulf War, and the bodies of 3 soldiers who lost their lives arrive back in England.
Sergeant Vince Phillips, Corporal Steven Lane and Trooper Bob Consiglio were all members of the crack SAS Regiment based in Hereford.
They'd been part of an 8-man patrol, call sign Bravo-2-0, whose task was to seek and destroy the mobile Scud launchers with which Saddam Hussein was attacking Israel.
Now the man who led the mission has told their story.
He can't be identified for security reasons.
The patrol was dropped into Western Iraq by helicopter, but poor information meant there were problems from the start.
They were surrounded by Iraqi trrops Allied intelligence didn't know about; they had no radar protection from enemy planes; and weather reports had failed to warn them of freezing conditions.
So cold was the weather that Sergeant Phillips died of hypothermia on only the second night.
Trooper Consiglio was killed in a firefight as the patrol retreated towards Syria, before Corporal Lane also developed hypothermia…he died just a few miles from the border.
The others — captured by the Iraqis — were interrogated and tortured.
For the relatives of those who died, the book's the most detailed account of events they've had.
Sergeant Phillips' parents in Swindon told us they were annoyed at not being told the full story earlier, but declined to be interviewed.
Perhaps the most fitting tribute to their son is that he gave his life to a mission which may have saved many more.
If the Scud attacks had provoked Israel into entering the war, experts say it could have developed into a global conflict.
Daphne Du Maurier's classic book’ Rebecca’now has a sequel.
It's been written by the best-selling author Susan Hill, and takes the story on from Du Maurier's dramatic ending written fifty years ago.
The sequel's selling well, but not all the critics are impressed.
Abi Donald reports.
SUSAN HILL Author
Dr MARGARITA STOCKER Oxford University
Voice over
’ Last night I dreamt I went to Manderley again…
’ One of the most famous opening lines to a novel.
Daphne Du Maurier's’ Rebecca’is regarded as one of the best works of modern English literature.
The film starring Laurence Olivier and Joan Fontaine was a huge success, but for some people it left too many questions unanswered.
What happened after the fire at Manderley? and did Max de Winter ever manage to put the past behind him?
Well Rebecca now has a sequel, Mrs De Winter.
It's written by the novelist Susan Hill.
Female speaker
I said I want to write my own novel, I wanted to take the characters from Rebecca, who of course would come to me bearing their pasts, but I wanted to move them right away from Rebecca and then write on, and that's what I did.
It was very exciting.
Voice over
Susan Hill lives with her husband and two daughters at their home in Chipping Camden in Gloucestershire.
She's established herself as a writer with award winning novels including’ I'm the King of the Castle’and’Woman in Black’but Mrs de Winter has come in for criticism.
Doctor Margarita Stocker a Fellow of St Hilda's College in Oxford thinks the publishers commissioned the book purely for the money.
Female speaker
It's based on a kind of cowardice, a lack of reliance on your own judgement if it suceeded before it'll succeed again, it's just a money making machine and shows no literary thought by the publishers.
Voice over
There's been a lot of hype surrounding the book.
Rumours have suggested Susan Hill was given a million pounds for writing it, she says she got nothing like that amount.
It's also been suggested she's turned down 4 million for the film rights.
Female speaker
No offers have been made for the film rights for any amount, 4 pounds 4 milion pounds or 400 million pounds.
Sorry to scotch that rumour, I wish they had but they haven't.
Voice over
Mrs De Winter is already tipped as being one of the best sellers this year.
Whatever the critics say it seems a lot of people will be picking up a copy just to see what might have happened to the De Winters.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Unemployment down 13
Unemployment has fallen to its lowest level for almost a year.
The Government says it's good news.
Defence firms shed 1000
But 630 jobs are going at British Aerospace.
And its subsidiary Royal Ordinance is also shedding 382 posts.
Allitt admits child attacks
Child killer Beverley Allitt has finally admitted she attacked nine children.
During her trial last May she denied all involvement.
American pilot freed
US pilot Michael Durant has been freed in Somalia.
He'd been held for eleven days.
Taylor refuses to go
England manager Graham Taylor says he won't resign even thought his team's almost certainly out of the World Cup.
FTSE up 5
The hundred shares index closed up five point four at three thousand and eighty six point three.
The pound is down at one dollar fifty one and two marks forty three.
RUNS=0:10
Anne Dawson
Welcome back: The government is being urged to put more money into pre-school playgroups, to help mothers get back to work..
Campaigners say single mothers are in particular need of better childcare to give them a fair chance in the labour market.
CHRIS MOORE/Swindon
JULIE PETT/Mother
CHRIS TULLY/Mother
LYN CAULDWELL/Pre-School Playgroups Assoc
SIMOM COOMBS MP/Con Swindon
Voice over
This nursery in Swindon is better off than most, because it's subsidised by Thamesdown Council.
It provides daycare for children whose families pay according to what they earn.
But even that can be a hundred pounds a week — still too much for many.
Female speaker
I was made redundant in the summer.Ity's a chicken and egg thing.
You can't get a job without having childcare.
You can't pay for childcare without having a decent job.
Voice over
It's single parents who suffer most.
Chris Tully sends daughter Joanne here, but the cost is a real burden.
Female speaker
Without it, I counldn't get to work, which is important to me.
Also it's close to where I work so if there are any problems I can get here quickly to sort them out.
Voice over
In its report, Conting the Cost of Childcare, the Pre-School Playgroups Association says more government money is needed, but many get little or nothing
Female speaker
A group like this that can offer parents the chance to pay according to what they earn is able to offer full day care for 45 pounds.
If we could invest more in this sort of group then more families who'd like to return to work would be able to afford to do so.
Voice over
Swindon's Conservative MP is backing the new campaign
Male speaker
Women will be needed in greater numbers in the workforce.
We cannot have their children in the hands of those unqualified to look after them.
That will mean the sort of support for groups that this campaign is talking about.
Voice over
But while the government does nothing, the campaigners say that childcare in Britain will continue to lag behind the rest of Europe
A church with some of the finest stained glass windows in the country is having them restored.
Each window is being carefully removed, and taken to a workshop in Yorkshire to be cleaned and repaired.
Some of the restored windows are now back in place.
STEPHANIE REEVE/Fairford
KEITH BARLEY/Conservator
KENNETH MUNN/Clerk
Voice over
It's taken a year for this window to be repaired and replaced.
St Mary's Church at Fairford in Gloucestershire, is the only parish in the country to have a complete set of late medieval stained glass windows.
But the ravages of the centuries have robbed the glass of their fifteenth century colours.
This is what the window looked like before it was restored.
Pollution and weathering battered the surface of the glass.
But gradually, each window is being taken away, each section cleaned and then carefully fitted together again.
The work is carried out by Keith Barley and his team at their studio in Yorkshire.
Apart from cleaning each pane, they take photographs of the windows which help them paint in missing images, in keeping with the overall style.
They also replace inferior glass used by previous restorers.
This window is the tenth to be restored and has cost around fourteen thousand pounds to repair.
But there are twenty eight stained glass windows here, and to restore every window will cost around a quarter of a million pounds.
The Friends of Fairford church have organised funding for the restoration project.
One of the founders of the group, Kenneth Munn, is pleased with the results so far.
The people of Fairford can now enjoy a fresh glimpse of another of their unique stained glass windows, fully restored.
As for the craftsman, he says he's just pleased to work on something that's a permanent display.
A hundred and fifty people look certain to lose their jobs with the closure of a weapons factory.
The plant makes and tests rocket motors, but doesn't have enough new orders to keep going.
The management say Government defence cuts are to blame.
ABI DONALD/Wescott
KEN BIRCH/T
JOHN BUTTERWORTH/Employee
BILL LAPHAM/Aylesbury Vale District Council
Voice over
The Blue streak rocket…the Royal Ordnance's most notorious failure.
Now the factory which developed it in the 60s looks set to go the same way.
Westcott once employed a thousand people, now there are only a hundred and fifty, and today it was announced that they too would lose their jobs unless the factory could find substantial new orders.
Female speaker
We're very down, we've just lost our jobs what can I say.
Male speaker
We're very despondent.
Male speaker
Some people were shocked although it was expected some people are devastated.
Voice over
Royal Ordnance has gradually been scaled down since 1987 when it was privatised.
British Aerospace took over from the Minstry of Defence and the work reduced.
John Butterworth joined the company as an apprentice 30 years ago he says Westcott has changed beyond all recognition.
Male speaker
It's changed dramatically.
There was so much noise and testing going on.
You couldn't wish for a better place to work.
It's so picturesque.
Voice over
Although the Aylesbury area still has an unemployment rate which is below the national average, the job loses have come as a blow, but the district council is already thinking about other uses for the site.
Male speaker
The buildings could be used for other purposes and we'd welcome that.
Voice over
Many of the workers at Westcott are specialists in the field of rocket motors, without Westcott they're worried there won't be a chance of further work in the declining defence industry.
The announcement of the Westcott redundancies came as monthly figures were released showing unemployment coming down across the region.
In Buckinghamshire, twenty four and a half thousand people are now without jobs, a fall of just under two hundred.
In Oxfordshire, just over nineteen thousand people are out of work, that's down more than five hundred.
In Gloucestershire, there's been a slight fall to just over twenty two thousand two hundred.
In Hereford and Worcester, the total again fell by more than five hundred to twenty seven thousand six hundred.
And in Wiltshire, the total fell by more than three hundred to just under twenty one thousand.
Fox hunting is to be banned from all county council-owned land in Northamptonshire.
The decision, taken by a sub-committee has yet to be ratified by the full council but would affect hunts such as the Grafton, Pytchley, and Bicester with Whaddon Chase.
The ban has been pushed through by the Labour group which regained control of the county council in May.
Library Pictures
People living near a rubbish tip which has been burning unchecked for six weeks fear their health is at risk.
Environmentalists are worried that the fumes from the fire are hazardous.
KEN GOODWIN/Nailsworth
Cllr ALAN DENBIGH/Green Party
JOHN PULLIN/Stroud District Council
Voice over
This tip is in a wooded valley classed as being of outstanding natural beauty.
The rubbish that's been legally dumped here over the years has now caught fire.
It's been smouldering deep below the tip for at least six weeks.
There's a school nearby and environmentalists are worried about the possible effects of fumes given off from the burning rubbish.
He says that there is burning plastic, and rubber.
It's giving off smelly fumes.
It could be dangerous.
The tips owners, who were not available for comment, have been told that the responsibility for making the tip safe is theirs, even though they had up until recently leased out the site to a local company which operated the tip.
He says that the land owner has been told to deal with the fire.
The council can legaly enforce this.
At the request of the owner of the land, an excavator began work today to discover the extent of the fire.
The operator told us that rubbish is smouldering at a considerable depth and it would take a lot of work to put it out.
But, says Councillor Denbigh, it must be dealt with now.
He says that the smoke is drifting through the woods, it's hardly the type of place you'd go for a quiet walk.
Because of the amount of work needed to put out the burning tip, it may be some time before this area of outstanding natural beauty becomes a smoke free zone.
Still to come on Central News, getting mothers back to work
A floral competition designed to promote European harmony has ended in claims that the judging was unfair to the British entry.
Cheltenham finished second — and many in the town say it should have won.
Ken Goodwin reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
BOB SHACKELL/Entente Floral Organiser
MALCOLM GEORGE/Heart of England Tourist Board
Voice over
Cheltenham's flowers have made the town a prizewinner many times.
But the most prestigious award — the European Entente Floral — slipped through the towns fingers.
Judges from seven European nations visited Cheltenham to view the flowers.
But when judging switched to countries like France, Belgium, and Holland, the British judge was absent.
It seems a sponsor to pay for the trip couldn't be found.
Cheltenham came second.
Some councillors have protested that it's unfair.
Bob Shackell, the man who co ordinated Cheltenham's entry into entente floral, says it's a big dissapointment.
He says that it was a bit unfair — it may have made a difference.
Winning entente floral would have meant a big tourism boost for cheltenham — so what went wrong?
He says that sponsors wouldn't put up the cash to pay for a judge to travel abroad.
He says Hungary also didn't send a judge — it's sad no-one could come up with the cash.
Even if a British judge had travelled abroad, Cheltenham may still have come second.
But those involved in entente floral feel at least they would have had a fighting chance of clinching the title.
A new book of unusual views of Oxfordshire has been published, featuring the work of a photographer who's made the county his adopted home.
The book's intended not just as a guide for visitors, but as a chance for locals to get a fresh look at familiar sights.
Simon Garrett reports 
NORMAN MCBEATH/Photographer
Voice over
Norman McBeath is, as his name suggests a purebred Scot and not a man of Oxfordshire.
He came to the county to leave teaching behind and start a new life as a professional photographer.
He's now a regular picture contributor to the Independent newspaper and Harpers and Queens magazine and has a rising reputation.
His new book illustrates the wide variety of the Oxfordshire countryside through picture portraits of the smallest details.
The 70 pictures represent a year of work.
Each shot is accompanied by a few paragraphs about the subject's history, or why he chose to photograph it.
But the pictures take precedence.
Many hours were taken up in the dark recesses of the developing room at Oxford's photography workshop; even more spent waiting for the precise moment to open the shutter.
The picture which became the cover shot, of the Rollright Stones, was a particular race against time.
International Rescue has come to the aid of a firm of toy makers.
Pelham Puppets has just received an order to make ten thousand Thunderbirds puppets.
In these times of recession, the order means the company is now counting down to a bumper Christmas.
Clare Lafferty reports.
CHELTENHAM Gloucestershire
TONY RICHARDSON Pelham Puppets
MARK INDGE Puppet Maker
ALISON LINGLEY Artist
Voice over
They first appeared on the television in the mid 60s. 25 years on, The Thunderbirds are back and they're more popular than ever.
At the headquarters of Pelham Puppets in Cheltenham they've just received an order to make 10,000 models of Lady Penelope and friends.
In these times of recession, the Company is very grateful for this help from International Rescue.
The company has had to take on ten extra staff to make up the order.
Between them they're turning out more than 300 puppets a day.
All the Thunderbirds are hand painted.
The artists need a very steady hand.
With more orders expected, Pelham Puppets is counting down to a bumper Christmas.
With shops seemingly prepared to snap up as many puppets as the company can make, these Thunderbirds really ARE go.
Pit closures delayed pending judge's decision
The closure of thirty-one pits by British Coal has been delayed pending a decision by a judge as to whether or not it is legal.
One in ten unemployed
The latest unemployment figures show that one in ten people are now without a job.
Rail fares increase by more than 9
Rail fares are to increase by up to nine point four per cent, more than twice the rate of inflation.
Water rates also rise above inflation rate
Water rates will also increase by more than the rate of inflation.
Death sentence of Russian serial killer
Andrei Chikatilo has been sentenced to death by shooting for committing fifty-two murders in Russia.
Madonna's new book referred to CPS
The Police have referred the singer Madonna's new book, Sex, to the Crown Prosecution Service after complaints about its contents.
FTSE down 28
The hundred shares index closed down twenty-eight point one at twenty-five, forty-six point six.
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy and down at two marks, forty-seven.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A charity is calling for tougher action in the fight against solvent abuse.
The number of people who die from the habit is increasing every year, and a special conference has been looking at ways of tackling the problem.
Nick Clark reports.
BARBARA BARBER/Darren's Mother
DARREN BRADSHAW/Former Glue Sniffer
TREFOR HUGHES/Re-Solv Charity
Voice over
The growing menace of solvent abuse has already provoked a stark government campaign to stop it.
But the problem still haunts many families.
This schoolboy called Darren died aged just sixteen four years ago.
He'd choked on his own vomit after a session of sniffing aerosols.
Female speaker
I was looking for drugs and walking over the aerosol cans.
I just didn't realise.
Voice over
Since her son's death Mrs Barber has been fighting to get the message of the dangers of solvent abuse across.
Today she joined health and social workers at a special conference hosted in Northampton.
There too a twenty year old who has managed to kick a habit that was leading him down a dangerous path.
Male speaker
We needed money for glue, we went vandalising property.
It just isn't worth it.
Voice over
It's hoped the conference will help co-ordinate groups around the country in the battle against a problem which is causing more and more deaths every year.
Male speaker
The kids need to be able to learn how to say no.
Male speaker
You just look a mess.
It just isn't worth it.
Voice over
Thirteen people are being questioned after drugs and stolen property worth tens of thousands of pounds were seized in a series of dawn raids.
Four of those arrested are being held on suspicion of armed robbery.
Chris Moore reports.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
Det Sgt MARK KEARNEY/Thames Valley Police
Just part of the haul from raids on 18 adresses across Milton Keynes yesterday and this morning.
Detectives from Thames Valley CID, joined with the force's burglary, fraud and drugs squads and uniformed officers to carry out the raids.
The officer says they found stolen chequebooks, 38 chequecards, and a quantity of drugs like LSD and cannabis, as well as other items such as computer equipment
4 of those being held at Milton Keynes police station are being questioned about armed robberies.
The secret operation followed a long period gathering information on criminals in the town.
But it's not though they've cracked one big crime ring.
Male speaker
There's nothing to suggest the crimes are connected at this stage but wqe are keeping an open mind.
Voice over
However, the results of the operation are described as highly successful and the first charges are expected soon.
Work has begun to demolish a council housing estate built almost seventy years ago.
GLOUCESTER
Union officials representing research workers in the coal industry have been called to a conference of mining unions to discuss the effect of this week's big round of pit closures.
But British Coal says the closures are unlikely to affect local jobs.Tim Hurst reports 
STOKE ORCHARD/Gloucestershire
Voice over
Three hundred and fifty workers at British Coal's research establishment at Stoke Orchard in Gloucestershire, have been told pit closures are unlikely to effect future work.
Union officials at the plant have been called to a conference in Nottingham, but management say most work at the plant is already funded from abroad.
Mining engineers Meco, based at Tewkesbury in Gloucestershire, say their world-wide business will cushion the effect of British pit closures.
The Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust has cut forty jobs at its sites across the country.
The Trust blames the redundancies on the recession.
It says its had fewer visitors, and that in turn has led to a fall in essential income.
Clare Lafferty reports.
SLIMBRIDGE/Gloucestershire
Dr MYRFYN OWEN/Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust
Voice over
The birds at the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust in Slimbridge used to attract around three hundred and fifty thousand visitors a year.
But now the recession has taken its toll.
This year the numbers are down by twenty four per cent.
That in turn has led to a fall in income.
To compensate, the Trust has had to cut forty jobs in its eight sites across the country.
Nine will go in Slimbridge.
They include posts in research and administration.
Today's announcement comes at the end of what had been a successful decade for the Trust.
The eighties saw vast expansion and investment.
Officials think now that may have been a mistake.
It costs an adult four pounds thirty five to visit Slimbridge.
Visitors today were divided on whether that price would put other people off.
Ten of the posts to go will disappear through natural wastage.
The thirty redundancies will take effect by the end of next month.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
SEPTEMBER 9 1991/GAVIN MOYLE/Victim
GORDON SHERET/Sutcliffe Catering
Voice over
A year ago Gavin Moyle was recovering in hospital with a metal frame attached to his fractured skull.
His neck had also been broken.
A car park security camera captured the tail end of the attack in the centre of Swindon.
Gavin was tended by a friend as his attacker calmly walked off.
Afterwards he said it was completely unprovoked.
He said they only went out to get something to eat.
The man who did must have just got a kick out of it.
After leaving hospital he moved back to his parents home in County Durham.
His father found him dead in his bedroom last week.
It's beleived he took an overdose.
Gavin's parents say he never fully recovered, and he left them a poem about his feelings following the attack.
which was printed tonight in a Swindon newspaper.
It begins:’ The night it happened.
One could not forsee.
The incident that occurred and of all people me.
It also talks about the operation.
’ The blots he screwed into my head.
The pain, the pain.
Please let me be dead.
Before the attack Gavin Moyle was as a chef for a catering company in Swindon.
But he never found another job.
He says he worked with them for about seven months.
He cared a lot about other people and could never understand why someone should want to hurt him.
Even though Gavin Moyle's attacker was captured on video as he walked away, there has never been a prosecution.
A 19 year old man was charged but the case was later dropped because of lack of evidence.
Gavin Molye's funeral will be held tomorrow.
Rail users on a newly-modernised commuter line will face the biggest of the fare increases announced by British Rail today.
The average rise is twice the rate of inflation, but travellers on the Chiltern line will be charged even more as a premium for the improved service.
Erika Barnes reports.
AYLESBURY/Buckinghamshire
RICHARD FERN/Network SouthEast
IAN NALDER/Transport Users/Consultative Committee
Voice over
A chilly reception for early morning commuters today.
Temperatures were down, but fares are going up; on average 8%.
Network South East say the recession's to blame.
Income has dropped by £80million in the past 2 years and travellers will have to help bail them out.
Female speaker
It's a terrible blow just on top of everything else.
Male speaker
2 times the rate of inflation is difficult to swallow.
That's why I don't travel on the train very often.
Male speaker
It will affect my pocket and eventually, I'll have to pass the rise onto my customers.
Voice over
These passengers on the Chiltern line will face a bigger rise than most.
The cost of recent improvements will be passed on to the public.
Male speaker
Everything has to be paid for.
We spent £79million on improvements.
We've delivered the results, it's appropriate that they should be charged more on that route.
Voice over
Commuters are calculating the price they have to pay for comfort and punctuality.
On the plush Chiltern line, travellers from Banbury will have to pay £2,452 for an annual season ticket to Marylebone.
That's an increase of 9.5%.
On the less efficient route from Oxford, they face an 8% rise.
That compares with an increase on the Intercity trip from Swindon of 7.5%.
Male speaker
It's much better, but I'm not sure that we should pay more.
It should be like that anyway.
Voice over
And rail watchdogs would like more improvements elsewhere as a matter of course.
Male speaker
We're calling for more investment from the Government.
Voice over
These commuters have a choice now.
To let the pockets and the train take the strain.
Or perhaps find a less relaxing route to work instead.
Police are hunting two men who bundled a schoolgirl into a car and abducted her.
She was then subjected to a torrent of abuse, while being driven around busy streets.
The girl managed to escape unharmed.
Kim Barnes reports.
BLETCHLEY/Buckinghamshire
Sgt JUDY STEVENSON/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The girl who's just 14 was at Bletchley Railway Station to meet her boyfriend when her ordeal began.
She was grabbed from behind by a man and forced into a car where another man was waiting.
Sh says she was very frightened.
They subjected her to verbal abuse.
Police want to speak to anyone who saw anything around the train station.
The girl was driven along Sherwood Drive and onto Watling Street, where the driver ignored a no right turn sign.
As the driver stopped at this junction the girl managed to jump out of the car.
She then ran back to the railway station and met up with her boyfriend.
Police say she's now recoevring from her terrifying experience.
She says we're taking the incident very seriously.
We want to speak to anyone who saw the car, a small metallic blue hatchback.
Both men are black.
The driver is 6ft, about 23 years old, stocky, with very short hair.
The passenger is about 22, also with very short hair and a round face.
Police don't believe the abduction's linked with a string of of sex attacks in Milton Keynes which they're still investigating, but they are warning women to be on their guard.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
GARETH FURBY
HARRIET RYLEY/Aylesbury
LYNNE DEELEY/Injured Nurse
12 April 1993/OXFORD
Voice over
Lynne Deeley has been confined to a wheelchair since she was mown down by her own car in April this year.
She's been studying photography at Aylesbury College since then — forced to put her career as a nurse on hold.
Today Oxford Crown Court heard how Miss Deeley, aged twenty-five spotted David Mills stealing her metro car from outside St. Andrew's Residential Care Home in London road in Oxford where she was working as a care assisstant on April the twelfth this year.
Mr Benjamin Gumpert for the prosecution said the only thing Miss Deeley could think to do was to stop the car driving off — she went to the back of the vehicle.
He said Mills reversed slowly, then more quickly, forcing Miss Deeley to jump out of the way.
As he paused at the exit she then ran to the front of the car and stretched her arms across its bonnet.
The defendant stared at her and then quite deliberately drove over her, quite slowly.
Her body was dragged over 70 feet on the front and underside of the car.
She was left in a heap at the side of the road as the defendant drove off.
Lynne Deeley suffered a crushed pelvis, multiple fractures to her leg, a broken ankle and head injuries.
She was in hospital for a month and is still in a wheelchair.
Mills, who's unemployed and lives in Oxford was arrested twelve days after he ran down Miss Deeley, after a joyriding display in Oxford.
Judge Richard May told Mills’ to drive in that way when she tried to stop you and knock her down and run her over was callous behaviour beyong belief.’
Today Mills pleaded guilty to causing grvous bodily harm with intent, two cases of aggravated vehicle taking, driving while disqualified and without insurance and failing to provide a breath test.
He was sentenced to six years.
Lynne plans to marry her fiancee Martin Keene next year — she says she's determined she'll be walking down the aisle.
A coroner has paid tribute to a parachutist who sacrificed his own life to save a colleague.
Christopher Claridge died after his parachute became tangled with another during a display.
He jettisoned his parachute but died after his reserve chute failed to open in time.
RICHARD BARNETT Eastnor
HEREFORD
DAVID LEWIS Icarus Parachute Team
Voice over
An onlooker captured Christopher Claridge's last moments on video as he took part in a parachute display at Eastnor Castle last August.
Mr Claridge is seen here on the lower parachute…standing on his shoulders is parachutist John Boxall.
As the two were about three hundred feet from the ground, their parachutes became entangled.
John Boxall, who's been on crutches since the accident, described what happened.
He said he shouted to Chris: What do the canopies look like.
Chris replied Not good John.
Mr Boxall went on:
PTC
Chris Claridge hit the ground before his reserve chute had time to open.
He died from multiple injuries.
Icarus team leader David Lewis took part in the same jump.
He said there was nothing they could have done to avoid the accident.Both men were extremely experienced.
But at 300 feet they were too low for the reserve chutes to open.
The Deputy Coroner, David Halpen recorded a verdict of accidental death.
PTC
After the hearing, David Lewis also paid tribute to Christopher Claridge:
Nobel prize for Mandela and De Klerk
Nelson Mandela and President De Klerk have won the Nobel peace prize for working to dismantle aparthied in South Africa.
700 jobs to go at Courage
Courage breweries are cutting seven hundred jobs.
The company blames falling sales, increased excise duties, and imports.
Labour claims the Chancellor Kenneth Clarke is planning to cut Defence spending by one billion pounds.
Mr Clarke's spent today considering his strategy for next month's Budget.
Fears for pool birth safety
The Government's being urged to investigate the safety of water births.
It's follows the death of a baby in a birthing pool at a Bristol hospital.
FTSE up 34
The hundred shares index closed up thirty four point five at three thousand one hundred and twenty point eight.
The pound is up at one dollar fifty one and two marks forty four.
Welcome back.
Later on a poet with real soul, but now with the Friday sport, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
JAN AAGE FJORTOFT
Voice over
In a week when English football went crashing…
Norweigan Jan Aage Fjortoft was climbing to the top…he scored one of the Norway goals that put paid to Poland and stamped his country's ticket for America and the 94 world cup…
so much for international success…what about Swindon…he hasn't scored for them in the league yet…but would give anything…and everything to get amongst the goals
Jan Aage says having scored for Norway he now hopes he can score for swindon in the league and that this is a turnning point he would rather score for swindon than norway…
The goals were going in for Jan Aage in pre season friendlies…
Swindon were winning too…who knows Norway's world cup success may just push the winning button at the county ground…
Its Everton tomorrow…keeper Fraser Digby is fit again and he's back in goal…
Welsh international Paul Bodin he's still got world cup hopes of course has recovered from hamstring trouble…
Town's form we all know…
Everton got off to good start but are slipping down the table…
moving up the table are Oxford…
Southend away tomorrow…and if you believe in lucky omens…here's one…
United's best…biggest away win last season was at Southend…it was 3-0…two for Durnin and one for Dave Penney and manager Denis Smith says the same score will do him nicely tomorrow…
and for the first time in a long time…manager Smith can name an unchanged team…keep a winning side…
United are off the bottom thanks to last sunday's win…
Southend started well but have lost some form in recent weeks…
in the third division Hereford want to forget all about last week's six nil drubbing up at Crewe…so instead we've got the three goals they scored against tomorrow's opponents Colchester last season…
a repeat performance would be just the job…
there's good news for United…keeper Alan Judge is fit again so he's back and Chris Pike could also return to the attack…
they'll have a tough old game on their hands tomorrow as Colchester are playing well and getting results…
the goal of the week…has to be the United winner against Stoke…it lifted them off the bottom of the table…
A Penney from heaven
football may have had a rough old week…but we've got some celebrating to do now…
Central South has two new champions…one from speedway and one from boxing…they've got centre stage in action roundup 
Pictures Sky Sport
SIMON WIGG/World Longtrack Champion
Voice over
Daren Fifield is our first new champ…we met up with him in training a few weeks ago…the boy was a knockout…
and he proved it at London's York Hall when he went and won the Commonwealth Flyweight Title…
Daren who comes from Kennington stopped his opponent Danny Porter in the ninth round…
He's Oxford's first professional boxing champion for thirty years
it was a real bruiser of a battle…
Daren carried a few scars from it…but congratulations to him…next on the bill should be the British title
our next champ is Simon Wigg from Buckinghamshire…he's won the world long track title for the fourth time…with a new look…the bike has been aerodynamically designed by grand prix men…and the suit which he wears over the leathers is made of lycra…
Simon Wigg says that everybody was laughing at him because the bike looked so different but he had the last laugh…won the title and that's what it's all about…
Gloucester rugby club could do with some better aerodynamics at the moment…the cherry and whites are still searching for their first win of the season…they've a club game tomorrow against Cardiff at Kingsholm…
playing for a place in the third round of the Pilkington Cup are three local teams…
Hereford are away at Sheffield…
Lydney at home to Havant and Henley at home to St. Ives
A police squad has been out on the streets rounding up school truants.
They picked up scores of children who should have been in class, and found that many stay away from school with their parents' knowledge and consent.
GRAEME BOWD/Milton Keynes
CHRISTOPHER HART/Education Welfare Officer
Sgt LAWRIE YEARLEY/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Market day in Milton Keynes, and among the many shoppers there are some who shouldn't be here.
Truancy has reached plague proportions, In this town around a thousand secondary schoolchildren stay away each day.
Many wander aimlessly in the shopping centre, or play games machines in the arcades.
Now a police truant squad is out to take them off the streets.
They ask the youngsters why they're not at school.
The children's details are checked with their school.
Few excuses turn out to be genuine.
The truants are questioned by education officers, and often their parents too.
For many are accompanied by mothers who've let them take the day off.
Often they say the children are sick — though apparently they're well enough to go shopping.
Education authorities have no doubt that truancy is caused by poor discipline at home.
He says parents don't accept their responsibilities.
But the authorities seem unable or unwilling to take tough action.
They have no power to take the children back to school.
Within minutes of being released by the police, these youngsters were back in an amusement arcade.
The few parents taken to court are treated lenienty.
This woman has been prosecuted four times for failing tio send her daughter to school.
After three conditional discharges today she was fined £30
Meanwhile police say that truancy leads to crime.
Yesterday 3 children between 5 and 9 were found shoplifting.
Others truants are at risk.
This youngsters was found with a known sex offender who ran off.
The schools say truancy is not a major problem, this one claimed to have only 6 truants today, but in the town we found nearly twenty of its pupils in half an hour.
Police say their campaign will continue until the youngsters get the message.
A farmer who was convicted of starving and neglecting farm animals has lost his appeal against a six month prison sentence.
GLOUCESTER
RSPCA VIDEO
A shot's been fired during an armed robbery on a building society.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
The gunman fired a handgun at the ceiling of the Bristol and West in Banbury High Street as he demanded money.
He was given a bundle of notes, but they exploded red security dye onto him as he escaped.
The raider's described as white, five feet nine tall, and about twenty-five years old.
He has dark swept-back hair and was wearing a dark bomber jacket and jeans.
The police say his hands and clothing should still be covered in red dye 
The last American Air Force Squadron at RAF Upper Heyford stands down from active duty today.
F-one-eleven fighter bombers have been flying from the base for more than twenty years.
KATE GARRAWAY/Upper Heyford
Col RANDALL SCHMIDT/USAF
PAUL O'SULLIVAN/Steeple Ashton Parish Council
DEREK HOWLIN/Publican
MARGARET MASON/Upper Heyford Action Group
Sgt BILL DALEY/55th Squadron
The last active duty F-1-11 bomber brings 75 years of flying history to an end.
The fifty-fifth fighting squadron is the oldest American unit in Europe.
Now after 23 years at Upper Heyford airbase in Oxfordshire it's being disbanded sending it's airmen to new jobs in America, and it's aircraft to become museum pieces.
Male speaker
We are going to miss Upper Heyford.
The community here has always been very supportive of what we do on the base.
Voice over
The squadron is returning to America as part of the wind down of NATO bases after the end of the Cold War.
During its time in Oxfordshire it's seen active duty most recently in the Gulf War.
But for those living nearby its the squadron's contribution to the community that will be most missed.
They will be very much missed particularly by the traders.
They spend alot of money in the village, it must run into millions of pounds.
It is going to effect my trade very much because the Americans are the mainstay of my business particularly at lunchtime.
But not all are sorry to see the squadron go.
Last year two F1-111'S crashed.
One nearly missing an agricultural factory.
The other came down near the village of Upper Heyford, killing its two crew members.
Some local people say the fear of such crashes and the noise of the squadron's manoeuvres has made their lives a misery.
Female speaker
We have our local school in the flight path and apart from the fact the noise is so bad they have to stop teaching, there is also genuine concern about safety.
Voice over
Most of the airmen and women fly home in January but some say they have been here so long that this is their home, they'll be staying in England.
Male speaker
I have lived here for nearly eighteen years and I have been accepted by the local community.
I love the way of life over here.
Voice over
The last squadron member officially says goodbye to Upper Heyford in January, but few will forget the squadron the fighting fifty-fifth.
The singer Frankie Vaughan has left hospital just eight days after a life saving operation to repair an artery.
Now he's hoping to be back on the golf course soon and singing again by the end of the year.
Mike Rowbottom Reports.
OXFORD
FRANKIE VAUGHAN Singer
STELLA VAUGHAN Wife
Voice over
Last week Frankie Vaughan was on an operating table undergoing major surgery to the most important artery in his body; the Aorta.
A rupture was discovered after a turn on the golf course.
He was very close to death.
But today he came out of the John Radcliffe with a smile and a joke.
Male speaker
I'm hoping it will improve my golf swing.
I know I've had something quite unique happen to me and I'm just very glad that I'm leaving here so well.
I'm a bit tired, but I'm looking forward to going home.
Female speaker
He's a bit naughty, but I'll make sure he behaves, so he can make a full recovery.
Voice over
Frankie, at 64, was working right up until he was taken ill.
He was doing a summer season in Blackpool.
He even wanted to carry on after hearing about his problem, but the Doctors made it clear that would almost certainly be fatal.
However, he's a trooper and that means the show must go on, so he'll rest for a while at home, but hopes to be back singing and dancing by Christmas.
Bank of England cuts base rate to 8
The Bank of England has cut the base rate by one per cent to eight per cent, its lowest level since June nineteen eighty-eight.
Many mortgage rates reduced
Some banks and building societies have reduced their interest rates as a result.
High Court adjourns pit closure ruling
The High Court has adjourned ruling on whether or not pit closures are legal until next week.
Tory MPs banned from entering pit
A number of Conservative MPs have criticised the pit closure plans, two, Winston and Elizabeth Churchill, were banned from entering a pit to visit Roy Lynk of the Union of Democratic Mineworkers who is staging a protest.
PM calls for EC made for citizens
At the European Summit in Birmingham, the Prime Minister has urged delegates to send a clear signal that they want to build a community to serve the interests of its citizens.
Mitterrand taken ill at Birmingham summit
France's President Mitterrand, who recently underwent cancer surgery, has been taken ill at the summit.
FTSE up 17
The hundred shares index closed up seventeen point three at twenty-five, sixty-three point nine.
The pound is down at one dollar, sixty-six and down at two marks, forty-four.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
The serious fraud office has been sent details of a business deal drawn up by the former chairman of Oxford United Kevin Maxwell, and the former managing director of Derby County.
Payments totalling seventy-thousand pounds are said to have been involved.
Erika Barnes reports.
KEITH COX/Managing Director/Oxford United
Voice over
The 3 year deal was struck in the late 80s when Kevin Maxwell was in control of United.
It was with a company called Sports Marketing International, run by Stuart Webb, former managing director of Derby County.
It was Mr Webb who joined Robert Maxwell to buy out Derby in 1984; he recently severed his links with the club.
Details emerged when United's new owners Bio Mass Recycling started looking into the clubs records and came across payments for seventy thousand pounds.
Male speaker
The agreement was for consultancy which records show were less than the sums of money involved.
Voice over
Details of the payments were passed onto the Serious Fraud Office who confirmed that:’ Oxford United have provided information of financial transations by the club's previous owners.
But they are not investigating matters regarding Oxford United, Derby County and Mr Webb.’
Male speaker
The club was reimbursed some of the money by another Maxwell company so the loss to the club is not substantial.
Voice over
Mr Webb, who is out of the Country at them moment, says he welcomes that the accounts are being looked at, as he claims he's still owed more than £130,000.
At the weekend, Oxford and Derby put their Maxwell past behind them.
Oxfords financial fortunes may be under scrutiny.
But their fortunes on the field on this occasion, a clear success.
Every year, thirty million working days are lost through back problems.
And the situation is getting worse…in the past five years the number of reported cases of serious backpain has risen by forty percent.
This week has been designated national backpain week to raise public awareness of the problem.
Richard Barnett reports:
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
LIZ HURST/Sufferer
STEVEN DAVIES/Registered Osteopath
Voice over
At sometime in our lives, 4 out of 5 of us are afflicted with back pain.
It costs the National Health Service £350million a year to cope with back problems caused by eveything from sporting injuries to stress at work.
And now backpain week has been designated by doctors and osteopaths to make us more aware of the problem.
Liz Hurst knows all about backache already.
She's suffered from it for 30 years.
She makes regular visits to Osteopath, Steven Davies in Cheltenham for treatment.
Female speaker
She suffered from back pain as a teenager after lifting heavy weights the wrong way.
Male speaker
He cannot treat wear and tear, but he can ease pain and help people to combat back pain.
Voice over
During a 40 minute session, Steven uses massage and manipulation to loosen up Lizs muscles, to release tension and ease pain.
She's one of 50,000 people who visit Osteopaths every week for treatment of back problems.
Female speaker
She feels wonderful after the treatment.
Back pain is very bad.
Voice over
The latest figures show that the number of cases of serious backpain reported has risen by 40% over the past 5 years.
So it looks as if the doctors and Osteopaths will continue to have their hands full.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
first action on Goals Extra tomorrow tea-time…the live game on sunday comes from Filbert Street…it's Leicester against Peterborough…we're off to the rugby next…the big local game tomorrow is at Kingsholm…its Gloucester against Bristol…
Voice over
we've a new champion to celebrate tonight…
Nicky Bingham is her name…her game showjumping…and she's the first to go in our action round up 
Voice over
Now what do you reckon is the most difficult…the most dangerous job in sport…boxer…jump jockey…racing driver you could argue all night couldn't you…what about a chap who has to protect himself from head to foot…gets fired at…and skates on ice…in other words the netminder in ice hockey…see for yourself in our Friday Feature 
DAVID GRAHAM
DON DEPOE/Coach
Voice over
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
13 JANUARY 1992/SWINDON/Wiltshire
Voice over
The body of 10-year-old Nicola Yates was found beneath trees at the Coate Water Country Park in Swindon in January.
She'd been strangled by her father, 33-year-old Richard Yates from Eldene.
Bristol Crown Court was told that Yates had begged his estranged wife Julie to allow him to take Nicola out for the day.
He'd taken her to a pub — The Crumpled Horn — before walking to the park.
Yates was a convicted rapist — the court heard he flipped when Nicola asked him what a rapist was.
In a fit of temper Yates grabbed Nicola's sweater, tied the sleeve round her neck and throttled her as she cried out’ Daddy don't’.
He then frantically tried to revive her before leaving her face down in a copse.
Afterwards he returned to The Crumpled Horn, where he laughed, joked and played darts with friends.
Yates was questioned by police soon after and immediately confessed to the killing.
Tonight he starts a life sentence.
An inquest has opened on a brilliant student found hanging in her room at an Oxford college.
The death of the girl, an award-winning A-level student, has baffled her family, friends and teachers.
Meanwhile, student counsellors say the pressures on high-achievers can be enormous.
Kim Barnes reports.
OXFORD
ELSA BELL/Student Counsellor
Voice over
Eighteen year old Tracey Cole appeared to have everything to live for…a place at Oxford, with a national sociology award to her credit.
But a friend found her hanging in her room just a week into her course.
Those who advise students say the pressures on those who seem destined for great things is enormous.
These are difficult days for students…financial worries and job uncertainty, as well as coping with life alone.
But other students at Tracey's college all of whom were personally informed of the tragedy by letter felt it was unusual.
The college say they're distressed by Tracey's death, she had every reason to anticipate a good degree.
A memorial service will be held for Tracey…and the inquest into her death has been adjourned so further inqiries can be made.
While today's cut in interest rates has been welcomed by industrial leaders, the news has come too late for many businesses.
But at a conference today, chief executives of some of the country's biggest companies have been hearing how up to a thousand new jobs could be created.
Nick Clark reports.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
GRAHAME HANDLEY/Cherwell Council
JOHN GARLAND/Shop Owner
JOHN NEILL/Unipart
Voice over
Dozens of beleagured businessmen in the midst of a painful recession were due to hear Michael Hesletine speak at this conference in Oxfordshire, but the President of the Board of Trade had to cancel at the last minute and the delegates instead got a DTi stand-in.
But the words of the speech were the same if not the delivery.
Male speaker
The government is fighting on.
Voice over
The conference was set up to attract more business to north Oxfordshire, where along of the flanks of the M40 empty office space is part of the landscape.
But it seems some employers are seeing the potential.
Male speaker
A thousand people have come here in the last year and another thousand are expected in the next year.
Voice over
But it's the smaller busineess that are hit hardest.
On the fringes of Banbury two hotels recently brought in the receivers.
And at this carpet shop in the town itself it's crisis time.
Male speaker
It's a very difficult time, we're just living from day to day.
Voice over
This business on the other hand is booming.
Prodrive Motorsport make rally cars and parts, and low sterling rates are attracting foreign buyers like never before.
For the majority though business is bad, but they're fighting on.
Male speaker
We've simply got to work out ways to survive.
We will not give up.
Voice over
Meanwhile more jobs are to go in Hereford.
Sun Valley Poultry this morning announced sixty five employees will ihave to go from the firm's cooked meat plant.
A judge sent the jury home early and left his courtroom to examine the spot on the Severn Bridge where two men died when a gantry collapsed and fell one hundred feet in the River Severn.
Five companies have been accused of ignoring dangerous faults on the platform.
Tim Hurst reports.
SEPTEMBER 1990
Voice over
3 men were working on the gantry when it fell from beneath the Severn Bridge in September 1990.
Only one survived.
The 2 who died were Robin Phelps, from Brockweir in Gloucestershire and Eric Sullivan from Tintern in Gwent.
The third man, Mark Seaton, was rescued from the river and has already given evidence at the trial of 5 companies at Bristol Crown Court.
The jury has been told that locking pins which should have secured the gantry had failed.
They also heard that the gantry was new, built to speed up painting work on the bridge.
Using the old gantries, it had taken 20 years to paint the centre span.
The jury, sitting in court 4 at Bristol, were sent home early by Judge Overend, so that he could drive to the bridge to see for himself the spot at which the accident happened.
5 companies, John Laing Construction, John Laing Services, gantry makers Secalt and Tirfor and engineers Flint and Neil, have pleaded not guilty to breaching regulations under the Health and Safety Act.
They've been accused of ignoring dangerous faults on the new gantry.
The trial, which is expected to last another 5 weeks, has been adjourned until Tuesday.
The son of the man who designed the Spitfire fighter is campaigning for a new stamp to be issued in recognition of his father's achievement.
Reginald Mitchell died of cancer not long after the first Spitfire took to the skies.
So, as Harriet Ryley reports, he never knew of, and was never honoured for the vital role his plane played in the Second World War.
Dr GORDON MITCHELL/Designer's Son
LOWER SLAUGHTER/Gloucestershire
THE FIRST OF THE FEW/Odyssey Video
Voice over
It's been said it's the most elegant, beautiful airplane ever designed.
Every way you look at it it's right…it's beautiful.
Dr Gordon Mitchell, the son of R.J. Mitchell, designer of the Spitfire.
The pilots used to say it's a pilots' plane — when you flew a Hurricane the pilot flew the plane, but when you flew a Spitfire, it flew itself.
It was the plane considered to have given Britain the edge at the Battle of Britain.
But RJ Mitchell's early death from cancer at the age of 42 in 1937 meant he never knew about the vital role the Spitfire played in his country's defence.
He says because my father died early in 1937 he's never been honoured for his work.
No posthumous awards are given, except for gallantry.
Then I heard about the idea of a set of stamps and it seemed this was a way to recognise his work.
Dr Mitchell has spent the last five months getting people to write to the Royal Mail Stamp Programme Manager in London to lobby for a set of stamps honouring his father's work.
Winston Churchill is one of eleven MPs who are supporting him.
The idea is to persuade the Royal Mail to issue a set of stamps commemmorating four of R.J. Mitchell's designs;
the Southampton Flying Boat, the Walrus Amphibian which also played an important role in the Second World War, one of the Schneider Trophy planes and the prototype Spitfire — the only version of the plane RJ Mitchell lived to see.
It was the designer's work on the planes which won Britain the Schneider trophy — the World Cup of the aviation world, which led to his designs for the Spitfire.
The 1942 film,’ The First of the Few’starring Leslie Howard as the designer, told a slightly different story, suggesting he was inspired to design the Sptifire by watching seagulls wheeling in the air.
He says a few years ago I asked my father's test pilot Geoffrey Quill about this business of the seagulls and he told me your father was a hard-headed engineer and if he was stuck for inspiration he would never have wasted time watching bloody seagulls!
RJ Mitchell died fifteen months after the first flight of the Spitfire.
His son is hoping a set of stamps honouring his work will make a fitting tribute to the designer's genius.
An English vineyard is trying to beat French Wine makers at their own game.
The Three Choirs vineyard is making an English equivalant of Beaujolais Nouveau, and is launching it on the French market.
ABI DONALD Newent
TOM DAY Three Choirs Vineyard
ARABELLA WOODROW Wine Buyer
LYNN HEMMING Graduate
Voice over
The latest grape harvest in Gloucestershire.
These grapes will be used to make the newest wine from the Three Choirs vineyard.
’ New Release’will be bottled and on the shelves in a months time and is England's answer to the French wine Beaujolais Nouveau.But the greatest coup for Three Choirs this year is that the company has already had an order for its wine from a French buyer.
Male speaker
We're taking the game back to them.
Earlier this year we won an award in Bourdeux and we've had a lot of interest.
We already sell wine in Germany, but now we're taking it to where it should be-back to France.
Voice over
The wine will also be sold in this country.
Three Choirs has built up a good reputation and has proved popular with wine buyers.
Female speaker
Since I'm buying Three Choirs for my shops then I obviously rate it highly.
But I've always been a champion of English wines.
They're very well made.
Voice over
But there's some stiff competition for’ New Release’, each year Beaujolais Nouveau hits British shops in a flood of publicity with people racing to bring back the first bottle to Britain.
So in an attempt to make sure New Release doesn't go unnoticed Three Choirs is launching it's own publicity campaign.
It's asked three unemployed graduates of Cheltenham and Gloucester College of Higher Education to plan and run an event on the day that New Release is launched.
But the graduates are already finding that publicity stunts aren't that easy, picking grapes in a gown and mortar board does have it's problems.
Female speaker
It's a bit tricky keeping the mortar board on your head.
But it's not too bad, luckily it's not wet.
Voice over
New Release will be on sale on November the 18th, the same day as Beaujolais Nouveau.
The students are hoping to arrange their own type of wine run, distributing New Release around Gloucestershire, in the hope that it'll prove every bit as popular as it's French rival.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
George Michael takes Sony to court
FTSE up 16
The hundred shares index closed up sixteen point eight at thirty one thirty seven point six 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty and down at two marks, forty three.
Welcome back: In a few minutes, the son of the man who designed the Spitfire says his father should be commemorated with a new postage stamp.
But first, reporting on a glut of weekend goals, here's Tim with the sport.
Hello there.
TIM RUSSON
Pictures BBC Sport
Voice over
After being whacked six nil at Crewe Hereford needed a pick me up…the tonic was the first goal against Colchester an absolute gem…
Chris Pike the scorer…so much for the breathtaking…here's the bizarre…
Chris Fry goes chasing a long ball…
Colchester keeper John Keeley chops him down…a penalty a professional foul…a sending off…player manager Roy McDonough kept his substitute keeper on the bench and went in goal himself…
Pike took the penalty…2-0
For the second half Colchester did reshuffle…the sub keeper came on…stil only ten men of course…and within minutes it was Chris Pike 3 Colchester 0 as the striker got his hat-trick…
well done Pikey…
how many could United score…the crowd chanted we want six…
Chris Fry must have heard them and he did his best by knocking in number four…
what happened next more fun and games…
Colchester had their second keeper Nathan Munsen sent-off for this challenge on Derek Hall…
when did one team have two keepers sent-off in the same game…it could only happen at Hereford…
player manager McDonough went back in goal…and with only nine men to beat Hereford were cruising…only one more goal though that went to skipper Hall…5-0…the best of times at Edgar Street…
At Southend the worst of times for Oxford…but nothing and nobody is ever going to stop goals like these…
Tommy Mooney the scorer…
what happened next was a landslide…everything Southend did went right…every shot they hit was on target…and every chance was taken…
Ricky Otto got number two…
and five minutes later came number three…
Bressington the marksman this time…
three down Oxford's confidence and nerves were shot to pieces…and goodness knows what was said in the dressing room at half-time after Mr. Mooney had banged in the fourth goal…
midway through the second half Oxford at last found an answer…
David Penney cracked home a good un…
but that pushed Southend's scoring button and they hit back with two more…
Otto made it five-one…
and a minute later Mooney made his hat-trick…6-1 to Southend…
in the premiership Swindon are still searching for their first win…
Everton scored first at the County Ground…the celebrations of Peter Beagrie are usually better than his goals…
Town looked beaten…they were staring defeat in the face again but they're fighting spirit saved them…in the last do or die attack of the match skipper Sean Taylor won them a draw…
we've some better news at last of Gloucester rugby…the cherry and whites won their first match of the season on saturday…they beat cardiff at Kingsholm 16-5 
KEITH RICHARDSON/Coach
Voice over
It was only a club game…sadly no league points to be won but victory over a side like Cardiff can only bring good to Gloucester…they went into the lead with two penalties from martin roberts…
and then won it with a try from Tim Smith…there were signs of the Gloucester of old…the forwards charging…the backs taking the ball and finding space to score…
roberts added the conversion…13-0…
Cardiff were missing four internationals…
Gloucester had four first teamers out too…so it was still a realistic test…the second half was so kind to the cherry and whites as the welsh side came powering back…their only score was a try by Ford which came after a lot of pressure…16-5 the final score the final verdict comes from coach Keith Richardson…
Keith Richardson says it was very very important they got a win against a strong side such as cardiff and this can only help them improve
and this afternoon the Gloucester coach was weighing up his team's next opponents…tomorrow at Kingsholm the cherry and whites take on the South African Barbarians…a team bristling with international talent…they were warming up on the playing fields at Wycliffe School in Stonehouse…
Keith Richardson says its going to be a very big game for gloucester and he suspects it will bring all the good things out
Gloucester v South Africa kicks off at seven tomorrow night…
finally only one of junior teams has made it through to the third round of the cup…
Henley beat St. Ives by 65 points on saturday…and here's their reward another home tie
An MP has called for action after complaints that a gang of youths is terrorising a housing estate.
Local people say they're kept awake by constant noise.
There are also claims of drug taking and vandalism.
GRAEME BOWD/Swindon
SIMON COOMBS MP/Con Swindon
TOM JONES/Householder
Insp PETER RUSS/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
Swindon MP Simon Coombs has been touring the town's Freshbrook estate.
In recent weeks the streets around Mead park have been plagued by a gang of treenager.
Local people are demanding action.
He says there is evidence of glue sniffing and drug taking.
The residents are being given a bad time.
People can't get to sleep until after midnight.
Most of the trouble is at a children's play area known as the Fort.
There are claims of drunkeness.
Police say discarded straws could indicate drug taking.
Graffiti has spread to the walls of nearby houses.
There are also complaints of litter.
He says he asked youths to clear up their litter and was abused.
But the police say they will prosecute where offences can be proved.
He says they've already charged youths with drug offences and damage.
But there are fears that Wiltshire council could cut its police budget by as much as £2m.
Local people say if this happens the police won't have enough resources to tackle vandalism.
After all the hype and controversy, the memoirs of Lady Thatcher have finally gone on sale.
Security leading up to the launch of The Downing Street Years was tight, to prevent any unauthorised leak of the book's contents.
So big is the rush expected in the shops that W. H. Smith has bought more copies of this book than any other in its history.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
CHRIS RUSHBY/Product Manager
PETER GEE/Distribution Manager
PETER ROBERTS/Branch Manager
Voice over
It's been under wraps for weeks, but now the political biography everyone's talking about has finally arrived.
WH Smith's Swindon warehouse today took delivery of 25 000 copies at its Swindon Warehouse.
And a similar number are already on sale at its 450 stores around the country.
Never before has Europe's largest book retailer bought so many copies of one book, but it's confident the gamble will pay dividends.
Because of the row over serialisation rights, security has been tight.
Smith's copies have spent the last six days under lock and key at its Dunstable depot.
There was a break-in, but the books were hidden and none stolen.
At Smith's Regent Street branch in Swindon, publication day sales were going well.
Female speaker
I wanted to see for myself what Mrs Thatcher has to say.
Voice over
The memoirs are more than nine hundred pages long, but at 25 pounds many customers thought it expensive.
Male speaker
I won't be buying it.
She's not one of my favourite people.
Voice over
Love her or loathe her, odds are that in the bestseller stakes Lady Thatcher will be nudging Catherine Cookson all the way to Christmas.
A hatful of goals.
The winners lose, and the losers win and draw.
Lest we Forget…but has the Spitfire man been forgotten?
And a study in scarlet.
Turning the tables on Beaujolais Noveau.
In Central News tonight:
Stop this savagery.
Anti-hunt campaigners say Ban the Terrier Men.
Miracle or menace?
New study after baby dies during water birth.
And the wraps are off…the rush is on, for Maggie's memoirs.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The incident was filmed ten days ago.
The hunt involved has admitted it was wrong.
Tomorrow, the video will be used to persuade a group of councillors that hunting should be banned on council-owned land.
Amateur Video
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Swindon
JIM BARRINGTON/League Against Cruel Sports
SIMON CLARKE/Master Of Foxhounds
DAVID GLAHOLM/Wiltshire County Councillor
SIDNEY BAILEY/Huntsman
Voice over
League of Cruel Sports helpers caught the savage death of a fox on camera in almost total detail.
It pictures a fox run to ground in a full flowing drain.
A hunt follower with a terrier sends it in after others try to divert the water.
The video is being used to cause maximum publicity against foxhunting before a Wiltshire County Council vote to ban it tomorrow.
The video was taken at a meeting of the New Forest Hunt ten days ago.
The hunt itself moved on after a few minutes, leaving the terrier man to flush out the fox.
The League Against Cruel Sports launching its latest campaign in Swindon, says similar acts happen all the time throughout the hunting world.
In this case the Fox is trapped at both ends before the terrier goes in.
Eventually the dog is pulled out with its jaws fastened on the nearly dead fox's throat.
The Terrier man then kills it with a small pistol.
Even the New Forest Hunt master admitted it was wrong when he spoke at a rival press conference.
The issue has already stirred strong passions in Wiltshire where County Councillors will be voting on a measure to ban foxhunting on all land under its control.
And there have been similar demonstrations in Gloucestershire which has a similar vote next week.
Tomorrow the anti hunt campaigners can smell victory after a long battle.
If there is a ban in Wiltshire or Gloucestershire it will affect the Vale of White Horse Hunt seriously.
They were out near Cirencester at the weekend.
Male speaker
it's been going on for hundreds of years and I don't see why it should stop.
There should be freedom of choice
Voice over
The anti Hunt campaigners believe they have enough to carry the day tomorrow.
They're hoping that the video will carry them even further…to Parliament…where they hope to lobby MPs to legislate against hunting.
The Government has ruled out an immediate ban on birthing pools in hospitals, despite the deaths of two babies born underwater.
The Department of Health is waiting for the results of an Oxford University study before deciding what action to take, if any.
The hospital involved in one of the deaths says the birthing pool wasn't to blame 
JESSICA FOWLE/Reporting
Prof GEOFFREY CHAMBERLAIN/Royal College of Obstetricians
Dr MARY RENFEUR/Perinatal Epidemiology Unit
TESS McKENNEY/Mother
SHEILA KITZINGER/Childbirth Expert
Voice over
Birthing pools became popular in the mid 80s.
Many women prefer to spend their labour, and sometimes delivery, under water.
They say it makes the experience less painful for them and less traumatic for the baby.
But the safety of the practice has been thrown into doubt by the revelation that a baby died eighteen months ago at Saint Michael's Hospital in Bristol and another suffered possible brain damage at the same hospital.
It was also revealed that a baby died after being delivered in the birthing pool at the Churchill John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford, although the hospital has ruled out any connection between the death and the method of birth.
The national Perinatal Epidemiology Unit in Oxford is conducting a nation-wide study into the subject.
It aims to establish how many women are choosing this method of birth and what practices are in place in different hospitals.
Sam…is a happy and healthy water baby.
He was delivered in a birthing pool five years ago and it convinced his mother in favour of a repeat experience.
Tess's mother, Sheila Kitzinger, a childbirth expert, is concerned that recent events will be used to deprive women of choice.
Female speaker
We need the research
Voice over
At present there's very little data available on the subject of birthing pools.
The results of the Oxford study will be published in November next year, although interim findings are expected earlier.
Then the Department of Health will re-consider the future of the practice.
A man serving life for murdering a policeman has been found guilty of beating up a prison officer at a high security jail.
But the jury cleared Charles McGhee of nine of the ten charges of violence to prison staff, and he was sentenced to twelve months for wounding.
MARIA COYLE/Reporting
The man who produced the record’ Telstar’by the Tornadoes in the sixties, has been honoured by his home town.
Joe Meek's futuristic sound effects made Telstar Britain's most successful pop instrumental.
Richard Barnett reports:
THE JOE MEEK TRIBUTE/ Woodford House Video
NEWENT/Gloucestershire
ERIC MEEK/Brother
JOHN REPSCH/Author
MARK NEWSON/Fan
CLEM CATTINI/Tornado
Voice over
Telstar by the Tornadoes was the biggest hit for Britain's first independent record producer, Joe Meek.
The pop world was a far cry from Joe's beginnings in the Gloucestershire town of Newent.
His brother Eric remembers Joe had no interest in the family fruit wholesaling business.
Male speaker
Joe was more interested in wires and cathode ray tubes.
Voice over
Joe Meek moved to North London and in 1960 he set up his own recording studios above a leather shop, where he produced dozens of hits…
His first number one, Johnny Remember Me by John Leyton:
Thirty years on, a book on Joe Meek has rekindled interest in Britain's first independent pop producer:
Male speaker
He broke all the rules.
That's how he achieved a sound way ahead of its time.
Voice over
Hundreds of fans turned out to see a plaque unveiled at Joe's birthplace, Number One, Market Place in Newent.
Male speaker
The Joe meek Appreciation Society has more than 300 members.
His fan club is growing all the time.
Voice over
Among the fans…the drummer with the original Tornadoes, Clem Cattini.
He says he had no idea Telstar would be such a massive hit:
Male speaker
When he first recorded it he wasn't that keen.
He was flabbergasted how it turned out.
Voice over
Joe Meek shot himself in 1967 because he was depressed about the failure of his latest recordings and his troubled private life.
So family memories are tinged with sadness:
Male speaker
He doesn't think Joe wanted it to end that way.
It all happened so suddenly.
Voice over
Joe Meek's last big hit was Have I the Right by the Honeycombs.
And his music lives on.:
Heseltine announces only ten pits to close
Michael Heseltine has announced to the Commons that only ten pits will close, not the thirty one announced last week.
Miners turn up for work at Silverhill
Halifax cuts mortgage rate by 0
The Halifax building society is to cut its mortgage rate by 0.7 per cent.
Man appears in court charged with Nikki Allen murder
FTSE down 1
The hundred shares index closed down one point seven at two five six two point two 
The pound is down at one dollar, sixty two and down at two marks, forty one.
Finally, if you watched our series,’ Inside The Globe’earlier this year, you may remember the two contestants we followed from their home in Wiltshire to take part in the quiz show, Blockbusters.
BLOCKBUSTERS/A Central Production
David Stewart and Fiona Thornton-Norris, from Corsham School, made it through to the third Gold Run and the really big prizes.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
It was Bill Shankly's super team of the 60s who were feared most when they'd lost.
They fought like wounded lions in the next game; 20; 30 years on Swindon are showing the same spirit.
Some reckon they're not tough enough to win promotion.
Notts County will disagree with that after picking the ball out of the net 5 times.
Martin Ling got the first after 29 minutes.
The landslide was beginning to roll.
Notts County about to cave in as Town went for the kill.
Dave Mitchell made it 2-0 just before half time.
There was no question of easing off in the second half.
We'll show 'em, said Swindon and sure enough County were rocking and rolling.
Nicky Summerbee claimed goal number 3, although it took a couple of deflections on the way win.
County were battered and bruised, but they still had a bit of bounce left and came back with a goal from Dean Thomas which sent Nicky Hammond the wrong way, only because it took a deflection.
Swindon turned up the heat in the last 10 minutes to score 2 more.
Number 4 was something special.
The scorer, teenager Kevin Horlock, who was making his full league debut.
What a start for him.
The crowd called for 5 and Town gave them what they wanted.
The scorer this time was substitute, John Moncur.
5-1.
Swindon win in style.
At the Manor Ground the crowd would have settled for just one goal; the 0-0 scoreline does the game justice.
Barnsley are not known for their fancy football or flair, but they're well drilled and organised and Oxford just couldn't find a way through.
United's best chances came in the first half, but Barnsley gave as good as they got and went close once or twice.
Full marks again to keeper Paul Reece.
He's not let a league goal in yet.
In the second half, Oxford brought on winger, Chrissy Allen in the hope of livening things up, but the game was as dead as a dodo.
After 9 games without a win, Hereford United hit the jackpot on saturday with a well earned win over Torquay at Edgar Street.
Skipper, Derek Hall got them going with his first ever goal for the club, so no wonder he went on a victory run.
Torquay came straight back with an equaliser.
Colin Colcombe scored just 2 minutes later.
Here we go again.
The Hereford fans must have thought, but United did em proud with a second from Marcus Browning.
Hereford's last win was on August the 21st, so this was long overdue.
The third goal came from top scorer, Owen Pickard.
3-1.
Happy days for Hereford.
And there's changes coming up both on and off the pitch.
Oxford United have transfer listed two of their goalkeepers…
Paul Kee and Ken Veysey are for sale following the success of Paul Reece…but only one of them will go and that'll be the one who attracts the biggest bid…
…off the pitch Oxford may have a new chairman this week while Swindon are still refusing to say why their Chief Executive, Peter Day has suddenly left the club…as Erika Barnes now reports.
RAY HARDMAN/Chairman/Swindon Town FC
Voice over
Swindon's board said; There's no rift and no apparent rhyme or reason why Chief Executive, Peter Day suddenly walked out of Swindon Town.
Mr Day had been with the club since the heady days of the Wembley play offs and he brought to the club new hope in the shape of player manager, Glenn Hoddle after the financial scandles which shook the County Ground.
A prepared statement failed to unravel the mystery.
Male speaker
Peter and I talked over the weekend.
And after mutual agreement he went.
Voice over
The statement has failed to quash the rumours of disagreements between the board or the sponsors.
Mr Day was not at home to comment about his departure.
Swindon now says it's business as usual on and off the field; building on the weekend's success against Notts County; aiming for Premier League football next year.
No replacement has yet been sought; or found for the vacant post of Chief Executive.
Meanwhile, over at the Manor Ground, the future of Oxford United chairman, Pat McGeough is in doubt.
The club's new owners, Biomass are said to want a change in management style.
More on that is expected later this week.
To rugby now and on saturday Gloucester enjoyed their biggest and best win of the season…they beat Bristol thirty…eight eleven at Kinghsolm…shame it was only a club match 
Voice over
The Gloucester…
Bristol fixture is a 100 hundred years old…and it was a happy birthday for the cherry and whites as they ran away with it…there'll be no telegrams from the Queen for Bristol though just a few nasty looks from the coach…first try was scored by Neil Matthews and Gloucester with help of a penalty were 11-6 up at half-time…
In the second half they pushed and pulled Bristol apart…the pack worked like a steamroller…and produced 4 tries…hooker John Hawker went over first…
Not long afterwards he was followed by Bob Phillips…there was no way anybody was going to stop him…
But Bristol used their weight to score their only try when Peter Stiff barged through to touch down…
That was all they did get…the Gloucester pack huffed and puffed again and blew Bristol down…with Phillips going through for his second try…
Gloucester scored three tries in six minutes and this was the best of them…it was made by a kick on from Cummins…the ball bounced perfectly for Jerry Perrins who was unmarked in the fast lane with a straight drive to the line to park the ball…
Bristol didn't have their strongest side out but nothing would have stopped Gloucester on saturday…skipper Ian Smith scored the last try…38-11…just what coach keith richardson wanted
So, after an historic climbdown over the pit closures, and a weekend of furious public protests, what of Michael Heseltine?
Just two years ago, the MP for Henley was being talked of as the next Prime Minister.
Now there are calls for him to resign.
Our political editor, Jon Lander, assesses Mr Heseltine's political future.
JON LANDER/Political Editor
Voice over
MPs had difficulty getting their mail today because the Commons post office was bunged up with parcels containing lumps of coal addressed to Michael Heseltine.
They were from members of the public drawing his attention to the fact that he had made — to put it politely — a political miscalculation.
Less than 2 weeks ago, Mr Heseltine had the party faithful squirming with delight at the Tory Party conference.
Today he made a humiliating climb down in the Commons and demonstrated that he'd lost his political touch — that he didn't realise how upset the voters would be if he put 30,000 — going on 100,000 — people out of work.
One of the Tory MPs who supported him for the leadership of the party in 1990 told me that Michael Heseltine no longer had a political future.
He said that at the party conference, those who feared they had a weak leader, could take comfort from the belief that there was a strong man waiting in the wings to take over.
Today that strong man was shown to have dropped a massive political clanger.
He's probably the best leader the Tories never had.
Fans of the great British sausage have formed an appreciation society to protect what they say is a healthy and nutritious food.
The sausage lovers are fighting back against criticism by the European Community.
But the launch comes at the start of Cholesterol Countdown week, when people are being urged to eat less fatty meat.
Gargy Patel reports.
BICESTER/Oxfordshire
LONDON
BARBARA WINDSOR/Actress
KIDLINGTON/Oxfordshire
DON STEELE/Family Heart Association
STEEPLE ASTON/Oxfordshire
JOHN WALTON/Award Winning Butcher
Voice over
The great British banger…an essential part of the great British breakfast.
It goes down equally well in roadside cafes and high class restaurants.
At least with these connoisseurs at a breakfast lauch of the Sausage Appreciation Society.
The British banger has suffered bad publicity in recent years from Europe.
Criticised for what actually went into it, now the sausage is singled out for the artificial colouring often put in.
But the sausage industry is fighting back.
Thirty thousand tons are eaten each year.
Supporters say it's a nutritious and healthy food.
But this is also the start of Cholesterol Countdown week.
Campaigners say fatty meats like pork increase the risk of heart disease, the country's biggest killer.
But the public is ignoring the dangers.
The Family Heart Association is urging more people to have their cholesterol level checked and act on doctors' advice.
Low fat sausages for example contain only a third as much fat as ordinary sausages.
And master sausage makers like John Walton say a good sausage can be very healthy using leaner meat and fresh ingedients.
Experts say in moderation most foods can be enjoyed.
The Sausage Appreciation Society says the great British banger is here to stay.
In part two: A bunch of fives.
Another net profit for Swindon Town.
And thirty years on…a town pays tribute to the Telstar man.
Where's the money?
Fraud squad search for missing charity boss.
Piling on the pressure: The miners' protest on Heseltine's doorstep.
And, Save our Sausage.The heat is on for the British Banger.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Fraud squad officers have been called in, and they want to examine bank records.
Cancelled cheques show the money was withdrawn in ten, twenty and fifty pound notes.
Tim Hurst reports.
FEBRUARY 1991
LIBRARY PICTURES/WORCESTER
MICHAEL CLARKE/Solicitor
Det Insp MIKE COWLEY/West Mercia Police
Voice over
At the end of the Gulf war, millions of pounds was raised in Britain for Kurdish refugees in northen Iraq.
New charities mushroomed, one of them the Worcester Kurdish Refugee Association.
They collected tons of blankets and food, stockpiled in Worcester before being flown to Iraq.
It was insured by the charity organiser Ruth Hilali, and when it apparently disappeared in transit, more than £100,000 was paid by insurers into charity funds at the Worcester branch of the Royal Bank of Scotland.
A solicitor acting for another trustee has discovered that that money was withdrawn in cash.
The Charity Commissioners, who controlled the affairs of the refugee association, have asked the fraud squad to investigate.
Investigators say it's possible the money may have been taken to Iraq or Turkey to buy refugee supplies on the spot.
But if that is the case, they ask, why hasn't Ruth Hilali been touch with colleagues for the last four months.
A family of four has narrowly escaped being killed by toxic fumes from a boiler.
They were rescued just in time, after one of them, an elderly woman, managed to raise the alarm.
Now experts are urging householders to check their heating boilers are safe.
Kim Barnes reports.
TETSWORTH/Oxfordshire
BRIAN BALDOCK/Paramedic
DAWN SKIRVING/Daughter
WARWICK
JIM KIRK/British Coal
Voice over
A family of four slept on through what could have been a tragedy in this farmhouse near Thame.
They were saved, only because 76 year old Nellie Bell managed to stagger to a phone and raise the alarm, before collapsing on the floor.
Farmer John Parker was found unconscious, while his wife Margaret and Lisa had collapsed, sick and delirious after inhaling toxic carbon monoxide from a coal fired heating boiler.
Relatives who've visited them in hospital say they are recovering.
It's thought the flue may have become blocked.
It comes on the same day as a young couple and their 4 year old son in Warwick were killed by gas fumes.
British Coal have just launched a safety campaign urging boiler owners to have them checked.
Ironically, an engineer was due to call at Lobbersdown Farm today after the fami ly had noticed the boiler was smoky.
They're expected to be allowed home tomorrow, counting themselves very lucky.
Less than a week after announcing that thirty one coal mines were to close, the President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine has backtracked, and cut the closure list to ten.
The U-turn follows a weekend of protests and demonstrations across the country AND on Mr Heseltine's own doorstep.
Nick Clark reports.
ANGIE PETKOVIC/Co-organiser
NIGEL JONES MP/Lib-Dem
MICHAEL HESELTINE MP/President/Board of Trade
Voice over
It couldn't have been more blatant; an indignant show of protest on behalf of thousands of miners and much of the nation.
3 tons of coal were dumped across the driveway to Michael Heseltine's country estate near Daventry by tipper lorry.
A banner signed Frickley NUM showed the protest came from a colliery in south Yorkshire.
The protestors simply drove off.
Northamptonshire police this afternoon said they were not following up the incident.
And just as a bulldozer began clearing the coal, another demonstration of anger was taking shape at the unlikely venue of Cheltenham; a town far removed from collieries and pits, but nevertheless a hotbed of outrage.
More than 3,000 turned out for a rally organised by 2 hoteliers who say they just had to do something.
Female speaker
I had to do something to show how strongly we all felt.
Male speaker
I think it was an excellent demonstration, all parties, all people, united.
Voice over
The sheer strength of feeling across the nation this afternoon forced the President of Trade and Industry to backtrack on the pit closures.
Male speaker
Because of the concern we have decided to initially shut down ten pits.
Voice over
As the miners' issue has developed, demands have been growing for Michael Heseltine's resignation.
In his south Oxfordshire constituency there's ALSO dis-satisfaction with the way he's performed.
Male speaker
I think h's got it all wrong.
Male speaker
He's done it all very badly.
Female speaker
I don't think he's to blame.
Voice over
In the Commons Michael heseltine accepted all responsibility for the handling of the affair.
His future is still very much in the balance.
The composer Edward Elgar was once hailed as England's answer to Beethoven.
But after critics savaged his second symphony, Elgar became deeply depressed and never wrote another major work.
Now a play's been written about the darker days of his life in Worcestershire.
KEVIN ASHFORD/Reporting
DI TREVIS/Director
ALEC McCOWEN/Edward Elgar
The Royal Mail's come up with the answer to a sticky problem.
A self adhesive stamp is now undergoing a six month trial — and the signs are it could soon have the traditional postage stamp licked.
ROBIN POWELL Swindon
Dr TONY LANE Chief Scientist
Voice over
No need to lick — just bend, peel and stick…the Royal Mail's out to educate a new generation of stamp users.
Britain's first self-adhesive stamp is undergoing trials in the North East, and if it catches on, sticky stamps will go on general sale next summer.
The new stamp's been developed at the Royal Mail's Research and Development Centre in Swindon.
This machine is a tensile strength tester, to ensure the stamp peels off the stamp book, but stays on the letter.
Security was another important consideration in the stamp's design.
Despite the introduction of phosphorescent strips which show up under ultra-violet light, and a security shield on the new 10 pound stamp, counterfeits still cost the postal service millions of pounds a year.
So unlike foreign self-adhesives, ours will have the same perforated edges as conventional stamps.
Most customers' taste buds will have to endure the gluey variety for some time yet…but post offices with philatelic counters are already stocking sticky stamps.
We asked Gloucester's stamp collectors what they made of today's break with tradition.
Male speaker
I'm a collector, so I have to collect them all.
Male speaker
I use a lot of sticky lables, so I won't have a problem with the new stamps.
Voice over
Lick and stick stamps have been around since the 1840s, but by the turn of the century it's thought self-adhesives will be the norm.
So, what then?
Royal Mail scientists tell us their next project is a book — or a box — of 100 sticky stamps.
You may not need to queue for stamps again.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Demonstrators hiss at Queen
FTSE down 8
The hundred shares index closed down eight points at thirty one twenty nine point six 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty nine and up at two marks, forty four.
Patients who're worried about going into hospital for surgery, are being invited to a new clinic to help ease their fears.
They'll go for an extra check up with the medical staff, a couple of weeks before their operation.
The idea's to make hospital less daunting and the treatment more successful.
ERIKA BARNES/Oxford
TRACEY DODSON/Hip Replacement Patient
DAWN ABBOTT/Pre-Admissions Clinic
Mr JOHN SPIVEY/Consultant Suregon
Voice over
Quite naturally, Tracey Dodson's rather worried about her stay in hospital.
She's due to have a hip replacement operation in a few weeks time.
Quite rare for someone so young.
Today she's come to a pre admissions clinic just for a few hours.
It's a chance to learn more about what's in store.
Female speaker
Being put to sleep, being cut open, it's all a bit frightening.
They've told me what I can and can't do.
They showed me my new hip.
I feel fine now.
Voice over
The clinic, has been operating here at the Nuffield Orthopaedic Centre in Oxford for a year on a trial basis — one of only a few in the Country.
Now it's been so successful, it's opening on a permanent basis.
Female speaker
If you've got patients who know what to do, they can help us.
They cooperate better and take an active part in their recovery.
Voice over
Tracey will come for her operation in November.
But the pre admission briefing means the medical team can get an early look at her…and she at them!
If they found the operation wasn't necessary, they could easily postpone it and make way for another patient.
In this case everything will go ahead as planned.
The clinic means everyone will be better prepared should any other problems arise.
Male speaker
We operate when we've assessed how fit the patient is.
It's important to plan, so we predict how best to treat them.
Voice over
Not only is the operation a concern.
But so is life after surgery.
Tracey is also being shown in advance how she can help herself when she's recovering from the operation.
The clinic has given Tracey the confidence to take another big step in her life — saving time, saving money and most importantly saving worry!
Still to come on Central News, the clean machine.
Welcome back.
Britain's first electric buses have gone into service — it's hoped they'll cut pollution in a city centre.
Environmental groups have welcomed them, but say that they're no more sophisticated than milk floats.
HARRIET RYLEY/Environment Reporter
OXFORD
ROGER WILLIAMS/Oxon CC
JOHN PARKER/Southern Electric
OLIVER TICKELL/Friends of the Earth
Voice over
Catching a bus in Oxford can be a dirty, smelly business — they're the only traffic allowed in the city centre, but the diesel fumes are smelly and the buses are noisy.
She says it's not a very good atmosphere for you.
I'm asthmatic and so are my children.
This could be the answer — an electric bus.
As part of its plan to make the city centre cleaner and quieter, Oxfordshire County Council is paying for four electric buses to run for one year.
They're built and designed by Southern Electric and will shuttle between the railway station and the city centre.
He says electric buses are cleaner and more efficient and we're keen to have a more environmentally-friendly transport in such an historic city centre.
The buses run on batteries which have to be charged fifteen minutes every hour and eleven hours at night.
He says you could argue we're just transferring the pollution from the streets to the power station.
That's true, but at least once it's there it's easy to clean up.
While the green lobby is delighted at the introduction of electric buses — there are still reservations:
He says they could have used more forward-looking technology.
This is milk float technology — it could have been more innovative.
The year's trial run begins on November the first and the service will be free to rail-users.
If the electric buses prove popular the county council says it hopes that all buses running in the city centre will be electric by the turn of the century.
A glider pilot is trying to popularise a new aerial sport by taking people for free rides.
He's trying to show that the glider can be far more than the gentle flying machines they seem from the ground.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Reporting
PETER MALLINSON/Glider Pilot
Voice over
So you thought gliding was a pleasant way of spending leisure time away from the cares and woes down on the ground.
Think again!
They may not have engines but today's gliders are capable of some astonishing feats in the right hands…like those of ace aerobatic glider pilot Peter Mallinson.
Male speaker
This is very good for a two seater glider.
We can do flick manouvres, spinning related manouvres, inverted flying, and so on.
But we can't do inverted loops or high negative G manouvres
Voice over
He's flying a two seater from his base at Nympsfield on the edge of the Cotswolds in Gloucestershire.
A civil servant by day he has given himself a mission: to show the rest of the world just what can be done in a glider.
So he's taking people up on regular flights over the Gloucestershire countryside.
Male speaker
you get used to it.
Ienjoy taking people up who have never done anything like it before.
It's exhilarating seeing the smiles on their faces when they come down
Voice over
The view from the back seat so far has been quite encouraging.
Male speaker
It was tremendous.
Your mind and body feel great sensations and it happens so quickly.
Voice over
The acrobatics need a great deal of skill but anyone fancying a ride needn't worry if they have a weak stomach, they'll probably leave that behind after the first manouvre anyway.
Ten new age travellers who bought a plot of land to live on have been visited by the councillors who'll decide whether they can stay.
The travellers paid eighteen thousand pounds for the site and had hoped to settle down and send their children to local schools.
But they'd reckoned without planning laws, and may have to move.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Tidenham Chase
KIZ/Land Owner
Cllr FRANK WILLIAMS/Forest of Dean District Council
Voice over
Councillors from the Forest of Dean came to visit the site at Tidenham Chase, before deciding whether or not to allow the travellers to stay there.
The travellers bought the two acre site six months ago.
At eighteen thousand pounds it cost them their combined life savings.
But with toilets, a telephone and electricity it seemed the ideal place to settle down.
Now though the Forest of Dean District Council has told them that although they own the land, they haven't got planning permission to live there.
The travellers have now applied for retrospective planning permission.
But planning officials say the site isn't suitable for residential use.
They think it would have too great an impact on the rural environment and they've recommended that the application be turned down.
It's now for the councillors to decide.
A final decision about the site will be made at a council meeting next month.
The travellers will then find out if they've got to get on the move again.
An elderly man's died and a woman is critically ill in hospital after a house fire in Worcestershire.
LOWER SAPEY/Worcestershire
Neighbours found the couple at their home in Lower Sapey, near Great Malvern.
The fire was already out.
The cause isn't known.
The undercover soldiers of the S-A-S have been singled out for their bravery in the Gulf War.
HEREFORD
The S-A-S, which is based at Hereford, is the only regiment in the British Army to receive the’ Western Iraq’battle honour, which it can now display on its colours.
During the Gulf War, the S-A-S went behind enemy lines to destroy Iraqi scud missile sites.
Women Deacons in the Diocese of Oxford are to be the first in the country to be ordained as priests.
If the bill allowing the ordination of women is passed in Parliament, six ceremonies will be held in the Diocese next April.
For some members of the Church of England it'll be the fulfillment of years of campaigning, for others it's the end of the road.
JESSICA FOWLE/Charlton on Otmoor
Canon JUDITH MOUNT/Charlton on Otmoor Parish
11 November 1992
Father MARTIN FLATMAN/Cowley Vicar
Voice over
As a Deacon Judith Mount can lead prayers, preach and preside over baptisms, weddings and funerals at the village church in Charlton on Otmoor in Oxfordshire.
But she can't bless the communion wine and wafers because only a priest can do that and at present women can't be ordained as priests.
Following the General Synod decision last November to allow the ordination of women, all that is to change.
If the measure gets the go-ahead in a free Parliamentary vote, Judith hopes she will be one of around seventy women Deacons from Oxford to be ordained in a series of six ceremonies.
Judith's mixed feelings about the occasion are shared by Father Martin Flatman who is giving up his position as a vicar in Oxford in protest at the move.
He's hoping to enter the Roman Catholic church.
The Oxford ordination ceremonies have been booked for April the sixteenth and seventeenth of next year although the Diocese stresses there's been no race to be first, they've merely found themselves at the head of the queue.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The decision was made after councillors watched a video of a fox being mauled by a terrier that had been sent into a flooded drain to catch it.
The man who led the campaign for the ban says such barbaric activities had to be stopped.
CHRIS MOORE/Devizes
DAVID GLAHOLM/Labour County Councillor
Anti-Hunt Video
JOHN ROBINS/Conservative
PAUL SAMPLE/Liberal Democrat
Wiltshire County Councillors arrived to be met by three groups of protestors waving placards.
The anti-hunt lobby, likening the pastime to murder…the pro-hunt supporters demanding the freedom to deal with vermin…and tenant farmers who rent their land from the council and want to make their own decision about any ban.
The man who'd led the fight to ban hunting since the Tories lost control of Wiltshire had the scent of victory.
But he was almost drowned out.
Male speaker
These people do themselves and their cause no good by this sort of disgraceful behaviour.
It shows them up for what they really are, and only strengthens my resolve.
Voice over
Before the vote, councillors had seen this video by the League Against Cruel Sports.
It shows hunt followers sending in a terrier to catch a fox that had taken refuge in a drain.
The hunt involved admitted it was in the wrong.
In the chamber, there was passionate debate on the banning motion.
Male speaker
As a farmer, I know that the restrictions in this motion are impractical and impossible.
Male speaker
If anybody thinks that foxhunting plays any real part in controlling the fox problem, they are mistaken.
Voice over
But the vote, 43 to 24 in favour of a ban was never really in doubt.
Male speaker
It's a step towards civilisation.
Male speaker
Rubbish, it's a step backwards.
We're all suppoosed to be free in this country
Male speaker
It means the tenant farmer's right to decide what goes off on his land has been denied him.
Voice over
The ban covers more than eleven thousand acres of council land.
Famous hunts such as the Beaufort, Avon Vale and Tedworth will be affected.
The Wiltshire decision means that 28 out of 47 counties in England and Wales have outlawed hunting with hounds.
Hereford and Worcester has already voted for a similar ban, Northamptonshire's decision only has to go to the full council, and Gloucestershire votes next week.
A court's heard how a gang of armed robbers tried to kill a police inspector by opening fire with shotguns during a high-speed chase.
One shot shattered a police car windscreen.
The prosecution says it was deliberately aimed at the inspector's head.
Two men deny attempted murder.
6 January 1993 SANDFORD Oxfordshire
GARETH FURBY Reading Crown Court
Voice over
The case follows a police raid in January on a caravan site at Sandford near Oxford.
The two defendants, Matthew Loveridge, who's 19, and Frank Smith, who's 25, were arrested here, about 30 miles from the scene of an alleged robbery the day before at a sub-post office in Berkshire.
The court heard there were four men in the gang, all wearing balaclava helmets and armed with two sawn-off shotguns.
They threatened the post mistress, and stole more than two and a half thousand pounds.
They were then involved in a high-speed chase.
and allegedly opened fire several times on pursuing police cars.
A sergeant's car was hit, and two shots were fired at an inspectors vehicle.
Prosector Nicholas Browne told Reading Crown Court:
The court heard the gang hijacked several cars to try to shakle off police.
Drivers were ordered out at gunpoint.
They even crashed a getaway vehicle into a lorry, but eventually police tlost track of them.
The next day police raided the caravan fsite near Oxford and recovered a shot gun cartridge from the remains of a fire, as well as £410 in cash, fround hidden in a cupboard under a pile of towells.
The prosecution claims this is money from the post office robbery.
But both defendants plead not guilty and the trial continues.
Heseltine wins back some backbench support
The President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine has won some support in his battle to avert a tory backbench rebellion in tomorrow's debate on the coal crisis.
Police investigate death of Petra Kelly
FTSE up 54
The hundred shares index closed up fifty four point eight at two six one seven 
The pound is down at one dollar, sixty one and up at two marks, forty five.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Drivers and motorcyclists are fighting against plans to restsrict their use of the historic Wessex Ridgeway.
The Department of Transport wants to ban them from the ancient route for sixty days a year.
Now the proposals are being considered by a public inquiry.
Nick Clark reports.
DAVID COLEMAN/Countryside Commission
TIM STEVENS/Trail Riders' Fellowship
CRAIG CLINCH/Motorcycle Action Group
The Ridgeway is one of the oldest routes in the world, man and beast has been travelling its 85 mile length from Wiltshire to Buckinghamshire for at least 4,000 years.
But in more recent times, there's been another, many are saying, less-welcome user.
Vehicles are allowed along a 45 mile stretch called the Wessex Ridgeway.
Many off-road drivers see it as a challenge and while a voluntary code of practice has reduced the number of cars and bikes on Sundays and bank holidays, some are still upsetting the walkers and riders.
Today's public inquiry is examining proposals from the Department of Transport and the Countryside Commission to actually make it illegal, to ban vehicles from the Ridgeway on Sundays and bank holidays.
Male speaker
People don't like the noise.
We think it's reasonable to implement a ban for just 60 days a year.
Voice over
But opponents to the plan say the ban would be just unnecessary legislation and an infringement of freedom.
Male speaker
It's taking away part of our national heritage.
Male speaker
There is a small minority who abuse the Ridgeway, but it should be left to us to disuade them.
Voice over
So there'll clearly be some fight before signs like this become a new feature of the Ridgeway.
A result of the inquiry is expected next Spring.
Part of one of the finest book collections in the world is being auctioned tomorrow.
Many of the books are personally inscribed to the collector by the most famous authors of the century.
Simon Garrett reports 
CHRISTIES/London
TOM LAMB/Christies
SIR WILLIAM HAYTER/Former Warden/New College
Voice over
The books of John Sparrow, deceased warden of All Souls College Oxford, will likely fetch quarter of a million pounds at auction.
Warden Sparrow bought his first book at 15; had his own published at 16.
Many volumes are personally inscribed by authors like John Betjeman Evelyn Waugh and Ian Fleming.
But 9 months after Warden Sparrow's death the collection's being sold off.
Sparrow's books bear witness to his movement in the most exclusive circles.
He regularly entertained the great brains and the great names of his time.
At the same time as he was Warden of All Souls, an old schoolfriend took charge next door at New College.
Male speaker
He was very untypical of the modern world who dislike the modern world and make their dislike of the modern world perfectly evident of other people
Voice over
Many of the Sparrow books are outstanding not just for the inscriptions inside them, but for the condition they're in.
Some of the vellum bound books are nearly 400 years old and have been read by successive generations of Oxford students.
Sparrow added his own comments and scraps of paper to theirs.
He was regarded as the classic book lover.
Even in these days of recession Warden Sparrow's books are bound to fetch a 6-figure sum at tomorrow's auction.
A collection of its quality may never be assembled again.
The people who build cars for James Bond have unveiled their latest model at the Motor Show.
Aston Martin, the luxury car company has made two hundred workers redundant in the past two years.
But it hopes that the Vantage, with a price tag of a hundred and fifty thousand pounds, will help safguard jobs in the future.
Chris Moore reports 
NEC/Birmingham
NEWPORT PAGNELL/Buckinghamshire
WALTER HAYES/Chairman/Aston Martin Lagonda
Recession or not; if you've got it, flaunt it.
And this is the car that Aston Martin hope will steer them out of recession.
So for the marque that's become synonymous with Agent 007, who better than former Bond girl, Fiona Fullerton unveil it?
The Vantage is top of the market stuff, costing £150,000 even for the most basic model.
It has a top speed of 186mph and can go from London to Monte Carlo on just one tank of fuel.
Male speaker
It will last forever.
It's a car for life.
Since we started in 1913, only 11,500 have been built and 8,500 are still on the road.
WE still get cars in for service from the 1950's and 1960's.
You have to look at it as an heirloom and a thing of beauty.
Voice over
The recession has hit Aston Martin hard.
It's had to make more than two hundred people redundant at its Newport Pagnell factory.
Critics say it should concentrate on a less exclusive market.
Male speaker
There's no better time to launch a car like this.
The market is going to recover, in fact there are signs of already.
And in the sort of market we work in, there are people around the world who aren't suffering from the recession and do still want to buy fine cars.
Voice over
Like its illustrious predecessors, this Aston Martin, complete with skis, rocket propulsion, missiles was used by Bond in The Living Daylights.
The Vantage is sure to become a classic.
Production starts next year, and 50 have already been ordered, mostly from overseas.
Christopher Gore was a loner, with few friends.
Those who did know him had little idea that he was a dangerous psychotic, who nurtured a deep hatred for his parents.
Richard Barnett reports.
ERIC HESTER/Headmaster
Prof JAMES DAVENPORT/Head Of Maths
EDDIE CONNORS/Former Friend
Voice over
Christopher Gore, a genius tormented by mental illness, who finally lost control and killed his parents.
From the very start, Gore was earmarked as someone who would succeed.
He was educated at St Ambrose boys Catholic school in Altringham, where he succeeded in getting top marks in A-level maths, physics and chemistry.
He says he was a quiet lad who was well behaved.
When his father got a job at Berkley nuclear laboratories, the family moved to Tetbury.
Gore won a place at Bath University.
There, he sailed through a first class honours degree in maths.
He decided to stay on and take a PHD, but his work was cut short by the onset of mental illness.
He says they were very shocked when Gore announced he was leaving because of illness.
After leaving University, Gore became a familiar site around Bath city centre, where he would spend his days entertaining tourists by juggling.
One man who saw his act later became his friend.
He says that he seemed like a nice chap.
He was very shocked when he saw his picture in the papers.
But Gore was a sick man.
Mentally unstable, he would kill his parents in an explosive night of violence.
His sister, Catherine must now rebuild her life.
Gore will spend most of his life in Broadmoor.
Police hunting the so called Fishermead rapist in Milton Keynes have new leads following a nationwide appeal.
They've received hundreds of calls, and now have the names of two men who fit the attacker's description.
Erika Barnes reports.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
DCI GORDON THOMPSON/Thames Valley Police
Chief Supt CAROLINE NICHOLL/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The rapist struck twice last winter at the Fishermead Estate in Milton Keynes.
Once he was armed with a knife.
His victims were just 14 and 19 years old.
Detectives are also investigating 15 other sexual assaults in the city, which are not necessarily connected.
Pictures of the rapist shown in a nationwide appeal produced a huge response.
Male speaker
We've had 400 calls.
A number will obviously be eliminated.
There are a couple of leads.
People we wanted to see before.
Voice over
Police are now using DNA testing, or genetic fingerprinting in an attempt to track down the rapist.
So far 650 blood samples have been taken.
Now a year on from the first rape, police are taking steps to protect women as the nights close in.
Female speaker
We've got extra foot patrols in uniform and plain clothes to prevent an attack and to pick up information.
Voice over
16 officers are still working on the case full time.
They want to hear from anyone who can help track down the rapist.
He's described as white, in his late 20's, of medium height and build, with light coloured hair.
A cheap and simple device which could cut car crime has been launched in a unique partnership between police and private enterprise.
It's hoped the low price of the immobiliser will make it attractive to car owners who've been reluctant to fit expensive alarms.
Wesley Smith reports.
RECONSTRUCTION/BANBURY/Oxfordshire
CRAIG COOK/Reformed Car Thief
SANDRA MONKHOUSE/Car Theft Victim
PHILIP CULLEN/Unipart
PC ROGER HEDGES/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
For Craig Cook, a reformed car thief, this used to be a way of life.
Breaking into and stealing cars at every available opportunity.
His job was made all the more easier by drivers who hadn't bothered to take measures to stop people like him.
Craig Cook, a reformed car thief, explains how easy it is to break into a car.
The statistics show that 64% of cars do not have any form of security device and the chances of having your car stolen is a high as one in 40.
The thief rarely thinks of the consequences for the victim.
Sandra Monkhouse explains how her car was taken almost from under her nose.
Now Thames Valley Police have got together with Unipart of Oxford to design a device which have helped Sandra and many like her, it's an immobiliser.
The red light shows it's in action, the switch is hidden away inside the car.
Unipart's Philip Cullen says the device can be fitted for £35 with an oil service.
The Police say they back the idea.
Craig says he believes this would make a would-be car thief think twice before trying to steal a protected car.
A helpline has been set up to help drivers make sure they never see this happening to their car.
In part two: Wheels not wanted…the fight to keep drivers off the Ridgeway.
Pages from history…the book collection that speaks volumes.
And For Your Eyes Only…a car that Bond would kill for.
Sent to Broadmoor…the academic genius who killed his parents.
Cover up…how he planned to burn the evidence.
And a fatal affliction…the sickness that caused him to kill.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
BRISTOL
SEPTEMBER 1991/TETBURY/Gloucestershire
Voice over
Christopher Gore, the son of a nuclear scientist and himself a brilliant academic, waited patiently to be let in to Bristol Crown Court, where he was to be accused of killing his father and his mother.
Since Dr John Gore, a nuclear scientist and his wife Ruth were found at their home at Tetbury in Gloucestershire in September last year, axed to death, their son Christopher has been held at Broadmoor Hospital.
He was sent back there, without limit of time, when the judge heard he'd be dangerous, particularly to women, for many years to come.
The prosecution said it was a tragic case; a brilliant academic who'd killed his quiet, middle-aged parents, for whom he'd developed a consuming and irrational hatred.
After proving himself best mathematician at Bath University, Gore had developed behavioural problems.
He had fantasies about harming and killing people.
He blamed his parents for being over-ambitious on his behalf; a claim denied, said the prosecution, by his sister, who would have talked of the love and support of their parents.
It was his sister who found the bodies.
Gore went to stay with his parents at Tetebury one weekend in September last year.
From the garage he took a felling axe with a three foot handle and shattered his parents' skulls.
He stabbed them many times after they were dead.
Then he watched a video and tried to set fire to the house before going back to Bath.
The next day he gave himself up to police.
The court heard that 5 psychiatric reports had been prepared at Broadmoor; Gore was schizoid, suffering from a psychopathic disorder, requiring treatment for many years to come.
One psychiatrist told the court that after teartment Gore would have to prove himself normal for years before anyone would recommend his release.
Christopher Gore's attack on his parents was frenzied and brutal.
By contrast, his attempts to cover-up his crime were cool and calculated.
But as Ken Goodwin reports, his scheme to destroy the evidence didn't go according to plan.
RECONSTRUCTION
RECONSTRUCTION
Det Ch Supt MALCOLM HART
GRAHAM FRANCIS/Taxi Driver
Voice over
On the Friday before his parents death, Christopher Gore had taken a train from Bath — where he was living — to Chippenham station.
There he'd been picked up by his mother Ruth.
She gave him a lift back to their cottage in Tetbury.
It was 5 a.m.
Sunday morning.
The cottage was in darkness.
In an interview, Christopher Gore told detectives what happened next.
He says Gore woke up with urge to kill his parents.
He went to garage, took out axe, took out knife, went upstairs and killed them both.
Gore then devised a plan to burn down the house, destroying any forensic evidence he might have left behind.
He connected a timeswitch to an electric fire.
He draped inflamable material over it and calibrated the switch to come on later in the day.
Then he calmly washed his clothes and had a bath.
At about 10.45 a.m. on Sunday morning, he called a taxi.
He says Gore chatted to him, he seemed very normal.
But Gore's meticulous planning was starting to crumble.
The timeswitch he'd primed earlier had flipped on, switching on the electric fire and igniting the materials he placed over it.
But as the fire began to smoulder, Gore's sister Catherine paid an unexpected visit to her parents cottage.
It was she who made the discovery and called the emergency services.
The fire was put out before it could take hold and before vital fingerprint evidence left by Gore, was destroyed.
A murder hunt was about to begin.
Gore had gone to a house in Bath to stay the night with friends.
They saw a news item about the deaths on television and advised Gore to give himself up to police.
On Monday afternoon at 1.55 p.m. he walked into Bath police station and told the Desk Sergeant.
’ I gather you want me for 2 deaths and a fire.’
Detectives brought Gore back to Gloucestershire for questioning.
They soon realised they were dealing with a brilliant, but disturbed mind.
He says Gore treated the whole thing like a game of chess.
In conversations with detectives Gore revealed a fascination for the Yorkshire ripper.
He also boasted that he had committed other serious crimes.
Police questioned him about 2 unsolved murders; 43 year old Anorexic Carmel Gamble was found bludgeoned to death in her cottage in Stroud in 1989.
The building had been set alight by the killer.
Police never traced a scruffy looking man seen with her the day before she died.
Teenager, Melanie Road was found stabbed and raped just yards from her home in Bath in 1984.
At that time, Gore was still a first year at Bath University.
It was noted that both women were killed on the night of a full moon, as were Gore's parents.
He says Gore was questioned about 2 murders — they both remain unsolved.
Christopher Gore has all but destroyed his family.
To friends, he was a quiet genius; unbeknown to them, his personality would eventually be siezed in the grip of mental illness — with devastating effects.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
WANBOROUGH/Wiltshire
SWINDON/Wiltshire
JEFFERY GADD/Father
FREYDIS SHARLAND/Eating Disorders Association
Voice over
Leonie Gadd was 20 when she died…she literally starved to death.
Her body was found in bed by her step mother at the house she shared with her boyfriend in Wanborough near Swindon.
Her father Jeffery attended the inquest in Swindon to hear how his daughter had not eaten…and resorted to self-induced vomiting when she did.
He said his daughter wanted to be cured.
The inquest heard that Leonie had been seen regularly by her GP and had been referred for psychiatric treatment.
A Harley Street doctor had recommended in-patient care but this would have cost the family too much.
She was referred to another annorexia specialist in London but she died before she could receive any treatment.
Leonie's GP Dr Jonathon Rayner saw her a week before she died in July and told the inquest there was no indication her condition was life-threatening.
In fact a month before her death, Leonie was treated at the Princess Margaret Hospital in Swindon…but that was for a kidny infection, not the psychiatric treatment she needed for her annorexia nervosa…and she was released after four days.
Wiltshire Coroner John Elgar recorded a verdict of death by natural causes, saying there was no reason to suggest there'd been a lack of care or self-neglect.
But her father wants treatment for annorexia sufferers to be improved.
His calls are supported by counsellors who say more needs to be done.
Leonie father's Jeffery is considering beginning a campaign to help prevent the tragedy which befell his daughter…the best way he says of honouring her memory.
A mother is appealing to the Government to help her get her sons back from her estranged husband in Libya.
She says he tricked the boys into going to Libya.
Now the authorities say she has little chance of getting them back.
Clare Lafferty reports.
LECKHAMPTON/Gloucestershire
JULIE EL-AJNAF/Mother
LIBYA
LUCY JAFFE/REUNITE
Voice over
LIBYAN
Julie El-Ajnaf is relieved to be at home in Leckhampton with her daughter Emel.
But she'll never be happy until her two young sons are there aswell.
Six year old Jalal and Nassir, who's eight are in Libya with their father Farash.
Fourteen months ago the family left Gloucestershire to visit Farash's home country.
It was supposed to be just a four week holiday.
But while they were there Farash dropped a bombshell.
Julie spent a year in Libya.
But it was an unhappy period.
In September Julie decided she could stand it no longer and returned home.
She brought Emel, but her husband wouldn't let her bring the boys.
The only contact she has with them now is on the phone.
Male speaker
Yes I keep asking Daddy but he says no way.
Voice over
Julie has written to the Government asking for help.
But they say they can do nothing.
Organisations dealing with problems like Julie's say the chances of getting the children back are slim.
Despite the bad news Julie says she'll continue to fight for the sons she's lost.
Police have launched a new campaign to crackdown on motorists who're killing people by driving too fast.
Code-named’ Operation Casino’it's targeting drivers in rural areas.
For a limited period they're being offered an alternative to prosecution…it's a short, sharp lesson on the dangers of speeding.
Gareth Furby reports.
ENSTONE/Oxfordshire
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT VIDEO
SAMMY KYME/Victim
CELIA CROOK/Driver
CHRISTINE BOYLAND/Lollipop Lady
ROY NELMES/Speeding Motorist
Voice over
The road through this Oxfordshire village has claimed 8 lives over the past 5 years.
In most cases excessive speed was too blame.
But some motorists still aren't getting the message.
Now police are out to give them a short, sharp lesson, as an alternative to prosecution.
In a nearby village hall drivers are lectured on the dangers of speeding and forced to watch a graphic video.
He says it was graphic and showed the effect speed has.
This 9 year old is one of the lucky ones.
She was knocked down just last week and only survived because the car wasn't breaking the 30 mph limit.
She says she just stepped onto the road after looking both ways.
She says she was only driving at about 25 mph.
If it had been any faster, the child would have been killed.
The children from Enstone village school helped the police launch the new campaign, even writing new lyrics for a favourite tune.
They sing:’ We all make mistakes.
Run out in the road.
Slow down and follow the highway code.’
The school's lollipop lady says some drivers have a lot to learn.
She says one was driving at about 70 mph and could have hit her.
But back at the police lecture room, the message seemed to be getting through.
He says it has had a big impact.
The campaign will run for a fortnight and will target the main roads through 11 villages.
A glazier is facing the biggest challenge of his life — replacing thousands of windows shattered during the civil war in Croatia.
Sixteen tons of glass have been donated by a British firm for the project.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
SHAUN OVERTHROW/Glazier
BOB LINHAM/Organizer
Voice over
The shattered towns and cities of Croatia, bombarded and battered by months of shelling in the civil war.
But for the people of the former Yugoslavia life still goes on.
Osyak high school has taken several direct hits — but the children still need to be taught, and take their lessons in draughty windowless classrooms.
They can't carry out repairs — there's simply no glass available.
Step foreward Shaun Overthrow.
He's a Gloucestershire glazier raring to work.
He'll be helping to escourt sixteen tons of glass to the school and will also carry out repairs.
He says that it shouldn't be to difficult, just time consuming.
The trip has been organised by electrician Bob Linham, who managed to persuade a British firm, which doesn't want to be named, to donate the glass.
He says that the kids in school sit and freeze, because it's so cold.
But isn't there a risk that all the hard work will be for nothing?
One shell landing nearby and every window in the school could be blown out again.
he says that when an IRA bomb goes off people repair damage afterwards.
You don't just give up.
The work will take about two weeks to complete — and for children at Osyak school, it may mean a draught free winter.
Police are warning elderly people to be on their guard against a bogus council worker who has been calling at homes in the Forest of Dean.
So far nothing has been taken, but the woman has been asking detailed questions about security and the layout of the houses.
Meanwhile police have launched a new campaign to reduce the number of distraction burglaries, which increased by fifteen percent last year.
They're staging a play aimed at teaching the elderly how to deal with conmen and women.
Liz Hannam reports.
BIERTON/Aylesbury/Buckinghamshire
BERTHA ELLIS/Crime Victim
Det Insp PETER JONES/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Bertha Ellis is 96.
She'd never experienced crime until 6 weeks ago when a young woman kept her talking in the garden while her accomplice rifled her home.
They stole £50.
Female speaker
I just felt dreadful.
I was just glad he took money and not possessions, because possessions can't be replaced.
Voice over
It was money that belonged to the Sunday School where Bertha is treasurer.
She paid them back out of her pension money.
She's one of 27 pensioners living in the Aylesbury area who've been victims of distraction burglaries in the past year.
That's one every 11 days and already up 15% on the whole of last year.
Male speaker
It's the intrusion.
The fact that a person you trusted has taken advantage and gone into your home uninvited.
Voice over
To try to combat this the police have organised an educational play warning of the dangers of talking to strangers.
Female speaker
Have you any I.D.
Male speaker
I left it in the car.
Female speaker
That's no good.
Voice over
300 elderly people were in the audience.
They were told never to open the door to someone they didn't know.
Male speaker
The old jumble sale routine.
I go to the front door and sweet talk her while you go round the back, into the kitchen and get the money inside the spare teapot.
Male speaker
Don't take people on trust.
Ask for identification.
If in doubt keep them out.
Voice over
With Christmas approaching its a peak time for burglaries.
Thames Valley police are hoping their action will make it an unhappy time for thieves.
In part two: On the Clinton trail…could an Oxford road lead to the Whitehouse.
Just the tonic…the hospital helping women patients help themselves.
And an absolute picture…the folly copied from an eighteenth century painting.
Nurses say fewer women would need hospital treatment if they were better informed about their bodies.
And women who are admitted for surgery respond better when they're given more information.
At one hospital staff have been taking extra steps to make sure patients know what choices they have, and they say the results are dramatic.
Gargy Patel reports.
OXFORD
GILLIS TATE/Patient
JACKIE HOURAHANE/Senior Sister
WENDY HILLAN/Staff Nurse
RUTH GLYNN/Patient
Voice over
The day before she's due to leave hospital, Gillis Tate talks to her nurse about the care she'll need at home.
A week ago she had a hysterectomy; a major operation that will take weeks, maybe months, to recover from.
In a bed across the ward, Ruth Glynn is being pampered by the hospital's beautician.
Ruth's had 5 operations in 3 years.
The latest was major abdominal surgery.
Both women have been part of the Churchill's special care system, where treatment is invidually tailored to the patient.
Staff give women as much information as possible.
For those like Gillis, it makes all the difference.
The gynaecological unit here has developed an information network, which they say should be available to all women.
The health world is fast changing, they say.
Helping women to help themselves has very positive results.
On the wards, day to day care means preparing patients as well as they can for surgery and beyond.
By also promoting treatment and support outside the hospital, the unit aims to reach more women.
Better information on cervical and breast screening, for example.
Conditions like the menopause where, in the past, women were told it was just a phase they were going through.
Those who benefit from the help say it's invaluable.
The unit plans to produce a health information booklet for all women in the region.
And being better informed they say, will help those like Gillis to a better recovery.
The finishing touches are being put to a folly inspired by a 250 year old painting.
It replaces the original crescent shaped building which disappeared in Georgian times.
Richard Barnett reports:
PAINSWICK Gloucestershire
RICHARD FALCONER Architect
Lord DICKENSON Trustee
Voice over
For the first time in 2 and a half centuries, the Rococo Garden at Painswick is dominated by a Gothic screen called an exedra.
The original building disappeared in the Georgian era.
And the only reason historians even know the exedra existed, is it appears in a painting of the gardens dating from 1748.
For the architect, working from a tiny feature in a painting posed quite a problem.
Male speaker
It was a case of using a magnifying glass and working it out from there.We asked experts for advice, but they didn't agree.
Voice over
Now the finishing touches are being put to the 20ft high screen, which has cost £35,000 to build.
The original exedra was probably made of wood and plaster, and is unlikely to have lasted more than 25 years.
The new screen is built onto a steel frame so it should survive considerably longer.
Male speaker
The Rococo garden was to enjoy and have fun in.
The exedra is an important feature.
Voice over
The exedra is one of the last of the Rococo garden's major features to be completed.
The Georgian eagle house has already been restored and work is continuing on reconstructing the 250 year old vegetable garden.
The Painswick garden is the finest example of its kind in Britain.
And the exedra has given the landscape an added Georgian elegance.
Leslie Crowther showing signs of improvement
FTSE up 28
The hundred shares index closed up twenty eight point seven at two six four five point seven 
The pound is down at one dollar, sixty one and down at two marks, forty three.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
In two weeks time, the American people will elect their next president.
It's been a tough and bruising campaign, with the backgrounds of both candidates coming under intense scrutiny.
The Republicans have placed great emphasis on their claims that the Democrat frontrunner Bill Clinton was guilty of anti American behaviour while he was a student in England.
JESSE MALKIN/Rhodes Scholar
Prof BYRON SHAFER/Oxford Professor of/American Govt
Dr TIM WOODS/Fellow Student
Voice over
The Spires and Shires tour company has added a new landmark to its sightseeing tour of Oxford.
It's not a college, or even a church, but a Victorian town house, really rather unremarkable but for the fact that the man tipped to become the next American President used to live there.
Bill Clinton spent 2 years at Oxford from 1968 to 1970.
He was 22 when he arrived.
A graduate of Georgetown University, he'd won a coveted Rhodes Scholarship to study for a BPhil in Politics at University College.
One of today's Rhodes Scholars is Jesse Malkin from California.
He's closely studied Clinton's Oxford career, writing to all his classmates now living in the States.
Ever since March, when Clinton recalled smoking marijuana, he's been unconvinced by the candidate's own version of events.
Dodging the draft for the Vietnam War is one of the more serious accusations levelled at Clinton about his Oxford days.
He'd already registered as available for action, back home in Arkansas, but after a year in England, he wrote a letter to his local officer training corps explaining that he didn't want to fight after all.
Perhaps spotting a chink in Clinton's armour, the Republicans have further accused him of stirring up feeling against the war.
Clinton's known to have attended at least one anti-war protest and one fellow student clearly remembers his opposition to America's involvement in Vietnam.
But even some ofthe President's closest supporters reckon the scandal-mongers have gone too far by trying to link Clinton the Rhodes Scholar with the Soviet secret services.
It's claimed he made contact with the KGB on a vacation trip to Moscow during his second year at Oxford; an argument that certainly doesn't wash with Jesse Malkin.
For its part the Oxford establishment has mainatined a stony silence on Bill Clinton.
University College refused to let us film.
The University itself issued just a simple statement, mentioning that he was an amiable student, who divided his spare time between playing rugby and the saxophone — a passion of Clinton's to this day.
But why should Oxford be so coy about a man who may turn out to be one of its most distinguished alumni?
The chances are that Oxford WILL have to roll out the red carpet the next time Mr Clinton comes to town.
The polls put him well ahead of George Bush, with the Independent Ross Perot in third place.
For Oxford's American contingent, it's all wrapped up.
Male speaker
People know what Bush will give them if he gets re-elected.
They've seen it before and they don't like it.
Voice over
Bill Clinton never did get his Oxford degree.
In the summer of 1970, he took a place at Yale Law School rather than return to England to sit his exams.
He went on to become America's youngest state governor at 32.
In just 2 weeks time, we'll know whether he'll become one of its youngest Presidents; whether Leckford Road really CAN lead to the White House.
Doctors and scientists from thirty countries are joining forces to fight one of the world's deadliest diseases…meningitis.
It can kill some babies and children within hours.
Others can be left badly brain damaged.
But the battle for a cure really began in the front room of a private house seven years ago.
TIM HURST/Gloucestershire
August 1986/STROUD/Gloucestershire
LIZ BRETT/Head of Awareness
POLLY JORES/Matthew's Mother
Amateur Video
Dr DICK MAYON-WHITE/Oxford Health Physician
JANE WELLS/Trust Founder Member
Voice over
Matthew Jores, from Gloucestershire, is six years old.
He was left blind and deaf four years ago when he caught meningitis, diagnosed too late to be treated.
In 1986, Gloucestershire was on the edge of panic, with 14 times the national average for the disease, and parents in Stroud, at the centre of an apparent epidemic, gathered to demand Government action.
From such protests, and meetings in family homes, grew the Stroud based Menigitis Trust, which is organising the first international conference, being held in Britain next week, aimed at wiping out the disease.
Meningitis attacks the brain.
Some, especially adults, have a natural immunity.
In babies and young children, the symptoms can be confused with a heavy cold.
Work has been going on in Oxford, partly funded by the Trust, to understand more about meningitis, why and how it can kill; exactly what the founders in Stroud wanted in the panicky days of 1986.
Now the Meningitis Trust has a turnover approaching a million pounds a year, a full-time staff of 16, and trials begin in Gloucestershire next year on additional vaccines.
No-one will ever know how many lives have been saved, how many children have made a full recovery since their work began just seven years ago.
A hospital has opened a new soft play centre to help children with behavioural problems and adults with physical and learning difficulties.
It's like an adventure playground but everything in it is padded with foam to provide a safe learning environment.
JESSICA FOWLE/Aylesbury
DAWN WALTON/Mother
JUDY WILLIAMS/Mother
FIONA MATTHEWS/Learning Disabilities Services
Voice over
Exploring unfamiliar surroundings, learning to relate to other children, letting off steam or just a bit of rough and tumble.
Everything in this brightly coloured room is foam-padded, so even the most energetic and fearless are safe.
This is the new soft play centre at the Manor House hospital in Aylesbury.
For some children it's a treat to make a visit to hospital less daunting.
Others have behavioural problems and need to let off steam in a safe and controlled setting.
She says: They can just run riot, they can enjoy themselves without being told off.
It's just fun.
I think he's going to be very sleepy at the end of the day.
Female speaker
It's an added bonus, the icing on the cake.
I didn't dream it would be as good as this.
Voice over
The noise level in the room is evidence that the children are having a good time but they don't like being asked silly questions.
Female speaker
I like the thing over there.
Female speaker
The slides's my favourite.
Female speaker
I like the slide because it's good.
Voice over
The centre is the result of three and a half years of hard fundraising work by local people.
It cost eighty thousand pounds.
Because of careful planning and design the room will be used not only by children but by adults with learning disabilities.
Female speaker
They'll be able to use the facilities to gain confidence in sitting, standing, movement and interacting with others.
We're thrilled to have it.
Voice over
A day at the centre's fun for everyone but most important are the results which prove that play therapy is no soft option.
Still to come on Central News, the fruits of mass production.
Can farmers cut spraying and still make a living?
Plus, Maggie's back!
The Thatcher roadshow comes to town.
Welcome back: Farmers are being urged to reduce their use of chemicals and work with nature to combat weeds and pests.
Wesley Smith
A new scheme, known as LEAF, aims to show landowners that they CAN protect wildlife and STILL farm profitably.
RICHARD BARNETT/Glewstone
ANDREW JACKSON/Farmer
CAROLINE DRUMMOND/LEAF
Voice over
The Man Of Ross Farm in Herefordshire is unashamedly commercial…its orchards produce 2,500 tons of apples and pears a year.
But here profitable fruit production is geared to working with nature.
For instance Andrew Jackson traps pest species of moth to monitor the population.
They are only sprayed when numbers become a problem.
He encourages natural predators to control pests…like this cannibal mite which preys on the Red Spider mite…an enemy of fruit crops.
Special wildlife corridors of trees and shrubs have been planted between the orchards as a refuge for beneficial insects.
And Andrew only uses pesticides and herbicides when there's no alternative.Even then he uses minimum concentrations of chemical to avoid residues on the fruit or in the soil:
Male speaker
It's about using biological controls and chemicals in moderation so there's no risk to consumers.
Voice over
The farm sets a good example in other ways too…branches pruned from the trees are shredded so the goodness goes back into the soil.
Other farmers still burn the prunings.
And nine ponds have been created to encourage wildlife.
Man Of Ross has just been chosen as a demonstration farm by an organization called LEAF…
Linking Environment and Farming.
It will be used to show other farmers what can be done:
Female speaker
Farmers have to use chemicals in moderation to produce the sort of fruit of the quality people want.
Voice over
Meanwhile Andrew has found that farming sympathetically offers other benefits too…the 70 beehives around the farm which help pollinate the fruit blossom also provide some delicious honey.
Football, and speculation is mounting that Oxford United's new manager could soon be leaving the club just six weeks after he was appointed.
Denis Smith would be first choice to return to his old club of Stoke City, if their manager
Lou Macari moves to Celtic as expected.
Macari looks set to take over at Parkhead by the end of the week.
Oxford are still struggling near the bottom of Division one.
Last night they drew nil, nil at Nottingham Forest.
KATE GARRAWAY/Reporting
After their six one thrashing by Southend at the weekend and seven straight away defeats, Oxford were out to proove something.
Despite pressure from Forest Oxford showed they weren't going to crack.
If Forest thought they were on their way up the table after beating Tranmere on Saturday that hope was frustrated.
Whitehead's save kept his team in the game.
Forest's last chance of the match fell to Steve Stone.
The final score Oxford nil, Forest nil.
The Margaret Thatcher roadshow rolled into town today to a rapturous reception.
Lady Thatcher's promoting sales of her new book.
In just a few days, more than three hundred thousand copies have been sold.
It seems the Lady's fans just can't get enough of her.
GARETH FURBY Cheltenham Town Hall
SIR DENIS THATCHER
DESMOND JEWITT Thatcher Supporter
ADRIAN BOURNE Harper Collins UK
Voice over
The queues were long.
But for the converted it was worth the wait.
A signature in the Lady's book.
A possession to be treasured and for some a reminder of better times.
They say she should be running the country.
It's a shame she's not in charge now.
Cheltenham's Tory faithful welcomed the Lady and she returned the compliment.
She says she likes Cheltenham, she's visited it several times.
But the problem is Cheltenham no longer likes the Conservatives enough.
The consitituency returned a Liberal Democrat MP at the last election.
But the Lady's other half, who was also signing that book today, doesn't think it's much to get worked up about.
He says it'll go back to the Conservatives at the next election.
Some of the faithful have a theory.
If Lady Thatcher was still Prime Minister, then Cheltenham would still be Conservative.
He says they would still hold all the Liberal Deomcrat strongholds in the South.
So far Lady Thatcher has signed thousands of copies of the book.
But with a cover price of twenty five pounds a copy, it's well paid work.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Recovery faltering
FTSE up 32
The hundred shares index closed up thirty two points at thirty one eighty eight point three 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty eight and up at two marks, forty six.
RUNS=0:10
In Central News tonight.
Crisis this Christmas.
Hostels warn that homeless could freeze to death.
Bottomley wields the axe.
Jobs will go in NHS shake-up.
And come and get it.
Is this YOUR stolen property?
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The recent cold weather means most hostels are full.
An emergency appeal for blankets has been issued, but with winter just around the corner, they're already predicting a crisis this Christmas.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
PHIL SMITH/Hostel Manager
JOHN HICKMAN/Chief Housing Officer
CHER SAWYER/Thamesdown Housing Link
Voice over
Farnsby House in Swindon provides shelter for around 20 homeless men.
But with night-time temperatures down to minus 6 at times this month, it's increasingly having to turn people away.
Now it's in urgent need of blankets to lend to those forced to sleep rough.
Stevie's one of the lucky ones.
The hostel took him in and then offered him a room in a shared house.
But when he first arrived in Swindon he slept in a car park.
A recent report by Thamesdown Borough Council suggested there were at least 1800 homeless people in Swindon.
All are agreed — the situation's showing no signs of improvement.
Cher Sawyer's employed by Thamesdown Housing Link to help people like Stevie get back on their feet.
At the moment, her organisation only looks after men, but more and more women — some with children — are asking for help.
In the long term, it's hoped that Swindon will one day have a shelter specifically for homeless women.
Meanwhile, with weather experts predicting a rather colder winter than last year, the priority is blankets — to prevent those turned away from Farnsby House and other hostels from dying on the streets.
A hundred and ninety jobs in the health service are under threat tonight from a management shake-up.
Health Secretary Virgina Bottomley has told the Commons she wants to merge several regional health authorities.
Staff in the regions affected say they're worried for their futures.
ABI DONALD/Oxford
BARBARA STOCKING/Oxford Regional Health Authority
VIRGINIA BOTTOMLEY MP/Health Secretary
PENNY THEWLIS/Community Health Council
Voice over
In the Commons today The health Secretary Virginia Bottomley announced a shake up in the way health care is managed.
For staff at oxford regional health authority it means their jobs are in jeopardy.
At the moment there are 14 regional authorities in England, overseeing and co-ordinating health care, today it was announced that many of these will be merged leaving just 8.
Oxford regional health Authority is to merge with east Anglia, a hundred and ninety people work at the Oxford Headquarters, they don't know if they'll keeping their jobs.
The Government is changing the way it manages health care, at the moment the Regional health Authorities oversee the work done by the smaller district health Authorities.
The Government's intention in the long term is to scrap Regional Authorities completely.
Although the local health watchdog, the community health council is welcoming a reduction in bureaucracy, it does have it's reservations about merging the health authorities.
The health Authorities will be merged next year, by 1996 the government hopes to have abolished them.
Staff at Oxford Regional health Authority will now have to wait and see how many of them are to keep their jobs.
Police are appealing for the owners of hundreds of stolen items to come forward and claim their property.
It follows an operation involving seven police forces.
Eighteen people have been charged, but the haul remains unidentified.
KIM BARNES/Gloucestershire
Chief Insp BOB PRESTON/Gloucestershire Police
Sgt JAN BLOMFIELD/Properties Officer
Voice over
Hundreds of thousands of pounds worth of property waiting to be claimed by its owners.
Everything from computers and videos to power tools and antiques.
The haul follows Operation Gauntlet when officers raided sixty four adddresses in Gloucestershire and surrounding counties.
Some of what they found has been reclaimed by its owners but there's plenty left.
He says it never ceases to amaze me what people will steal and what you see here is a total cross section of prpety which people have acquired through dishonest means.
Gloucestershire police worked with colleagues from six other forces to stage the raids in early september.
62 people were arrested…18 have been charged with theft and handling offences.
Police say they smashed a major crime ring.
He says success is judged on the number of people we manage to charge with criminal offences.
So far we've been very successful.
The icing on the cake would be being able to reunite people with property they've had stolen.
Serial numbers are missing from much of the electrical equipoment but police properties officers hope people might recognise their belongings.
He says not everyone knows their serial number but some people do know distinguishing marks on their hi fi.
It's those people we'd appeal to to come forward and help us indentify their items.
With hundreds of items to return police say anyone who wants to inquire about property should ring 0285 641 723.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
1988
1989
Eddie Browning was arrested in June, 1988, soon after the murder of Marie Wilkes from Worcester.
The pregnant housewife was found stabbed and battered after going missing when her car broke down on the M-50 motorway.
Browning was jailed for life but has always protested he was innocent as in this interview with Central News.
Browning lost his last appeal.
But an inquiry was launched into the handling of the case by West Mercia Police after this video tape came to light.
It shows Inspector Peter Clarke under hypnosis -talking about the car he saw parked on the motorway on the day of the murder.
It's alleged he gave a different description in this interview to the one he gave to the trial and the inquiry looked into why the evidence was not disclosed to the jury.
The police have also been investigating why more than a thousand other pieces of information did not appear to have been investigated by West Mercia Police -including the evidence of this nurse.
She says a man tried to abduct her in similar circumstances around the time of the murder.
But the man was not Eddie Browning.
The family of a British nurse who died in a terrorist attack in Egypt are angry at the way they learned of the tragedy.
Sharon Hill, from Gloucester, died when bullets struck the mini bus she was travelling in.
Her family are furious that her name was made public before they'd been told.
Ken Goodwin reports.
FRANK MATTHEWS/Uncle
CORRIE MATTHEWS/Uncle
LOUISE BODEN/Nursing Manager
Voice over
Sharon Hill's trip to Egypt was to be her adventure holiday away from it all, before she got married.
She'd been in Egypt's capital Cairo and, along with seven other tourists, was travelling in a bus from to Assiut, a stronghold of the muslim fundamentalist group.
But her minibus was ambushed near Dayrut and raked with gunfire.
It's thought militant muslim terrorists were responsible.
Sharon suffered stomach injuries and died later in hospital.
At home in Gloucester, her mother and father learnt of their daughters death not from official sources, but from a news bulletin.
He says the family are furious over the way they found out about her death.
Sharon's parents were too shocked to talk about their daughter, but issued a statement through an uncle.
He say she was a fantasic person, with time for everyone.
Sharon worked as an enrolled nurse at Gloucestershire Royal Hospitals Elderly Care Unit, where she was a popular member of staff.
Her colleagues are stunned by news of her death.
She says Sharon was liked by colleagues and patients alike.
The whole staff are deeply shocked by what's happened.
It's the second attack on visitors to Egypt in less than a month, the foreign office says the great majority of tourists experience no problems in Egypt, but adds.
Egyptian authorities are giving the highest priority to protecting visitors, but 100% security cannot be guaranteed.
Commenting on the way Egyptian authorities had released Sharon's name, the spokesman added: We particularly regret the way the news of Sharon's death broke.
We only give out names if we know that relatives and next of kin have been informed.
Sharon had travelled to Egypt alone.
Her boyfriend has been helping comfort her grieving family in Gloucester.
He now faces the agony of receiving a letter she told him on the phone that she'd written the day before she died.
A new video aimed at unravelling the mysteries of the British Parliamentary system has just been released.
Its maker — Central TV's Political Editor Jon Lander — has drawn on years of lobby experience to explain the workings of the home of democracy.
The video's been particularly welcomed by one of the regions newest MPs, who's still baffled by some of the more peculiar aspects of Parliamentary life.
Erika Barnes reports.
ORDER
JON LANDER/Political Editor
DAVID LIDDINGTON MP/Con Aylesbury
Dr CHRIS POND/Public Information Office
BETTY BOOTHROYD/Speaker
TONY BANKS MP/Lab Newham NW
Voice over
Jon Lander says democracy doesn't work unless it's understood.
He hopes the video will play its part in the Parliamentary process.
Gloucester nurse killed on holiday in Egypt
FTSE up 12
The hundred shares index closed up twelve point four at two six five eight point one 
The pound is up at one dollar, sixty two and up at two marks, forty five.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
The organiser of a Kurdish refugee charity who's at the centre of a fraud squad investigation is reported to be carrying out relief work in Turkey.
But she's left a string of debts in this country while thousands of pounds worth of emergency supplies have been left to rot in a warehouse.
Mark Kiff reports.
WORCESTER
HEINO KOPIETZ/Friend
SUSAN HANNAH/Former Landlady
Det Insp MIKE COWLEY/West Mercia Fraud Squad
Voice over
Clothes…medicine…blankets and baby foods form just part of the vital supplies donated to help the Kurdish refugees fleeing persecution after the Gulf War.
But instead of relieving their misery, they're just lying rotting in this Worcester storage centre.
They were donated to the local Kurdish Refugee Association, run by Ruth Hilali.
But she hasn't been in touch with her colleagues for four months.
And the Fraud Squad is investigating the disappearance of a hundred and thirty thousand pounds of the charity's funds, which were withdrawn in cash from the Royal Bank of Scotland.
But now a friend of Mrs Hilali living in London says she's helping coordinate relief work in Turkey.
But in Worcester, Mrs Hilali has left a string of debts…owing sixteen hundred pounds on the house she used to rent.
Her former landlady says she used a different name when taking on the tenancy of the property.
Police officers investigating the case haven't ruled out the possibility that the missing funds have been used to buy supplies for the refugees.
The police investigation into the missing money continues tomorrow with a meeting with the Charity Commissioners…but the supplies donated in good faith by thousands of people are likely to remain rotting until the mystery resolved.
A new drug which could slow down the onset of Aids in people infected with the HIV virus is undergoing trials in America.
The drug's designed to stimulate the body's own defence system to fight the virus.
Simon Garrett reports 
SIMON GARRETT/Oxford
NICHOLAS MEDLEY
Dr PETER LEWIS/British Bio-technology
Voice over
Nicholas Medley is a haemophiliac, infected with HIV 8 years ago through a contaminated blood product.
His hopes of treatment have frequently been raised then dashed.
Male speaker
You're bound to welcome any step forward in research.
Some are better than others, but with the long lead time, it's difficult to get too optimistic.
Voice over
In a laboratory in Oxford they're producing P24 VLP.
It's a protein which mimics the aids virus hopefully stimulating an infected person's natural defences.
It's not a miracle cure, but it's hoped American trials prove it can slow down the onset of Aids.
Male speaker
There's a lot of expertise in Aids research in America and in treatment of patients with Aids and HIV.
We're a bio-technology company and in a sense we're going to the Mecca of bio-technology.
Voice over
The trials of P24 VLP will take 18 months.
It's one of a dozen drugs of its kind currently being researched.
It may delay the onset of Aids, even if only by a small amount.
Male speaker
I've been HIV + since about 1984.
I'm still in the same position without actually having Aids.
One never knows if and when you're going to develop it take weeks months or years or possibly never.
Anything you could take to slow or halt the onset of Aids would be worth knowing about.
Voice over
Even if the results of the trials are dramatic, it'll be at least 2 years before people with the virus could benefit.
An international enquiry into the mysterious death of UN Secretary General Dag Hammarskjold more than thirty years ago has re-opened following evidence from a retired diplomat.
Hammarskjold died in a plane crash, and the former diplomat has discovered that the plane was shot at before it crashed.
Tim Hurst reports.
1961
Prof GEORGE IVAN SMITH/Retired diplomat
Voice over
Dag Hammarskjold's United Nations aircraft crashed in what was then the Belgian Congo 31 years ago, killing everyone on board.
By chance, Hammarskjold's assistant, who went on to become a UN ambassador, wasn't on board.
Today, that former assistant, Professor George Ivan Smith is retired and living at Stroud in Gloucestershire, from where he's researched the truth behind the crash.
His findings include a confession from a man who shot at the UN plane minutes before it crashed.
Hammarskjold was Swedish and Professor Ivan Smith has passed his findings to the Swedish Government, who've re-opened their own enquiry.
Professor Ivan Smith was prompted to make his accident findings public after the recent shooting down of an Italian plane over Bosnia.
One piece of the jigsaw is still missing, an airport manager called Red Williams, working in Congo at the time of the crash.
He later returned to Britain to work at Manchester airport, but 10 years of research by Professor Ivan Smith has drawn a blank about his present whereabouts.
A baroness who was jailed after stripping an elderly relative of all her wealth is insisting she did nothing wrong.
Baroness Susan De Stempel, who's now been released, claims the police forced her to admit she stole a fortune from her senile aunt.
She's been speaking for the first time on camera following her release from prison, exclusively to Central News.
Gareth Furby reports.
Baroness SUSAN DE STEMPEL
TERRY KIRBY/Author—The Trials of the Baroness
Voice over
Baroness Susan De Stempel was jailed in 1990 for a crime described as cruel and ruthless.
She'd stripped her senile aunt Lady Illingworth of a fortune.
But today the Baroness is out of prison and apparently none the worse for her ordeal.
She says other prisoners used to chant’ Baroness,’but eventually they accepted her and she was know as the Duchess.
The Baroness came to public attention in 1987 when her first husband Simon Dale was murdered.
They'd fallen out and the Baroness had left their mansion and moved into modest rented accomodation at Docklow near Hereford.
In September '87 her husband's body was found on his kitchen floor.
He'd been battered to death.
The police thought the Baroness had an obvious motive.
Today she still insists they were wrong.
She says she did want him out of the house, but she didn't want to kill him as a court was going to evict him anyway.
There was no motive.
At Worcester Crown Court the Baroness was cleared of murder.
But by now the police had found out about Lady Margaret Illingworth, a rich aunt who'd been stripped of her fortune after she'd gone senile.
The Baroness had moved her up from London to Docklow.
And within weeks she was in control of Lady Illingworth's possessions, forging her signature a total of sixty seven times.
The police said it was wholesale fraud.
And Lady Illingworth died in poverty in a council run nursing home in Hereford.
But today, even after her conviction and serving her prison sentence, the Baroness insists she did nothing wrong.
She says she didn't bring her to Docklow to take control of her wealth.
She only admitted the offence as part of plea bargining and just because you plead guilty it doesn't mean you did it.
She says the police threatened her.
The police say the the Baroness was dealt with properly according to the law.
And an expert on the case believes she still hasn't come to terms with what she's done.
He says she's obviously still a determined woman, but the facts are she did admit the crime.
Last year the police went back to the Baroness's former home to look in vain for hidden gold bars.
It's was thought Lady Illingworth had gold worth £12milion.
But the Baroness says it was all a rumour.
The Lady never had any gold bars and she never took them.
And today even though she's free, the Baroness is bankrupt and living on state benefit.
The chairman of Oxford United football club has resigned.
Pat McGeough was asked to consider his position after the club was taken over by Bio-mass.
A Directors Board meeting took place last night.
Mr McGeough was Oxford's managing director during the chairmanships of both Robert and Kevin Maxwell.
He's credited with keeping the club afloat after the Maxwell companies collapsed.
Plans for an incinerator for BSE-infected cattle in the Forest of Dean have been approved, despite strong local opposition.
CINDERFORD/Gloucestershire
The district council and a planning inspector refused permission for the incinerator at Cinderford.
But after a two-year battle the Environment Minister has given his approval.
The owner says there is no risk to people's health from burning the diseased carcases.
A child who suffers up to forty fits a day is baffling doctors, who say they don't know what's caused the little girl's brain disorder.
Now her family is setting up a charity to help children facing similar difficulties.
Richard Barnett reports:
HARDWICKE/Gloucestershire
SHARRON MILLS/Mother
Dr MICHAEL WEBB/Paediatrician
TRUDIE ASHLEY/Grandmother
Voice over
Toddler, Francesca Mills plays happily with her toys.
But underneath the joyful exterior there's torment.
For Francesca, who's almost 3, suffers from a brain disorder which triggers off convulsive fits.
At one stage she was having forty fits a day.
Now she's on powerful drugs to suppress the problem…and she only has to cope with a one or two fits each day.
Female speaker
She has difficulty walking and she can't feed herself.
At first it was very difficult, but now we've learned to live from day to day.
Voice over
Doctors are baffled by the cause of Francesca's brain disorder.
Male speaker
Because we don't know what the disorder is, we can't tell the family what the future holds.
Voice over
But the problem cannot be cured.
The family are setting up a charity trust to help other people facing similar difficulties.
For instance parents need their own transport.
Female speaker
Children under 5 aren't eligible for mobility allowance to help the parents with transport.
But because of the fits, Francesca can't travel on public transport.
Voice over
Meanwhile for Francesca, like her mother, it's a case of living from day to day, in the hope medical science may eventually come up with an answer.
A man who was refused a job because of his beard has lost his appeal at an industrial tribunal.
Steve Gilbert claimed unfair discrimination.
But he's been told he should have shaved if he'd wanted the job.
GRAEME BOWD/Southmoor
STEVE GILBERT
UPS Commercial
ANNIE GARTHWAITE/United Parcel Service
Company Video
Voice over
Steve Gilbert has had a beard for 20 years and says he can't imagine life without it.
Last March the former snake importer went for a job as a delivery driver.
But the manager of the United Parcels depot near Witney said beards were against company policy.
He says he laughed at the interviewer.
He said it was good enough for other companies and that he wouldn't shave it off.
That was the end of the interview.
American owned UPS is the world's biggest despatch company and makes much of its clean-cut image.
The management admit they don't hire people with beards and growing one is a sackable offence.
They say its all about giving a good impression.
She says they want the people who meet customers to look good.
She thinks people who are clean-shaven look much smarter.
But it seems it's not the hair which offends, but where you grow it.
The company does not object to moustaches, and in this promotional video almost every UPS worker seems to have one.
As for Mr Gilbert, an industrial tribunal dismissed his claim of unfair discrimination.
If he'd been a Sikh it might have been different.
But the chairman said he'd heard nothing to suggest that an Englishman is required to wear a beard.
Mr Gilbert is not impressed.
He says it's perverse to refuse applicants with beards.
It infringes the rights of the individual.
UPS is now recruiting a hundred staff for a new depot at Abingdon.
Steve Gilbert will not be applying.
Stolen cars worth more than three hundred thousand pounds have been recovered in a raid on a disused airfield.
The police are now trying to recover two more stolen cars which had already been sold for up to thirty thousand pounds.
KATE GARRAWAY/Reporting
CHEDDINGTON/Buckinghamshire
Det Con NEIL GREY/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The names here would make any luxury car dealer proud.
Jaguar, Mercedes, BMW and Landrover.
Their value coming to more than three hundred thousand pounds.
But this isn't a car showroom.
These were all found in a diused airfield at Cheddington in Buckinghamshire and all of them are stolen.
Police discovered them in a raid, after they were tipped off by a buyer who had seen this advert in the motoring magazine Exchange and Mart.
He had gone to the airfield intending to buy a car but when he checked it out he discovered it was stolen.
Police say they were shocked at the range of cars they discovered.
Male speaker
It was staggering really to arrive there and see all these cars.
We then checked over the cars and made an arrest.
Voice over
A man has been charged with theft.
Police believe the site was to be a focus of a stolen car ring.
Many of the vehicles had windows smashed to disguise engraved registration numbers and stop police tracing them.
A porsche and a BMW were sold yesterday for up to thirty thousand pounds.
Police are now anxious to trace the buyers who might not yet realise the cars they are driving are stolen.
Fourteen flats and bedsits for homeless young people are being built in a city centre with the help of Government funds.
But housing officials say while the scheme is welcome, many more projects are needed to keep youngsters off the streets.
TIM HURST/Gloucester
ALEX/Aged 17
JOHN GUMMER MP/Enviroment Secretary
MARTIN SHOTBOLT/Youth Housing Association
SAM/Aged 21
Voice over
Up to 40 young people at a time are homeless in Gloucester.
If they're not lucky enough to find a hostel place, they end up in bed and breakfast accommodation, without the support that a hostel provides.
Government money is helping to convert a former library in the city centre into 14 flats and bedsits, money which the Enviroment Secretary says must be fought for in competition with other cities.
Homelessness amongst the young is a growing problem in the city, and officials want more purpose-built flats and bedsits, so that those in hostels can be moved on, leaving room for newcomers.
The new development, a joint venture between the city, housing associations and the Government, should be open in February next year.
Still to come, a champion of champions.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
KEN GOODWIN/Ross on Wye
JONATHAN MALCOLM/Racial Abuse Victim
SARAH EWARD/Girlfriend
Voice over
When Jonathan Malcolm and his girlfriend met they could have little idea of the trouble which lay in store.
Trouble from racists who objected to a white woman going out with a black man.
It came to a head when the couple were having a night out in Ross on Wye, where they lived.
Youths started to taunt Mr Malcolm.
He says that he was so mad that he got a knife to scare them.
But he ended up in a scuffle and the youth was wounded.
Jonathan ended up in Hereford Crown court charged with stabbing Kevin Ward in the stomach.
Malcolm had been told to expect a prison sentence, but the judge took pity on him, saying that he had been provoked by racial abuse from drunken louts.
He ordered that Jonathan do a hundred hours unpaid community work.
The couple have now left Ross on wye, Jonathans girfriend says that it was only a small minority who were involved in racial abuse but it was so unpleasant they now feel they can't live there any longer.
She says that she was half strangled by a group of youths who taunted her by insulting her boyfriend's colour.
People we spoke to in Ross said that people involved in racial abuse were in the minority.
He says that Ross is a friendly place.
She says that people should be ashamed.
She says that some people are narrow minded.
She says that there's more racism in big cities.
Jonathan and Sarah want to forget about what's happened to them — and are now living in Gloucester.
They say Ross on Wye has too many bad memories for them
A woman who has shivered through two winters and still faced large gas bills has been told the wrong meter was being read.
Susan Tasker-Poland says she's furious that she suffered the cold unnecessarily.
British Gas has admitted she was getting her neighbour's bills.
RICHARD BARNETT/Hereford
SUSAN TASKER-POLAND/Gas User
NIKKI DAVIES/Neighbour
Voice over
For the past two winters, Susan Tasker-Poland has huddled over just one bar of the gas fire in her Hereford council flat.
She's on income support, and has to watch every penny she spends on heating.
What she couldn't understand was the more she shivered…the higher the gas bills.
They culminated in this one for over 94 pounds.
Female speaker
She was freezing and keeping the fire low to save money.
Voice over
Meanwhile downstairs neighbour Nikki Davies was delighted with her gas bills.
Despite sweltering in the luxury of a fire blazing full on, she received a series of credits on her budget account.
Female speaker
She kept the heating high to keep the flat warm.
Now she faces a big bill.
Voice over
It was only when an independent gas fitter checked the meters on the outside of the flats that Susan and Nikki discovered they were getting eachothers bills:
Female speaker
She's absolutely livid that she's been freezing for no reason at all.
Voice over
British Gas has admitted the meter reading mix up…blaming it on a clerical error.
It's sending an official to the flats to sort things out.
Now Susan can look forward to a cosy flat this winter…but she still plans to give the British Gas man a very chilly reception.
Doctors say people's health could be put at risk from car pollution if a new road is built.
The European Community is believed to support plans for a road cutting across the region to link up with East Coast ports.
The doctors say it should be scrapped, and an MEP says she'll raise her objections to the road in the European Parliament next week.
KIM BARNES/Aylesbury
Library Pictures
Dr DUNCAN KEELEY/Road Campaigner
CAROLINE JACKSON MEP/Con Wiltshire
Voice over
It's to relieve congestion like this that an Aylesbury by-pass is planned.
But protests have come thick and fast from those who say it will bring even more traffic.
Now doctors say it'll bring severe health risks…most seriously for asthma sufferers.
He says asthma has been becoming increasingly common for the last 20 years for reasons we don't understand.
Increasing road traffic is definitely a candidate to explain this rise.
What we do know is that if you've got asthma automobile pollution can make your asthma worse.
Now forty-five GPs and consultants in Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire are backing Dr Keeley's protest to the Roads Minister.
It's claimed the by-pass is part of a major east west link from the M 40 in Oxfordshire to the Haven ports.
That's thought to be part of a trans-european road network which will be debated in the European parliament on Monday.
She says I intend going to Strasbourg on Monday to argue that this report has been irresponsibly drawn up.
The European parliament needs to consult more widely.
Local consultation on the road which would be dual carriageway, with a possible extension is due to end next week.
She says there is a need for a better east-west link.But I remain to be convinced that it's a 3 lane highway, driving its way through Oxfordshire and Wiltshire.
Medical campaigners say they're fighting for quality of life.
He says there are a wide range of health concerns.
Benzine and child leukemia, and family mental health, as part of a commuter lifestyle.
They want to see the road plan sent back to the drawing board.
Now if you're the owner of an anxious Alsatian or a tense Terrier, a top dog breeder could have the answer — aromatherapy.
She says a spot of lavender oil rubbed into the coat will soothe the nerves of any dog.
CLARE LAFFERTY Fairford
SUE JACKSON Dog Breeder
Voice over
After a hard day chasing rabbits and catching sticks, what better way to relax than by treating yourself to an aromatherapy massage.
Sue Jackson is a champion dog breeder.
She says aromatherapy oils can be as beneficial to dogs as to humans.
Sue turned to aromatherapy oils when one of her dogs wasn't producing any milk any milk for her puppies.
Sue has tested all the oils she uses on her dogs.
She asks owners to be careful about what kind of oils they use on their pets.
Apart from improving your dogs mood, Sue says there are practiucal advantages to the massage.
The dogs certainly seem to enjoy it.
So if you really want to the best for you dog, give him a good rub down.
Top breeders recommend it.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Howard meets ethnic community leaders
FTSE up 10
The hundred shares index closed up ten point seven at thirty one ninety nine 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty seven and up at two marks, forty six.
Welcome back.
Later on the dog breeder enjoying the sweet smell of success.
But now with all the sport here's Tim
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
DENIS SMITH/United Manager
Voice over
Old acquaintances will be forgot when the clock strikes three at White Hart Lane tomorrow.
Playing for Spurs…
Colin Calderwood and David Kerslake, Swindon heroes of old.
On the bench Ossie Ardiles…it's Town against Tottenham.
Some re-union too.
Going back to their old ground are John Gorman, Terry Fenwick and John Moncur.
But who'll be buying the drinks?
Who'll be celebrating?
Ccould depend on a fitness test for Paul Bodin.
He's got a calf injury.
Kevin Horlock is standing by to play.
One man definitely missing is Micky Hazard: he's out of favour.
Spurs have only lost one at home.
That was to the Arsenal.
But what better place for Swindon to score their first league win of the season.
At the Manor Ground, Oxford are playing Luton.
Last season this was United's biggest home win of the season.
4-0.
One of the old faces, John Durnin, scored all four.
Now the United fans are wanting new faces.
When are they going to get some new players?
Denis Smith says he's been trying to get players since he came but has to sell first and there have been no bids for any of the players.
The transfer kitty could come courtesy of Stoke City.
United are on 25 per cent of any fee the Potteries team get for striker Mark Stein.
Chelsea have bid a million: do we hear one and half?
Let's hope so.
It would bring a windfall of around 300,000 smackers to the Manor.
United are unchanged tomorrow.
There could be a switch on the bench.
Paul Reece has a knee injury, so Paul Kee is standing by.
It's only October I know, but United can't afford to lose tomorrow.
But then again Luton will be saying exactly the same thing.
The sun's been shining all week over Hereford: United are on a high, five goals against Colchester was the best news there's been for years at Edgar Street.
And what price striker Chris Pike after this?
Signed on a free transfer in the summer, this hat-trick took his total to six for the season.
Also amongst the goals were Chris Fry and skipper Derek Hall.
He's joint top scorer with Pikey.
It's Bury away this weekend and manager Greg Downs can keep his winning team unchanged.
Now if Hereford are to build on last week's success they need to get at least a draw at Gigg lane.
Goal of the week is Hereford's first against Colchester.
It came so fast the keeper hardly saw it so for him and for all Hereford fans here it is in slow motion
and don't forget first football action is on Goals Extra tomorrow tea time…the action now comes from as many as x different sports…its round-up time 
TIM SMALL/Lechlade Fishery
Voice over
We're going angling first this week to the Bushyleaze Lake in Lechlade…the country's top fly fishers have been in action in the British final of the Airflow Classic…
66 anglers…19 teams…lots of fish…
Tim Small says…the lake is fishing really well and it's good to have the top anglers there
Bushyleaze Lake opened in the summer…they stocked it with 200 tons of trout…
Its open to all anglers…and there's plenty left…
the one that got away for swindon speedway was the final of the division two knockout cup…they were racing against Glasgow in the final…the first leg at Blunsdon finished in a draw…54 points a piece…
but up in Scotland Glasgow won 64-to 44…it's Swindon's last meeting of the year at Blunsdon tomorrow…and they're defending a season long unbeaten home record
no cups either for any of our tennis girls in the Autoglass Classic down in Brighton…
Oxfordshire's best Claire Taylor…
Lizzie jelfs and Caroline Billingham all qualified but fell in the first round…
Emily Bond a new name from Gloucestershire did best of all…she beat Heidi Hogh 6-1 6-0 but just failed to make the quarter finals…
Gloucester's hockey team scored their first national league win last week…4-0 on sunday they're at home to Cambridge City…
there's home matches on the ice on Saturday for Milton keynes…
Oxford and swindon…
on the River Thames tomorrow afternoon…one hundred and nineteen scullers are competing in the Marlow club's 30th anniversary long distance race…and finally over in Cheltenham the horse with 125 owners…
Fuzzy Logic has made it two wins out of two…
Hardly a week goes by now without us having a new champion…central south sport has never had it so good…this week we've the European champion of champions to toast…the name is Sue Wright…the game is squash…and this is the Friday Feature 
SUE WRIGHT/European Champion
Voice over
The village of Haddenham in Buckinghamshire has a new kid on the block.
But this is no ordinary new resident.
This is Sue Wright, one of the world's top squash players.
She's just moved up from Kent and has come with packing cases full of cups and medals: a winning record which was topped this week with the Champion of Champions trophy and an ambition to become the world's number one.
Sue Wright says she started playing squash with her sister and then her dad started coaching her.
The main reason for the move is to team up with her sister Debbie who's the club pro at the Thame Racquets and Fitness Centre.
This is Sue's office now:.
squash is her full time job.
Sue Wright says it is a very hard life.
There is a lot of training to be done because you have to be at peak fitness.
And what Sue puts in is hour upon hour of training: not just on court, but in the gym with fitness coach Nick Byrnes.
There's no limit to her chase for success.
Sue says there are times when she doesn't feel like training but she presses on because she wants to be number one.
Sue Wright is Britain's reigning squash champion.
Number five in the world: will she make number one?
Sue says she's beaten all the players above her in the world rankings and will have to work harder to make up the difference.
Police have arrested and questioned a tanker driver after toxic waste got into a stream, destroying the local wildlife.
14 OCTOBER 1992/COLEFORD/Forest of Dean
Hundreds of gallons of waste were dumped in a layby in the Forest of Dean last week.
It seeped into the nearby River Lyd, and thousands of fish, insects and other wildlife died along a six mile stretch.
The arrested man has been released on bail until the results of scientific samples are known.
The Prince of Wales planted a tree today to mark the Queen's forty years on the throne.
WESTONBIRT/Gloucestershire
He travelled the short distance from his home at Highgrove to Westonbirt Arboretum in Gloucestershire, to plant a small Japanese Katsura tree.
The tree is the first of a glade of forty species from all over the world.
When complete, they'll range in height from three to one hundred and twenty feet.
The man who led the allied troops in the Gulf War has just launched his autobiography.
General Norman Schwarzkopf, or Stormin' Norman as he became known, retired from the forces last year.
As Gargy Patel reports, he's now looking for a new challenge.
OXFORD
Gen NORMAN SCHWARZKOPF/Gulf War Commander
DOMINIC SALTER/Anti-war Campaign
Voice over
Stormin' Norman, regarded by many as THE hero of the Gulf War.
Now retired from the army, but still attracting publicity wherever he goes.
At the time of the conflict, he caught the world's imagination through his individual style and straight talking manner with the troops.
A refreshing contrast to the more reserved British approach.
For the last year he's been setting out his story in his autobiography, a glimpse into decision making during operations like Desert Storm and an insight to his personal life.
Coming from a strong military background and dealing with an alcoholic mother taught him self-reliance at an early age.
Since leaving the army, he's been on a constant round of lecture tours.
His visit to a literary dinner in Oxford was the only public appearance in this country.
But it attracted anti-war campaigners who say the book is trying to sanitise the real cost of the war; thousands of lives lost.
And the General was part of it.
And critics say with Saddam Hussein still in power, the war was futile.
Not so, says the General.
Norman Schwarzkopf's army career spanned 35 years.
He rose to a 4 star General.
His tour of duty included Korea and Vietnam.
His larger-than-life presence continues to win him friends.
But the most important part of his life is his wife Brenda and his children.
After Kuwait, he was offered America's top army job, Chief of Staff.
He turned it down.
Now he's looking for his next challenge.
But he's the first to admit you can take the man out of the army, but you can't take the army out of the man.