

Now for the second in our series looking at life in rural England just after the Second World War.
In nineteen forty-six, a film unit made a documentary called’ Twenty-four Square Miles’about country people and their way of life.
Living conditions were basic.
Many were living in sixteenth and seventeenth century cottages with hardly any mod cons.
We've been back to some of the houses featured in the original film to see how they've changed.
Courtesy of/CENTRAL OFFICE OF INFORMATION
EDNA LOCKYER/Daughter
PAULINE DUMBLETON/Grand-daughter
GILL MOBLEY/Tenant
Voice over
These cottages are typical of the homes in the 40s documentary.
They were dotted throughout the 19 villages in the area chosen by the film's makers.
The idea of the film, made by the Central Office of Information, was to paint a picture of the daily life of people in the countryside and the problems they faced.
The film made local celebrities of several people who were chosen to feature in the film.
One of them was a housewife, Louis Harper who lived in the village of South Newington.
When I first came to live here this room ran through to the back of the house, but my husband put up a partition, so we have a small room at the back where we can have our meals.
This room leads into the scullery where there's an open range.
In the far corner of the scullery, there's a door leading to the stairs.
They go straight up into one of the bedrooms.
The bedrooms have small windows, level with the floor and no ceiling.
They're open, right up to the timbers of the roof and it's no end of a job trying to keep the place clean.
For years after, Louis Harper continued to struggle to keep it clean.
It wasn't until 1974, that the house was modernised and ceilings put in.
But her daughter Edna remembers her mother's constant battle to keep the bedrooms in order.
She says her mother had difficulty getting them clean for many years.
She had ladders and broomsticks and poles for the broomsticks and had to climb up a ladder to the top of the roof to get the cobwebs and everything down.
Few homes in the area filmed had electricity.
They relied on gas lamps for light.
Or candles.
The candlestick to light the way to the old outside privy at Exeter cottage is still upstairs.
Louis's grand-daughter has less than fond memories of night-time visits.
She says the worst thing she can remember was the outside loo and having to get out a lantern if you wanted to go in the night and go out there with all the cobwebs and strange shadows.
The cottage still looks very much the same from the outside.
Inside it's greatly changed.
The old sitting room and scullery are now one big sitting roomand the old kitchen next door is now a hallway.
Only a few villages had piped water in their homes.
Most, like Louis Harper, had to fetch water for everything from baths to washing dishes and get rid of it outside.
As the film's narrator, John Arlott explains, water was fetched from several sources.
In most cases having a piped water supply means nothing more than stand-pipes set up here and there from which water has to be carried to the houses.
In the villages without supplies water for all domestic purposes is fetched from springs, from wells and in a few cases from streams.
But as he goes on to explain, some of the newer council houses weren't much of an improvement.
’ They have sinks but no taps, the waste-pipes emptying into a pail.
The lavatory is inside, but it's still only a bucket.’
Today apart from some obvious signs of 20th century living, this oucnilc house in Tadmarton hasn't changed much on the outside.
But when its current owners moved in in 1970 the kitchen was still very much the same.
She says when they first moved up there was an old stone sink and a cold water tap; no hot water and since then the council has put in a new sink with hot and cold running water.
There was a stone copper that you lit a fire underneath which was also taken out.
Yet houses like Gill's were among the most modern in the area at the time.
’ There are more modern grates, making cooking easier.
There are built-in cupboards and shelves; larders and bright and fairly spacious sculleries.
Usually with a built-in copper.’
Now it's hard to believe that half a century ago piped water, sewerage and bathrooms complete with toilet and bath were luxuries many didn't have.
But these were some of the more welcome changes following the end of the Second World War, which were transforming life for people living in the countryside.
Major calls for’ central part’in EC
FTSE down 13
The hundred shares index closed down thirteen point nine at twenty six ninety one point seven.
The pound is down at one dollar fifty four, but up down at two marks forty three.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
On the eve of bonfire night safety officers say they're hopeful that the number of firework accidents will be down on last year.
But they're warning that nineteen ninety three could be different — with new EC regulations allowing in a flood of dangerous fireworks from Europe.
Simon Garrett reports.
SOUTH PARK/Oxford
SARAH CARTER/Trading Standards
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
CATHY STONE/Manageress
STEVE VERMEULEN/Oxfordshire Fire Service
Voice over
Each year, more and more people watch fireworks at organised displays, rather than setting off their own at home.
As a result, bonfire night 1991 saw the lowest accident figures for 20 years.
Safety watchdogs hope for an even greater improvement this week.
Female speaker
We're going to an organised display.
Fireworks are too dangerous to be sold otherwise.
Male speaker
Go to an organised one.
It's much better; safer.
Male speaker
They're doing something at the boy's school, but we're not doing anything personally.
Voice over
Today all fireworks must conform to British safety standards.
But next year, the single European market could mean a flood of dangerous imports.
Female speaker
From 1st January, we'll have countries in the European community allowed to send in as much imported goods as they like.
We could find a lot more dodgy items on the market, as some other countries don't have our standards.
Voice over
Fireworks are explosives.
All carry a measure of danger.
Firemen want people to wear clothes which won't catch fire.
Even the humble sparkler can cause horrific injuries when combined with a highly flammable shell suit.
Male speaker
You can just imagine what it would be like if a child was actually wearing this at the time of ignition.
Voice over
Shops selling fireworks are visited by fire officers to make sure they're complying with safety regulations.
Many even demand proof of age.
Female speaker
We do ask them how old they are and if they are younger they bottle out when you ask them
Voice over
Whatever the age of the purchaser the firemen can't stress enough the importance of following the firework code.
Male speaker
Keep fireworks in a closed metal or wooden container.
When you go to light them, use a wick and light them at arms length.
Don't mess about with fireworks and always let an adult light them if you're going for a small family display.
Voice over
Failure to stick to the safety rules is simply playing with fire.
In part two: Five a Side…
Oxford and Pompey's ten-goal thriller.
Plus, all mod cons: The country life…
Forties-style.
There were football fireworks last night with sixteen goals in our three Central South games…
Oxford drew five all with Portsmouth…
Swindon went down two-nil to Brentford while Hereford lost three-one at Gillingham…
Here's Tim Russon 
Voice over
The gunpowder plot had nothing on the game at the Manor.
United were blown to bits in the first half, as Portsmouth roared into a 3-goal lead.
Alan McLoughlin got the first after 18 minutes.
3 minutes later, Pompey's very own Guy; top scorer, Guy Whittingham made it 2-0.
He's worth a few million pennies at the moment.
And there was worse to come for United, as Ceri Evans went and sliced a corner into his own net.
3 down and only 30 minutes gone Oxford were staring defeat; disaster in the face.
Back they came though, with a goal from David Penney, which proved that Portsmouth weren't so hot; that United could perhaps pull this one out of the fire.
But within 2 minutes, it was 4-1.
Whittingham again.
That's 18 for him this season.
Right on half-time, United got their second.
Jim Magilton thumped one home and in the dressing room.
They must have got a rocket from manager, Brian Horton.
But it was Portsmouth who came out firing in the second half.
Mark Chamberlain scored a beauty.
5-2.
That was it surely; the end of Oxford.
Some supporters were on their way home, when John Durnin ran through and scored to make it 5-3.
There were even more empty seats as the game ticked into the last minute, which was 60 seconds of magic, madness and mayhem.
Winger, Chrissy Allen was pulled down and the ref gave a penalty.
Magilton stepped up 5-4.
Then the ref had the whistle in his lips, when United grabbed the equaliser with the very last touch of the ball.
You had to see this game to believe it.
At the Manor Ground they'll remember; remember the 3rd of November for some time.
The only sparks at the County Ground, came from Brentford, who turned the formbook upside down and inside out by putting 2 goals past Swindon.
Gary Blissett gave Brentford the lead midway through the first half, which was a bad one for the Town defence.
The second goal should have been stopped too.
There was too much room; too much time for Lee Luscombe to make it 2-0.
Town were on top in the second half and could have got something.
They won a penalty just after half-time when Martin Ling was pulled down, but Craig Maskell threw the kick away and with it went Swindon's chances.
In the third division, Hereford United were seeing stars at Gillingham after letting in 2 early goals.
Nick Forster got them both.
There was no stopping the first, but the second; well it was more to do with bad defence, than good attack.
United came back with a goal just before half-time.
Good one two; a first for young Jason Rowbotham who's on trial with the club.
And it was close.
Touch and go until the very last minute when Andy Arnott got a third for Gillingham, the end for Hereford; the end of a night of football fireworks.
Hundreds of Maxwell pensioners have been lobbying Parliament on the eve of the anniversary of the publisher's death.
They were calling on the Government to replace millions of pounds, plundered by Maxwell from pension funds.
Erika Barnes reports.
OXFORD
BOB KNIGHT/Graphical Paper and Media Union
KEITH KIRKBY/Former Maxwell Employee
ALAN HANBROOK/Printer
WESTMINSTER/London
Voice over
The smiles hide the anguish.
These people were all robbed of a secure future by Robert Maxwell.
He'd plundered their pension fund.
Now almost a year since he died, they're receiving some money, but don't know how long it'll last.
Today they travelled to Westminster to call for help in the uncertain years ahead.
Male speaker
We're hoping to put pressure on the Government to top up the kitty and guarentee pensions.
Male speaker
If we don't keep up the pressure, their pensions will be reduced.
Voice over
Reporter asks: What do you think of the future?
Male speaker
Very grim.
Voice over
Earlier a group of sacked journalists, also victims of the Maxwell regime, held their own demonstration against the publisher, at Pergamon Press in Oxford.
Their anti-Maxwell message echoes that of the pensioners.
Male speaker
I always disliked him.
They often called me paranoid.
I wish I was wrong and I still had my pension.
Voice over
Once in Westminster, the pensioners made their point loud and clear.
But the response was not what they wanted to hear.
Social Security Secretary, Peter Lilley said the Government had already taken substantial measures to help the pensioners.
But no Government could accept an obligation to use taxpayers' money to make good all losses resulting from fraud.
It's a year on Guy Fawkes night that Maxwell died.
But the pensioners won't let him rest in peace.
They'll continue their campaign to win back the security they'd worked a whole lifetime for.
The Oxford college where Bill Clinton studied politics says it's greatly honoured by his victory in the American Presidential Election.
Right up until polling day, University College stayed silent for fear of harming his chances.
Now it's hoping for a visit from the most powerful man on earth.
Robin Powell reports.
OXFORD
Prof JOHN ALBERY/Master/University College
FRANK THURMOND/Clinton Supporter
GEORGE CAWKWELL/College Fellow
Voice over
All day the Stars and Stripes have flown over Oxford High Street.
University College is celebrating one of its old boys landing the biggest job in world politics.
It was a particularly memorable night for Frank Thurmond.
As well as being an American student at University College, he's also an Arkansas Democrat.
Only yesterday he received a letter from Mr Clinton thanking him for his support.
Bill Clinton came to Oxford to study politics in 1968.
This was his college room.
Those who knew him remember an amiable man, but not necessarily the sort of person you'd expect to end up in the White House.
One of those contemporaries, Bob Reich, is tipped to become President Clinton's Economic Adviser.
But if there is to be an Oxford mafia in Washington, it won't be the first time former University College students have made history.
Clinton completes an impressive quartet of political leaders who studied there.
Prime Ministers, Clement Attlee and Harold Wilson and Australia's Bob Hawke are the other three.
So what can the college hope to gain from a Clinton Presidency?
With that in mind, the college plans to invite President Clinton to visit at the earliest opportunity.
Before that though, a congratulations are in order.
Presidents may come and go.
But for as long as there's an Oxford University, some things will never change.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
RICHARD HILL/Solicitor
1991/UCKINGTON/Gloucestershire
PETER QUIGLEY/Family Friend
Voice over
After an 8 day trial, David Harper, the last of three defendants, was cleared of killing the 17 year old twin sisters in a barn fire.
His solicitor made the only comment.
After the not guilty verdicts, the parents of Rebecca and Emma Harper left the court, too upset to speak.
Another of the defendants, Daniel Winter, cleared of manslaughter yesterday, was in court to hear the verdicts.
A third man, Wisdom Smith, was also cleared yesterday on the orders of the judge.
All three men had been accused of manslaughter and arson after Rebbecca and Emma Harper died in the barn fire at Uckington near Cheltenham in Gloucestershire last year.
All five had gone to the barn after an evening in the pub.
Photographs showing the burning barn, taken at the height of the fire by a neighbour, had been shown to the jury.
Since the fire 22 months ago, in January last year, the barn has been rebuilt.
Bales had been arranged for the jury as they had been on the night of the fire.
Two bunches of roses, placed by the twins' parents, mark the bay where the girls died.
A joyrider has been filmed driving at speeds of more than a hundred and fifty miles an hour along a motorway.
At one stage the car raced along the hard shoulder to overtake other vehicles.
One patrol car crashed during the pursuit, injuring two officers, but the police say it's incredible no one was killed.
Mark Kiff reports.
POLICE VIDEO/M4/Wiltshire
Sgt GRAHAM SAUNDERS/Wiltshire Police Air Unit
Insp CHRIS DAVIS/Avon and Somerset Police
Voice over
From the helicopter of Wiltshire Police a stolen Porsche Carrera was filmed travelling along the M4 at speeds more than double the legal limit.
At one point the driver overtook a line of vehicles on the hard shoulder while travelling at around a hundred and thirty miles an hour.
The police officers on board the helicopter were appalled by what they saw.
The car had been stolen from London…
Wiltshire Police were alerted when the two occupants, a man and a woman, made off from Membury Services in Berkshire without paying for petrol.
The helicopter was scrambled from Wiltshire Police Headquarters and within minutes was in pursuit.
They followed the car as it tore down the M4, finally reaching Bristol.
By now, Avon and Somerset police were pursuing the car on the ground.
It almost caused numerous accidents, here narrowly avoiding a head-on collision.
At one point the driver slammed on the brakes causing the police car behind to run into the back of the vehicle…the car was badly damaged…the two officers inside were taken to hospital for treatment to whiplash injuries.
The stolen sports car was finally abandoned in the St Pauls district of Bristol…the thieves made their escape through nearby flats.
The police say the best they could do with the car travelling at such high speeds was to keep track of it.
The stolen car is now being examined for fingerprints…police are confident they'll be able to track down the joyriders.
The declining popularity of bonfire night in the back garden is having two effects: a dramatic cut in the number of people hurt by fireworks, and booming business for the firms that put on the big public displays.
To meet the growing demand for bigger and better bangs they import their fireworks from all over the world.
KEN GOODWIN/Staverton
KEITH HILL/Firework Maker
GRAHAM LUNDERGAARD/Sandling Fireworks
Voice over
You'd never be able to mount a display like this in your back garden.
Even if you could afford it, letting off these kind of fireworks safely requires the kind of knowledge normally found in an artillary regiment.
There's enough explosive power in a really big display to make the twenty kegs of powder Guy Fawkes planted below the Houses of Parliament look like a damp roman candle.
Sandling fireworks, based at Staverton, import fireworks from all over the world.
They're kept in steel and concrete bunkers, and staff work in isolated huts for safety reasons — if one blows up, it won't take all the others with it.
At this time of the year, they're working flat out.
He says that this is a basic’ 'Bye’sign, for the end of a display, this part of the job is quite artistic.
In your garden display, fireworks have just a few grams of explosive in them.
They're the peashooters of the firework world.
Organised displays use the canons.
He says the mortars range in size from two inches to twelve inches.
But this is by no means the biggest, in a recent Japanese display a mortar which weighed three quarters of a ton and had a diameter of four feet was let off.
It produced an air burst almost a mile wide.
Sandling fireworks aren't quite in this league but they do test their imports every week to make sure they're up to scratch.
He says that these should be nice…they're imported from Australia.
Lots of glittery effects.
Firework displays thrill thousands on bonfire night.
For one local company it's meant business taking off like a rocket.
A school drama group tonight launches one of the most ambitious amateur productions ever staged.
Their adaption of Nicholas Nickleby is nine hours long and has a hundred and fifty speaking parts.
GRAEME BOWD Milton Keynes
ROY NEVITT Director
PAUL PRESCOTT Nicholas Nickleby
SARAH BENJAMIN Kate Nickleby
Voice over
Charles Dickens was not known for his brevity.
So the stage adaption of Nicholas Nickleby was always going to be a challenge.
The play runs for nine hours over four nights.
And the Stantonbury drama group are doing the whole thing five times, The school at Milton Keynes is one of the country's biggest comprehensives, but only half the cast are pupils.
The rest are from the local community.
But will anyone want to sit through nine hours of amateur theatre?
He says they've already had a lot of bookings.
It's a good way for young people to learn literature through the stage.
The play has been a year in the making.
Even so, with members of the cast having so many other commitments it's been difficult to get everyone together.
One actress Lizzie Bancroft came to the final rehearsal with a two week old baby.
But the orchestra couldn't make it.
Lizzie sang unaccompanied.
The play, incidentally, has more than a hundred musical cues.
The title role went to school pupil who left earlier this year.
Paul Prescott had to learn more than a thousand lines while studying for five A levels.
He says no-oner else seemed to want the part.
He says that although it's a large company the other young men preferred other parts.
There was no sense of competition.
Many of the cast were discovering Dickens for the first time.
They found him interesting if not always politically correct.
She says Dickens knows how to write about men but women are kept out of the limelight.
But she likes the play becasue it's descriptive.
Nicholas Nickleby was last staged by the Royal Shakespeare Company ten years ago.
This production has cost £50,000, most coming from local sponsors.
But then it does run for 20 nights.
How many people will sit through all four episodes remains to be seen.
But if it all sounds a bit long-winded, just try reading the book.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Major favours identity cards
FTSE down 13
The hundred shares index closed down thirteen point three at thirty-one, forty-nine points exactly.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-seven and up at two marks, fifty-one.
Maxwell pensioners have been lobbying Parliament to urge the government to secure their pensions.
Low interest rates have reduced the return on what's left of the pension funds, and the pensioners say their future looks bleaker than ever.
KATE GARRAWAY/Reporting
JIM DREDGE/Pensioner
JEAN CHILTON/Pensioner
PETER CORNELL/Pensioner
DAVID LIDINGTON MP/Con Aylesbury
Voice over
The eve of the second anniversary of Maxwell's death couldn't have come at a more crucial time for the pensioners who travelled to London today.
There's now a shortfall of more than fifty million pounds in their pension schemes because falling interest rates are undermining what's left in the fund.
It has meant in some schemes there is only just enough money to pay current penioners, with nothing left for people approaching retirement age.
There's deep resentment from people who fear a lifetime of hard work could come to nothing.
Today pensioners from Nuffield Press in Cowley and Hazel, in Aylesbury were amoung hundreds lobbying Parliament, with the shortfall affecting up to two hundred people in the region they're now turning to the government for help.
The hole in the pension fund has increased by sixty-five percent over the last year.
And the pensioners say unless the government takes action to plug it, Maxwell even in death will always have a stranglehold over their lives.
A police force has reported a DROP in the number of reported crimes for the first time in years.
There were big reductions in car thefts and shoplifting, and police say a crime-busting operation code-named Gemini is paying off.
RICHARD BARNETT/Gloucestershire
ROBERT TURNBULL/Asst Chief Constable
Voice over
Gloucestershire is one of only eight counties the Home office says is winning the battle against crime.
The latest figures show that the number of crimes in the county are down by 0.2 percent…a small amount but heartening news after soaring crime rates in previous years.
And whereas most forces are coping with a rocketing crime rate, Gloucestershire are reporting shoplifting down by 13 percent…bike thefts down by 9 percent, and vehicle thefts reduced by 3 percent.
Police are delighted that they're winning the battle against the criminals.
And they say a special operation called Gemini which puts extra officers on the street to catch the burglars and car thieves is paying off.
Male speaker
The success of Gemini is encouraging…we have had an increasing number of arrests and a large amount of property recovered.
Voice over
Not all the news is good…thefts from vehicles in Gloucestershire is still going up by four percent.
But even that is better than many other counties…and officers are confident their successful crackdown on crime will continue.
Still to come on Central News, going like a rocket.
Welcome back.
The government's being urged to provide more financial support for people who care for sick or disabled relatives.
Carers say their work saves the tax payer around thirty billion pounds a year.
KAREN THOMPSON/Oxford
MARGARET BOWEN/Carer
MARIAN WILLIAMSON/Carer
KEN KELLING/Campaigner
ANDREW SMITH MP/Lab Oxford East
NICK SCOTT MP/Social Security Minister
Like many carers Marian Williamson and Maragert Bowen from Oxford both gave up their jobs.
They each have grown up sons with severe learning difficulties and need to be at home.
Margaret says she looks after 35 year old Andrew 24 hours a day.
The invalid care allowance she receives is 33.70 a week
Marian set up a support group for carers in Oxfordshire.
She says looking after her son Andrew can be quite trying.
Today Marian, Margaret and their sons travelled, from Oxford to London to join fellow carers.
They've collected some of the six thousand signatures on a petition which was handed in to Downing Street.
It calls for the invalid care allowance to be increased and extended in the budget.
The govt's also urged to introduce a take up campaogn so carers are more aware of the benefits available.
Oxford's Labour Mp Andrew Smith has thrown his weight behind the campaign
But ministers say the govt's increased spending on carers from four million to four hundred million in the last 14 years
Carers say they fear the impact of VAT on fuel as many are already struggling to survive.
They say it's time they were paid for doing a full time job, which dominates their lives and saves the state thirty billion pounds each year…
In Central News tonight:
Keep it closed.
Anger over plans to reopen prison.
Get out and stay out.
New crackdown on squatters.
And We want our money.
The Maxwell pensioners fight on.
Good Evening.
WESLEY SMITH
Prison officers say there are plans to re-open a Victorian jail which was mothballed nearly a year ago.
They claim the prison wouldn't be properly staffed and that the public could be put in danger.
HARRIET RYLEY
Prison reformers say the Home Secretary's new get tough policy on crime is leading to panic measures to house more offenders.
They say the jail's facilities are inadequate, and that it should stay closed.
SIMON GARRETT/Arncott
RON ADAMS/Prison Officers Association
ADAM SAMPSON/Prison Reform Trust
DAVID YOUNG/Oxfordshire County Council
Voice over
A Fire engine stands outside Bullingdon prison for the third time in ten days.
A prison officer's been overcome by smoke after a deliberate fire.
A dramatic increase in the prison population means the old Oxford prison could soon reopen under control from Bullingdon.
It would be used to house prisoners on the verge of release.
But unions say there won't be enough properly trained staff
Male speaker
The low security inmates they're talking about were the same type of inmates who were at Wymott prison and caused 36 million pounds of damage.
If this happens in Oxford they'll be tarred with the same brush.
House prices will fall…they won't be safe from this type of prisoner.
What the public should remember is that the murderers the rapists haven't gone away…they're in Bullingdon prison now and pretty soon they may be housed in Oxford prison
Voice over
Prison reformers say reopening Oxford would be a sign of government panic
Male speaker
Oxford actually while it was open had a good reputation amongst prisoners for the relationship between staff and prisoners.
Now the prison service will have to recruit and train staff very quiuckly and they won't have the experience to handle prisoners
Voice over
Oxford jail belongs to the county council.
As late as yesterday the Home Office told them no decision's been made on its future.
They plan to turn it into student rooms or a museum
Male speaker
Oxfordshire have wanted it back as a site to open up to a much wider public, it's not very suitable for a prison anyway, certainly since local government reorganisation in 1974 and they have plans for making use of it if and when it comes back to the county
Voice over
Dsepite Home Office denials prison officers claim staff are already being allocated to it
Male speaker
It's the worst kept secret in the prison service.
What we'd like them to do is come clean sit round a table and talk about running it properly
Voice over
An announcement from the Home Office confirming the reopening of Oxford is expected in the next few weeks
Squatters say they could be forced to sleep on the streets by new Government measures aimed at speeding up their eviction.
If the proposals get the go-ahead, they could be given just twenty four hours to leave illegally occupied property.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford
PAUL/Squatters' Estate Agency
ARTHUR MIX/Squatter
GEOFFREY CUTTING/Small Landlords Association
Voice over
Squatters in Oxford have been so organised they have their own so called estate agency.
But now they feel under derious threat because of measures announced today by Home Secretary Michael Howard.
Once they're approved landlords or homeowners will be able to go straight to a county court for a possession order.
If the squatters aren't out within a day the police can move in.
Male speaker
It will affect not only squatters but also give unscrupulous landlords an easy way of geting rid of people.
It's all very well to say they can appeal but that's not easy
Voice over
Squatting has been justified in Oxford, as elsewhere, as a way of combatting homelessness.
But their image has not been helped by some leaving damaged and defaced properties.
Male speaker
It's true that some to leave a mess but that's convenient for builders and speculators who can wreck a place and then blame it on the squatters.
Voice over
The new measures will also include prison and financial deterrents with fines up to five trhousand pounds iof the squatters fail to comply.
Male speaker
We welcome this announcement and think it's long overdue.
The problem at the moment is the law sides with the squatter
Voice over
The Home Secretary has introduced the tougher regime after promising a crackdown at this year's Conmservative Party conference.
A fourteen-year-old offender who's had three holidays in Spain this year at tax payers' expense has had a court case adjourned because he's being interviewed by the police on other matters.
SWINDON
The boy, who can't be named, was due to appear at a Youth Court in Swindon.
He's admitted shoplifting, theft and criminal damage but denies two alleged assaults on police.
It was revealed in August that Wiltshire Social Services have been paying for him to stay at his grandparents' house on the Costa Blanca.
His case was adjourned for three weeks.
200
MacSharry resigns over GATT failure
The Community's GATT negotiator Ray MacSharry has resigned after the breakdown of the talks.
Major promises MPs final say on Europe
FTSE up 19
The hundred shares index closed up nineteen point four at twenty seven eleven point one
The pound is down at one dollar fifty three, and down at two marks forty two.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Now to the final part in our series’ Twenty-four Square Miles’looking back at the film of the same name and the lives of the country people it chronicled.
When the film was made in nineteen forty-six leisure time was dominated by local dances, pubs and the Young Farmer's Club.
A group of former Young Farmers who appeared in the film came together for a lunchtime drink to remember the making of the film and to talk over old times.
24 SQUARE MILES/Central Office of Information
Courtesy
RITA BUTLER/Featured in Film
WYN STEWART/Featured in Film
GRAHAM BUTLER/Featured in Film
PHILIP PAGE/Featured in Film
CLIFF BUTLER/Featured in Film
Voice over
A game of darts at the local pub; just as much a favourite way to relax at the end of the day 50 years ago, as it is now.
The only big difference with today, is that all the men are wearing hats and the complete absence of women in the pub.
Perhaps they were all at this well-attended W.I. meeting, where not only hats, but coats and fur stoles seems to have been the thing.
These scenes are a record of the way people living in the countryside enjoyed themselves in their leisure time in 1946.
They were filmed for a documentary,’ Twenty-four Square Miles’shot in an area that size in north Oxfordshire.
It was made by the Central Office of Information as a record of country life.
For many young people, one of the best ways to socialise was in the Young Farmers' Club, which held regular meetings and trips to nearby farms.
Today, at the Wykham Arms in Sibford Gower a group of those former young farmers get together for a game of darts and a chat.
They all appeared in the film which is an unusual record of part of their youth, even if there were some apprehensions about the filming.
Rita Butler appeared in several scenes on her family's farm.
She says she can remember it was very exciting, people from London coming down onto our farm and her father being interviewed and all the scenes she was in.
While everyone agreed the changes in living standards since the film was made were for the better, there was some nostalgia for farming as it was when they were young.
Female speaker
It was very hard work but fun, because farmers all helped eachother.
They would share the work and do it together.
Now of course it's mechanised and there's one man in a tractor and that's it.
Voice over
That sense of solidarity was reflected in the Young Farmers Club get-togethers.
Wyn Stewart and her husband, Peter are proof that the Club was something of a dating agency for its members.
Male speaker
The Young Farmers movement was a sort of matrimonial agency for many farmers' sons and daughters.
Voice over
Some of the scenes in the film of people at play are almost comical now because of their seriousness, though harsh lights and cameras could hardly have been conducive to a relaxed atmosphere.
Dancing was popular; the film crew covered a YWCA dance, a band dance and folk dancing.
Male speaker
Many people who were in the film are gone now, including one of the girls he used to dance with alot in those days.
The film brings back alot of memories.
It doesn't seem like 50 years ago.
Voice over
Graham Butler's younger brother, Cliff was still at school when’ Twenty-four Square Miles’was made, but was also a member of the Young Farmers' Club.
Male speaker
We thought we were fairly modern people then.
Looking at the film now, it looks terribly dated.
We didn't really know how primitive conditions were.
But in those days, we thought we were quite technologically advanced people and life was good.
We felt sorry for the people who lived in towns.
Voice over
Going into town for entertainment usually meant a dance or the cinema — in Banbury.
The pictures are long gone here, replaced by the inevitable bingo hall.
The market; always a place to catch up on the gossip as well as buy groceries, is still there.
Many scenes from the film are remarkably unchanged…
Bloxham High Street is much the same in 1992 as 1946.
And further west in the village of Swalcliffe, you can even pick out the same grave-stones from the original shot, while over the road opposite the church, the only change is the conversion of the cottage on the right into a pub.
Yet in the near half century since’ Twenty-four Square Miles’was shot, the horse has been replaced by the tractor and the train by the car.
Male speaker
There've been such enormous changes.
I can't believe there's going to be the same sort of changes in the next 50 years.
Voice over
The Sultan of Brunei has received a doctorate from Oxford University.
The Sultan who's thought to be the richest man in the world, is on a state visit to Britain.
Chris Moore reports 
OXFORD
GEORGINA FERRY/Oxford University
Voice over
Even the Chancellor of Oxford University, Roy Jenkins, has to wait outside on the steps of the Clarendon buildings on a cold November morning, when the Sultan of Brunei is in town.
The Sultan arrived, a royal 20 minutes late, to be met by the Lord Lieutenant of Oxfordshire and the Mayor of Oxford.
It's a tradition that visiting heads of state and royalty can choose a city to visit.
The Sultan chose Oxford, which, also by tradition gave him a docotrate of civil law.
Most of the ceremony was in Latin.
While the Sultan gave his thanks in Malay.
The University denied it was hoping for some form of financial benefit from the visit.
Female speaker
I don't think so.
The university has strong links with Brunei though the Oxford Forestry Institute.
Brunei is 80% forest and the 2 are working together on a joint forestry project.
Voice over
Following the ceremony, there was a further procession to the Divintity School before the Sultan left for a visit of the Univeristy's Centre for Islamic Studies.
With Christmas approaching, the managers of a shopping arcade are searching for someone to play the part of Santa Claus in their grotto.
They've been advertising for more than six weeks…at the job centre in the local papers and on the radio.
But so far they've had only one reply.
Clare Lafferty reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
SHEILA RALPH/Regent Arcade
HAMISH DAWSON/Santa Claus
Voice over
A museum described as containing one of the finest collections of modern art of its kind is threatened with closure because of council cutbacks.
Now a campaign has been started to try to save it.
This report from Mark Kiff.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
ROBERT DICKINSON/Museum Curator
Voice over
There aren't any crocodiles left in Swindon.
They disappeared thousands of years ago.
Soon the museum which houses the town's history could become a thing of the past itself.
The museum, along with its art gallery, has been put on the endangered list by Thamesdown Borough Council, which is being forced to make cuts in its budget.
The curator says the museum would be a great loss to the town.
The Curator, Robert Dickinson, says Swindon would lose touch with its heritage and past.
Swindon's art gallery has attracted national acclaim.
One critic called it the Tate Gallery of the south west with works by Lowry, Henry Moore and Graham Sutherland displayed alongside local art.
Together they helped attract 25,000 visitors last year.
Closure would save the council £50,000 a year.
Now a campaign has been started to save the museum and art gallery.
It's been strongly supported by people visiting the displays.
The visitors say the museum contains more than they thought and would be sorry to see it close.
One couple came down from London to the art gallery and have seen some very interesting works.
The future of the museum and art gallery won't be decided for some time, but if it does win through, its battle for survival will become part of the history of the town itself.
A year ago today came the first reports that publisher Robert Maxwell had fallen from his yacht to his death.
It also proved to be a fall from grace, as it transpired that he'd stolen millions of pounds from his workers' pension funds, to pay off mounting business debts.
As Erika Barnes reports…a year on the victims of his crime are still haunted by Maxwell's legacy.
OXFORD
ALAN GOVIER/Retired Printer
AUDREY GOVIER/Alan's Wife
ROBERT MAXWELL/Speaking in 1990
NICHOLAS DAVIES/Former Maxwell Aide
PAUL LOWE/Director/Oxford United
Voice over
Former printer, Alan Govier has all the time in the world to reflect on his Maxwell legacy.
He'd looked forward to a comfortable retirement with his wife Audrey.
But the year since Robert Maxwell's death has been far from comfortable.
Male speaker
We've had a year of ups and downs.
It was a worry when we didn't get a pension and when it did come, it alleviated things, but we know it could run out in the New Year.
Female speaker
The first 6 months were very difficult.
He was quite depressed and didn't know which way to turn.
Voice over
After 49 years with Maxwell's Nuffield Press, Alan had high hopes for his retirement.
The same hopes as any other pensioner, unless of course that pensioner happens to hold the purse strings.
Male speaker
Although I'm an old age pensioner, I've got lots of things to do.
And in preparation for my retirement, I'm discarding with some of my duties.
Voice over
And in preparing for his own comfortable future, Robert Maxwell plundered £1 billion, which had been set aside to secure the future of hundreds of his workers.
Ironically, his wife, Betty is left without a pension.
Today she offered sympathy for the victims.
She said’ My heart absolutely bleeds for those people who are suffering hardship.
Personally I can do nothing because I have no money at all.’
An insight into the man who stole from his pensioners, is told in a book by his former journalist, Nicholas Davies.
The author worked alongside Maxwell for many years and his career at the Daily Mirror also ended in disgrace with his sacking, soon after the publishers death.
Male speaker
He would be a charming and generous man.
On the other hand, he was an absolute b, as has been proved by his disgraceful plundering of the pensions.
His worst fears have been recognised.
Voice over
Robert Maxwell is still larger than life even in death.
A year on, his pensioners are still fighting to sever his grip on their lives.
So too, are the companies he left behind.
Oxford United's new owners are still trying to shake off the Maxwell legacy.
Male speaker
There were 6 months of turmoil after his death.
Then 6 months of stability when we took over.
Although cans of worms keep arising.
Voice over
Robert Maxwell used to boast,’ If there's a way back after death, I will be the one to find it.’
For those still haunted by his memory, the hope is that his way back is blocked.
The pensioners' dream is for a secure life, after Maxwell's death.
He didn't leave me anything.
He ruined my retirement really.
The plans we had have gone out the window.
A firm of housebuilders has bucked the worst recession the industry's ever known by increasing its profits by forty-five percent.
The company says catering for first time buyers is boosting sales at a time when other builders are reporting big losses.
RICHARD BARNETT/Cheltenham
RICHARD FRASER/Chief Executive
JON DAVIES/Estate Agent
Voice over
Westbury Homes, based in Cheltenham, sells more than two thirds of its houses to first time buyers.
It's a strategy that's boosted half year profits 45 percent to 3.7 million pounds.
The firm expects to build well over 2,000 homes in the coming year, and says most are sold before they're even finished.
Male speaker
With incentives like free carpets and help with the mortgage, sales are going well.
Voice over
Most of the houses sell for around 60,000 pounds…and keen pricing seems to be the key to attracting first time buyers:
Estate agents are cautious about taking the profit rise as a sign the slump in house sales is over.
But they're hopeful things will pick up:
Male speaker
Most sales are under the 60,000 pound mark, and low mortgage rates and other incentives are geared to the first time buyer.
Voice over
With mortgage rates the lowest for over a decade, and plenty of cut price deals on offer, the boom in sales to first time buyers is likely to continue.
A four year old boy who saved his brother from drowning and a pensioner, who rescued two people from a burning car have been praised by Princess Diana for their bravery.
They each received British Red Cross Care awards.
KATE GARRAWAY/London
STEPHEN LACK/Award Winner
SHEILA LACK/Mother
Voice over
His moment of glory…recognition for a moment of true bravery.
Four year old Stephen Lack, from Northampton was playing in his grandmother's garden when his younger brother Mark fell into the pond.
Stephen saved his brother from drowning.
Stephen's quick thinking has earned him a bravery award in the Care in Crisis competition run by the Red Cross, and the respect of his mother.
Another winner is sixty-five year old Kenneth Arnold from Quedgeley in Gloucestershire.
When he saw a car crash then catch fire outside his house, he ran out and managed to pull both driver and passenger free.
The rewards for Stephen and Kenneth's bravery, gifts and the chance to meet the Princess of Wales.
But they say their real reward is knowing they've helped to save lives.
Still to come on Central News, Stairway to Heaven.
Welcome back.
Later on we meet a fanatical cone collector.
But first with all the sport, here's Erika.
ERIKA BARNES
Voice over
Oxford's Denis Smith made three wishes this week.
He wanted a goalkeeper, a goalscorer and a goalstopper.
His wishes came true.
John Byrne the striker, Phil Whitehead the keeper and meet the latest new kid on the block…
Central defender Matthew Elliott from Scunthorpe.
The hat-trick of new signings are in the squad of fifteen to play Milwall — so out go Collins, Penney and Reece who's injured.
Oxford are down…but not out.
Milwall think they're on the up after a good midweek win over Forest.
Well, if the Oxford manager was granted any more wishes, then he'd want a change a fortune.
If only they could conjour up the magic of their last meeting against Milwall last season…three nil the score then.
Changing faces and places at Swindon too.
Micky Hazard is out of favour and out of the team.
He's off to Spurs.
Word is that Coventry's US International Roy Wegerle will be the new man about Town on Monday.
Swindon really need him now.
A third of the way through the season…and still without a win.
They meet Wimbledon this weekend who've only lost once at home this season.
Frazer Digby and Terry Fenwick are back fit in Swindon's squad of sixteen.
Hereford are suffering something of a flu epedemic at the moment.
They certainly caught a cold with Preston at the weekend…rather generous in defeat.
Chris Pike is back in the side to play Chester tomorrow after going down with the snuffles and sneezes.
Gareth Davies is over his injury too.
And hopefully Andy Reece has had his flu jab, before joining United on loan from Bristol Rovers.
Hereford just can't keep a clean sheet and their lowly league position reflects that.
Chester have won five in a row and are now fourth.
Goal of the week.
See how Owen Pickard upended Preston North End…for Hereford's first on Saturday.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
KEN GOODWIN/Cirencester
ADRIAN LOVE/Crash victim
RICHARD LOVE/Father
Voice over
This car was Adrian Love's pride and joy…a Mark Ford Escort which he'd lovingly restored.
Now it's a crumpled wreck after a van collided head on with Adrian on a stretch of road near his home town of Cirencester.
The woman driver of the hired van who's British but has ben living in france for eleven years had apparently driven a mile on the wrong side of the road.
Male speaker
I turned the corner and the van was straight in front of me, there was nothing I could do.
Voice over
But police have told Adrian that even though the driver admitted she was in the wrong, she's unlikely to be prosecuted.
Adrian's father is furious.
Male speaker
She was in the wrong and she shouldn't be allowed to get away with it.
Male speaker
That car was all I had now it's completely useles.
Voice over
Gloucestershire police say that they're unlikely to prosecute the woman as they have no means of making her return to England to face charges.
Adrian has been left to recover from his injuries knowing that the woman is back i France with no prospect of returning.
A youth has been jailed for eighteen months for beating a man so badly his own father didn't recognise him.
Gavin Lees was attacked and left unconscious by a railway footbridge.
He was discovered by his father, who at first didn't realise he was looking at his own son.
17 May 1993
DIDCOT/Oxfordshire
May 1993/DONALD LEES/Victim's Father
GAVIN LEES/Victim
PAT LEES/Victim's Mother
Voice over
The face of Gavin Lees just after a horrific attack on May the fifteenth this year.
He suffered a jaw broken in two places which had to be wired up for five weeks.
He'd been walking home after celebrating starting a new job after nine months on the dole when he was set upon.
His injuries were so severe his own father who found him near a railway footbridge at Didcot Parkway didn't recognise him.
But his son feels the sentence — eighteen months after six months custody was allowed for — given to twenty year-old Darren Presley was fair:
Donald Lees is working away from home and has yet to be told about the sentence:
Pat Lees feels sure her husband will agree with her that the sentence was not adequate:
Her son is now back at work and says he just wants to put the whole episode behind him.
An inquest's heard how an experienced woman rider died when her horse somersaulted on top of her after tripping over a jump.
The coroner recorded a verdict of accidental death.
A hundred horses had already taken the fence — only one had got into difficulty 
SIMON GARRETT/Aylesbury Coroner's Court
MARGUERITE BOUCHER/British Horse Society
Voice over
Vanessa Weaver died from head and chest injuries when her stallion Kharon landed on top of her.
They'd misjudged a fence at the Tythrop Park horse trials at Kingsey in Buckinghamshire.
The horse tripped, Mrs Weaver was thrown forward twenty fgeet onto her head and the horse followed.
The inquest heard Mrs Weaver was an experienced horsewoman with the correct protective clothing and headgear.
Only one of 100 other competitors had had any trouble at the fence.
Coroner Peter Lovegrove said’ This is a sport with risks, dangers are accepted by those who do it.’
a sentiment echoed by the sports governing body.
Female speaker
They've entered the sport for the fun of it.
Probably because it is a bit of a risk but they know full well what their doing, the rules and regulations
Voice over
Mrs Weaver was a devoted horsewoman who dreamed of appearing at Badminton Horse Trials.
She told her husband Derek she didn't mind going when her number was up, but she wanted to go in the saddle
An elderly man has died after being rescued from a house fire.
STRATTON ST MARGARET/Swindon
Three fire crews were called to a semi-detached house at Stratton St Margaret in Swindon, after the ground floor caught light.
They rescued the man who later died.
The cause of the fire is not yet known.
Prison officers and civil servants have been taking industrial action in protest over what they claim is a move towards privatisation.
ARNCOTT/Oxfordshire
Prison officers at Bullingdon prison near Bicester began their work to rule last night.
They claim government changes are contributing towards prison disorder.
Government employees have been picketing social security offices in Oxford and Gloucester.
Tax offices and job centres were also affected.
A racing driver has appeared in court accused of deceiving the DSS over income support claims of more than twenty-one thousand pounds.
Samantha Raeisi from Swindon is hoping to compete in the Grand Prix.
She was remanded on bail at Swindon Magistrates charged with obtaining money by deception.
She's also charged with criminal damage.
Every motorist hates them — but there's one man who loves them.
David Morgan is a man with a passion — about traffic cones.
He likes them so much he even looks forward to being stuck at roadworks.
JESSICA FOWLE Carterton
DAVID MORGAN Cone Collector
STEVE WIXEY Employee
Voice over
He's got big ones and small ones, yellow ones and pink ones, he's got the revolving variety and even a custom made wedding one.
David Morgan's known in the trade as Cone Man.
There are four bollard-making companies in Britain but his factory, at Carterton in Oxfordshire, turns out the most.
David's not a man for leaving work behind him at the end of the day.
What he likes most of all is a good traffic jam on his way home.
Male speaker
While I'm on a journey I'm always looking for cones and sometimes I'm fortunate enough to be held up at traffic works.
I can have a look at what's there.
If there's somenthing I haven't got I park and bargain with the road workers.
Voice over
David's been collecting cones for more than thirty years and since then he's accumulated some real beauties.
A 1956 collector's item — the first polythene road cone, a dud one so long and thin it couldn't stay still and a Korean cone found floating in Swanage harbour.
It's a hobby with real travel potential.
Male speaker
I found one in a cave in the Scilly Isles.
I even managed to get one on my honeymoon in Corsica.
In the airport was a rare sand injected cone made in Leicester 25 years earlier.
Voice over
But with all that enthusiasm you'd think at least some of it would rub off on David's employees?
Male speaker
I don't love them, I'm attracted to them but I'm not going to fall in love with them like that man.
Voice over
The hobby does have a down side, being King Cone can put a serious strain on one's social life.
Male speaker
I don't mention it at dinner parties or evening drinks because people shift away from me or say’ I must circulate’.
Voice over
So far David's letters from a couple of children who understand his fascination but what he really wants is enough other fans to set up a collectors club for cone crazies.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Man charged over massacre
A twenty-six year old man has appeared in court charged with the murders of the seven people who died in the Rising Sun pub shooting in Ulster.
Woman saw scared James
At the James Bulger trial, a woman has told the court how she confronted two boys and the frightened toddler when she saw him with injuries, but was told he'd fallen and was being taken home.
Civil servants strike
Many of Britain's civil servants have been on strike in protest at what they see as moves towards privatisation which they believe could cost them their jobs.
Hunt for back-pack killer
Three hundred police are hunting for the person who has now killed seven back-packers, including two Britons, in Australia.
FTSE down 63
The hundred shares index closed down sixty-three point four.
The pound is down at $1.47 one dollar, forty-seven and up at DM2.51 two marks, fifty-one.
And that's it for now.
Of course, it's Bonfire Night, so if you're off to a display or just having a few sparklers at home, have a great evening.
We leave you with our Guy Fawkes display.
Goodnight.
Not a classic I know, but there weren't many to choose from!
Now, they're calling him the heir to Britain's tennis crown.
Today Oxfordshire's Tim Henman justified the tributes being paid to him in court circles!
He took on number one seed Jeremy Bates in the quarter finals of the National Championships at Telford.
Voice over
It's the elder statesmen of tennis who reckon Tim Henman is Britain's young pretender.
He's made dramatic progress through the British and World rankings over the past year.
Today ranked number eight, he was taking on the best of British, Jeremy Bates.
And whilst he lost in two sets 7-5, 7-6 he only dropped one service game.
It was Bates' toughest test in the competition so far which has seen other top seed tumble in the early stages.
One more honour for Henman, he makes his senior representative debut in Britains European Cup team at Trieste next month.
Well a little closer to home now for the rest of the sport in our roundup.
Gloucester Rugby boys take on Nottingham tomorrow.
Centre Don Caskie returns for the first time in a month after suffering concussion in Gloucester's defeat at Bath.
It may be the closed season for rowing…but down on the river, it's the Head of the River.
The unstoppable pair of Steve Redgrave and Matthew Pinsent are doubling up to make it a foursome for the race from Mortlake to Putney tomorrow.
England international Julie Bradbury will on home territory for her latest challenge.
She'll be defending her doubles title in the Oxfordshire open championships this weekend at Radley College.
And finally the tale of a little village football club and their little football pitch.
Peppard of South Oxfordshire, the champions of the Parasol League have moved to a ground at a stadium in Reading, where they beat Oxford city 1-nil in the FA Vase.
But an eagle eyed referee may have sabotaged their cup run…because the pitch was five yards too narrow.
And I think Oxford city will be praying for the chance to replay the match on a full sized pitch.
Now this week's Friday Feature takes us appropriately enough to church, to see what enthusiasts claim is the fastest growing sport around.
Tim Russon reports.
STEVE TOMALIN
HELEN PHILLIPS
JEAN BRANSBY
BEN BRANSBY
Voice over
Oh come all ye faithful…to St. Werburgh's Church…behind the stained glass there are no services these days…the only worshippers are mountain folk…
because this is one of the country's top indoor climbing walls…amid the pillars and pulpit are man made rock and cliff faces…
mountaineers come to this church in Bristol to train…to keep fit…to learn new techniques…its the only centre of its kind for miles around so its a base for all Central South climbers…
such as junior champion Ben Bransby from Cirencester who climbs with his mum Jean…and the Gloucester team of Helen Phillips and Steve Tomalin…
Steve Tomalin says: I started last year after a trip to the Alps.
We've progressed since then.
It's fantastic.
A superb training area for the winter.
You can learn all the basic techniques.
It's pretty close to the real thing.
Helen Phillips says: Sometimes it's more technical than outside.
Jean Bransby says: It's a lovely atmosphere in the church.
There's no unpleasentness.
Ben Bransby says: It's normally harder than outside and if you fall off, you're fine.
climbing they say is the fastest growing sport…indoor mountaineering is certainly packing them in…there's plans to build a centre like this in Cirencester…
Jean Bransby says: It's good for youngsters.
It's as safe as football or rugby!
indoor climbing offers a whole range of challenges…they can even get the mountains to move…the Alps the Himalayas…you can climb them all indoors…for climbers St. Werburgs is simply heaven
All over the country this week stately homes are being put to bed.
It's an annual ritual for the National Trust, as they close down their properties for the winter break.
SIMON GARRETT/Claydon House
MICHAEL SANDFORD/Joint-Custodian
AMY BRENNAN/Cleaner
ELIZABETH SANDFORD/Joint-Custodian
Voice over
It's not every house that has antique vases thirty feet up a wall to dust…fortunately even at Claydon House the problem comes but once a year.
Flicking a duster round this intricatly carved wooden pagoda is also a painstaking affair.
It's all part of putting a National Trust house to bed for the winter
Male speaker
In this room alone there are over five thousand books.
Each must be individually cleaned.
That takes quite a while to do in itself.
We have to get right up to the ceilings and dust right down to the floors of every room so that in Spring it's all ready for you to come and see
Voice over
Claydon is the ancestral home of the Verney family.
It's said one of them had designs on Florence Nightingale.
But when she turned him down he married her sister instead.
Florence was a frequent visitor…and had many of her ideas adopted in Parliament through the devotion of her brother-in-law.
But when the leaves fall even Florence goes under the dust sheets.
Amy Brennan's seen cleaning methods come and go over thirty years of service
Female speaker
When I first came the cleaning was more general.
Now we have to do more fine dusting and it's a lot more technical than it was all those years ago.
Maybe they know better how to look after things now.
We were always careful, but not as careful as we have to be now.
Voice over
There's no chance of dirt being swept under the carpet.
Dust, damp and temperature variation are the main enemies.
Protection comes in the form of hundreds of dust covers…individually handmade for each object in the material most suitable…and colour-coded by room
Female speaker
We have a very fine cotton lawn for the delicate items and a heavier calico for the more sturdy ones.
About 300 metres of each, I've torn to make the covers so far but I'm still doing it because each one has to be the right size and colour-coded by room.
It's not too bad because I enjoy sewing
Voice over
The National Trust runs its hundreds of properties as a charity…and apart from protecting its charges from the ravages of winter, covering up saves them five months dusting.
The procedure preserves many fragile artifacts for future generations…a sort of hibernation for the nation
Children with Down's Syndrome are being given expert help in learning how to talk to people and to each other at a special new unit.
Teachers say Down's children are just as curious and interested as other children.
But because they have less control over muscles, it's harder for them to form words and sounds.
With some concentrated help, they can learn to communicate much better with their own families and the world around them.
Gargy Patel reports.
OXFORD
PAT Le PREVOST Language Therapist
DEBBIE McKENZIE Mother
SIOBHAN CONWAY Mother
GEORGE McKENZIE Father
Voice over
2 year old Matthew is learning to recognise the word fish.
Stephie is using sign language to say teddy bear.
These youngsters were born with Down's Syndrome.
They have as much interest in learning to talk as any other child, but because they have less control over the muscles in the mouth, it's harder for them to express themselves.
In the past, it often meant being ignored, even regarded as less intelligent.
But with practical help using sign language and sounds, experts say learning becomes easier instead of being frustrating.
Being able to work together and learn from each other is especially important.
For years, teachers relied on using spare rooms in the Park hospital building.
After 18 months of fundraising and campaigning, parents and helpers have now moved into a complete new centre.
Room for families to meet, for individual therapy and a working playroom for the children.
Teaching them how to deal with people, even when they break for crisps and fruit juice.
The unit currently teaches around 21 children from babies to young schoolchildren.
Parents are encouraged to take part if they want to.
Those that do say they learn just as much as their children.
Language is the key to understanding those around you, and for these toddlers it's also the key to making sure others understand them.
Princess of Wales denies split with the Queen
The Princess of Wales has taken the rare step of issuing a statement on recent newspaper reports about her relationship with the Queen.
The Princess says allegations of friction are hurtful and untrue.
Major and Delors agree over GATT talks
The Prime Minister summoned the European Commission President to Downing Street where the two agreed that talks to try to avert a trade war with the United States must begin as soon as possible.
Company failures reach seventy-six per day
The latest figures show that seventy-six companies per day are failing in Britain, the highest rate since the recession began more than two years ago.
High court family divorce case begins
The first High Court case in which a child is seeking effectively to divorce her parents has begun behind closed doors.
FTSE down 8
The hundred shares index closed down eight point four at twenty-seven, o two point seven.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-four and up at two marks, forty-five.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good weekend.
A campaign's been launched to help elderly people feel safer in their homes.
The scheme offers free security devices and advice on everything from fire alarms to dealing with bogus callers.
Harriet Ryley reports.
LIBRARY PICTURES
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
JOYCE TAPSALL/Widow
JOHN PATTEN MP/Con Oxford West and Abingdon
Voice over
The results of a brutal attack on an elderly man living on his own.
Ralph Baughan was tipped from his wheelchair and set upon by two men who broke his wrist.
Statistically the chances of elderly people being attacked in their own homes are very low.
But pictures like these on television and in the papers make a vivid impression and increase the fear of attack.
Joyce Tapsall who's sixty-eight has lived alone longer than most widows — her husband died when she was twenty-nine.
She's very conscious of security.
She says she's most nervous when people come to her door in the evening — salespeople for instance— night-time calls can be very disturbing.
The Help the Aged Home Safety campaign in Abingdon has already fitted a smoke alarm for Joyce.
It will also replace a rotten back door, under a scheme with the local district council which offers grants of up to a thousand pounds for such work for elderly people in the town.
The campaign was launched by the town's Mp, John Patten.
He says elderly people are not attacked in their homes very often, but the fear of attack is great and the campaign will help to play down those fears.
On offer are door and window locks, door chains, spy-holes and smoke alarms.
The idea is to secure peace of mind for the elderly whose greatest worry is fear of attack.
She says this is one of the biggest fears of the elderly and this home safety campaign should alleviate that worry.
Help the Aged hope that can help put minds at rest — at the very least they are there to offer advice and information.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
GLENN HODDLE/Swindon Town
KEVIN KEEGAN/Newcastle United
Voice over
first pictures of the action on Goals Extra tomorrow tea-time…the Central LIVE Match…
Newcastle v Swindon on Sunday afternoon…don't miss it…
We've got a full house of games in rugby this weekend…
Gloucester who are licking their wounds are off to Pontypool while four local sides play in the first round of the Pilkington Cup 
Voice over
This was the week that wasn't for Gloucester's cherry and whites.
The national papers have been busy printing their obiturary and the faithful fans are still in mourning following last Saturday's dismal defeat against West Hartlepool.
They've got to stop the wrot and changes are on the way.
There are 8 new faces in the team to face Pontypool.
Martin Roberts replaces the injured Tim Smith at full-back.
Dave Kearsey is hooker in a new look front row, with Hawker injured, Phillips and Jones dropped, Hannaford, Ian Smith, Fowke are all rested.
The first round of the Pilkington Cup brings Lydney, Berry Hill, Henley and Hereford into play.
The big match is at Coundon Road, where Hereford, who took on the might of Bath a few seasons ago try to kill the giants of Coventry.
now our action round up this week is more like a parade of champions…as Nigel Mansell races into the sunset over in Australia…we've got Milton Keynes sailing in with a winning windsurfer…and the best of the British ice skaters 
Voice over
Down under, the man who's turned the motor racing world upside down this season.
Nigel Mansell takes his place on the grid in Adelaide for the last Grand Prix of the season; the last race of his championship winning year.
Mansell is off to America, so this could be his very last drive in formula one.
The pit lane, though, reckons Red 5 will return.
The windsurfing season has blown itself out too.
Another Central South winner here is Penny Tyler from Milton Keynes.
She's won the womens' championships for the third year running.
Milton Keynes made two more champions this week, as Britain's top ice skaters competed for the National Title at the Bladerunner club.
John Martin took the Mens Title.
Charlene Von Saher won the womens.
She's the new British ice queen.
Coming up this weekend at Moreton in Marsh.
Some of the country's top long distance runners are competing in a big 10 kilometre race, which includes an inter-counties match and the Gloucestershire county championship.
At Radley in Oxfordshire, former English badminton champion, Julie Bradbury from Bladon is amongst the favourites in the Oxfordshire Open Tournament.
And on Sunday, the Oxfordshire under 18's hockey team are hoping to crown their season by winning the Southern Counties Championship.
The sporting world is full of fairy tales…but if the name of Samantha Raeisi ever reaches the headlines its going to be quite a story…she's from Swindon…she's a mum…she's a model…and a few years ago she was given just a few weeks to live…
Now Samantha is chasing fame and fortune in a racing car…
SAMANTHA RAEISI
Voice over
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
CULHAM/Oxfordshire
JOHN STEVENS/Managing Director
ALAN ROBERTS/National Farmers' Union
Voice over
Jacques Delors had originally intended to spend the afternoon looking around the JET Fusion Project at Culham…but his visit was cut back to just over an hour after an emergency meeting with Prime Minister John Major.
Mr Delors, president of the European Commission, has been blamed for the threat of a trade war which will hit farmers first…then more specialist manufacturers like the Cotswold Perfumery in Bourton On The Water.
Male speaker
My message is we make the materials to sell and its up to the politicians to create the conditions for us to sell them
Voice over
The Gloucestershire company has spent the last five years building up an export market in America with department stores now taking their products.
If the United States threatens to tax imported perfume it will double the price and take away nearly half their business.
It will mean a loss of hundreds of thousands of pounds.
Male speaker
The United States is a very important market for us.
They appreciate well mader British Goods
Voice over
The trade row is centred on the production of Oil Seed Rape, a widespread crop throughout the region.
The sanctions have been aimed at France But Britain's membership of the European Commission means it becomes involved as well.
Male speaker
Farmers are going out of business at the rate of five thousand every year.
This is only going to accelerate that process
Voice over
If sanctions continue they could affect the EMI Compact Disc worksa in Swindon…at the moment they export between ten and twenty thousand discs a month to America.
Voice over
By the end of today's visit mr Delors had clearly had enough of the controversy.
Male speaker
Not about that.
He ignores question on future of Europe.
Clearly he was saving his powder for the next negotiating battle in the GATT talks.
The media interest in the collapse of the GATT negotiations and the first signs of a world trade war have overshadowed the REAL reasons for Jacques Delors' visit today.
He had been planning to talk to scientists there about their fears for the future when the project ends.
Our reporter Nick Clark joins us from JET.
NICK CLARK/Live from JET
JERRY GOFF/IPMS
Voice over
An RAF base is to close with the loss of up to 140 civilian jobs.
RAF Hereford will shut down because of cutbacks in defence spending.
The base has been training airmen for more than half a century.
Richard Barnett reports:
CREDENHILL/Hereford
Grp Capt MARTYN STEER/Commanding Officer
COLIN SHEPHERD MP/Con Hereford
Voice over
RAF Hereford, based at Credenhill just outside the city, has been training RAF officers and men since 1940 in everything from catering to secretarial work.
The Ministry of Defence announced today that it will close in 20 months time as part of cutbacks in defence spending.
The base currently trains around 8,000 airmen and officers a year in administrative and leadership skills.
The work done at Hereford will be transferred to RAF Halton in Buckinghamshire.
140 civilians work at the base and those who can't be transferred to other defence jobs will be made redundant.
Male speaker
It's always a very sad day when a base closes.
The staff have reacted stoically to the news.
Voice over
Hereford MP Colin Shepherd has lobbied to keep the base open.
Male speaker
It's very disappointing.
He had hoped Hereford RAF base could be saved.
Voice over
With companies in Hereford shedding staff in the recession, the outlook for those who lose their jobs at the RAF base is bleak.
The sun will set for the last time on RAF Hereford in July 1994.
A new eighty million pound train service is in chaos because of leaves on the line.
British Rail recently put fares up on the affected routes saying customers had to pay for the vast improvements they'd made.
Simon Garrett reports 
BRITISH RAIL VIDEO
OXFORD
RICHARD FEARN/Thames and Chiltern Line
Voice over
If this is the age of the train it's the season of the leaf.
Quarter of all services on the prestigious Thames and Chiltern routes are carrying fewer carriages or arriving late because of the problem.
Rotten vegetation causes wheels to skid.
Metal grinds on metal.
But customers are largely unsympathetic.
Female speaker
They should get out and cut the trees back from the lines so they don't have the problem.
Voice over
The introduction of new turbo trains brought with it double the rate of inflation fare increases.
They suffer badly from the leaf menace.
In Network Southeast, 3,000 sets of wheels will be damaged this year at a cost of half a million pounds.
Thousands of journeys will be delayed.
Male speaker
I do understand.
Voice over
The leaf season should be over in 2 weeks, when a resumption of normal service is promised.
In BR's defence they say railways all over Europe suffer the same problems.
In this country, experiments are continuing with sticky goo to counteract the slippery leaf mould.
A fortune awaits the inventor who can solve the problem once and for all.
The estranged wife of the Marquis of Blandford says he's making a real effort to get back on the straight and narrow.
Becky Blandford says the former drug addict is giving up his reckless life and trying to get to know their young son.
But, in a television interview, she appeared to rule out the possibility of a reconciliation.
June 1993/ABI DONALD/Reporting
24 February 1990
THIS MORNING/Granada Television
LADY BECKY BLANDFORD
Voice over
Jamie Blandford during one of his worst periods, following his arrest for not paying 10,000 pounds maintenance to his wife and on his way to Pentonville.
The last few years have been rocky for the heir to the Blenheim Palace estate.
He seemed to have kicked his heroin addiction and given up his unorthodox lifestyle three years ago when he married Becky Few-Brown but soon the marriage broke down.
Now Becky Blandford, although separated from her husband has been defending him on the daytime television programme, This morning.
Female speaker
He's making a very big effort now and I hope it lasts.
Voice over
Judy Finnegan says.
Does that make things easier between the two of you?
Female speaker
Yes I'm very happy because George has now got a father back again, and that's what counts.
And James is now behaving like a father.
Voice over
Judy says.
But you don't want him to behave like a husband?
Female speaker
I'm bailing out of that one.
Voice over
It appears that the marchioness meant she was bailing out of answering the question, rather than bailing out of her marriage.
The Marquis may have had a diggicult year but the last few months though have been more difficult for Becky Blandford.
She suffered serious head injuries when she fell from her horse last year.
She's still undergoing treatment and hasn't yet made a full recovery.
Female speaker
The memory is very bad.
And I have headaches it just goes on and on.
Voice over
The injuries were very serious her face she's still having therapy for partial paralysis of the face, and today she paid tribute to staff at the Radcliffe Infirmary who treated her.
It's hoped within the next two years she'll make a full recovery, but it's still not certain whether her marriage will ever recover.
A village which was flooded three times in a year has been celebrating the fact that it will never happen again.
Flood prevention work has just been completed, and the houses stayed dry through the wettest October on record.
So, what better excuse for a street party?
LIZ HANNAM/Bloxham
May 1992/DIANE KITSON/Flood Victim
RICHARD KITSON/Flood Victim
FRED MABBS/Flood Victim
KEITH MITCHELL/County
JOHN DORRA/National Rivers Authority
Voice over
This used to be a regular sight in the village of Bloxham, near Banbury.
Last Winter they suffered the worst floods for fifty years, with some homes being hit three times.
Female speaker
We can't live in it.
It's completely ruined the furniture.
We'll have to have all the floorboards ripped-up.
Voice over
Eighteen months later and the villagers are getting together to hold a street party to celebrate the completion of the flood relief work.
Male speaker
We can relax.
When it's raining you don't have to worry so much.
Male speaker
One's nerves are shattered.
Every time it rains you look out the window to see if it's going to happen again.
We're all delighted with the work that's been done.
Voice over
The flood relief scheme was co-ordinated by Cherwell District Council.
The brook had to be cleared and this three hundred year old bridge widened.
It required the co-operation of villagers, the county council and the National Rivers Authority.
Male speaker
We had to get people round the table and get them to speak to one another and get them to share the cost.
If one bit of the brook is cleared and not the rest it just creates a problem somewhere else.
We have to co-ordinate it all and work together.
Voice over
Although the relief work should prevent the recurrence of the worst of the floods, there can be no absolute guarantee.
Male speaker
You cant't guarantee it.
Weather patterns change.
Storms come and go.
Storms come and go and people get flooded.
That's a fact of nature.
Voice over
The village has however survived one of the wettest Octobers on record, so people living there are hoping they're now home and dry.
Still to come on Central News, the ups and Downs of Hereford United.
Is it the end of the road at Edgar Street?
And memories of a miner.
The boys who kept the home fires burning.
In Central News tonight: Facing eviction.
A dying man and his family to be thrown out by mortgage firm.
They took my furniture.
Official complaint after police raid on a flat.
And love is…doing the washing up.
The couple who are no longer Home and Away.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Mr Harris, who's now in a hospice, hit financial problems when his building firm went bankrupt.
Debt counsellors say the eviction threat is one of the worst cases they've dealt with, and even if the family is thrown out, the mortgage company won't get any of its money back.
GRAEME BOWD/Sandford on Thames
MAUREEN HARRIS/Wife
ANDREW LANE/Oxfordshire Money Advice Project
DALE HARRIS/Son
Voice over
Deep in debt the Harris family are facing eviction over mortgage arrears.
But for Maureen Harris and her nine children there's an even greater worry.
Her husband Peter seen here last Christmas, is now dying of throat cancer.
Tonight he's at a hospice in Oxford.
The family has lived here in Sandford for 17 years.
Debts started to build up when Mr Harris's building firm collapsed and he went bankrupt.
A broker advised Mrs Harris to take what she thought was a short term loan secured on the house.
In fact it turned out to be a second mortgage.
The interest rate was 39 per cent.
She says she didn't understand the form she was singing.
It left her paying more than £300 a month for 30 years.
She only received £6,000 of the loan.
Their troubles began in the mid eighties.
The house had been paid for but when Mr Harris went bankrupt it went to the receiver.
But MRS HARRIS was allowed to buy it back with a mortgage of £75,000, its value at the time.
They borrowed more money for living expenses, then the second mortgage of £16,000 from a company call Dorend.
With interest the total debt is now £135,000, far more than the house is worth.
If it's sold the first lender takes priority.
So there seems little chance that Dorend will get any of THEIR money back.
A debt counsellor who's been helping the family says the lender has shown no compassion.
He says it's one of the worst cases he's seen.
The mortgage company don't stand to gain anything if the houyse is repossessed.
But tonight the family were flying a union flag outside their home.
They say they won't leave without a fight.
He said his father did all the work on the house after he bought it.
If they have to leavce they'll knock it down.
On Thursday they'll ask a judge to postpone the possession order.
If they lose they could be homeless by Christmas.
The lenders Dorend have refused to comment on the case.
A man has lodged a formal complaint and is demanding compensation from the police for breaking into his flat and confiscating his furniture.
They were investigating alleged deception by his flatmate, which he says he had nothing to do with.
ROBIN POWELL/Cheltenham
GRAHAM DONAGHUE/Tenant
MARK HODGES/Graham's Flatmate
Voice over
This was the sight which greeted Graham Donaghue, on returning to his rented flat in Cheltenham after visiting relatives.
All his furniture was missing…and his bedroom ransacked.
At first he thought he'd been burgled, but he was astonished to find when he called the police that they'd done it.
Earlier his flatmate Mark Hodges had been interviewed at the police station about alleged deception.
Mark says he was accompanied to the flat, but then realised he didn't have the right keys…he claims he offered to find Graham, but the officers broke in straight .It's claimed the officers left these tyre marks on the front lawn…and this typewritten note.
The police deny leaving any meaasge, but they've declined to be interviewed.
A spokesman told us: The officers who searched the house were using their statutory powers.
The doors had to be forced, but photographs were taken, as is usual police practice.
It would be wrong to comment further.
But Graham Donaghue is demanding compensation.
Graham and Mark have been asked to find more than £500 to repair the hallway or risk being evicted.
In the meantime, they're making do without furniture.
Police are hunting a gang of armed robbers who've invaded three homes of people in their eighties.
A retired senior army officer and the mother of a director of Barclay's Bank were among the victims.
SIMON GARRETT/Watlington
Det Insp STEVE EVANS/Thames Valley Police
KINGSHILL/Buckinghamshire
Sir John Mogg, the 80 year old former deputy supreme allied commander in Europe tried to fight off the robbers who invaded his Watlington home armed with a knife.
He was tied up.
His wife was thrown across a room and knocked unconscious.
After an hour the two men left with silver and jewellry.
The same men are thought responsible for two similar attacks in Buckinghamshire on Bonfire night.
Widow Jo Robinson who's eighty-four and walks with sticks was attacked in her home in Great Missenden
Male speaker
She was forced face down on the bed while another man went through her belongings.
She was foreced downstairs and into her white mini car and forced to drive here to Kingshill
Voice over
The two men told Mrs Robinson to take them to her rich friends.
After an hour imprisoned with them in her own car, a white mini, they chose the home in nearby Kingshill of the mother of Sir Nigel Mobbs, a director of Barclay's Bank.
But the Mobbs had a panic button in the house, and Mrs Mobbs set off the alarm.
The men dumped the mini outside Great Missenden library.
None of the elderly people involved is seriously hurt, but police say they quite easily could have been.
Speaking about the attack on his mother's home…
Sir Nigel Mobbs said:
Male speaker
It was a horrific crime and I hope the two thugs who did it can be apprehended and sent away for a long time.’
A man who's been forced to live on the other side of the world from his wife for two years because of immigration red tape has finally been told he can join her.
Philip and Kelly Morle were separated the day after their wedding when Kelly was forced to return to Australia.
KATE GARRAWAY/Cirencester
PHILIP MORLE/Husband
KELLY MORLE/Wife
Voice over
For Philip and Kelly Morle, washing up isn't just a chore.
Merely being together makes it a real treat.
In the two years they've been married they have only had one day together.
Kelly who's Australian was forced to return home the day after their wedding.
Philip who's a theatre director planned to follow in a week.
But then came the news his immigration application had been delayed a few weeks because he's a diabetic.
The authorities feared he'd be a drain on the health service.
The few weeks turned into one hundred and four weeks.
A separation that was hard to bear.
Male speaker
It was a case of getting up late and trying to maek the day as short as possible.
Then going to bed early and trying to write lots of letters and talk to Kelly on the phone and that is what life was like.
Female speaker
It was very difficult with some of the authorities saying yes he could come and others saying no.
It was hard because we didn't know anything for sure.
Voice over
But Philip and Kelly never gave up their dream of being together.
They campaigned from two hemispheres, putting pressure MP's.
Philip was forced to undergo hundreds of private medical tests which cost over six hundred pounds.
Male speaker
I was writing to my MP who was writing to the Secretary of State who was writing to the High Commisioner and it just went on.
It was just a feeling of anger and desperation.
Voice over
Philip's visa has finally come through and Kelly has returned to Britain to help him get ready for married life in Australia.
But their battle with the authorities isn't entirely over.
Now they are campaigning to be allowed to take their pet cat with them.
A man accused of murdering one pub customer and injuring another, has claimed he was acting in self defence.
NORTHAMPTON
It's alleged, that Nicholas Hyde, from Northampton stabbed Donald Allison to death at the Toby Inn at Thorplands in October last year.
He's also accused of wounding another customer.
Hyde's defence counsel has told Northampton Crown court that provocation would be an issue in the trial.
Hyde has pleaded not guilty to both charges.
Two hundred and fifty workers at a factory recently taken over by an American company have been given their redundancy notices today.
BROCKWORTH/Gloucestershire
Safety work has begun in preparation for the demolition of one of Swindon's most controversial buildings.
SWINDON
Queen's Drive House in Walcot is owned by British Telecom.
But it's been unused for more than two years and is now derelict.
There were complaints that the building had become an eyesore, and that asbestos used in its construction was a danger to children tempted to play there.
The demolition's being carried out by Thamesdown Council.
Police have carried out an operation to catch poachers taking part in the illegal sport of hare-coursing.
The raid was a result of the Countrywatch scheme, which was launched last month to prevent poaching.
A network of farmers and gamekeepers used CB radios to alert each other about suspicious activity.
Officers pursued nearly a hundred people who were seen chasing deer, badgers, foxes and hares across South Oxfordshire and Berkshire.
Library Pictures
Celebrities have given a big welcome back to a theatre that's reopened after a two hundred thousand pound pound refit.
After years of uncertainty, the new management says the Roses Theatre now has a bright future.
Guests wishing it well included Robert Lindsay and Michael Palin.
RICHARD BARNETT Tewkesbury
ROGER BILDER Theatre Manager
Voice over
The Gala night at the Roses Theatre in Tewkesbury welcomed a new comedy double act…
Robert Lindsay and Michael Palin.
They joined other stars to celebrate the theatre's reopening after a seven month long 200,000 pound facelift.
For twelve years the theatre was run by former Crossroads actor Stan Stennett.
But in February he lost management control.
And there were calls for the theatre to close as it had become a big drain on local council finances.
The new management team say they're determined to ensure the theatre survives and pays its way by attracting a wider audience:
Male speaker
They hope to attract from a wide area.
Everyone locally is keen to support their local theatre.
Voice over
Now everyone hopes the curtain is opening at the Roses Theatre on a successful and prosperous future.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Court action on Royal photos
Lawyers for the Princess of Wales have been granted an injunction to prevent further publication of photographs of her exercising in a gym seen in the Sunday and Daily Mirror newspapers.
Earlier, the Princess issued a statement expressing her outrage and distress over the affair.
Greysteel murder charges
A man has appeared in an Ulster Court charged with eleven murders including seven at the Rising Sun pub in Greysteel.
Man admits murdering parents
Roderick Newall, a former Army Officer extradited to Jersey, has pleaded guilty to murdering his parents six years ago.
Actor at bridge demolition
The actor, Richard Todd, has joined war veterans for the demolition of the Pegasus Bridge in France, one of the first points to be liberated by the Allies in the Second World War.
FTSE down 8
The hundred shares index closed down eight points at thirty, seventy-seven point six.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-seven and down at two marks, fifty.
Welcome back: In a few minutes we'll be turning back the clock with the men who kept Britain's coalmines working during the Second World War.
But first, with the sports news, here's Erika.
ERIKA BARNES
Things are going from bad to worse.
Defeats for Swindon and Hereford.
A point for Oxford.
Still not enough to ease the misery for the Central South football sides.
BBC Sport Pictures
Voice over
Humiliation!
Desparation!
Resignation?
Three words to sum up the feelings of the Hereford fans on Saturday.
They want United's Directors to quit after United's fifth defeat in six games.
Player Manager Greg Downs is living up to his name.
He's down, but not out.
He's still got a job to do.
To lift his tiny squad, ready for two cup games next weekend.
Back to the last, when Chester City had a field day.
As early as the first minute they had a goal disallowed.
It was a warning of what was in store.
Five more goals went past Alan Judge.
The first courtesy of his own man, Colin Anderson.
Hereford hung in there, they had their chances to make amends.
But shortly before the break, it was former Hereford player Paul Wheeler who put Chester two ahead.
The second half brought more misery.
An early goal from Chris Lightfoot secured victory for the visitors…
Two more strikes from David Pugh and then Lightfoot again just added insult to injury.
Swindon Manager John Gorman said’ he feels like a boxer who keeps getting knocked down’.
Town are certainly on the ropes.
This time a three nil defeat at the hands of Wimbledon.
It'll be some heavyweight challenge for Town to pick themselves up off the floor and fight their way out of trouble.
Swindon may feel the need some help from above…though unlike the other boxing match of the weekend…a lunatic parachutist probably isn't the answer.
Manager John Gorman says they don't need any more sympathy…or advice…they just need results.
Well, it took a Milwall old boy, who's now United's newboy…to become the weekends golden boy.
John Byrne made both Oxford's goals in their two all draw at Milwall.
He nearly scored himself.
It brought hope and a valuable point to the bottom of the table side.
It was Milwall who took the lead after nineteen minutes.
Mark Kennedy, who'd been accused by his manager of not working hard enough, earned his reward for this shot.
Oxford left it until the second half for their equaliser.
Joey Beauchamp had two attempts at goal.
The first failed…but there was no messing with his second.
And then a touch of deja vue.
How often have we seen Oxford let in a goal…just after scoring themselves?
Mark Kennedy bagged his second within seconds of United's equaliser.
But what happened next brought some hope on an otherwise bleak weekend.
United came back again to claim the point.
Chris Allen's wonderful cross, was nudged back by Byrne and Nick Cusack was head and shoulders above the rest to claim the goal.
And gloom and doom for Gloucester Rugby too.
Lowly Nottingham took them to task…and took them apart…26-14.
KEITH RICHARDSON/Gloucester Coach
Voice over
Gloucester lost everything…their confidence…their pride…an embarassing defeat by second division strugglers.
Male speaker
Usually there's pride and passion in Gloucester.
But coaching and plans went out of the window.
The team's a shadow of its former self.
Voice over
Nottingham took the initiative early on.
Buster Musto ran through for a touchdown by the posts.
Guy Gregory, who was later to prove the match winner, easily converted.
Gloucester needed a kick start to get into the game.
Three penalties helped put them in front.
But not for long.
Gregory put the boot in…metaphorically speaking!
More penalty kicks and more points on the board.
A glimmer of hope for Gloucester.
John Hawker powered through for a try.
But the points just evaporated as the conversion and other penalty chances went wide.
The second Nottingham try put the final nail into Gloucester's coffin.
A kamakasi kick, easily intercepted.
And Richard Bygrave killed off the game.
Male speaker
The team have to pick themselves up and perform on a Saturday.
If they don't do it in the league against Bristol then the club is in serious trouble.
Voice over
A unique collection of drawings and paintings of life in a coal mine are going on display.
The artist was one of the so called Bevin boys, who were drafted in to work as miners during the last war.
KEN GOODWIN/Condicote
JILL HOLLOWAY/Wife
Voice over
They were called Bevin Boys and during second world war their front line was the not a battlefield, but a coalface.
Named after Ernest Bevin, the minister of labour, they were needed to keep the pits open, to fuel Britain's war effort.
One Bevin boy was eighteen year old Ted Holloway.
A young artist, the mines fascinated him.
He produced thousands of drawings and paintings, which after his death his wife, who lives in the Cotswolds, published in a book.
She says that the lighting conditions in the mine and the great contrast to life above ground contributed to his artistic fascination for the subject.
A 50th anniversary meeting of Bevin Boys in Stoke on Trent also marks the opening of the Ted Holloway exhibition which will tour mining areas throughout Britain.
Many former Bevin Boys feel that their wartime contribution was quickly forgotten.
He says that Churchill had told them they could be proud to have mined coal for the war effort.
But he feels they were never appreciated as much as those who served in the forces.
Mrs Holloway says that she's sad that a once great industry now seems to be in terminal decline.
But she hopes that the exhibition of her husbands work will revive memories of the great contribution made during the war by the Bevin boys.
A new society's been formed to commemorate the life and place in history of a seventeenth century squire.
John Hampden's admirers claim he was the Winston Churchill of the English Civil War, and played a vital role in the birth of democracy.
Simon Garrett reports 
GREAT HAMPDEN/Buckinghamshire
Dr JOHN ADAIR/Historian
JULIAN BING/Descendant/Earl of Strafford
MILES HOBART-HAMPDEN/Earl of Buckinghamshire
Dr FRANK HANSFORD-MILLER/Historian
Voice over
John Hampden's Regiment of Foot guarded the inaugural meeting of the Hampden Society and made sure everyone paid their initial £5 subscription.
The man himself might not of approved.
Owner of most of Buckinghamshire, he refused to pay 20 shillings tax because Charles the 1st hadn't consulted Parliament.
It eventually led to Civil War.
Male speaker
In 1640 he was the Winston Churchill of the English nation.
He was the first commoner to stand up to the might of the king.
He was the father of democracy and the forerunner of all our Prime Ministers.
Voice over
During his life Hampden contrived the execution of the King's advisor the Earl of Strafford.
The Earl's descendant accepted the apologies of Hampden's heir.
Male speaker
John Hampden was a tremendous man and it's right that future generations can now recognise that.
Of course I totally forgive what went before.
Voice over
Hampden's statue guards the entrance to St Stephens Hall, formerly chamber of the House of Commons.
Hampden refused to buy a knighthood from the king.
His descendant today is Earl of Buckinghamshire.
He says his ancestor was an incredibly brave man.
Male speaker
We have no conception now of just what he undertook.
I would like his perserverance, his strength of character and some of his patience.
Voice over
Hampden's great house was bought by Hammer films in the 70's to make horror movies.
Now restored it's a fitting meeting place.
One of the founders so admired the puritan he stood for Parliament in 1968 under the banner of the John Hampden New Freedom Party.
Male speaker
I looked round in history for a fitting symbol for a party which would repesent the individual citizen against the state and the person I alighted on was John Hampden.
Voice over
For many of the society's members, the fascination with Hampden has been lifelong.
Male speaker
I first heard about Hampden on a radio programme when I was a boy off sick from school and I've been interested in him and his life ever since.
Voice over
Hampden fought and died for the sovereignty of Parliament.
He would have followed the Maastricht debate with great interest.
Male speaker
Undoubtedly yes, I don't think he would have been too happy with any threat to English liberty.
Voice over
Hampden's cousin, Oliver Cromwell, eventually ruled Britain.
Some in the society believe John would have been there instead had he lived.
Murder suspect found dead in desert
Ian Spiro, the businessman wanted for questioning after his wife and children were found murdered, has been found dead in the California desert.
Yeltsin and Major in Downing Street talks
Russian Leader Boris Yeltsin has met John Major for arms and economy talks in Downing Street.
FTSE down 7
The hundred shares index closed down seven point three at twenty-six, ninety-five point four.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-three and down at two marks, forty-three.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
GLENN HODDLE/Swindon Town
Voice over
Glenn Hoddle is the Manager of the Month; that's official and on the evidence of this top of the table battle with Newcastle his team must be serious contenders for promotion to the premier league.
The football played by both sides yesterday, was top class.
Newcastle had the best of the chances or looked a shade more dangerous in front of goal, but a draw was the right result.
And it just goes to show that quality can be as big a crowd puller as goals.
Swindon's football was a delight.
They make the ball do the work and there's not many teams who'll dare go at Newcastle in front of a packed house at St James' Park.
Everyone in the Town team played a part.
Hammond was outstanding in goal and when he was beaten, there was always Captain Cool; Colin Calderwood.
Micky Hazard was made man of the match.
Martin Ling wasn't far behind.
Here they are together.
What a duet; what a game for Glenn Hoddle and his men.
GLenn Hoddle says he's delighted with his team.
And coming up on the rails in the first division are Oxford United.
They've gone seven league games unbeaten now.
On Saturday they banged 3 past Southend.
John Durnin got the first after 18 minutes.
10 minutes later, he was back with number 2 and United were coasting.
At the back, the defence went to work and Paul Reece performed his tricks again to keep Oxford in command.
United got a 3rd, just before half-time.
David Penney the scorer and after what happened against Portsmouth last week they realised even a 3-goal lead isn't safe these days.
So they kept on going for goals; didn't get any, but it wasn't for the lack of trying; Southend 0; Oxford 3.
In the 3rd division Hereford got off to a flyer against Chesterfield at Edgar Street.
Defender, Andy Theodosiou celebrated his return to the team with a goal.
United are playing well.
They're worth watching and they deserve better than they're getting, but they've got to sharpen up in front of goal.
After that miss, United's luck ran out.
Chesterfield came back with a penalty, as Lancaster crash landed in the area.
Sorry ref, you were wrong.
Keeper Judge never touched him let alone trip him.
But the ref's decision was final so too was Lee Turnbull's penalty.
Worse to come Chesterfield took the lead at the start of the second half with a goal from Paul Lemon.
The ball came off the studs on his boot.
No justice I'm afraid for Hereford.
They ran themselves into the ground, ran Chesterfield off the pitch, but they couldn't get another goal.
And as often happens, United were so committed to attack, that they left the drawbridge down at the back and Lemon scored another in the last minute to make it Hereford 1; Chesterfield 3.
We've got the Hereford rugby team in cup action in a moment but first to one of the happiest places of the day and that's Gloucester…folk there are smiling again because the cherry and whites are winning again…on saturday they won twenty four…ten at Pontypool 
Voice over
A few years ago no …came away from Pontypool without a few bruises and a thorough beating by the famous front row…those days have long gone…Pontypool are not the force they were…some fear it could be said of Gloucester too…not after this win…
Martin Roberts…
Damian Cummins…
Julian Davis and Derek Morgan got the tries…watching them all the way was coach Keith Richardson
and that's all there is to it…let's hope Gloucester have learnt their lesson for the season…
an extra game for you tonight here's Hereford's moment of glory against Coventry in the first round of the Pilkington Cup at Coundon Road on Saturday…
On paper on form hereford had no chance but they gave it everything and took an early lead with a try from Ivan Powell…
Coventry used to be one of the best teams in England…they've won the cup twice…now they're in the second division and they had a hard time on saturday…five penalty kicks saw them through…with three tries…none of which were that dazzling…it was Hereford who entertained…their last try was something special something to remember…
Dave Rogers went for broke…went for the line on his own and made it…a great effort but Coventry held on to win by thirty four points to fifteen…
so just one Central South team in the cup now…and that's Gloucester who come into the third round…for a tough old game on Tyneside…that's in three weeks time
even though they lost Hereford still went and celebrated…and we've a few more Central South folk to congratulate tonight…here they are 
Voice over
Mike Teague the Gloucester iron man is back in the England rugby team to face South Africa at twickenham on saturday…
Teague's career looked all over after the world cup final…but he's beaten off a shoulder injury and is back at his best…so too is Oxfordshire jockey Richard Dunwoody he rode five winners on saturday…today he won again on the Nicholson trained Now Your Talkin…he's the top jockey with 40 winners…now he's talkin…the Williams team from Didcot don't do a lot of talking apart from Nigel of course but they've swept the board in formula one this season…
Oxford's Eddie Jordan finished his motor racing season by winning his first point of the year in Australia…but the gold medal tonight goes to the Laser boat building firm of Banbury their craft will be sailing in the the next Olympics in a class of its very own
A critically-ill baby is being flown to Oxford from the war zone in Bosnia for an operation to save her life.
The British Government lifted red tape restrictions so that a charity here could fly in the eight-month-old girl, and give her the best chance of survival.
Phil Bayles reports 
KEVIN BIRD/Charity Worker
GERALD SMITH/Rescue Co-ordinator
The apparently calm, almost holiday mood of this Bosnian couple disguises the sheer terror they've endured over the past few weeks.
Not only have they suffered the nightmares of the civil war, but as each day has passed, they've known that their daughter has moved a stage closer to death.
As baby Odessa's condition deteriorated they were forced by the war to leave her in a hospital in Belgrade.
They were later reunited by the Red Cross, but two days ago the shelling became so bad they were forced to flee.
A Briton known to leaders of a charity based in Northampton discovered them and fled with them to the relative safety of Split.
Little Odessa Blagajek has a heart tumour which needs immediate surgery.
Kevin Bird took them to Split because he thought he get could from there to Britain.
He was stunned to find that visa restrictions just introduced by the British threatened the baby's life.
But today, Odessa's chances looked much brighter thanks to the intervention of a Northamptonshire headmaster who has brought hundreds of Bosnians to Britain.
Gerald Smith said the visa restrictions would be lifted and was on the phone to a woman in the United States to tell her how her $500 gift would be spent.
Barring any last minutes hitches, Odessa and her mother and father will be on a plane to Heathrow in the next few days.
Charities and Government officials pulled together to get her out.
Now Gerald Smith wants many more babies to follow Odessa.
He's asked John Major to order a massive Dunkirk-style evacuation of refugees by aircraft carriers.
The Marquis of Blandford has insisted he can't be stopped from succeeding his father as the next Duke Of Marlborough.
Jamie Blandford broke his silence after two jail terms and an estranged marriage, to appear on breakfast television.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
THE BIG BREAKFAST/Planet 24
JAMIE BLANDFORD
HAROLD BROOKES BAKER/Burkes Peerage
Voice over
Looking relaxed, Jamie Blandford reclined on Channel Four's Big Breakfast studio bed, with his interviewer, Paula Yates and opened up about his controversial life.
That included his descent into drug addiction and his relationship with his father, the Duke of Marlborough.
Female speaker
What happened when your dad found out.
He says: He just didn't understand.
He didn't think it could happen to me or that it could be a blot on our landscape.
So he just denied it.
She says: So that made it easier for you to carry on then.
He says: yes
Voice over
The Marquis was born to inherit Blenheim Palace, one of Europe's most impressive stately homes.
He's the eldest son of the Duke of Marlborough, but has fallen out with his father after 2 jail sentences for drugs and driving offences.
He's also split from his wife Becky and she has custody of their son.
Female speaker
Are you worried that your father might try to disinherit you if you go off the tracks again…
He says: He can't disinherit me, it's an irrevocable legacy.
She says: That's quite wonderful isn't it.
He says:Yes it is
Voice over
Jamie Blandford admitted things were different for him than for his predecessors, most of whom he described as living in blissful ignorance of the world.
Experts on noble lineage detect a change in the thirty six year old heir.
It's thought he's becoming more responsible.
Male speaker
He's beginning to become more accessible, more thoughtful and more interested in what's happening at Blenheim which is one of the great national institutions.
I think he will become a very good administrator.
Harold Brookes Baker.
Voice over
Whether that stretches to being reunited with his wife and son is unknown.
That was a subject he chose to stay silent on.
In part two: Just the ticket.
Another good awayday for Oxford.
And the Winston Churchill of his day.
A rebel takes his place in society.
Down then out.
Cruelty farmer jailed, then released on appeal.
Free at last…the traveller framed on drugs charges.
And they can't do it.
Jamie Blandford insists he won't be disinherited.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Colin French has a long record for animal cruelty, and there were cheers in the public gallery as he was taken away.
Animal rights campaigners say they're bitterly disappointed that he's still free.
Gareth Furby reports.
BUCKINGHAM
LILLIAN BUCKNER/Animal Rights Campaigner
JIM BUCKNER/Protester
Chief Insp DOUG DAVIDSON/RSPCA
Voice over
A group of animal rights activists were waiting for Colin French as he arrived at court for sentencing.
They shout at him that he's going down.
French's solicitor urged the magistrates to ignore the demonstration.
He claimed his client had been victimised.
But the magistrates said French had flouted the court order and hisrecord — of sixty five convictions for animal cruelty — was so serious only a prison sentence was appropriate.
As Colin French was taken away by police animal rights supporters in the public gallery began to cheer and clap.
But their joyb was shortlived.
Just a few minutes later French was released on bail pending an appeal.
For his own protection he was escorted from the court by police.
At this point the demonstrators beleived he was on his way to prison.
But within less than an hour he was back on his farm.
She says its wrong.
He says he should have gone straight to prison.
He says they'll await the outcome of the appeal with interest.
It's expected the appeal will be heard within the next six to eight weeks, until then Colin French is free on bail.
CHRIS MOORE/Winslow/Buckinghamshire
APRIL 1990
DECEMBER 1990
5 MARCH 1991
Chief Insp DOUG DAVIDSON/RSPCA
26 MARCH 1991
COLIN FRENCH/Speaking in 1991
OCTOBER 1991
MARCH 1992
Voice over
And tomorrow we begin a three-part series on the work of the RSPCA 
We've been behind the scenes of the Society, which is funded entirely from public donations.
We see its inspectors at work, and share the joys and the frustrations of those who dedicate their lives to saving animals.
That's Crusade against Cruelty, tomorrow, at six twenty five.
A British tourist freed after two years in an Indian jail may have to wait another four months to leave the country.
Nick Brown was wrongly imprisoned, and has criticised the Foreign Office for not getting him released earlier.
Nick Clark reports.
STEPHEN JACOBI/Fair Trials Abroad
It was while travelling through Goa in December 1990, that Nick Brown began a living nightmare.
He was arrested by police, who he said, planted cannabis on him to extort a bribe.
His release after 2 years in Indian jails, follows the efforts of his mother at home in Bampton in Oxfordshire, who even stood against Douglas Hurd in the last election to draw attention to her son's plight.
Yesterday an appeal court found Nick was wrongly convicted.
And today, he's just enjoying being free.
Male speaker
Chiefly there's a feeling of immense relief.
I'm lucky to have such a caring family.
Female speaker
I just can not describe the feeling of relief.
We're both very tired too.
Voice over
As well as relief, there's anger too at the way the Foreign Office initially handled the case.
Male speaker
There seemed to say there's no smoke without fire.
Male speaker
The turning point was Mrs Brown's campaign against the Foreign Secretary.
Voice over
The Foreign Office tonight said: We did as much as we properly could and extended considerable assistance to Mrs Brown's efforts.
Despite the good news.
there's still a feeling Nick Brown may not yet be out of the woods.
Legal technicalities mean he could have to stay in Goa for another 4 months and understandably he just wants to get home.
In Central News tonight.
A hundred thousand pounds a year.
Locking up ONE tearaway could mean council cuts.
The lost generation.
The young singles struggling on income support.
And what a drag!
Smokers told, do it in your OWN time.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Keeping the youth in a special secure unit is stretching the council's social services budget to the limit, and it may not be able to afford to replace some staff when they leave.
But one MP said tonight that the money being spent on ONE youth is a disgrace.
KEN GOODWIN/Reporting
FRED DAVIES/Gloucestershire Social Services
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con
Voice over
The Earl's Wood secure unit for young offenders is certainly no hotel — but staying here can clock up the kind of bills more usually seen at the Ritz.
A twelve year old young offender from Cheltenham is currently a resident at the Birmingham unit — at a cost of two thousand pounds a week.
Gloucestershire County Council is footing the bill.
In a year, it'll add up to over a hundred thousand pounds — if that happens the social services department says it's budget will be so stretched it may be forced to make cuts in other areas.
He says that the council is obliged by the government to take full responsibility for young offenders — and that includes paying for keeping them in secure units.
One local MP says it's outrageous that it costs two thousand pounds a week to keep the boy at the centre.
He says that a person could stay at a hotel with his own doctor and nurse cheaper than that.
He says that although it's a high price to pay, he hopes it will help keep the lad out of trouble when he's older.
The Governments plans for dealing with young offenders will be a major feature of Queens speech next week.
It's not known if more funds will be made abvailable to send young criminals to places like Earlswood, or wether local authorities will still be expected to pay the bill.
Poverty among young people on income support is now so bad that it's affecting their physical and mental health, according to a leading children's charity.
The National Children's Home says many can't even afford basic necessities like food and clothing, It's calling for immediate government action to help what it calls The Lost Generation 
KATE GARRAWAY/Oxford
SARAH JACOBS
HELEN DENT/National Children's Home
Voice over
Like most young people Sarah Jacobs loves looking at fashionable clothes.
But for her the chance of actually buying can be only a dream.
She was put into care at nine because her parents couldn't look after her.
Now unemployed, she lives on thirty four pounds a week from which she must pay for all her food and living expenses including some rent.
She says it's not enough and everyday is a battle just to survive.
Female speaker
I only have a pound left and I was paid on Friday and that is because I bought food and very basic toiletries.
Some times you go into supermarkets and you see food you'd like to buy but you can't.
YOu have to buy the very smallest amounts, like small tins.
Voice over
The National Children's Home says there are thousands of young people like Sarah, struggling to survive because government benefits are inadequate.
The charity interviewed more than a hundred youngsters accross the country and found that:
a third hadn't eaten in the previous twenty four hours.
half had been seriously ill through malnutrition in the last month.
and nine out of ten were suffering from severe depression.
The ages between sixteen and twenty-two are supposed to be the best in your life.
But for this group of young people it is far from true.
The report says young people don't choose to be dependent on others.
Sarah Jacobs has tried to build herself a life, saving for four years to buy furniture and applying for training courses.
Female speaker
Young people don't have to live like this.
The government does have a choice if it didn't want us to live like this then we wouldn't have to.
Voice over
The National Children's Home wants the government to re-think the provision it makes for young people, increasing benefits for those on training courses and setting up grants for those leaving care.
It says young people are the future and unless we invest in them, that future looks bleak.
To the other end of the musical spectrum, and three young brothers are being tipped for stardom in the world of rock music.
They've formed their own band, and have just released their first single.
The only problem is, one of them's still only thirteen and has to get time off school to play gigs.
SARA WHITE/Evesham
BEN TURNER/Tribute to Nothing
JIM TURNER/Tribute to Nothing
SAM TURNER/Tribute to Nothing
JACK
Like lots of other music mad teeangers Sam, Jim and Ben Turner get together after school, and dream that one day they'll be famous and play in a rock band.
Only its not just a dream for these three brothers from Malvern.
Their band is called Tribute to Nothing and they've just released their first single.
The only problem is getting Sam the lead singer special permission take time off school because he's only 13.
’ We wrote the single after moving into a little village and seeing all the people driving to their office jobs and we thought we'd have a go at them’
’ Im responsible for themusic if you can call it that’
’ I'm 13 and I want lots of fans to write to me’
’ Its noisy and there's always loads of equipmenjt lying about all over the place, but it's great fun.’
’ We play a supportive role.
They write all the material themselves and transport all their gear.
They are too young to drive yet, so its a supportive role’.
The single's out on Kingslake records and the band, described in a national music magazine as ankle biting rockers, are being tipped for the top.
Moving house is reckoned to be nearly as stressful as divorce or coping with bereavement.
But one couple seem to thrive on it.
In fact, they like it SO much that they've moved house EIGHTEEN times.
RICHARD BARNETT Marden
JEAN HUNT Wife
TONY HUNT Husband
Voice over
Jean Hunt scans the property pages at her bungalow in Herefordshire.
It's a weekly ritual for Jean, who's moved home eighteen times…and all within ten miles of where she lives now:
Female speaker
Life's a bit miserable sometimes and moving is fun.
Male speaker
He's in love with his wife and she can have anything she wants.
Voice over
We took Jean and Tony on a nostalgic visit to one of their favourite homes from the 1970s in Hereford…
Male speaker
He can't remember why they moved.
Voice over
She can't remember either.
Male speaker
One time he went to the wrong house just after they'd moved.
He felt a fool.
Voice over
Tony and Jean have been in their present home for two years.
And Jean's started to move the furniture around…a sign that she's getting itchy feet:
Male speaker
Moving furniture is always a sign that a move is on the way.
Voice over
Jean says she's not quite ready for another move yet…so here's one for the family album…the Hunts stationary for once.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Howard's bail abuse clampdown
The Home Secretary has unveiled plans to crackdown on people who commit crime whilst on bail.
Leaked paper suggests cuts
Labour has condemned Government plans to cut benefits for young, single mothers after details of plans were leaked and published in a newspaper.
Police hunt finds remains
Jersey police hunting for the bodies of a couple believed murdered six years ago have found what appear to be human remains after their son, Roderick Newall, helped with the search.
Writs issued over photos
The Princess of Wales has issued writs to prevent further publication of photographs taken of her in a gym.
FTSE up 18
The hundred shares index closed up eighteen point three at thirty, ninety-five point nine.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-seven and down at two marks, forty-nine.
A county council has told its entire staff that they can no longer smoke in their offices, and if they want a cigarette they must have it in their own time.
From now on smokers must clock out and go to a special room for each cigarette break.
The council says it's better for everyone, but unions say smokers are being victimised.
JESSICA FOWLE/Aylesbury
KAREN NEWMAN/County Safety Advisor
NEIL PROWSE/UNISON
Voice over
Buckinghamshire County Council's headquarters is now a smoke free zone.
Until recently voluntary smoking bans had operated in most areas.
But now anyone wanting to smoke must go to one of three designated rooms to have a cigarette break.
The ban itself isn't unusual but the County Council has also ruled that anyone taking a break for a cigarette must do it in their own time.
They have to clock out when leaving their desk and clock back in before returning.
Female speaker
We felt that if smokers were going to use smoking rooms phones wouldn't be covered and it would cause resentment amongst non-smokers who had to cover for them.
We felt it was important that smokers limited the time they spend away from their desks.
Voice over
And some employees welcome a nudge in the right direction.
Female speaker
I don't want to smoke in the office.
It's good for me to come away because I smoke fewer.
Voice over
But not everyone's behind the policy.
Unions say staff feel it's unfair but are frightened to speak out publicly.
Male speaker
There's fear hanging over everybody with the local government review there's going to be mass redundancies.
Whether that's true or not it's difficult to speak out against what the authority's doing.
People do feel victimised.
Voice over
Under the new policy, anyone working on the twelfth floor will need to go down to the first floor to clock out, to the fourth floor to find a smoking room, down to the first to clock on again and back to the twelfth to carry on working.
The County Council is providing free counselling sessions for anyone who decides that smoking's just too much of a fag.
Still to come on Central News, facing the music.
Can an expert tell the difference between top price and budget compact discs?
And, a moving tale.
The couple who can't kick the habit.
Welcome back: One of the world's leading classical violinists is backing a local record company in an attempt to bring down the price of compact discs.
Wesley Smith
Lord Menuhin wants good cheap classical music for the masses.
So he and the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra have teamed up with a firm better-known for selling low-price collections of pop oldies 
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Reporting
LORD MENUHIN/Concert Violinist
MARK FREY/Tring Joint Chief Executive
JEREMY MONTAGU/Oxford University Music Faculty
PETER McMULLIN/Blackwells
Voice over
The Royal Philharmonic Orchestra is known throughout the world.
They fill concert halls and attract the top conductors.
You don't expect to find their newest recording being knocked out at four quid a go in the cut price racks.
But that's exactly what an Aylesbury based record company is doing.
Tring International has commissioned the orchestra to perform up to fifty classical works to be sold at knockdown prices.
And they've enlisted the support of the orchestra president Yehudi, now Lord, Menuhin.
Male speaker
Music should be available to everyone.
In any case it costs nothing to hear it on FM radio these days, and it can only do orchestras good.
More awareness will fill the concert halls
Voice over
Tring International is based on a business park on the outskirts of Aylesbury.
Until now they have made a tidy profit from selling re-issued pop hits from the fifties, sixties and seventies.
They also have a classical range but mostly of old recordings.
The Royal Philharmonic venture is very different.
Male speaker
Larger companies charge a lot for their CDs.
We are investing in a major name and are providing excellent value for money
Voice over
The first issue is a performance of Beethoven's Sixth Symphony with Russian conductor Mark Ermler.
Others in the series will include conductors like Jane Glover, Lord Menuhin, and Barry Wordsworth.
But at 3.99 are they really as good as a full priced version with a top flight conductor.
We bought a CD of the same work but by the Berlin Philharmonic conducted by Herbert von Karajan and released on Deutsche Gramaphon.
Price 13.99.
Then we asked former Royal Philharmonic musician and Oxford University lecturer Jeremy Montagu to assess them.
He wasn't told which was which.
Male speaker
if you prefer the romantic side then the cheap version seems to be the best.
It seems to me the other one was almost casual.
Voice over
Not everyone shares the enthusiasm.
Blackwells music store in Oxford stocks every kind of music from cheap to very expensive.
They don't foresee a revolution.
Male speaker
There is already a successful lower end of the market selling at under five pounds but competing on equal terms with the more familiar names
Male speaker
I hope it's only the beginning.
I hope we will be able to bring music to a much wider public
Voice over
Cut price classical CDs aren't new but until now they've either been old recordings or foreign orchestras have been used with relatively obscure performers and conductors.
Commissioning the Royal Philharmonic is likely to set the cat among the pigeons.
A woman whose husband was shot dead is to get compensation, even though the people charged with the killing were cleared.
Tony Alliss died during a row over a boundary fence near his home, but the trial judge decided that no crime had been committed.
Now Mr Alliss's widow says the award has vindicated her husband.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Kings Stanley
JOYCE ALLISS/Widow
BOB ALLISS/Brother
MARTIN EDDEN/Family Solicitor
Voice over
Tony Alliss was shot dead during a row over a boundary fence near to his home in Kings Stanley near Stroud.
His neighbours, Terence Maule, and his son Grayg, were charged with murdering Mr Alliss.
But they walked free from Bristol Crown Court after the judge ruled that there was no case to answer.
More than three years later Tony's widow, Joyce has won compensation for her husband's death from the criminal injuries compensation board.
It ruled that although there was no conviction, Mr Alliss had been the victim of a crime.
And it said that his actions on that night had in no way contributed to his death.
Tony's brother now wants to know why a jury wasn't given the chance to examine the evidence put forward at the compensation hearing.
Mrs Alliss' solicitor says justice has been done.
The value of Mrs Alliss's award hasn't yet been decided, but lawyers expect it to be’ substantial’.
A carpet company is cutting a hundred and fifty jobs.
NCVO 
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
Abingdon Carpets in Oxfordshire is moving its distribution centre on Nuffield Way in the town to Bradford in Yorkshire.
The firm began production in Abingdon over a hundred years ago.
The Head Office, which had moved to Wales, will now also be moved to the North.
The job losses have come soon after the firm was taken over.
A man charged with the murder of a security guard has now been named in court.
MILTON KEYNES
Edward Smith from Kempston in Bedford, had originally appeared before magistrates in Milton Keynes as a juvenile, so couldn't be named.
But today his age was given as eighteen.
Smith is charged with murdering security man Ron Letts who was run down trying to stop a stolen van leaving Harmon's Contracts in Wolverton.
Smith was remanded in custody for two weeks.
A woman who was left with severe brain damage in a road accident has been awarded three hundred thousand pounds compensation from her husband's former employer.
Karen Grant from Northampton was awarded the money at the High Court in London for injuries she suffered in the crash more than five years ago.
She was a passenger in a van being driven by her husband which pulled across the path of another vehicle.
A social worker who was sacked for smoking cannabis while in charge of a group of youngsters, has won his appeal against dismissal.
GLOUCESTER
Terry Sprayson will now have to be found a new job by Gloucestershire County Council.
He and a colleague were dismissed for using the drug during a visit to a holiday caravan park in Torquay.
Councillors decided to uphold Mr Sprayson's appeal because they said his action didn't put children in danger.
A beauty spot earmarked as an open-cast mine has earned a reprieve.
British Coal has had an option to mine the site for the past ten years.
But now the Forestry Commission has decided to end the uncertainty by announcing plans to turn it into a wood.
ROBIN POWELL/Lydney
JOHN EVERARD/Forestry Commission
Library Pictures
Voice over
It may look bleak in November, but during the spring and summer, Oakenhill near Lydney is a main attraction for visitors to the Forest of Dean.
There were plans to turn it into an opencast mine, but now the Forestry Commission, which administers the Forest from its headquarters in Coleford, has withdrawn its permisssion for British Coal to mine there, deciding instead to start re-planting trees.
The right to mine Oakenhill was bought in the early '80s by the Free Miners, who still exercise their mining privileges in the Forest under laws laid down 7 centuries ago.
But they sold it on soon after to the Coal Board.
With the price of coal falling, the opencast idea became increasingly less viable, and the option to lease the site was never taken up.
A decade later, the local community's delighted that the Forestry Commission's decided to end the uncertainty.
Male speaker
It's excellent news.
It preserves a beauty spot for us all to enjoy, and they wouldn't have dug much coal out anyway.
Voice over
It's not known how much public money's been spent on the proposed mine, but British Coal told us it keeps its plans under constant review.
Meanwhile, with tree-planting due to start soon, walkers and conservationists will once again be able to enjoy Oakenhill to the full.
A group of physically handicapped people are protesting over plans to charge them for using day centres.
They say the centres are a lifeline for the disabled…the council say the charges would help them meet a two million pound shortfall in their budget.
Richard Barnett reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
EILEEN BALLINGER/Centre User
GLENDA HOWES/Centre Secretary
TIM EDGINGTON/Centre User
Voice over
Every week, around 80 people turn up at the Prestbury Road Handicapped Day Centre in Cheltenham.
They come for companionship and for the chance to enjoy a wide range of activities.
In the craft workshop there's the opportunity to enjoy painting and drawing, basketwork and tapestry.
Many of the disabled people who use the centre cook their own meals in the kitchen.
And some self education goes on with the help of computers.
Female speaker
The centre means everything to her.
Otherwise she'd be stuck in the house all day.
Voice over
But now, people who use the Prestbury Day centre and other similar centres in Gloucestershire, say they're under threat.
The County Council, faced with making savings of around £2 million in its social services budget, is considering bringing in charges for using the centres.
The disabled from the Prestbury centre and other similar centres are planning a protest demonstration in Cheltenham on Friday to oppose charges.
Female speaker
She couldn't afford to pay the charges.
Male speaker
Everyone would miss the centre.
Voice over
A spokesman for the County Council confirmed that charges for using day centres are being considered.
But no decision has yet been reached.
Meanwhile the campaigners are busy making protest banners.
The three-month jail sentence imposed yesterday on farmer Colin French marked the culmination of four years hard work by the RSPCA.
They spent more than a hundred thousand pounds bringing a string of prosecutions against French for cruelty to his livestock.
But while dealing with one of their biggest cases, the local branch of the RSPCA has still had to cope with all the day to day demands on their time.
In the first of a three part series, Liz Hannam looks at what the society has to cope with in a typical twenty-four hours.
WHEATLEY/Oxfordshire
STANTON HARCOURT/Oxfordshire
BLETCHINGDON/Oxfordshire
DAVE HOBBS/RSPCA
Voice over
The morning beings with a planning meeting, but planning's not easy in this job.
A phone call is made to the Society every 29 seconds.
The cygnet will now be taken to the swan santuary at Egham.
Tracy's a familiar face there.
Meanwhile Chief Inspector Doug Davidson makes one of his
Benjie, a Yorkshire Terrier, is a special favorite.
The RSPCA took him on because his owners couldn't afford the vet's bill.
But you can't plan your day when you're an RSPCA inspector.
Shop staff have locked the cat in this garage.
The problem is locating it, a cat can crawl through any hole it can get its head through.
It'll be taken to the vet to see whether or not it's worth saving.
Meanwhile, Tracey is about to embark on one of the most unusual cases of her career.
Although it's several hours before the devil worshippers are expected, they must be in position before nightfall.
The long wait begins.
Then suddenly excitement.
But it turns out to be just courting couples.
After 7 hours, the opersation will be called.
But they'll be back.
Whenever there's a chance of preventing an animal from suffering, the RSPCA will be there.
And tomorrow night we look at the work which takes up a third of the RSPCA's time, dealing with farmers and their livestock.
The English Church is about to make one of its biggest decisions in four hundred years.
After years of debate, the issue of women's ordination is due to be resolved by its Parliament — the General Synod — tomorrow.
Some clergy say the Church of England is doomed if it says no to women priests.
Others are threatening to leave the Church if centuries of tradition are reversed.
Robin Powell reports.
DRAYTON/Oxfordshire
Rev Dr SUSAN COLE-KING/Drayton Parish
COWLEY/Oxford
Father MARTIN FLATMAN/Church Union
Rev RICHARD THOMAS/Oxford Diocese
Voice over
The woman presiding over this baptism wants to be a vicar.
She lives in a vicarage and already carries out most of the duties a vicar does.
But she can't call herself one and if she ever took a Communion service, she'd be breaking the law.
Female speaker
It feels a deep rejection of who I am.
I would really like to celebrate the Communion service with the people in my parish when they ask for it.
Voice over
Tomorrow all that could change.
Dr Cole-King features in a national campaign urging the General Synod, on which she sits, to allow women to be ordained as priests.
If enough of her colleagues vote in favour, she and hundreds like her will soon become vicars after all.
10 miles up the road in Cowley, Father Martin Flatman's hoping that won't happen.
As well as being a parish priest, he's a member of the Church Union, a High Church pressure group opposed to the ordination of women.
He's also on the Synod and he'll be voting no.
Male speaker
If we allow women to celebrate Communion, we break the traditional idea that the priest standing at the altar is a visual representation of Jesus.
His maleness is part of that representation.
Voice over
Meanwhile, the Oxford Diocese is dismissing the charge of a church at war with itself.
Male speaker
Both Susan and Father Martin have said that although they disagree on this issue, they can do so in love.
One of the strongest things that comes across, is that although emotions are high, the whole debate is being conducted very much in the spirit of love.
Voice over
The General Synod consists of the Houses of Bishops, Clergy and Laity.
There needs to be a two-thirds majority in favour in each house for the legislation to succeed.
The Oxford Diocese overwhelmingly endorsed women priests in a poll last year.
The Bishop, Richard Harries, will vote yes tomorrow.
There's also support for change in the Gloucester Diocese, though Bishop Peter Ball will abstain.
He's opposed to the idea.
The Hereford Diocese has also voted in favour.
Bishop John Oliver is a leading member of the campaign for women's ordination.
Most of the congregation at Drayton would certainly welcome their Minister-in-Charge becoming a vicar.
Female speaker
The way I think it should go, is that there should be women priests.
Female speaker
I think they've got a lot to give.
Male speaker
It'll have to happen — that we have women priests — in the end.
Voice over
Both sides expect the result to be very close.
Male speaker
People are going to get hurt, whichever way the vote goes.
If the vote goes in favour, then I will do what I always said I would do and I will prepare to leave the Church of England.
Female speaker
I'm deeply sad that he feels like that and I would hope that when it happens, he might feel it's not quite so bad and that he might change his mind.
Voice over
If the ayes have it tomorrow, Dr Cole-King can expect to be a vicar by this time next year, once the measure's been approved by Parliament.
For Father Flatman, the cost of conscience could be life on the dole.
Army bomb disposal experts have put on a display of the power of the modern explosives used by the IRA.
They allowed cameras into their Hereford base for the first time, to drive home the message that the public must be on their guard in the run-up to Christmas.
Tim Hurst reports.
LIBRARY PICTURES
BOMB DISPOSAL OFFICER
Voice over
City centre explosions, such a feature of daily life in Northern Ireland, are becoming an increasing threat to mainland Britain, according to army bomb disposal experts.
At a base in Hereford, which trains bomb disposal men in the army's toughest course, bomb teams demonstrated modern explosives…incendiary devices, letter bombs which contain just a few ounces of Semtex, and car bombs, at one pound, just half the size of those favoured by the IRA.
The army have been keen to keep their anti-terrorist tactics secret, for obvious reasons, so why go public now?
A call from the public will first bring out the police, who may then call Hereford, one of three such bases covering England, Wales and Scotland.
The bomb squad use remote control vehicles, or wheelbarrows, to investigate, and if necessary, disable the device with a controlled explosion.
Later though, a personal inspection is necessary, the man inside the suit never sure if a second device is timed to go off.
One pound of Semtex will reduce any family saloon to scrap metal.
The army's bomb disposal experts say the lesson is simple…report anything suspicious, especially in the run up to Christmas.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
NEWTON ABBOT/Devon
GLOUCESTER
VERONA KING/Resident
Insp ANN GREEN/Gloucester Police
PATRICK O'SULLIVAN/Acting Governor
Voice over
29 year old Steven Mynott was sentenced to life in 1980 for the murder of a 54 year old man.
Phillip Ayres, who's 25, has 5 years of his 11 year sentence for robbery left to serve.
He took part in a robbery in which a security man was bludgeoned with a sledge hammer.
They escaped from Channingswood prison in Newton Abbot in Devon, by taking out the metal windows of their cells, then using a loose piece of scaffold to scale the fence.
The car they used, stolen in Devon, turned up this morning in Gloucester.
It was found on Nettleton road with prison clothing in it.
Pensioner Verona King reported the car without realising what had gone on.
The escape comes the day after improvements to the 17ft high security fence were approved by the Prison Department.
The jail's acting governor says an inquiry is underway.
Prison officers at a maximum security jail say lives are being put at risk because of staff shortages.
They say that attacks on staff are on the increase, and recent searches have revelealed hidden caches of home made weapons.
Ken Goodwin reports.
LONG LARTIN/Worcestshire
MICK DAVIES/Former Warder
ROBIN PIT/POA
JOHN BODDINGTON/POA Regional Officer
Voice over
Mick Davies used to be a prison warder at Long Lartin jail.
But his career ended after an inmate he was escorting, attacked him.
He says that he suffered terrible injuries.
Mick is convinced that if there had been more staff available the attack might never have happened.
Long Lartin jail houses some of Britains most dangerous men, including IRA terrorists.
Spot searches carried out recently have uncovered a frightening collection of home made weapons.
Searches are not made as frequently as staff would like, because they say, shortages mean there simply aren't enough officers to do it.
He says that they must have more staff and investment in the system.
In a report, Prisons' Inspector, Judge Stephen Tumim singled out the jail for criticism, saying that staff are regularly intimidated by inmates, drug taking is rife and that parts of the jail are becoming no go areas for warders.
Some staff think the prison service is being deliberately run down.
He says that the Government want to privatise prisons — but this won't provide a better service.
The Home Office says that there are currently 351 staff working at Long Lartin; 5 more than the level agreed upon with the Prison Officers Association back in may of last year.
But arguments over numbers are academic to former warder Mick Davies.
Crippled by an inmate, he faces the rest of his life as an invalid.
A school fire in Buckinghamshire which has caused fifty thousand pounds damage is being treated as arson.
AYLESBURY/Buckinghamshire
The fire at Turn Furlong County Middle School in Aylesbury was started before pupils arrived this morning.
The roof was severely damaged and ten thousand pounds worth of school equipment including a computer was destroyed.
No one was hurt.
Eighty jobs are to go at an insurance group in Gloucester.
GLOUCESTER
Laurentian Life is making the losses at its Barnwood headquarters.
Staff are being asked to consider early retirement or redundancy packages.
Management say any compulsory redundancies will be announced later.
The job losses are blamed on the recession.
Toad, Ratty, Mole and Badger are making a comeback, eighty-five years after first appearing in the Wind in the Willows.
Next week a sequel will be published called The Willows in Winter.
The new book is by a man who's already written a handful of best-sellers, most of them about moles.
Simon Garrett's been to meet him.
WILLIAM HORWOOD Author
Voice over
He reads: Home was very far from Toad's mind some days later.
When the heavy door of his cell was heaved open and his jailor, along with three of his largest colleagues strode in.
They chained and manacled their dangerous charge once more leaving him only sufficient movement to shamble and struggle along the ancient passageways of his confinemnent
Not Kenneth Grahame's 1908 classic…but the answer to 'what happened next?'
He reads:’ Not that way,’cried his pessimistic friend grasping Toad's arm and directing him away from the especially grim and oppressive corridor into which his laboured steps seemed automatically to have led him
William Horwood made his name writing about moles in the Dunction books.
Both authors drew inspiration from the riverbank and the wildlife in Christchurch Meadows in Oxford.
Inspiration is one thing…but is it courage or vanity to presume to write a follow-up to a classic
Male speaker
If I have a mole role it's a conservative and careful thing to do and I have to do the job properly.
If I'm Toad as Kenenth Grahame was sometimes then it's a vain and conceited thing to do.
It'll be judged by how well it's written and what people think of it.
I've loved Kenneth Grahame through his writing since I was a child.
He was educated in Oxford I was born here.
We've both written about the riverbank down here as I have — so there's a lot of connections.
I have no problem at all doing this book.
I've enjoyed it and I'm sure my readers will as well.
Voice over
Some people might think I was approached by Harper Collins with a check for half a million pounds and asked to write the book — in a way I wish I had been.
Actually it was the opposite.
I'm not afraid of money but occasionally a writer wants to write something for love and for pleasure
It wasn't the rustle of the cheque-book but the siren call of a pencil drawing which led Mr Horwood to The Wild Wood.
He bought some of EH Shepherd's original sketches for The Wind in the Willows, and decided Mole had to be about to embark on a big adventure.
During his life Kenneth Grahame consistently refused to write a follow-up.
But Mr Horwood believes he would have allowed’ The Willows in Winter’to put straight the record about Toad's miraculous conversion to good behaviour
Male speaker
He was asked this question abotu ten years after the book came out and he said he'd never do a sequal.
But I was asked the same thing after Duncton Wood came out, I said I'd never do another and I've written five more.
He answered a letter from America saying Toad wasn't really altered as he was in my story, he was never going to be good.
I took this as his Imprimateur, his permission if you like for me to go away and write aqbout what Toad really got up to next rather than being annoyingly good as he is at the end of Wind in the Willows
Voice over
Of course sequals don't have to be limited to one.
New tales from Toad Hall could be appearing into the next century 
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
10 die in Kent crash
Ten holidaymakers from Canada and the United States have been killed in a coach crash on the M-Two in Kent.
FTSE up 2
The hundred shares index closed up two point five at thirty, ninety-eight point five.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-seven and up at two marks, forty-seven.
Scientists have developed an injection that doesn't use a needle and is completely pain-free for the patient.
They believe it could reduce the risk of AIDS being spread through contaminated blood.
The so-called drug gun forces powder through the skin.
KATE GARRAWAY/Oxford
KIM LONGSHAW/Diabetic
Dr DAVID SARPHIE/Oxford Biosciences
Prof JOHN BELL/John Radcliffe Hospital
Voice over
No sign of the dreaded needle or syringe…
Instead a compressed gas gun.
For the doctor its a medical breakthrough…drugs fired through the skin without piercing it.
For the patient its an end to painful injections.
For fifteen years Kim Longshaw, who's a diabetic, has had to inject herself four times a day.
Female speaker
I think it is simply very frightening, having to inject yourself in the leg, especially with old traditional needles.
Voice over
Kim believes the new drug gun would be a great benefit.
Female speaker
I think it would be very good particularly for children.
Because they are obviously scared of needles and it is hard for their parents, having to inject them.
Voice over
The drug gun has been developed by Oxford Biosciences together with the university.
The drug comes in a powder which is propelled through the skin using compressed gas.
They say this reduces the likelihood of diseases like AIDS or hepatitis:
Male speaker
One of the main disadvantages of needles and syringes is that needles invade through skin with the possibility of cross contamination and we think with our device we can completely eliminate that.
Voice over
Doctors believe the gun may also reduce health care costs…easy enough for patients to use themselves instead of a visit to the hospital.
So far it's been well received by doctors.
Male speaker
I think it is very exciting.
The idea of a device that doesn't need a needle or a syringe and the problems they cause would be a substantial advance.
Voice over
It will be another five years before the gun comes into common use.
But for people like Kim even the chance of saying goodbye to needles makes it worth the wait.
Still to come on Central News.
One day at a time.
The children who are learning to live with head injury.
And Toad and the gang are back…now it's Winter in the Willows.
Welcome back.
People who need help after suffering a head injury don't always get the care and understanding they need.
Often, they require long term treatment simply to relearn the basics of life, like walking and talking.
For thousands, the injury can lead to problems for the rest of their lives.
In the first of two reports, we look at the difficulties facing people with head injuries, as they learn to take one day at a time.
GARGY PATEL/Oxford
JANE RING/Jez's wife
DERICK WADE/Consultant
RICHARD SCOTT/Neuro-psychologist
JEZ RING/Head-injured patient
Voice over
May 1993.
Jeremy Ring, or Jez as he likes to be called, has started receiving physiotherapy to help him recover from a motorbike accident.
His problems are due to a head injury which affects his balance and muscle control.
He can't stand or walk without help.
Jez is a patient at the Rivermead centre in Oxford…one of the country's few specialist units that deal with head injury.
Six months later Jez has started to walk again.
Unlike many others, Jez has complete support from family, friends and his wife Jane.
They'd been married just eight weeks when the accident happened.
For Jez, each day is hard work, with slow progress, and sometimes with disappointment.
His cry was of frustration.
He's determined to carry on.
This August Rivermead staff and patients moved out of the old Victorian wards into new facilities.
Specialists say there's a growing need for more Rivermeads, and more understanding about head injuries.
There's growing concern that children with head injuries are not getting the help they need.
Oxford's Russell-Cairns unit is one of the few centres to deal specifically with children.
Psychologists speak to the whole family at length before assessing the child.
After injury, many head injured children can look fairly normal…the key is to identify the problems early on.
With adults, it's having to relearn the basic skills we learnt as children.
That report from Gargy Patel.
Tomorrow in One Day at a Time we see how some families have coped with bringing up children who've suffered head injuries.
Investigators say a fire in which a man died could have been started deliberately.
The man's body was discovered among the remains of a burnt out cottage.
Fire-fighters have have spent the day sifting through the debris looking for clues.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Pamington
HOWARD NASH/Gloucestershire Fire Service
Det Insp TREVOR GLADDING/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Twelve hours after the fire started, police and fire fighters were able to recover the man's body from burnt out cottage at Pamington near Tewkesbury.
Four fire crews from Cheltenham and Tewkesbury were called to Rose Cottage just after three o clock this morning.
Builders were called in to make the building safe before a Home Office Pathologist was allowed inside to examine the body.
The dead man hasn't been identified but neighbours say two men lived in the cottage…both school teachers.
Police have spoken to a man who was found outside the cottage when the fire service arrived.
He was said to be in a very distressed state.
The cause of the fire isn't yet known, but fire investigators are looking into the possibility that it may have been started deliberately.
Talks in Whitehall aimed at restoring trade union rights to thousands of workers have collapsed after months of secret negotiations.
Union campaigners are angry at what they see as government double dealing.
TIM HURST/Cheltenham
BILL BRETT/Civil Service Unions
MIKE GRINDLEY/GCHQ Unions
Voice over
Ten thousand workers at GCHQ, the Government's secret intelligence gathering centre, most of them at Cheltenham in Gloucestershire have been banned from trade union membership for 10 years.
Faced with resignation from the union or the sack, the last trade unionist left in 1989.
Since the ban was imposed by Margaret Thatcher, campaigners have argued for the restoration of union rights, and three secret meetings have taken place at the Cabinet Office, the last of them this afternoon ended in breakdown.
The union ban has already been criticised by the United Nations as an infringement of human rights.
Details of today's breakdown in talks was telephoned to former GCHQ unionists at their headquarters in Cheltenham, where the news angered campaigners.
Trade Unionists are planning to renew their camapign with a march marking the 10th anniversary of the ban in January next year.
Thieves have stolen seventeen rare parrots from a bird sanctuary.
Most of the birds were pairs, and staff at the sanctuary say it's devastated the centre's breeding programme.
KEN GOODWIN/Bourton on the Water
EDDIE TRIGG/Birdland
Det Insp PETER BURCOMBE/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Padlocks were cut, and aviaries were raided at Birdland in Bourton on the water.
The thieves knew exactly what they were after — breeding pairs of parrots and parakeets — six thousand pounds worth.
He says that it's a big blow, staff are very upset.
Among the thieves haul were African Grey parrots.
They're considered the best talkers, and fetch high prices as pets.
With Christmas approaching police believe the thieves may try to sell off the birds to dealers or to the public for the christmas market.
He says these were professional thieves who knew what they were after.
He says that they've hired security guards, and taken other security measures.
It's not the first time Birdland has been hit by thieves, last year parrots were stolen in a similar raid.
In this latest theft it seems that the extra security measures were no deterrant.
In Central news tonight.
They've made my life Hell…a dying man's anger over threat to evict his family.
I'll fight on…the councillor who faces a quarter of a million pound bill for the case he won.
And, Rare parrots stolen…police believe they'll end up as Christmas presents.
ANNE DAWSON
A councillor who sued two national newspapers for libel is facing a legal bill of at least a quarter of a million pounds, even though he originally won the case.
The ruling's brought more calls for changes to the libel laws.
WESLEY SMITH
Anthony Gilberthorpe was originally awarded damages of more than sixty thousand pounds, but now that's been overturned and he's been told he must pay all the costs.
Mr Gilberthorpe says he'll fight on.
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
ANTHONY GILBERTHORPE/Gloucester
Voice over
Six years ago, it was reported in the tabloid press that Gloucester city councillor Anthony Gilberthorpe had undergone an AIDS test in the United States.
The papers concerned were ordered to pay him more than sixty thousand pounds in damages.
Two years later they successfully appealed against the ruling in the High Court…and now Mr Gilberthorpe's been told he's too late bring the case to court again.
Mr Gilberthorpe now faces a legal bill for at least two hundred and fifty thousand pounds.
For the man in the street, sueing for libel can be an expensive business.
Mr Gilberthorpe's said libel actions were made more affordable…even The Sun, which benefited from the latest High Court judgement it's tim
Good evening,
A dying man threatened with eviction over mortgage arrears has said that the worry has made his suffering worse.
Peter Harris is fighting a possession order by a finance company which charges interest at thirty-nine per cent.
Tomorrow his family go to court to try to save their home.
Meanwhile Central South has been investigating the company which has taken the Harris family to court.
GRAEME BOWD/Oxford
PETER HARRIS
ADRIAN COLES/Building Societies' Association
Voice over
Peter Harris will not be in court tomorrow when his family make a final attempt to avoid eviction.
For the last week he's been in a hospice with terminal cancer.
He says he was close to death at the weekend but his condition has improved a little.
He says the worry of homelessness has made his condition worse.
A finance company is seeking possession of the house near Oxford where Mr Harris lives with his wife and seven children.
The family took out a 39 per cent loan after Mr Harris was made bankrupt.
They now owe a £135,000, more than the house is worse.
£35,000 is on a second mortgage to Dorend Limited which chareges interest of 39 per cent.
Today it emerged that DOREND ltd is run by Harold and Ruth Gee who live at this house in north London.
Company records show them as Co-directors of the company which has no other em ployees.
When approached by Central news Mrs Gee drove off at high speed.
Later she returned to the house refusing any comment about the Harris case.
In central London the couple's solicitor Alan Taylor said he'd been instructed to say nothing.
The building Society's Association described Dorend as a fringe lender.
It says people in finacial trouble should not take out loans at high interest to pay off mortgage arrears.
The Harris say they'll fight on to stay in the house where they've lived for 17 years.
Mr Harris says he hopes to leave the hospice later this month.
But he may not have a home to go back to.
A gas-fired power station is to be built at Didcot alongside the existing coal fired power station.
Its combined output will make it the second biggest in Britain.
Planning permission was granted two months ago but the generating company, National Power, has only just decided to go ahead.
An alternative site in Nottingham has been ruled out.
JESSICA FOWLE/Didcot
JIM TWOMEY/National Power
OLIVER TICKELL/Friends of the Earth
Cllr JOHN FRANCIS/Vale of White Horse District Council
Voice over
The new station, known as Didcot B, will be built next to the six cooling towers of Didcot A. This model shows how it will be less obtrusive with only two low-level chimneys and a number of small cooling towers.
National Power says because the station will be gas fired it's better for the environment.
Male speaker
These power stations are more efficient than conventional stations.
There's 27% less fuel burnt per megawatt of electricity.
It'll produce 58% less carbon dioxide.
Voice over
But there's concern from Friends of the Earth that the existing coal-fired station will be run down.
Male speaker
It will be less polluting but at the cost of native energy sources which will be left to rot underground.
Voice over
The existing site's an eyesore for the people of Sutton Courtenay who live on its doorstep.
They say the fight's not over yet.
Male speaker
We've got to have a good system of monitoring with a liason committee.
We've go to keep a wary eye on what they're doing.
Voice over
But in neighbouring Didcot feeling are mixed.
Male speaker
It's a good thing.
It'll bring a lot of work to the town.
Female speaker
It's supposed to be a country area.
There are lots of other places where it could be built.
Voice over
Constructing the new station is expected to create short term work for around six hundred people.
Once it's up and running in early 1997 it'll bring around another fifty jobs to the area.
Investigators say a fire in which a man died could have been started deliberately.
The man's body was discovered among the remains of a burnt out cottage.
Fire-fighters have have spent the day sifting through the debris looking for clues.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Pamington
HOWARD NASH/Gloucestershire Fire Service
Det Insp TREVOR GLADDING/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Twelve hours after the fire started, police and fire fighters were able to recover the man's body from burnt out cottage at Pamington near Tewkesbury.
Four fire crews from Cheltenham and Tewkesbury were called to Rose Cottage just after three o clock this morning.
Builders were called in to make the building safe before a Home Office Pathologist was allowed inside to examine the body.
The dead man hasn't been identified but neighbours say two men lived in the cottage…both school teachers.
Police have spoken to a man who was found outside the cottage when the fire service arrived.
He was said to be in a very distressed state.
The cause of the fire isn't yet known, but fire investigators are looking into the possibility that it may have been started deliberately.
Talks in Whitehall aimed at restoring trade union rights to thousands of workers have collapsed after months of secret negotiations.
Union campaigners are angry at what they see as government double dealing.
TIM HURST/Cheltenham
BILL BRETT/Civil Service Unions
MIKE GRINDLEY/GCHQ Unions
Voice over
Ten thousand workers at GCHQ, the Government's secret intelligence gathering centre, most of them at Cheltenham in Gloucestershire have been banned from trade union membership for 10 years.
Faced with resignation from the union or the sack, the last trade unionist left in 1989.
Since the ban was imposed by Margaret Thatcher, campaigners have argued for the restoration of union rights, and three secret meetings have taken place at the Cabinet Office, the last of them this afternoon ended in breakdown.
The union ban has already been criticised by the United Nations as an infringement of human rights.
Details of today's breakdown in talks was telephoned to former GCHQ unionists at their headquarters in Cheltenham, where the news angered campaigners.
Trade Unionists are planning to renew their camapign with a march marking the 10th anniversary of the ban in January next year.
Thieves have stolen seventeen rare parrots from a bird sanctuary.
Most of the birds were pairs, and staff at the sanctuary say it's devastated the centre's breeding programme.
KEN GOODWIN Bourton on the Water
EDDIE TRIGG Birdland
Det Insp PETER BURCOMBE Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Padlocks were cut, and aviaries were raided at Birdland in Bourton on the water.
The thieves knew exactly what they were after — breeding pairs of parrots and parakeets — six thousand pounds worth.
He says that it's a big blow, staff are very upset.
Among the thieves haul were African Grey parrots.
They're considered the best talkers, and fetch high prices as pets.
With Christmas approaching police believe the thieves may try to sell off the birds to dealers or to the public for the christmas market.
He says these were professional thieves who knew what they were after.
He says that they've hired security guards, and taken other security measures.
It's not the first time Birdland has been hit by thieves, last year parrots were stolen in a similar raid.
In this latest theft it seems that the extra security measures were no deterrant.
Church Synod approves ordination of women priests
The Church of England Synod has voted to approve the ordination of women priests.
The first ordinations should take place in eighteen months subject to Parliamentary approval.
Cook and Ashdown challenge Major on Iraq
Labour's Robin Cook and the Liberal Democrat Leader, Paddy Ashdown, have challenged the Prime Minister to tell the full story over the arms for Iraq affair.
They claim there are inconsistencies in Government statements.
Kohl meets Major over Maastricht delay
At talks in Oxfordshire, Germany's Chancellor Kohl and John Major have discussed the delay in Britain's ratification of the Maastricht Treaty.
Court increases jail term for killer
The Northern Ireland Appeal Court has added an extra four years to the prison sentence for Susan Christie who stabbed the wife of a lover to death.
Castle snubs Thatcher over tobacco links
The entertainer, Roy Castle, who's recovering from lung cancer, refused to shake hands with Lady Thatcher at a lunch because of her links with a cigarette company.
Trade talks to resume between EC and USA
Talks aimed at averting a trade war between the European Community and the United States of America are to resume next week.
FTSE down 17
The hundred shares index closed down seventeen point eight at twenty-six, ninety-six point eight.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-two and up at two marks, forty-two.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Now to the second part of our series looking at the work of the RSPCA.
As well as looking after the welfare of domestic pets, the society plays a vital role in the care of farm livestock.
As Liz Hannam reports, the RSPCA devote up to a third of their time to dealing with farmers and their animals, in the society's ceaseless crusade against cruelty.
BRILL/Oxfordshire
DAVE HOBBS/RSPCA
DOUG DAVIDSON/RSPCA
JULIE HARMAN/RSPCA Helper
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
NICK BROOKES/RSPCA
Voice over
2 sheep have been abandoned in a field, their fleece so heavy they can hardly walk.
Another sheep lies dead in a barn.
The RSPCA have been called to the rescue, but it won't be possible without the help of 2 farmers; members of a small, but vital network of helpers who give their time and resources free to the Society.
They haven't been shorn in 2 years.
But a prosecution is unlikely.
The owner isn't expected to claim them.
The RSPCA help regulate the biggest cattle market in Europe.
9,000 animals pass through the Banbury Stockyard on Market Day and between them, Inspectors Nick Brookes and Terry Winstone aim to check every one of them.
Much of the skill is knowing when to apply the regulations.
Horned cattle shouldn't be mixed with unhorned, but here Nick will take no action.
But this goat, which is kept with the sheep for similar reasons, has to be separated.
The farmer's tied him to the fence to stop him butting the sheep and that's deemed to be cruel.
Often that which may seem cruel is in fact legal.
And sometimes what may seem cruel, such as the speed with which the cattle are rattled through the ring, is done with the best intentions.
As well as preventing cruelty, Nick has also made suggestions to improve conditions in the market.
Cattle no longer have to go through the ring in numbered order.
4 years ago, Nick spotted a poorly lamb.
Not much was known about its owner at the time, he was called Colin French.
Ten years ago the RSPCA had a cash crisis which meant Nick could no longer patrol the market.
He was out for 18 months and in that time, he believes standards declined.
Although actual cruelty at markets is rare — there have been only 4 cases at Banbury this year, as long as there is a single case the RSPCA will be there.
And in the final part of our series tomorrow we look at the difficulties the RSPCA can face in securing convictions when they take cruelty cases to court.
Fifty years ago an American airman died averting a disaster, when he crashed his stricken bomber into a field after steering it away from a busy town centre.
Now the people of the town have honoured his bravery by erecting a permanent memorial.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
1944/THURLEIGH/Bedfordshire
MAUREEN KNOPP/Eyewitness
TIM ROBINSON/Bucks Herald
BUDGE HORNE/Royal British Legion
Voice over
The American B17 Flying Fortress proved a death trap for many a brave flier.
And so it was for Lt Clyde Sparky Cosper, based at Thurleigh in Befordshire, but who's selfless bravery saved a Chilterns Town from total disaster in 1943.
Female speaker
We saw an aeroplane with an engine on fire and its guns going off.
It swooped down towards Risborough and he managed to control it enough to bring it into a field
Voice over
Maureen Knopp is the only person still in Princes Risborough who saw the B17 struggling to avoid the town.
Today she joined a large gathering to honour Sparky Cosper on Armistice Day.
A Memorial shaped like a B17 tailfin has been erected next to the town's library.
Sparky Cosper was captaining a 10-man crew on a daylight bombing mission to Germany when his plane went out of control near Princes Risborough.
He had a full bomb load, but managed to level the plane long enough for his crew to bail out, then he managed to steer it away from the town and crash into a nearby field.
He died almost instantly.
Female speaker
I can remember willing him to jump out as a child.
But years later I realised what he'd done.
He could have bailed out, he was a stranger in a strange land, he owed us nothing
Voice over
The memorial appeared 50 years later through the hard work of a local newspaper reporter who thought something ought to be done.
Male speaker
It just shows people around here do care about the past and how relevant it is to them today
Voice over
Today the Royal British Legion fell in proudly to hear the dedication.
Male speaker
Clyde Cosper was one of many but I'm pleased to be here to honour him today
Voice over
Sparky Cosper already has a small exhibition in his honour at Booker Airfield.
Hid dog tag and cap badge were retrieved from the crash site.
But the people of Princes Risborough can now point to a permanent reminder of a man they have never forgotten.
An alleged joyrider who was seriously injured in a crash in a stolen car was carried two miles from the scene by his passenger.
He was later taken to hospital, where he's now under police guard.
Simon Garrett reports 
STANTON ST JOHN/Oxfordshire
Insp DAVID WISE/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Experienced traffic police can't believe how the driver of the stolen Ford Sierra managed to escape with his life.
His passenger helped pull him out and then carried him two miles away across fields from the accident scene.
An hour later, an ambulance was called to this house on Oxford's Barton estate.
A man in his early 20s was taken to hospital with serious injuries, including a broken pelvis.
The driver of a second car also needed treatment for head injuries.
The man behind the wheel of the third vehicle escaped unhurt.
There were reports of so-called hotting displays around Oxford last night.
Police believe the Sierra may have been on its way to take part.
A man has been arrested and is being treated under police guard at the John Radcliffe hospital.
Police are appealing for witnesses to the accident.
A verdict of accidental death has been returned on a pilot who crashed a world war two Spitfire at an air display.
The crash was caused by what was described as an unfortunate error of judgement by the pilot.
JUNE 1992/WOODFORD/Manchester
The forty seven year old aircraft failed to come out of a loop during a flying display at Woodford aerodrome near Manchester in June.
An expert told the court that the Spitfire appeared to suffer a high-speed stall and didn't gain enough height to complete the loop.
The pilot, David Moore from Horsley in Gloucestershire was an experienced display flyer, but the inquest in Manchester was told that he misjudged the height of the Spitfire during the loop.
Proposals to cut up to seventy-one hospital jobs are being discussed by a health authority.
HEREFORD
The job losses would be at the Hereford County Hospital, mainly among nurses and ancillary workers.
Hereforshire Health Authority needs to make savings of six hundred thousand pounds which it overspent this year.
A health clinic has stepped in to help patients who can't find a dentist to treat them on the National Health Service.
The clinic has taken the unusual step of hiring a dentist to look after those patients who simply can't afford to pay for private treatment.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
SWINDON
DIANE BREWER/Dental Patient
RICHARD SWIFT/Dentist
MICHAEL WARNER/Wilts Family Health/Services
SIMON COOMBS MP/Con Swindon
Voice over
A crisis has been looming in dental care for 2 years, ever since The Health Service reorganised its payment system.
Now, in one part of Swindon, it's happened.
Dentists are refusing to take on new Health Service Patients.
Female speaker
I approached 5 dentists before getting this appointment.
I think it's terrible.
Voice over
Diane Brewer is finally being treated at the Eldene Health Clinic, where Health officials have been forced to hire in a dentist for half a day a week.
The same applies to Pensioner Mrs Joan Morgan.
The problem has come about because dentists are being paid less by the government for their patients.
They say they can't afford to treat them on the National Health.
Male speaker
Our main concern is about quality of care.
We are worried that we can't provide the level we have provided in the past.
Dentists are concerned about quality of care.
If the fees are reduced to such a level that this quality can't continue, then the only answer is to move into the private sector.
Voice over
2 years ago, 50 dentists in Swindon offered new patients treatment on the NHS.
That has now been reduced to 15 and the problem is at its most acute in East Swindon.
But things may improve.
Male speaker
We would like to provide dental care through ther normal channels and dentists in Swindon would like to go back to offering that service.
I hope the review into dentists pay will help put that right.
Voice over
Dentists admit there are drawbacks to the system.
They aren't on call around the clock for emergency care.
The Government is looking again at the payments system to try and resolve it and the Town's MP recognises there is a problem.
Male speaker
Dentists are going to have to recognise they have a duty to the community, and the Government must recognise they should be paid correctly.
I think we can get a settlement.
Voice over
The Health department is also faced with the problem of freezing its spending plans at the moment.
So a fee increase for dentists would break with that.
It may be they've bitten off more than they can chew.
Babies lives are being put at risk because many parents are failing to fit car safety seats properly.
More than half of the seats checked in a survey were so badly anchored they would be useless in a crash.
Gareth Furby reports.
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT VIDEO
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
JOHN BOXHALL/Road Safety Officer
JOHN LYUS/In-Car Safety Centre
Voice over
Without a safety seat, in a crash a child would have little chance of survival.
But a badly fitted seat…in the rear of this car…can be just as dangerous.
Recent research has shown that more than fifty per cent of child safety seats are not fitted propertly.
And today a randomn check outside a school in Milton Keynes confirmed that conclusion.
He says the seat was loose.
It needs a fitting kit.
She says she'll do anything for the safety of the children.
A properly fitted seat will save a child's life.
But still too many are left loose.
He says the baby will hit the straps and it will cause injury.
The solution is a seat fitting kit a specially made safety belt which is fixed to the seat after being bolted to the car body.
This weekend road safety officers will offer free checks at a car safety centre in Milton Keynes.
The seat fitting kit costs around ten pounds.
But safety officers say that's a small price to pay to save a childs life.
Good evening:
ANNE DAWSON
Clergywomen across the region are celebrating tonight after the Church of England voted to allow women to be ordained as priests.
All three houses of the General Synod voted in favour of reversing centuries of tradition.
WESLEY SMITH
For supporters of women's ordination it's the culmination of years of campaigning.
But for others the vote may mean they'll leave the church as a matter of conscience.
Robin Powell reports.
GLOUCESTER
FEBRUARY 1992/St BRIAVELS/Gloucestershire
Rev PATRICIA PINKERTON/For Women Priests
Rev MARILYN SHARLAND/For Women Priests
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
Father LAWRENCE MacLEAN/Against Women Prests
Rev HOWARD COCKS/Against
Voice over
It was the moment they'd waited years for.
The General Synod's historic vote means Gloucestershire's would-be women priests are a huge step closer to being ordained.
Among the guests, Patricia Pinkerton, who made history earlier this year when she became the first woman to be put in charge of her own parish; St Briavels in the Forest of Dean.
This evening she could hardly hide her delight.
It had been a nail-biting day glued to the television.
She hesitated to call it a party, but the hostess thought it a good opporotunity to invite round like-minded friends.
The atmosphere was as lively as it was at Church House itself.
One speaker from the Gloucester Diocese was given a particularly noisy reception.
Needless to say, she didn't share the same point of view.
Someone else who won't welcome the vote is Father Lawrence MacLean.
For him, it was just another working day at the church in Cheltenham where he works as a curate.
But goings-on in Westminster were never far away.
This was an anxious day for everyone.
Later on Father Lawrnce had visitors too.
Like him, they're worried about the implications of allowing women to enter the priesthood.
Many priests have said they'll resign over the issue once the legislation is given Parliament's and the Queen's assent.
These particular ones won't be going that far, but for them the Church of England will never be the same again.
Well, while the vote has dismayed some, those who've campaigned for years for the ordination of women into the priesthood are celebrating.
We're going live to Gloucester, where Kim Barnes is with a group of women who hope to be among the first to benefit from today's vote.
KIM BARNES/Live from Gloucester
Rev PATRICIA PINKERTON/Deacon
VIVIENNE FRAY/Ordinand
Rev EDWARD MASON/Priest
Voice over
An inquest has been told how an elderley man died from the treatment he was taking for his athletes foot.John Ellis took a revolutionary new drug for his condition, after years of suffering.But within a couple of months, he died from liver failure.But the makers of the drug say it's safe for most people, and it won't be withdrawn.Chris Moore reports.
SHURDINGTON/Gloucestershire
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
TEWKESBURY/Gloucestershire
Dr DESMOND O'SULLIVAN/Sandoz Pharmaceuticals
Dr TERENCE RYAN/Skin Specialist
John Eliis was prescribed this new drug, Lamisil after suffering from athletes foot for many years.
He was 76, but within a month of his first dose at his home in Shurdington, in April this year he was suffering from jaundice.
He was rushed into Cheltenham General Hospital in late June and died there on July 12.
Today at Tewkesbury coroners court, a patholoigist said Mr Ellis had died from liver and kidney failure, caused by the drug.
But the reason WHY he reacted so adversely to Lamisil, was a mystery.
Coroner Lester Maddrell is sending a report to the Government's Commitee on the safety of medicines.
The makers of Lamisil, Sandoz Pharmaceuticals of Surrey say they tested the drug for 5 years before using it on humans.
They list possible side effects as mild to moderate and transient.
The most likely effects being gastro intestinal with some nausea.
But they say no life threatening reactions have been reporeted so far.
Doctors have been sent a letter by Sandoz pointing out that 4 people have suffered liver failure after taking Lamisil.
But one skin specialist says there are many more who have benefitted from this revolutionary drug.
A misadventure verdict was recorded on John Ellis.
The makers of Lamisil warned from the start that the drug could cause liver and kidney problems in elderley people.
They're not planning to take it off the market.
A private security firm's been called in to help farmers get rid of gangs of illegal hare coursers who are destroying fences and crops.
The police, who are running their own campaign against rural crime, say they understand the farmers' worries, but hope the private firms soon won't be needed.
CHRIS MOORE/The Ridgeway
NORMAN CARLISLE/Farmer
DAVID DUNN/Countrywatch
PC PETE HALE/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Hare-coursers mowed down this fence, cutting the wire so that four wheel drive vehicles can get across the countryside.
The gangs arrive mainly at night with dogs.
They put leashes onto the hares and let the dogs chase and kill the animals.
Farmers say if they try to intervene the gangs can turn violent and threaten to burn their property
He says two sons called on these fellows to leave the field.
But they turned nasty and backed down.
Now, Countrywatch…a firm from Herefordshire has been called in.
They patrol land and keep tabs on the gangs after tip offs from gamekeepers and farmers.
But they need strong evidence to secure a conviction.
He says our basic equipment is a notebook to document evidence.
At night we use big torches, and night vision equipment to get evidence.
Male speaker
I can't stop people using private firms.
But I would say that the police are working full-time on rural crime and are always there to serve the community.
Voice over
The gangs have caused ewes to lose their lambs, and other animals have been hurt by their dogs.
But farmers say they're determined to drive illegal poachers from their land.
Scientists have developed a new wave machine which could save hundreds of homes threatened by the sea.
The wave basin represents half a mile of coastline and shows which areas are likely to be washed away.
JESSICA FOWLE/Reporting
WALLINGFORD/Oxfordshire
Dr RICHARD WHITEHOUSE/Project Manager0
DION WRIGHT/Hydraulics Research
Voice over
The sight of the Holbeck Hall hotel crashing over the East Coast cliffs in June is dramatic reminder of the damage the sea can do.
Today, far from the ravages of the sea, the Science Minister unveiled the latest development in the fight against coastal erosion.
It's a wave basin developed by Hydraulics Research at Wallingford in Oxfordshire.
Representing half a mile of coastline, its 72 paddles can produce waves and set up currents and tides for scientists to study.
The results will be used to develop coastal defences.
It's more effective than doing the research at the coast.
The basin will provide important back up to the government's new policy of allowing nature to take its course in some cases.
It'll be used to predict when doing nothing is appropriate and when it could be disasterous.
The scientists at Wallingford know they'll never be able to tame the sea but they hope their new wave basin will help them find ways of making its effects less destructive.
A theatre group is marking the seventy fifth anniversary of Armistice Day by staging a gala performance of Oh What A Lovely War.
The musical evokes the courage and humour of the troops amidst the horror of trench warfare.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford
NORMAN EDWARDS/War Veteran
Library Pictures
SIMON REEVES/Amateur Actor
Voice over
It's a long way from the killing fields of northern France seventy five years ago, but the City Of Oxford Theatre Group still want to pay tribute to the thousands who died in the Great War.
So later this evening they are performing Oh What A Lovely War in front of an invited gala audience.
One man who cannever forget is Norman Edwards who was twenty when he first saw action with the Glosters during the worst of the fighting.
Male speaker
We got out over and we hadn't got twenty yards when the flares went up and it became undiluted hell 
Voice over
The theatre group has chosen Armistice Day for the production and the proceeds will go to the Royal British Legion and the Red Cross.
Male speaker
Seventeen million people died in this war and we should never forget.
It's a mind-boggling figure
Voice over
The play itself is an irreverent look at war.
But in the end it shows total respect for the people who fought and died.
Still to come on Central News.
Starting again.
The families of head injury children rebuild their lives.
And, Bristling with pride…
Gazza's got his spines back.
In Central news tonight.
Last minute reprieve…a dying man's family is saved from eviction.
Fears of a flu epidemic grow…but now the vaccine's run out
And turning the tide…saving hundreds of homes from coastal erosion.
Good evening,
ANNE DAWSON
A dying man and his family have won a temporary reprieve from eviction.
On the day the bailiffs were due to repossess their home, a finance company has agreed to cancel some of their debts.
GARETH FURBY
Maureen Harris took out a high interest mortgage after her husband was made bankrupt.
She now has a fortnight to pay off the arrears if she and her seven children are to keep their home.
GRAEME BOWD/Oxford
MAUREEN HARRIS
Voice over
Just hours before the eviction was due to take place Maureen Harris went to court to challenge it.
Her husband Peter is dying of cancer and the couple are deep in debt.
But just before the hearing there was a change of heart by the finance company which is trying to repossess their home near Oxford.
The debt counsellor who'd been helping the Harrises said Dorend Ltd had agreed to wave interest of around £30,000.
But only if the couple who have 7 children repay the outstanding capital immediately.
They've been given a fortnight to find £8,000.
Even that was better than Mrs Harris had been expecting.
She says they were very relieved and thanked those who had helped the family.
They hope they'll be able to raise the money from donations.
She's already sold most things of value.
But the mortgage company's barrister Jonathan Rich said the family's predicament was largely their own fault.
He said there were 4 potential wage earners in the household but they hadn't made any payment for 17 months.
The mortgage company had acted with forbearance, only taking them to court as a last resort.
Judge Charles Harris said their payment record was intolerable.
He said it was a very sad case but he added that if the Harrises don't pay up this time it's most unlikely that their eviction will be postponed again.
Police hunting the killer of a pensioner last Christmas have arrested a man.
RUSSELL'S WATER/Oxfordshire
The body of Jim Eggleton, who was seventy was found at his home in Russell's Water near Nettlebed in Oxfordshire on January the fourth.
He'd been beaten and his throat cut.
He was last seen alive on Boxing Day.
Two new witnesses came forward earlier this year, and police say a thirty seven year old man is now being questioned.
The daughter of an Oxfordshire couple murdered four years ago has been awarded compensation.
Peter and Gwenda Dixon from Witney were shot dead on a coastal path in Pembrokeshire in 1989.
Their killer has never been found.
Julie Dixon, who was eighteen at the time of the murder, has been awarded an undisclosed sum by the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board for the loss of parental support she suffered.
People in urgent need of a 'flu vaccination are being told they can't have one because supplies have run out.
They're being urged to take extra care until more vaccines are available.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
GEORGINA THOMAS/Pharmacist
Dr ELAINE FARMERY/Swindon Health Authority
SAMM FARMER/Pharmacy Assistant
PATRICIA MURGATROYD/Flu Sufferer
CAROL FERGUSON/Nationwide Building Society
Voice over
Business is booming for Swindon's chemists…
The flu's come early…and the number of sufferers is greater, the symptoms more severe, than any of the last 3 winters.
But pharmacists, like doctors, have run out of vaccines — leaving some patients at serious risk.
The health authority regrets the vaccine shortage, but says patients will just have to wait.
This chemist in Walcot is dealing with so many 'flu sufferers that even the assistants are going down with it.
Local businesses are affected.
A bus firm's had to cancel services because its drivers are too ill to work…and Swindon Town have called off a reserve match because they're down to just 6 fit players.
But the Nationwide Building Society has escaped lightly.
All 2 200 staff at its Pipers Way headquarters have been handed leaflets offering practical advice on how to Beat the Chill…one of the reasons, the society claims, why it boasts one of the lowest absentee rates in the financial sector.
Experts say the latest outbreak isn't as serious as the epidemic of '89…but they're warning the worst is still to come.
Welcome back.
One in ten young children suffer a head injury, which can sometimes lead to years of difficulty at school and work.
Unlike older people, these children have to learn to cope with recovery as they grow up.
In the second of our reports on head injury we examine how it's often the whole family who have to learn to take one day at a time.
GARGY PATEL/Banbury
JACKIE BOOTH/John's mother
NORTH LEIGH/Oxfordshire
JUDITH WARDLE/Alan's Mother
OXFORD
LESLEY DUNSTONE/Senior Nurse
SALLY DEAKER/Chris's Mother
Voice over
Every day John and his mum go over his schoolwork to make sure he keeps up with the rest of the class.
He was knocked down by a car when he was 4.
His skull was fractured.
No one was sure if he'd survive.
Experts said his injuries would mean permanent physical and mental disability.
But Jackie Booth was determined her son would recover.
She forced him to learn to talk again.
About 1 in 10 young children suffer some form of head injury, with learning problems in later years.
A few though are severley disabled.
Like John, Alan Wardle was knocked down as a small child.
The damage affected all his movement and speech.
With the help of talking computers, Alan CAN speak to others.
Judith Wardle chairs the Children's Head Injuries trust…a campaign for more support, more specialist equipment and research into head injury.
And it's crucial for children to get help as early as possible.
7 year old Chris is revisiting the Radcliffe Infirmary ward where he was a patient two months ago.
In the first stages of a child's head injury, staff here give vital support to the family.
Children need full assessment and follow up care to aid recovery.
At the Russell-Cairns unit in Oxford psychologists can pass on advice to schools to help youngsters like Chris.
There's concern that schools may not realise what help is needed because the children seem to be coping in the classroom.
Campaigners say even those in the medical profession don't know how to help.
And often, the coping and recovery depends on the family and the children themselves.
That report from Gargy Patel.
If you would like more information on coping with the effects of head injuries please write to us at this address:
Head injuries, Central News South, Abingdon OX Fourteen, One SA.
In case you didn't get that down, we'll repeat it at the end of the programme.
A bald albino hedgehog is starting to grow spines again thanks to a shampoo designed for humans.
Gazza's condition had baffled experts at an animal sanctuary but now they say he could soon be just as spiny as any other hedgehog.
August 1993 JESSICA FOWLE Haddenham
LES STOCKER Saint Tiggywinkle's
Voice over
It's nothing like an average trip to the hairdressers but Gazza's no average hedgehog.
Three months ago he was brought into the Saint Tiggywinkles animal sanctuary at Haddenham in Buckinghamshire.
He was down on his luck and not a happy hedgehog.
Almost all his spines had fallen out and to top that he's albino.
But a skin biopsy got to the root of the problem and diagnosed that he's suffering from mites, an allergic reaction to the mites and a fungal growth.
Now thanks to regular shampooing he's on the mend.
Male speaker
For the skin condition we're bathing him in Nizoral shampoo which gets rid of the fungus growth and makes the skin better and more stable.
When we do get spines coming through they don't fall out which is really good news
Voice over
The name Gazza does seem a little insulting to the footballer.
Male speaker
When we came up with his problems Paul Gasgoine was having his hair elongated and having bits of hair stuck on.
It just seemed appropriate.
Voice over
Because he's albino Gazza will never be released into the wild — he'd attract to much attention from predators.
But once he's grown enough spines it's hoped he can live in a walled garden — a real case of wash and go.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Laura loses fight for life
Laura Davies has died in a Pittsburg hospital.
The five year old had a multiple organ transplant two months ago.
Briton questioned over motorway crash
Queen Mother honours war dead
The Queen Mother has honoured the war dead at Westminster Abbey.
After the service she spent ten minutes talking to war veterans.
FTSE up 1
The hundred shares index closed up one point two at thirty, ninety nine point seven.
The pound is up at one dollar forty seven and two marks forty nine.
And a reminder that if you want more information on coping with the effects of head injuries, then the address to write to is:
Head injuries, Central News South, Abingdon OX Fourteen, One SA.
Now a summary of the main points in Norman Lamont's Autumn Statement.
1
The Chancellor has cut interest rates by one per cent to seven per cent.
Some building society mortgage rates cut
In response, the Abbey National Building Society is to cut its mortgage rates to between eight point one and eight point five per cent.
Some others also plan to make cuts.
Lamont limits public sector pay to 1
Public sector pay settlements have been limited to a maximum of one point five per cent.
This also applies to MPs, but there'll be no increase for ministers.
Tax on new cars abolished
Tax paid on new cars is to be abolished from midnight reducing average prices by around four hundred pounds.
NHS and council spending up by around 3
National Health Service spending is to rise by three per cent and local council spending by slightly more than that.
Pensions index linked No NI increases
Pensions and other benefits are to be indexed linked with no increase in National Insurance contributions.
Transport spending increased
More money will be spent on British Rail and London Underground where the extension to the Jubilee Line will go ahead.
Road building will also be extended.
Labour says statement fails to go far enough
Labour has said that the Chancellor's Statement does not provide an adequate response to the country's problems.
Unemployment figures increase
Meanwhile, unemployment figures have risen to the highest level for more than five years.
FTSE up 29
The hundred shares index closed up twenty-nine point six at twenty-seven, twenty-six point four.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-two and down at two marks, forty-one.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Every year, the workload facing the RSPCA increases.
Last year the society investigated nearly eighty seven thousand complaints of cruelty.
But despite their efforts, only three thousand cases were successfully prosecuted.
In the final part of our series on the work of the RSPCA, Liz Hannam looks at the difficulties the society face when they try to take a cruelty case to court.
WHEATLEY/Oxfordshire
DOUG DAVIDSON/RSPCA
WEST WYCOMBE/Buckinghamshire
BRILL/Oxfordshire
These hooves are from a pony locked up and left to become crippled in a barn.
When the RSPCA found him, he had to be destroyed.
They're part of a black museum kept by Chief Inspector Doug Davidson at his office in Wheatley.
The RSPCA is campaigning to get this type of running snare banned.
It's used to catch rabbits and foxes, but cats and dogs have also been its victim.
The RSPCA also want to change the law which currently makes them wait until they see cruelty inflicted before they can prosecute.
It means that when they have a tip off that devil worshippers are slaughtering animals, they have to wait until the animal is ill treated before they can act.
One of the major difficulties in a cruelty case, is amassing the evidence.
When animals are abandoned, such as the case with these sheep, proving ownership is difficult.
And even those convicted of cruelty can't be banned from owning animals, only from keeping them.
Hence Colin French, can still own legally own livestock.
But despite these restrictions, there are still successes.
Ivor Smith was filmed torturing a cat by an animal rights activist.
He was sentenced to 6 months in imprisonment and banned for life from keeping cats.
Peter and Glyn Lyons' dog, Merlin was found weighing just over 100lbs; less than three quarters of its normal weight.
They were found guilty of causing unnecessary suffering, banned from keeping a dog for 5 years and ordered to pay £500 costs.
And Colin French, convicted on 65 counts of cruelty to his farm animals, was this week sentenced to 3 months in jail, subject to appeal.
At the root of most problems, is the fact there are too many animals.
This kitten was a stray.
She died shortly after being found.
And for Doug, destroying animals is the worst part of his job.
The only way he can justify it to himself, is the belief that otherwise the animal would have had a miserable life.
And if destroying an animal is the worst part.
Saving one is the best.
Cyril was found weighing only 15lbs.
A vicar's wife who's an expert on knickers has just completed an in depth investigation into bras.
From the whalebone bodices of the nineteen hundreds to the flimsy teasers of the nineties.
Rosemary Hawthorne has looked into them all.
Clare Lafferty reports.
TETBURY/Gloucestershire
ROSEMARY HAWTHORNE/Bras Expert
Voice over
When is a bra not a bra.
When it's a bust bodice.
That's what they were called when they first appeared on the underwear scene in the early 1900s.
Female speaker
It looked like a camisole.
As the corsets slid down, they were boned.
Thus the bust bodice was born.
Voice over
Vicars wife, Rosemary Hawthorne has already written a book about knickers.
Logically, she's now turned her attention to bras.
Some of the earliest items in her collection look more like implements of torture.
Comfort and luxury came later.
After the flat-chested 60s and seventies, bosoms are now experiencing a revival.
This state of the art Vivienne Westwood corset says it all.
Through the ages women have explored various ways of enhancing their bosoms.
Most used the ever popular wonderbra.
Others used lung power.
From embarrassing to impractical.
There are those that say bras aren't an appropriate subject for a vicar's wife.
But Rosemary is unrepentant.
Oxford University has been banned from fielding one of its best-ever basketball players…because she's a woman.
The sports authorities have ruled Jodi Evans can't play in the men's team, even though she's every bit as good.
Gareth Furby reports.
OXFORD
JODI EVANS/Oxford Student
CHRIS BROWN/Captain and Coach
PETER RHODES/Universities Sports Federation
Voice over
Jodi Evans has been playing basketball since she was 12.
Back home she was in Canada's national squad.
But now she's studying at Oxford, the men want her talent in their team.
He says she's better than him.
He says he's glad she's on their side.
Her 5ft 10 inch frame caught the selectors eye as soon as she arrived at Oxford.
But the university sports federation has ruled that she can't join the men.
She can practice with them, but every tournament she'll be left on the sidelines.
She says it's frustrating.
She wants to play at the highest standard.
He says she's an exceptional player so an exception should be made.
They're losing a lot.
Today the sporting authorities stood by their decision.
He says it would set a precedent.
And there are 2 separate tournaments for men and women.
Oxford University also has a womens' basketball team.
But for a player of this standard there's little challenge from her own sex.
She says it's play of a different standard.
The girls enjoy it, but it's not what she's used to.t
Unless the rules are changed despite her talent the only time Jodi Evans will score points for Oxford University — is at an exhibition match — or in practice.
Three hospital wards are to be closed temporarily and seventy one staff made redundant to meet a shortfall in health authority funds.
HEREFORD
The gynaecology and Ear Nose and Throat wards at Hereford County Hospital, and the the orthopeadic ward at Hereford General are being closed because the county health authority needs to save six hundred thousand pounds by April.
Sixty nurses jobs are among the redundancies.
Job losses have been announced at council offices in Gloucestershire.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
Cheltenham Borough Council is shedding thirteen jobs from its treasury department because there is less work with the new council tax than with the poll tax.
The council tax means the number of bills to be processed will be almost halved to forty six thousand.
Thousands of pounds worth of antiques are filling the cells of a police station while officers try to find out whether they were stolen.
They were all discovered in a raid on a single house.
Simon Garrett reports 
COWLEY/Oxford
Det Sgt MIKE SCARLETT/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The police can't yet prove any of these antiques has been stolen, but they are suspicious.
They all came from a raid on a house in Oxford.
Not a run of the mill haul.
Male speaker
It's quite good property much of it antique of high value.
I'm sure it's previously been reported stolen, so we'll try to restore it to its rightful owner.
Voice over
The police will be looking for proof of ownership.
They'd want to be sure the items had been reported stolen and the person who owns this suitcase for example, would need to know what was written on the other side.
Or the name of the artist in this painting.
Male speaker
If anyone feels the property's theirs, we'd expect it to have been reported stolen.
We'd want a good description to make sure the right property goes back to the right owner.
Voice over
Anyone who thinks they can identify any of the antiques should call Cowley police station in Oxford on Saturday morning.
Anything which isn't identified beyond doubt, will go back to the man in whose house it was found.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
AMATEUR VIDEO0
STEPHEN HARPER/Father
VICKY HARPER/Mother
Voice over
Twin sisters, Emma and Becky Harper, died shortly after being filmed at a family party in Cheltenham.
They were planning carees Vicki Harper has survived the loss of her only children 22 months ago, by writing a book of her experience, which she hopes will help others.
She and her husband, Stephen, feel they've only just begun to grieve, one we barn, where they'd taken the girls in January last year.
The deaths of Becky and Emma, at the age of 17 and the subsequent court case, produced hundreds of letters of sympathy to their parents from across the country.
The girl's death produced reactions of grief in policemen, strangers, politicians, as well as family friends, some of whom offered advice.
A Bosnian baby with just three months to live has arrived in Britain and been rushed straight to hospital.Adisa Blagiyach has a tumour on her heart and has been brought to this country for life-saving surgery.
The operation was to have taken place anyway in a few days, but her condition worsened on the flight from Zagreb.
Nick Walshe reports.
GERALD SMITH/Appeal Organiser
AZRA DURIC/Bosnian Refugee
KEVIN BIRD/Aid Volunteer
Voice over
The final leg of an escape from Bosnia — the Croatian Airways seven three seven touched down at Heathrow carrying not just passengers — but also hopes.
Shnezhana Blagayatch carried eight month old Adisa into the terminal building — but it soon became clear something was wrong.
The baby, already stricken with a tumour on the heart and given just weeks to live, had suffered a seizure on the plane.
The month's first action on arriving in Britain was to rush her child to the airport doctor.
Gerald Smith says the baby will survive like Bosnia.
Mr Smith, a Northampton headmaster, has been involved in bringing hundreds of refugees to Britain from the Yugoslav war zone.
And soon he had the good news that this tiny refugee was fit enough to continue — though still very sick.
Another refugee, already settled in Northampton, spoke for Adisa's bewildered mother.
Azra Duric, another Bosnian refugee, says
Shnezhana and her husband Haris had escaped to the seaside quiet of Split from the beseiged town of Mostar.
Their car came under mortar fire and they had to cross five military checkpoints.
A volunteer from Kettering also made the journey.
Kevin Bird says she's a brave girl — she's put up with mortar fire, a tuma and now looks like having open heart surgery.
A lavish welcome had been laid on by Mr Smith — not just a teddy bear but also a Rolls Royce.
But what had promised to be a happy greeting turned to a strained departure — tonight Adisa was taken onto hospital although she's since been allowed to leave and join other refugees in Northampton.
An Oxford priest has become the first in the country to announce he'll leave the Church of England following the vote to ordain women priests.
Father Martin Flatman says he'll now join the Roman Catholic church.
It's thought up three hundred priests could follow suit.
Kim Barnes reports.
OXFORD
Rev MARTIN FLATMAN/Vicar of Saints Mary and John
Rev MICHAEL HALSALL/Assistant Curate
Dr WILLIAM ODDIE/Roman Catholic
Voice over
A different future is now opening up for Father Martin Flatman following yesterday's vote at the synod to ordain women as priests.
After morning service as usual, he broke the news to his congregation in a statement.
His views on the subject were clearly known.
He says he simply can't accept women as priests.
But colleagues are saddened.
Parishioners too, are disappointed at the news.
Father Martin now hopes to become a member of the Roman Catholic church, but admits that in this economic climate, he can't t many of those currently at odds will do likewise.
They'll face a period of instruction.
He believes that up to 300 of the 2,000 priests who threatened to leave will actually do so.
Like Father Martin, their beliefs could leave them homeless and unemployed.
A successful businessman is giving up the security of office life to become a rock singer.
Paul Aitken has always hankered after the bright lights, so at the age of forty-two he's handing over his business to his staff while he goes on the road to promote his record.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Chipping Norton
PAUL AITKEN/Singer
BEN GROVE/Guitarist
STEVE MORLEY/Bass Player
ALLISON AITKEN/Business Manager
JANE AITKEN/Daughter
REBECCA AITKEN/Daughter
Voice over
Paul Aitken, successful middle aged businessman.
Paul runs a corporate communications company in Chipping Norton with top clients like British Rail on his books.
Paul is happy enough, but he has a dream which has been with him since he was a teenager.
He wants to be a rock and roll singer…and he doesn't hide it from his clients.
Now he's turning it into reality.
Male speaker
There comes a time when you have to do what you feel most comfortable doing.
Right now I can't run the company and do the music simultaneously
Voice over
Paul and his band the Retros have released a single and an album.
most of it written or co-written by him.
Now he's prepared to give up his day job to chase the dream.
Male speaker
everyone has something they want to do or can do.
Voice over
The father of two employs eight people at his office.
His wife Allison runs the administrative side.
But there's never a time when music is far away.
He is principally a drummer but he always keeps a guitar on hand in case a new song idea hits him.
Male speaker
I'll carry on for as long as it takes.
We have a single and an album coming out and I'm determined to see it through
Voice over
The Retros are firmly based in the sixties performing old hits as well as their own material.
They dress the part and are convinced there's a market for them.
Male speaker
peopler want to see us getting sweaty and making mistakes, it's good fun for them
Male speaker
I want to play music that embarresses my kids.
So get your flares on and play it LOUD
Voice over
But while the middle aged boys chase the dream, how do the girls feel left minding the shop.
Female speaker
I think it's great.
More middle aged people should go out and do what they want to
Male speaker
you're never too old to do anything.
You see retiredf people taking up painting or writing novels.
People are capable of so many things
Voice over
Paul's daughters have no doubts.
They love it.
Female speaker
I love to dance to it.
She says: I love to sing along to it
Voice over
And they're destined for success if the Chipping Norton Cricket Club audience is any judge.
Female speaker
I love the music from the sixties and seventies
Male speaker
it's the first time I've heard them, I'm very impressed
Voice over
First Chipping Norton, then the world, and they're already picking up bookings.
But they hope it won't take too long or they'll be rocking around the grandfather clock.
A party's underway to celebrate the birthdays of James, Stuart, Jayne, Nichola, Hannah and Gary Coleman.
The sextuplets are seven today and they've been celebrating with cakes, presents and party games.
It's all made mum feel very much older.
CLARE LAFFERTY Stoke Orchard
JAMES
HANNAH
JAYNE
NICHOLA
STUART
GARY
SAM Older Sister
SUE COLEMAN Mother
Voice over
Forty two candles symbolise the combined age of the Coleman sextuplets from Stoke Orchard.
From early this morning they've been celebrating their seventh birthdays with cards, sweets and of course plenty of presents.
The sextuplets were born after their Mum Sue had fertility treatment.
After seven years she says coping with them STILL isn't getting any easier.
Plans for the evening include just a bit more cake, a few more presents and the simple kind of games that children really enjoy.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Laura's parents explain decision
The parents of the organ-transplant girl, Laura Davies, have explained their decision to allow her ventilator to be turned off to prevent further suffering.
Trade gap falls
Britain's trade deficit with the rest of the world shrank dramatically as output from factories rose.
It's good news for the Chancellor ahead of the budget.
Funeral of PC Dunne
Hundreds of people turned out for the funeral of the PC Patrick Dunne, who was shot dead on duty in South London.
FTSE down 0
The hundred shares index closed down point six at thirty, ninety-nine point one.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-eight and up at two marks, fifty-one.
RUNS=0:10
And it's a day off for the Premier League sides including Swindon.
They were due to fly to Greece for a game against a team with an unpronouncable name.
Sadly the opposition have gone down with the flu.
Now, we're featuring some stars of the present and future in our roundup.
EMILY BOND/Finalist
CLAIRE TAYLOR/National Junior Champion
Voice over
Swindon may not be the centre of the galaxy, but it's been the satellite centre for women's tennis this week.
There's been universal praise for Gloucestershire's Emily Bond who's reached tomorrow's finals after an aggressive 6-3 6-1 win over Spaniard Eva Borras.
Female speaker
My ambition is to progress to the top 300 in the world.
Voice over
There was disappointment for Banbury's Claire Taylor, who went out of tournament in the quarter final stage.
After her success winning the National Junior Title, it's harder going on the senior circuit.
Female speaker
I haven't gone down, I'm just trying to build up.
Voice over
Northampton's Derek Redmond, is to resume his athletics career.
After his injury in the 400 metre semi final at the Barcelona Olympics, he had hoped to make a career in basketball.
But he was unable to win a regular place in the Birmingham Bullets.
It's back to the league and back to business for Gloucester tomorrow at Bristol.
And after the shocking recent performances, including the 10-9 defeat by London Irish, there'll be five changes in the side.
And a colourful diversion for the county cricketers, who've been told their clothes of many colours will remain for Sunday outings even though seven out of ten members said they don't prefer them.
And finally news of one of Gloucestershire's favourite cricketers, David Syd Lawrence.
On Monday we'll see what progress he's making for his comeback to the county…and maybe even the international scene.
The first big race of the new National Hunt season comes to post at Cheltenham tomorrow.
It's the Mackeson Gold Cup.
So what chance a local winner?
Every chance.
The Twiston-Davies Scudamore stable at Naunton, have last years winner’ Tipping Tim’running and from the Nicholson yard comes’Second Schedule’.
Tim Russon weighs up the odds in Friday Feature 
PETER SCUDAMORE/Assistant Trainer
DAVID BRIDGEWATER/Jockey
DAVID NICHOLSON/Trainer
TERRY BIDDLECOMBE
Voice over
Never in the history of racing has a new stables had so many horses…and so many winners…the assistant trainer we know all about…
Peter Scudamore's racing records will be galloping along for years to come…
Peter Scudamore says
but what of the trainer…
Scudamore's friend and partner Nigel Twiston Davies…he doesn't like cameras…doesn't do interviews…a man of mystery…but a man who's at one with his world…
a man who runs a yard where there are no firm rules…no strict training techniques…the only order of the day is be happy…laugh and smile…it's a wonderful world
David Bridgewater says
A few miles down the road is Jackdaws Castle…a new yard with an old hand in charge…david Nicholson.,.
the Duke had a 100 winners last season his best ever…
Here there are rules there is routine…but again it works workers…and life success is sweet…
David Nicholson says
So this weekend we have two trainers racing for the big prize…who will win…which is best…our expert Terry Biddlecombe knows all…he rode with David Nicholson…then helped the young Twisdton davies as a jockey
Terry Biddlecombe says
who'll win the Mackeson…will it be the young lions from Naunton…or the grand old Duke from Ford…the race is on
Villagers trying to buy their local school and reopen it have lost their fight.
The school had just three pupils when it closed.
Despite three attempts to buy it and run it themselves, it's been sold instead to another private bidder.
CHRIS MOORE/Brockweir
VAL WELHAM/Local Architect
PAT GROVES/Villager
The people of Brockweir in Gloucestershire are furious at losing their school.
After it was closed and put up for sale eighteen months ago they did their utmost to buy it and run it on a community basis.
Three times, local architect Val Welham offered 110,000 pounds of her own money but each time it was rejected.
Female speaker
We've had this sealed bid exersise twice now.
It seems to us that when we're the highest bidder they don't sell it, and when someone else is highest, they do.
Voice over
Pat Groves had four children at the school.
She's bitterley disappointed that the council has sold it to a local businessman who wants to use the premises to repair binoculars.
Female speaker
I don't understand it at all.
I have a suspicion that the justifiable coverage we got in the media hardened the hearts at Shire Hall.
Voice over
Brockweir residents accuse the council of selling out to the highest bidder instead of letting future generations go to school in their own village.
But the locals aren't giving up yet.
An official complaint will be made to the District Auditor and The Ombudsman, claiming maladministration by Shire Hall
A monk who once coached the Oxford Boat Race crew has been has been installed as an Abbot.
Around forty senior figures from the Catholic church attended the ceremony which dates back many centuries.
SIMON GARRETT/Belmont Abbey
FATHER MARK JABALE/Abbot of Belmont
Most Rev JOHN ALOYSIUS WARD/Archbishop of Cardiff
Voice over
’ Take this shepherd's staff and take loving care of the brothers whom the Lord has entrusted to you’
Father Mark Jabale is the tenth Abbot of Belmont.
For the next eight years at least he will be responsible for the spiritual wellbeing of the Benedictine monks of the Abbey and beyond.
Flanked by thirty abbots and abbesses two bishops and an archbishop, it's a ceremony thick with incense and tradition
Male speaker
It's very reassuring because it could be quite daunting but all these are friends I've met before and so it's lovely to see them here supporting me
Male speaker
You can see those rows of abbots on either side and behind them is a long tradition of succession of abbots including great saints and I suppose a few sinners as well.
He's elected by the community but this a special blessing before he really takes over and wears his mitre and crozier.
The local bishop's expected to do this.
It's almost like the ceremony of ordaining a bishop in fact if I'd turned the wrong page we could have ended up with a bishop rather than an abbot you know
Voice over
The Abbots united for the inevitable photograph bear more than a passing resemblance to a sports team.
The new Abbot of Belmont feels at home in such a setting.
A lifetime rowing enthusiast, he's coached the Oxford boat race team and a world championship winning Great Britain Coxless Four.
Now he's a steward at Henley
Male speaker
A number of my fellow stewards from Henley were here at the ceremony and so perhaps it will rub off onto the body of the stewards at Henley
Voice over
Abbot Mark says he's definitely ruling out the use of his mitre and crozier while refereeing on the river.
But it'll take a brave competitor to challenge any decision he calls
Still to come on Central News.
Under starter's orders.
Following the form for the new National Hunt season.
And, Talking 'bout my generation…
On the road again at 40.
Welcome back.
Later on we'll be joining in the birthday celebrations for sextuplets who are seven years old today.
But now here's Erika with the sport.
ERIKA BARNES
We're under starters orders for the National Hunt season.
Coming up why Tim Russon's tipping’ Tipping Tim’for the Mackeson Gold Cup!
But first to another cup.
The FA Cup and a less than glamorous first round game for Hereford.
GREG DOWNS/Hereford Player-Manager
Voice over
Hereford have been down on their luck.
What they need is some success in the FA Cup to restore some pride.
Male speaker
I think we've got to knuckle down and work hard.
The results haven't been good.
But the tide is turning after the draw midweek.
Voice over
Beazer Homes league Cambridge city, their opponents in the FA cup, aren't going to be easy pickings.
But a win will bring them more glamorous and more lucrative opposition.
To the Manor now, where things may be looking up for Oxford United.
A singing and standing ovation after their two-all draw at Milwall.
They may be bottom of the table but their latest signings have given them a new lease of life.
Tomorrow's visitors Derby County…are currently fifth in the first division.
But they were thrashed last week by Wolves.
Oxford would like to repeat the humiliation.
They've got the same squad of fifteen who did so well last week.
New boy John Byrne makes his home debut together with Matt Elliott.
A win would lift Oxford off the foot of the table.
And as a reminder of their winning ways, here's the goal that stole the match from Derby at the Baseball ground last year.
And finally here's our goal of the week…
Nick Cusack's equaliser at the Den.
And it's clear the new partnership up front gives real hope for United.
In Central news tonight.
School has failed our son…
Parents' anger as autistic boy is expelled.
Charged with murder…
Pensioner's neighbour in court.
And fake sportswear…how it's funding the drug dealers.
Good evening,
ANNE DAWSON
The parents of an autistic teenager have accused an education authority of failing their son.
He was expelled from a special school after he lost his temper and hit a secretary.
WESLEY SMITH
Jamie Fieldhouse suffers from a condition that makes his temper flare up uncontrollably.
Now he faces the prospect of having to go to a school more than a hundred miles from his home.
RICHARD BARNETT/Sedbury
KEVIN FIELDHOUSE/Father
JAMIE FIELDHOUSE/Pupil
ANNE MARSHALL/Gloucestershire County Council
Voice over
Jamie Fieldhouse suffers from a form of autism called Aspergers Syndrome.
The 14 year old frequently becomes frustrated…and that leads to temper tantrums.
For the past 7 years he's attended Dean Hall Special School near Cinderford.
On Tuesday he had a temper tantrum on the school bus and then kicked the school secretary.
Dean Hall expelled him saying he was not a suitable pupil.
Dean Hall is only 15 miles from the family home.
Local Education officials say the nearest school Jamie can attend is 100 miles away in the New Forest.
Jamie says he wants to stay at Dean Hall.
But the school told us Dean Hall is for children with moderate learning difficulties.
’ This boy has a serious psychological problem.
He needs specialist care.’
Meanwhile Gloucestershire County Council says Jamie has severe autism.
The coucil has done all it can to help the family.
As the arguments go on, Jamie waits at home.
He doesn't understand why the temper tantrums happen, and there's no way he can control them.
Eleven months after a pensioner was found dead in his home, one of his neighbours has been charged with murdering him.
Paul Beechey, who's thirty-seven, was remanded in custody for a month
Friends of the dead man, seventy year-old Jim Eggleton, had got together to offer a ten thousand pound reward to find the killer.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Didcot
Voice over
The accused man Paul Beechey was driven into the magistrates court at Didcot in an unmarked police car.
Mr Beechey, pictured here a few days after the body of his neighbour was discovered, said nothing during the hearing.
The thirty seven year old is accused of murdering pensioner Jim Eggleton sometime between December the 26th and the 28th aty his home in Russells Water near Watlington.
Mr Eggleton, who was aged seventy, was found dead with head and throat injuries.
Mr beechey was remanded in custody for a month.
The discovery of the body started a wide ranging investigation.
Police released a video of the victim's last Christmas, just a few days before he died…detectives visited every home in Russells Water…the village pond was searched by police frogmen…mounted police were brought in to search the grounds of a nearby National Trust property.
The police maintained a constant presence in the village setting up a base in the village hall right next door to Mr Eggleton's house.
Friends set up a ten thousand pounds reward for any information in the inquiry.
A memorial tree will be planted in Mr Eggleton's honour on Sunday.
Drug cartels and terrorists are reported to be taking over the counterfeit clothing business.
Trading standards officers have seized two machines which were being used to make fake designer t-shirts.
Most are being sold at car boot sales.
JESSICA FOWLE/Swindon
ROBERT TAYLOUR/Wiltshire Trading Standards
Library Pictures
ANTHEA WORSDALL/Anti-Counterfeiting Group
Voice over
The counterfeit trade's becoming big business.
In Wiltshire trading standards officers have made an important breakthrough in cracking the crime.
These screen printing frames, used for faking Adidas and Umbro t-shirts, were seized from Gorse Hill in Swindon.
Male speaker
We know counterfeiting is a problem.
We don't usually get past the person selling at the car boot sale.
It's quite rare to get the equipment that's been used for this type of activity.
Voice over
A dramatic increase in the crime over the last eighteen months has hit clothing companies hard.
A spokesman for Adidas told us:
’ Counterfeiting is no longer the activity of Delboy Trotter.
We estimate that four million pounds worth of fake Adidas clothing was probably sold in the UK last year.
It's big business.’
Its petty-criminal image is being replaced with something far more sinister.
Unsuspecting bargain hunters buying fake designer T-shirts and other goods at car boot sales may be supporting drug gangs and even terrorists.
Female speaker
Undoubtedly we have lots of anecdotal evidence that links it with terrorist activities in Northern Ireland and other types of criminal activity like drug dealing.
Voice over
It's fairly simple to spot the difference between the real thing and a fake.
Male speaker
The quality is variable but is generally vastly inferior to the genuine itemm.
In some cases the logo is coming away.
Another tell tale sign is the neck labels.
Some have been removed.
Others aren't the same as the branded name of the company who legitimately produced the T-shirts.
Voice over
Anyone considering selling counterfeit goods at car boot sales could face two years in prison or unlimited fines.
And they could unwittingly find themselves supporting terrorists and drug dealers.
City centre pollution could be cut significantly thanks to a new type of bus.
The so-called hybrid bus is virtually silent and produces fewer exhaust fumes.
Simon Garrett reports 
HARRY BLUNDRED/Thames Transit
HARRY CHAMBERS/Iveco Ford
Voice over
The diesel fumes from Oxford's buses are not easily ignored.
Even in pedestrian areas where cars are banned, the rumble and the smell are everywhere.
Female speaker
It's just unbelievable.
I hate coming down town.
Female speaker
It just stinks.
It's really revolting.
Voice over
This new bus runs on electricity.
It's charged by just a one litre petrol or diesel generator.
The engine compartment is sound-proofed.
Thames Transit's agreed to buy 2 so-called hybrid buses for Oxford.
On reaching the city centre the generator goes off and the bus runs on in virtual silence.
Male speaker
There is a problem with pollution with visual intrusion and noise intrusion which needs to be solved and this goes a long way towards solving it.
Voice over
The hybrid buses will make their world debuts in Oxford and Florence.
Both city's having much to gain from a 2-thirds cut in the amount of exhaust emissions compared to conventional petrol or diesel driven vehicles.
However a wholesale switch to cleaner buses would be expensive.
They're £50,000 each; twice the usual cost.
Male speaker
Their always is that question but for a cleaner bus and city centre there is a bill to pay
Voice over
Because of the cost it seems hard to imagine many more than 2 hybrid buses ever driving round Oxford.
The operators say there is provison in law for the government to make grants to companies so they can buy more environmentally friendly vehicles.
So far, no such grants have been offered.
A pirate radio station, which was forced to close down eight years ago, is back on the air — but this time it's completely legal.
Sunshine 855 began broadcasting from a farmer's barn in the late seventies.
Now it has a proper licence.
Sara White reports.
LUDLOW/Shropshire
ADRIAN COLES/Former Broadcaster
GRAHAM SIMON/Sunshine 855
It all started more than a decade ago from this barn on an isolated farm in South Shropshire.
Radio enthusiast, Graham Simon was behind the idea and one of his first broadcasters was local Councillor, Adrian Coles.
’ It was a community radio station.
Everyone talked abnout it.
Local news came out on it.
We missed it when it stopped.
It filled a local need.’
Now however, Radio Sunshine is strictly legal.
They've even got a new franchise.
They may have gone down the medium wave dial from 10.17 to 8.55, but their new premises in Ludlow is more than a few steps up from the barn.
’ 10 years ago, Sunshine stopped.
10 years on, it is on.
We're back.
We want to provide a local radio service for local people.
That's all we want to do.
We want to be loved by everyone.’
10 years ago, Radio Sunshine achieved cult status and caught the public's imagination, but will it be the same now it's legal?
’ It is more professional.
It works better.
You were looking over your shoulder waiting for the knock on the door.
Now we can plan 2 years in front of ourselves.’
The station officially opens tomorrow and with 80% of the £200,000 capital raised locally, it seems that people round here think the world is a brighter place now that Radio Sunshine beaming into South Shropshire again.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
GREG DOWNS/Hereford United
DAVE SANSOM/Aylesbury United
Voice over
No-one knows more about the pleasure and pain of the FA Cup than Hereford player-coach, Greg Downs.
He was a Wembley winner with Coventry City and still with the Sky Blues, when they were beaten by non-league, Sutton in one of the biggest shocks in years.
Tomorrow his United team face them again.
So does that nightmare live on?
Greg Downs says it was just one of those things and his Hereford team are playing well and have a good cup record.
Canary Wharf in London was built in the wake of the big bang in the city.
It's a bit like a ghost town at the moment, but there could be a boom if window cleaner, Dave Sansom has his say.
Dave, the younger brother of former England full-back, Kenny Sansom, is the part-time player manager of Aylesbury United.
Tomorrow they're off to play West Brom.
Dave says he's really looking forward to a nice day
It's 45 years since Cheltenham Town made it through to the second round of the cup.
Tomorrow, they're away to St. Albans.
The Robins' main problem, is a long list of injuries.
In the first division, Oxford take on Luton at the Manor.
It's 7 league game without defeat now for United, but their last home win was this one against Cambridge in mid September.
United will be unchanged.
Nick Cusack may have to drop out of the squad because of injury.
At the County Ground, it's Swindon against Southend; top versus bottom.
Town's biggest home win so far was 5-1 against Notts County.
They'll be out to beat that tomorrow.
Swindon should be unchanged.
Micky Hazard took a knock at Newcastle and will have a late check.
Goal of the week; one of John Durnin's that helped smash Southend last Saturday.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
OXFORD
IRIS SAMMONS/Alzheimers Sufferer
DONALD SAMMONS/Husband
Dr KIM JOBST/Clinical Director
Prof DAVID SMITH/Project Leader
Voice over
Iris Sammons' life revolves around her husband Donald and her cat.
At 65, she'd like to reflect on her days gone by.
But she can barely remember what happened yesterday.
She has Alzheimers Disease, which is eating away at her mind.
Even recalling details of family life are hard.
Reporter asks: What about your children?
Female speaker
I don't know where they are.
Voice over
Reporter asks: Do you remember their names?
Female speaker
I shouldn't think so.
Voice over
Reporters asks: Do you see them often?
Female speaker
I can't remember.
Voice over
Her husband's voice: We actually saw them yesterday.
Iris is totally dependent on Donald who retired early to care for his wife.
Male speaker
It's upsetting.
Not only does it restrict my life.
It restricts her life.
She's happy just to sit down.
Voice over
Today, Iris and Donald are going to the Radcliffe Infirmary in Oxford to take part in a study of Alzheimers Disease.
Every year, their brains are scanned and compared, so researchers can monitor the progress of Iris's disease.
With the help of around 250 volunteers, some showing signs of dementia, the Optima research team have taken an important step forward in their understanding of Alzheimers Disease.
Until now, doctors have only been able to CONFIRM the disease after death.
But now scanning techniques have been improved, which will help make early diagnosis possible.
It all centres around a part of the brain called the medial temporal lobe.
It seems, this thins out as dementia takes a grip.
So measuring that part of the brain can give an indication of the progress of Alzheimers disease.
Male speaker
It's a very exciting breakthrough.
It would appear CT scanning can be useful in detecting whether Alzheimers Disease is there or not.If we look at Mr Sammon, his medial temporal lobe is quite thick, like sausages.
If we look at his wife, it's extremely thin and has disappeared.
The thickness of the structure is directly related to the diagnosis of Alzheimers Disease.
Voice over
A second scanner at the John Radcliffe Hospital can help make the diagnosis even clearer.
It looks at the blood flows deep in the brain.
Iris's scan reveals there's little activity in the affected part, compared with her husband's normal scan.
Male speaker
In our study we find, where you can give a fairly reliable diagnosis, people will know the situation and can plan.
Male speaker
Until it was confirmed as Alzheimers disease, she was panic stricken.
I'd never heard of it.
But it was explained to us.
The name helped.
Voice over
Iris's voice interrupts: It's the brain…dying.
Iris's condition is unlikely to improve.
But by joining the research she may help others.
The ability to diagnose the disease takes scientists one step closer to controlling, preventing or even curing the condition which steals away the memories of a lifetime.
A court's been hearing how a drink driver failed to stop after hitting a nine year old girl; she died from her injuries.
The man later told police he thought he'd struck a cardboard box.
Mark Kiff reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
RAJ LAKHANI/Newsagent
Voice over
Sharon Townsend was knocked down just yards from her home at Walcot in Swindon.
She'd been buying some sweets at a local newsagent minutes before the accident.
She ran out from behind a line of parked cars in Marlowe Avenue.
A Ford Escort hit Sharon, throwing her into the air.
The driver, Christopher Hart, who's thirty-nine and was unemployed at the time, was seen to slow down and then accelerate off, leaving the girl fatally injured.
A blood test revealed his alcohol level was 40 per cent above the legal limit.
The tragedy prompted people living in the area to campaign for road improvements.
Aid workers who'd hoped to bring refugee children from Bosnia to Britain have returned empty-handed because of new visa conditions imposed by the Government.
In spite of Home Office advice to stay at home, they intend to try again.
Tim Hurst reports.
AMATEUR VIDEO/FORMER YUGOSLAVIA
DAVE ELLAWAY/West Star Aid
Voice over
West Star, an aid agency based in Gloucestershire drove its latest batch of supplies to former Yugoslavia by coach, instead of lorry, hoping to fill the seats with children on the way home.
Bosnian authorities had agreed to release the children for a holiday, but the Home Office insisted on vizas, suggesting such groups should leave refugee problems to the professionals.
The Gloucestershire team learnt of the new visa rules while distributing aid in Zagreb.
They returned empty handed during the night.
One of the team, an ambulanceman and Red Cross volunteer, dismissed the Home Secretary's criticism.
The team hopes to get more aid, and visas, to Zagreb by Christmas.
They believe refugee children deserve a season of peace and goodwill.
All the rugby roads lead to Twickenham this weekend…where England are playing South Africa for the first time in over 20 years…
And by way of a curtain raiser Transvaal one of the strongest province sides are at Kingsholm tonight to play Gloucester 
KEITH RICHARDSON/Gloucester Coach
FRANCOIS PIENAAR/Transvaal Captain
Voice over
The return of South Africa to international sport has brought both delight and discussion, depending on which side of the fence you sit.
Controversy follows the rugby men around of course, but for the fans it's carnival time, while the international team wait for England.
Transvaal arrived in Gloucestershire this afternoon.
next is our action round-up which tonight takes us to swindon for the sport of kickboxing 
Voice over
For the first time ever there's racing at Cheltenham this sunday…its going to be a fun day…and so too is tomorrow for the winner of the first big steeplechase of the year…it's the Mackeson Gold Cup…there's fifty five thousand pounds in prizemoney…our search for a winner takes us to Herefordshire and a horse called Spacefair 
RICHARD LEE/Trainer
CAROL LEE
JAMIE OSBORNE/Jockey
Voice over
They've been described by some as the ugliest dogs in the world.
But a litter of nine Chinese Shar-Pei puppies are expected to fetch up to a thousand pounds each.
That's about ten pounds for every one of the wrinkles that makes them so distinctive.
Clare Lafferty reports.
PENDOCK Herefordshire
DOROTHY STEPHENSON Dog Breeder
Voice over
They've just got too much skin!!
But it's those wrinkles that make these Chinese Shar Pei's one of the most distinctive and sought after breeds in the world.
These puppies, born in Pendock in Herefordshire are just 3 weeks old.
But already they carry a price tag of up to a thousand pounds each.
As well as being one of the rarest breeds in the world, there are those who've labelled them as one of the ugliest.
Their breeder disagrees.
Female speaker
I don't care who they are, no one can say these dogs are ugly.
Even in ugliness there's beauty.
Who couldn't love something as cuddly as this.
Voice over
There are estimated to be about 6,000 Shar Peis in the world now.
But the breed was once very nearly wiped out.
In Communist China in the mid 1950's, all dogs, cats and birds were killed to save food for the people.
About a dozen Shar Pei's escaped the extermination.
And with the help of breeders all over the world, they've made a dramatic comeback.
As they get older, the puppies can expect to see their pink tongues turn a distinctive bluey black colour.
But luckily for them, as they age, the dogs won't get more wrinkly.
Inflation rate unchanged at 3
Britain's inflation rate has remained unchanged at three point six per cent.
CBI survey sees decline in business confidence
However, a survey by the Confederation of British Industry suggests a further fall in business confidence.
Boeing orders checks on 700 jumbo jets
The plane maker, Boeing is ordering new inspections on seven hundred jumbo jets following last month's Amsterdam air tragedy.
Compensation agreed for Kegworth disaster victims
Compensation terms have been agreed for the victims of the Kegworth air disaster on the M-one motorway.
FTSE down 28
The hundred shares index closed down twenty-eight point nine at twenty-six, ninety-seven point five.
The pound is up more than two cents at one dollar, fifty-five and up at two marks, forty-three.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and enjoy your weekend.
The most miserable man on television put a smile on his face for a change today, to launch a new celebrity cookbook.
It comes just in the time for Christmas and fund raisers are sure it'll be a popular stocking-filler.
KAREN THOMPSON/Oxford
MARTIN MOORE/Fundraiser
EMMA DAVIES/Occupational Therapist
RICHARD WILSON/Actor
There were no miserable, moaning Meldrews at the Ritchie Russell House Disabled Unit at the Churchill Hospital in Oxford.
They'd gathered for the launch of the Celebrities Cookbook by Richard Wilson, who's better known as the crusty and cantankerous Victor Meldrew.
But there were smiles instead of frowns from the star of One Foot in the Grave.
He says who is this?
That's supposed to be me.
I look like a demented barber.
Who did this drawing?
Six months ago staff and disabled adults who use the unit came up with the idea of writing to hundreds of stars, politicians and even the Royal family…
They wanted recipes.
And they got them from a host of people including Lady Thatcher, the Princess of Wales, Noel Edmonds, Frank Muir, Cliff Richard, Sir Harry Secombe and Ian Botham.
Clients at the unit admit it's a gimmicky idea but they say this cookbook is different from the others.
He says Sue Townsend sent us a recipe from Adrian Mole.
It; s written as he would write or speak.
Eight hundred books have been printed at a cost of eighteen hundred pounds.
The money raised will be put to good use.
She says they want to spend it on recreation, holidays, books, equipment and special aids which will help them have a better life.
But Richard Wilson says he regrets the fact that units like the Ritchie Russell have to find money from outside the NHS.
He says it's agood unit.
But they need money for extras.
It would be nice if the NHS could do this, but you can't blame them for trying to raise money in other ways.
First day sales are going well, and that's something even Victor Meldrew can believe.
If you've ever wondered what policemen do with their old truncheons, then here's the answer.
Scores of them are on show in a unique exhibition.
Some date back nearly two hundred and fifty years, and fetch prices of nearly six hundred pounds.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Huntercombe
WILLIE CLEGG/Exhibition Organiser
Voice over
Old truncheons don't disappear, they just grow in value, especially if they have a decoration.
Nearly a hundred of them are on parade at Huntercombe, three miles from Wallingford.
And quite apart from the general interest they've been fetching high prices.
Male speaker
They go back as far as George the second's reign in 1755.
That costs just under six hundred pounds.
It seems a lot of money but it's not to the man who's prepared to pay it
Voice over
They form part of a Law and Order exhibition which extends to stocks, manacles, handcuffs, and even a giant magnifying glass.
But the real interest is truncheons in all their variety.
Male speaker
we have people who know a lot about the subject, and others who are bringing in their own items for us to assess
Voice over
Most of the display has never been used in anger, or self defence.
But there are a few well worn examples which have clearly seen action although not for law and order.
Male speaker
This is an old press gang truncheon made of ivory.
It's the only one I get a sense of evil from when holding it
Voice over
The truncheons come from a time when every force had its individual design.
And there were more badges of office.
Male speaker
This one dates from the introduction of warrants.
It unscrews to reveal a space which held the warrant
Voice over
Clearly the truncheon has an enduring quality and is more than just a one hit wonder.
Tomorrow night on Central News we have a special report from Aghanistan, a country devastated by years of civil war and grinding poverty.
As thousands of refugees prepare for winter, our reporter Kim Barnes has flown in with a plane-load of desperately-needed warm clothing, to see at first hand the work being done to help.
Voice over
Twenty-three tonnes of clothes and blankets gathered by Oxfam, on their way to thousands of refugees facing another winter in the camps.
The interpreter says there was fighting in Kabul.
We left everything behind.
We've lost our home and all our belongings.
Into Afghanistan…tomorrow night on Central News South.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Economic recovery’ very real’
FTSE down 0
The hundred shares index closed down point six of a point at thirty ninety nine point one 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty eight and up at two marks, fifty.
Welcome back: In a few minutes, Victor Meldrew, the most miserable man on television.
But first, with news of a team that's managed to get at least one foot OUT of the grave, here's Erika.
ERIKA BARNES
Who wants to be a millionaire, when you can put on a million-dollar performance with a bargain basement team.
Oxford United beat Derby at the Manor.
Three points in the bank, thank you very much.
And the new investments are clearly paying dividends.
MATT ELLIOTT/Oxford United
Pictures Sky Sport
Voice over
Derby may be flash with their money; they were certainly flash with their football in the first half.
They nearly went ahead in the 13th minute.
Les Robinson got into trouble and Paul Kitson had a clear run at goal.
But his shot was too close for comfort and Philip Whitehead cleverly smothered the ball.
Ten minutes later another miss was to prove costly for the visitors.
Tommy Johnson dribbled past the Oxford keeper, shot towards an empty net, but up popped Matt Elliott to clear off the line.
United weathered the storm.
And Nick Cusack nearly put them ahead soon after with a 25 yard strike, saved at the second attempt by the County keeper.
But it was new boy Matt who put the gloss on Oxford's performance.
The Man of the match was outstanding in defence and equally dangerous up front.
Male speaker
It was pleasing for me.
It was a good result.
I got a goal and enjoyed every minute of it.
Voice over
And here's his goal.
Male speaker
Joey Beauchamp sent a great ball across.
There were four of us piling in on it.
The next thing I knew it was in the back of the net and I was celebrating.
Voice over
Derby had one more chance to balance the books but Paul Kitson wasted a glorious opportunity by blasting wide.
United were even more inspired after the break.
They weren't going to settle for the one goal.
And when Chris Allen was upended in the area, United probably thought they were home and dry.
But Jim Magilton's penalty was brilliantly saved by Martin Taylor at the foot of the post.
Still, seven minutes later Magilton made up for his miss.
A free kick 25 yards out perfectly placed and left the Derby defence bemused and helpless.
Worth another look.
Don't you just love it when they do that!
A goal to give any fan a lift.
It takes United off the bottom of the table.
Things are looking up.
Male speaker
There are three of us new to the side.
It seems to have helped the team.
Now we've got to carry on and get the the middle of the table.
Voice over
Reporter asks: What about Matt Elliott for England, it says in the Sun.
Male speaker
Yeah the Sun!
It's fun.
But not serious!
Voice over
Other sporting headlines now.
An FA tribunal has ruled that Oxford must pay Barnsley 75,000 pounds for goalkeeper Phil Whitehead.
The Yorkshire team had hoped for twice that much.
Hereford got the win they needed in the FA cup.
Chris Pike scored in the dying minutes of the game at Beazer Homes League club, Cambridge City.
They'll travel to Bath City in the second round.
And a quick mention of Banbury United's big game tomorrow.
They'll meet West Bromich Albion in the Birmingham Senior Cup at the Stadium in Banbury.
Kick off 7.30.
It never rains but it pours for Gloucester.
Rugby in the mud is no fun, especially when you're on the losing side, yet again.
KEITH RICHARDSON/Gloucester Coach
Voice over
A trip to Bristol was never going to be easy.
But the wind and rain made the going particulary tough.
Treacherous conditions gave way to a clumsy game.
The ball was slippery as soap.
And it was Ralph Knibbs who took advantage to claim the first try for Bristol.
Mark Tainton converted the first of his four successful kicks at goal.
And it was the penalties that rained down from here after for both sides.
Gloucester tried to muster the troops but Bristol held the line and their nerves and took the match 16 -12.
Male speaker
Gloucester were looking a good side.
Voice over
Plenty of committment, plenty of possession.
We didn't press the Bristol line.
And two points that looked possible evaporated in the wind and rain.
Gloucestershire cricketer, David’ Syd’Lawrence is making a last-ditch attempt to get back to full fitness after his knee injury.
He'll be spending Winter in Australia playing for the third team of a little club called Ranwick.
Before he goes, he's having specialist physiotheraphy.
DAVID’ SYD’LAWRENCE
PHILLIP NEWTON/Physiotherapist
Voice over
The walking wounded from the sports world.
Jockey Helen Brennan broke her back in five places after falling from her horse.
Liverpool footballer Michael Thomas out of the game for almost a year after rupturing his acheilles.
For Oldham goalkeeper, John Hallworth, a thigh injury has been torture.
This is the National Sports Injury Centre at Lilleshall.
And this is where Syd Lawrence continues his recovery.
Male speaker
Here you're in an environment where sports people have injuries and understand what it's like.
It's nice to be with other people to fight the same frustrations.
Voice over
No sooner had Syd apparantly recovered from the knee injury he sustained in New Zealand, then he suffered another major set back.
The injury was worse than before.
But now he feels ready for another come back.
He's preparing to play club cricket in Australia.
Male speaker
I've got to take it easy.
I'm not going to rush in and take heads off.
I'll take a shorter run up and build up to it gradually.
Male speaker
The main emphasis is on quality rather than quantity.
He won't just be pumping up muscles all the time.
It's quality exercise for coordination rather than strength.
Voice over
Here at Lilleshall, sportsmen and women, speak the same language.
They can lift each other when times are bad.
Syd sings and says: Do you think I'll get a record contract?
Male speaker
You realise what a miserable sod you can be.
It's been difficult.
You become selfish.
You get moody.
Voice over
Syd's been out of top class cricket for nearly two years.
Gloucestershire and England have missed him.
He's missed them too.
But not only is he fighting an injury, he's also fighting to regain his confidence.
Male speaker
You're so quickly not part of the team.
You feel like an intruder in the changing room You have to knock on the door.
Someone's taken your chair in the changing room, but I'll be back.
Voice over
Two schools for children with special needs are locked in an argument over whether or not they should merge.
One school says it would be a good thing, but the other says the children will suffer.
Councillors will decide tomorrow.
GARETH FURBY/Abingdon
ELIZABETH SIMS/Acting Head
ANN O'MEARA/Acting Head
EDWARD COX/Pupil
ELIZABETH SIMS/Teasdale School
LYNN WERRELL/Parent
MAGGIE BULLEN/Divisional Education Officer
Voice over
At the Tesdale Special School the teachers don't know whether they're coming or going.
And the uncertainty's affected some children.
She says one boy has gone back to bed wetting because he's so worried.
But just a few miles away at the Bennett House School it 's a different story.
Staff there want a merger saying children will benefit.
She says they've got good facilites and can cater for children up to 16.
The Teesdale is the only secondary school in Oxfordshire catering exclusively for children with special needs, and they seem to like it.
He says he likes the cooking, woodwork and the teachers.
But soon the Teesdale could merge with Bennet House which concentrates at the moment on younger children with greater difficulties.
The worry is different ages and different needs won't mix.
She says it'll demoralise the older children.
More than two thousand people have signed a petition opposing the merger.
Some parents fear their children could be moved back into mainstream education to compete on unfair terms with normal children.
She says they could be bullied and teased.
But Oxfordshire's Education experts say the Tesdale site will be kept open following a merger and no child will be forced to leave.
She says every parent shopuld know they won't be forced to move their children anywhere.
The Tesdale teachers and parents have asked Abingdon MP John Patten for help.
He's also the Education Secretary and says he can't comment because he'll have to make the final decision.
Oxfordshire County Council will vote tomorrow.
But it could be several weeks yet before these children know the fate of their school.
A student has made education history by becoming the first in the country to pass a new exam.
The top grades of the new qualifications are worth two conventional A-Levels, and it's hoped that as many as half of all sixth formers will soon be studying for them.
ROBIN POWELL/Wootton Bassett
KATIE BRAWN/Student
TIM BOSWELL MP/Higher Education Minister
SHEILA HOLLIDAY/Director of Vocational Studies
Voice over
Katie Brawn's CV boasts a qualification no one else can — a new Vocational A Level.
She earned a Distinction in Art and Design, which along with a conventional A Level in Textiles, helped win her a place at college.
Katie completed her course in a year — it should normally take 2 — but she refutes any suggestion that General National Vocational Qualifications, as they're known, are a soft option.
The Government hopes that by 1996 a quarter of all 16-year-olds will be studying for GNVQs, and up to 1/2 by the end of the decade.
Higher Education Minister Tim Boswell says it's vital that education's made more relevant to the world of work if Britain's to remain competitive.
Katie Brawn was a pupil at Wootton Bassett School.
Since her success, 60 more pupils have signed up for the GNVQ — these are studying Business.
The school's convinced that Vocational A Levels are the right way forward.
The real test for the new qualification is whether universities and polytechnics will accept it…
Katie's college did, though she's yet to find out whether potential employers will be similarly impressed.
Time for us to take a break now.
In Part 2 we have a special guest.
Male speaker
In part two, all the sport of course, plus this book.
I don't believe it.
Voice over
In Central News tonight:
It was hell: The stroke victim forced to sit in a tea trolley.
We ran for our lives.
Farmers escape as fire kills livestock.
And one foot in the gravy…the kitchen secrets of Victor Meldrew.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Mr Chandler, who's thirty eight, says the experience was’ hell’.
Social services say the action was’ not satisfactory’, but because of a shortage of staff, Mr Chandler was put in the trolley to stop him wandering off.
RICHARD BARNETT /Hereford
TONY MOUNTFORD/Social Services Manager
CAROLE PROTHEROUGH/Aylestone Centre Manager
Voice over
Peter Chandler spent days in a tea trolley with the trays taken out.
The adult babywalker was improvised by staff at the Widemarsh disabled workshop in Hereford to stop him wandering off.
He was told he would be sent home if he didn't stay there.
Staff said they couldn't afford the time to supervise him constantly.But although it may have been convenient to social workers to restrain a stroke victim in a trolley, Peter Chandler has one word to describe the experience:
The Hereford Social Services Area Manager has described the treatment of Peter Chandler as unsatisfactory.
But he said the problem was caused by a staff shortage:
Peter has now been transferred to the Aylestone Day Centre in Hereford, where he has volunteer helpers looking after him all the time.
Despite the severe mental problems resulting from the stroke, he's become a much happier person: INT
Now there's time for Peter to relax and enjoy looking at photographs of a recent trip to France organised by the centre.
They're in stark contrast to an earlier picture he'd rather forget.
Farm animals have been killed and thousands of bales of hay destroyed in a barn fire.
There've been a spate of attacks on barns in the same area, and the owner of the farm involved in the latest fire says he's not ruling out arson.
KEN GOODWIN/Acton Green
KEVIN WILLIAMS/Hereford
JOHN MORRIS/Farmer
Voice over
The fire started in the middle of the night at The Wootons farm at Acton Green in Herefordshire.
Most of the animals trapped inside the barn were rescued, but two died — this calf is now an orphan.
It's been treated for burns but is expected to survive even without it's mother.
Surrounding buildings had to be protected by a wall of water to stop them being engulfed by the flames.
He says that the fire is being held in by the collapsed roof, they want to let air get to it so it will burn itself out.
Although the cause of the fire isn't yet known, one of the men who owns the farm says that he's not ruling out an arson attack.
He says that it could have been arson, but he can't comprehend how saomeone wopuld want to risk people's lives.
On the other hand it could have been an electrical fault…he's waiting for the results of the investigation.
Mr Morris says that the firefighters prompt action saved the rest of the farm buildings from being destroyed.
He says that if the whole building complex could have gone up.
Since the august bank holiday weekend there have been twelve arson attacks in the Hereford and Worcester area — police say they're keeping an open mind on this latest fire
A former zoo keeper has appeared in court charged with cruelty to animals.
STROUD/Gloucestershire
Joanne Willies-Williams denies causing suffering to fifteen monkeys and ten chihuaha dogs at her home in Rodborough Fort near Stroud.
She's also charged with keeping two birds of prey at the fort which contravened wildlife regulations.
The case before Cirencester magistrates, has been adjourned.
A man has walked free from court after admitting handling money from an armed raid on a post office.
SANDFORD on THAMES/Oxfordshire
Nineteen year old Matthew Loveridge was arrested at the Ten Acre caravan site in Sandford on Thames in January.
He admitted handling over four hundred pounds which had been stolen from a post office in Reading.
He was sentenced to twelve months in jail but was released when the court heard he'd already been in custody for ten months.
Police are hunting three men after a stabbing in Oxford city centre.
OXFORD
A twenty-three year old man was attacked in the early hours of the morning as he was walking up Cowley Road.
The assault happened outside a pub, but police say there's nothing to link it with the incident.
The victim managed to walk three miles down the road before he was found by police.
Ferry death…family calls for changes in marine safety laws.
Bleak future…former drug addicts say cuts in funding will cost lives.
And motorway tragedy…witness relives moments before crash that killed three people.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Catherine and James Tomlins were returning to Ireland after a surprise visit to their grandparents in Britain.
Their grandmother says the family put their trust in so-called professionals, who failed them.Chris Moore reports.
AUGUST 1992
CORK/Eire
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
LUISE TOMLINS/Grandmother
TREVOR TOMLINS/Grandfather
Voice over
The man whose car collided with a coach moments before it crashed killing three people and injuring twenty-six others says he can't sleep for thinking about the accident.
Malcolm Austin, who's seventy three, is being interviewed by police investigating the cause of crash.
Four of the coach passengers are still critically ill.
Simon Garrett reports.
FIRE SERVICE VIDEO/TETSWORTH/Oxfordshire
POLICE VIDEO
MALCOLM AUSTIN/Car Driver
AYLESBURY/Buckinghamshire
Sgt GEORGE WRIGLEY/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
27 language teachers from 10 different countries were on the London coach.
The three dead women came from Thailand.
The driver lost his legs when the vehicle hit a motorway bridge.
He's being operated on today.
3 others are seriously injured.
Moments before there was a collision with a car.
Its driver believes the coach was swerving to avoid a third vehicle.
Male speaker
He seemed to come near me.
We collided.
I hit the central barrier and he went on about fifty yards while I ended up on the hard shoulder
Voice over
An incident room's been set up by police in Aylesbury.
Meanwhile they're trying to find out more from the injured.
Male speaker
The language barrier isn't too much of a problem, but some of them are frightened of police in their country so are a bit suspicious of us
Voice over
Some of the dead and injured still haven't been identified.
Some are still too distressed to talk.
Mr Austin will probably be interviewed again.
He wants to know what happened to put his own mind at rest.
Male speaker
When I heard that three had died I did not sleep at night I couldn't sleep thinking about them.
One girl in the ambulance was smothered in blood.
The other looked dreadful as well I couldn't sleep
Voice over
Police are appealing for anyone who might have seen the red London coach on the M40 before the accident to come forward.
Former drug abusers fear addicts could die if a rehabilitation centre is forced to close.
They say the chance to turn their lives around is being threatened by cuts to the centre's funding.
The warning comes at the start of European Drug Prevention week.
But the reformed abusers say the campaign is a waste of time and money.
Erika Barnes reports.
YARNTON/Oxfordshire
HELEN/Former Drug Abuser
IAN WHITE/Director/Oxon Social Services
GET THE MESSAGE/Department of Health
KENNETH CLARKE/Home Secretary
RICHARD/Former Drug Abuser
PAUL TOON/Director/Leys Community
SCOTT/Former Drug Abuser
Voice over
Scott started taking marijuana at the age of eleven.
He's spent much of his life in prison after turning to crime to support his habit.
Richard took heroin and cocaine.
His life and relationships were a mess.
Helen had a miserable existance hooked on prescribed drugs.
Now at the Leys community they're working towards a drug free future.
Without the support and expertise they would have had no future.
Female speaker
I would have carried on.
I might be dead or in a psychiatric hospital.
For some it would mean a life on the streets, death, prison, a mess up.
Voice over
But the rehabilitation centre which has been running for 21 years could be closed within the year.
Government funding to Social service departments who pay 230-pounds for each resident each week will be cut substantially in April.
The threat comes as European Drug Prevention Week begins.
Celebrities have been enlisted to raise awarness of the dangers of drug abuse.
But for those who've been caught in the drugs trap…the campaign is out of touch with the real problem.
Male speaker
The cliche is prevention is better than cure…
It's not relevent.
It's just not hitting home.
They won't take a slightest bit of notice…and will use the paper to role up a joint.
Male speaker
Please for the sake of young people for the sake of those trying to get help, don't take our service away.
Voice over
For those who've taken the decision to turn their lives around prevention isn't always better than cure.
Without it, they say there's no hope.
Male speaker
I wouldn't have a future.
I'd be breaking into houses, doing robberies.
I could end up dead.
Voice over
Colditz Castle, the notorious Second World War prison camp, is to be turned into a luxury hotel with plans for a casino in a wing once used as living quarters by the German guards.
The escape tunnels still exist but the British developers hope people will be queuing to get in, not out.
Gareth Furby reports.
COLDITZ CASTLE Germany
MILTON KEYNES Buckinghamshire
DAVID BATE Millingtons Developers
JOCK HAMILTON-BAILLIE Former Colditz Prisoner
Voice over
In the Second World War it housed around 800 prisoners.
All they wanted was to escape.
But now a developer hopes thousands of tourists will want to pay to stay here.
It'll cost around 30 million pounds to convert Colditz into two luxury hotels.
At the moment the castle houses a hospital and an aylum.
But the East Germans want it developed.
And the contract has gone to a company based in Milton Keynes.
The plans are ambitious.
But the devolopers face an uphill struggle; no thanks to the former prisoners.
He says one escape plan was to inject the wood with dry rot so the castle would fall down.
50 years later, it's working.
Many of the famous escape tunnels still exist, they'll be part of the attraction.
And a museum now located in the town will be moved into the castle.
Brigadier Hamilton Baillie is now retired and lving in Oxfordshire.
But nearly fifty years ago he was a prisoner at Colditz.
He says the German part would make a good hotel because the rooms were big.
But the prisoners section wouldn't be much use for anything.
The Brigadier still has some keys from Coliditz.
He even made his own plans to help plot escape routes.
Above ground the new Colditz will be very different.
But bellow ground the past will be preserved.
He says for safety reasons visitors won't be able to go down the tunnels.
But they're going to develop a ride which will recreate how it must have felt at the time.
The Milton Keynes-based developers still need to raise £30 million.
But they hope Colditz should be ready to accept its new inmates within a few years.
Lethal dose doctor fights to save career
FTSE down 17
The hundred shares index closed down seventeen point nine at twenty-six, seventy-nine point six .
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-two and down at two marks, forty-one.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
So both United and Town doing well in the league…in the cup success too…
Hereford and Cheltenham both won on Saturday and in the draw for the second round United were out first…but no team ever likes going to Yeovil in the FA Cup…better news for Cheltenham…they're at home to league opposition…and should fill the ground 
rugby next and a weekend double for Gloucester…on Friday they beat Transvaal thirty one-eleven…on Saturday they ran in five tries to win by thirty four…five at Moseley 
Voice over
Transvaal, one of the strongest teams in South Africa proved to everyone at Kingsholm that Springbok rugby is still a force.
The touring team took the lead with a try from Louw in the opening minutes.
Gloucester came back to their best and pulled level with a try from Simon Morris.
It was anybody's game; a real thriller for the crowd to enjoy.
Just before half time, the cherry and whites, who were black and whites for this game, forced a way through for the second try.
Caskie made the breakthough.
Marcus Hannaford got the final touch down.
It was even Steven in the second half, but towards the end Gloucester roared into life.
Kingsholm was on its feet as Caskie raced away.
A late challenge won a penalty try and a famous victory.
Only 5 first teamers played the next day at Moseley, but once again it was a wonderful win.
Gloucester went 5 points down.
Hooker, Glynn Mann got them back into it and after that there was no contest.
The pack was at full power.
They demolished Moseley, who didn't seem to know whether they were coming or going.
Paul Holcroft got the second try.
Number 3 was down to Pete Glanville.
it was more like a training session at times, but Gloucester need all the points and all the confidence they can get.
Paul Beach was next to score.
Last man over was winger, Jerry Perrins.
There was no stopping him; no catching Gloucester this weekend.
Over at Cheltenham racecourse yesterday history was made as the runners and riders came to post for the first-ever Sunday National Hunt meeting…around thirteen thousand people turned out to watch…and racing hopes, of course, that steeplechasing on Sunday will become a firm fixture…
Mark Kiff reports.
EDWARD GILLESPIE/Race Course Manager
Rt Rev PETER BALL/Bishop of Gloucester
JONJO O'NEIL/Jockey
DAVID NICHOLSON/Trainer
Voice over
Racegoers could have been forgiven for steering well clear of Britain's first Sunday jump meeting.
You could barely see the barber jackets for the brollies…torrential rain and wind made the going heavy everywhere at Cheltenham.
But this was meant to be a family day…and they came in their thousands…the Shetland Pony Grand National was as big an attraction as the thoroughbred races.
Edward Gillespie, Race Couse Manager, says it's been a fantastic day.
With betting banned, the punters were given the chance of a flutter by purchasing a prize draw ticket for each race.
The Bishop of Gloucester was one of the lucky winners.
He gave his blessing to the meeting and came close to finding himself partnering Desert Orchid in the opening race.
The Bishop of Gloucester says members of the church aren't all boring do-gooders.
The meeting was being held as part of the Jockey Club's campaign to change the Sunday betting laws.
All the big names were there: Scudamore, Pipe, Nicholson, Dunwoody, along with a few fortysomethings helping raise money for the Spastics Society, the main beneficiaries of the day.
Jonjo O'Neil says racing on Sunday is a much better idea than racing on a Monday when most people are at work.
David Nicholson says racing is an entertainment industry and they should be allowed to have Sunday racing.
And the popularity of yesterday's event means that another hurdle in the way of Sunday racing has been successfully cleared.
Its been wrotten weather for sport wrotten weather for just about anything this weekend…so let's give you some sunshine…we're off to Brazil to Rio…for news of a Gloucester girl in the British Steel…
Round the World Yacht Race…
LIZ MACDONALD
Voice over
This is the life down on the Copacobana beach in Rio…sun shining…waves crashing in on the sand…and its here that Liz Macdonald from Gloucester is setting off on the second leg of the British Steel Challenge…she's on board the Nuclear Electric yacht…from Rio they round Cape Horn and head for Hobart…they'll be racing for six weeks…
Liz says that the next few weeks will be very testing and difficult…
Liz and the rest of the crew set sail at the weekend…it'll be January 93 and seven thousand miles away when they land again