

Oxford United got the Christmas present they wanted — their best win of the season over league leaders Newcastle United…
But Swindon Town's promotion drive has been hit by the big freeze…
Here's Tim Russon with all the soccer news 
Voice over
Santa brought a sack full of goals to the Manor Ground and the biggest crowd of the season of just over 9,000 enjoyed the party.
John Durnin pulled the first cracker.
Newcastle thought he was offside.
The ref was full of Christmas spirit and United's top scorer was dancing with delight.
There were 3 goals in the first 10 minutes.
The second was sheer brilliance from Joey Beauchamp.
He's wanted by some of the top clubs but they won't get him in the sales.
His price is going up.
Nick Cusack got the final touch or flick, but it was all down to Joey.
Within seconds, Newcastle were back in it.
The Oxford fans were still cheering their goal when Liam 0 Brien all but broke the net.
They'd only been beaten 3 times this season so you feared the worst, but it was Oxford who struck next; another no goal, or no penalty, according to Kevin Keegan.
The ref's decision was borderline, but no question about Jim Magilton's finish.
Newcastle had some luck too with the build up to their second goal.
A controversial free kick was taken in the wrong place, but thanks to Lee Clark, the ball finished in the right place for the Geordies.
Only one goal in the second half, but it was worth waiting for.
A rocket of a free kick launched by Jim Magilton, made it 4-2 and sent Oxford and the fans into orbit.
It has been a good Christmas for Oxford.
On Boxing Day, they won a point at Bristol City and Joey Beauchamp must have won the wishbone from the turkey, judging by the first goal.
That came after just 4 minutes, but over the 90 minutes.
United were lucky to get away with a draw.
City had more play and the best of the chances, but they only took one.
Leroy Rosenior got the equaliser just before half-time and that's how it finished 1-1.
Boxing Day brought a bumper crowd to Edgar Street.
The pitch was rock hard and slippy and Hereford looked to be sliding into trouble when Shrewsbury full-back, Graeme Worsley thumped his team into the lead in the second half.
United's results are worrying.
There only 3 places off the bottom and the drop into the non-league world and there was just one minute to go when they saved themselves in this match.
Derek Hall got the goal; a 1-1 draw was the best they could have hoped for from this match.
Who's been dreaming of a white Christmas?
Not Swindon; the big freeze has been a nightmare.
Saturday's game at Luton was called off and tonight's home game against Birmingham City has also been postponed.
The County Ground is frozen.
Blinded…attackers superglue a milkman's eyes.
And sale of the century…the bargain hunters out in force.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
ADRIAN STAYTE/Milkman
Ch Insp PETER HOOD/Gloucestershire Police
LECKHAMPTON/Gloucestershire
NIGEL KENNY/Dairy Manager
Voice over
Milkman, Adrian Stayte faces the New Year in darkness, his eyelids stuck together with superglue.
He was delivering milk to houses in Cheltenham in the early hours of this morning, when 2 men pounced on him, demanding cash.
Male speaker
They jumped on him from behind, squirted superglue in his eyes and demanded cash.
The attack was unbelievable.
Voice over
Police hunting the culprits have condemned the attack.
Male speaker
It is barbaric.
Voice over
Meanwhile at Cheltenham Dairies in Leckhampton, where Adrian works, staff have pointed out that the attack was futile.
These days milkman don't carry money on their rounds.
Male speaker
Most people pay for milk by cheque so milkman don't carry much money with them.
Voice over
As his wife, Jeanette applies ointment to loosen the glue, Adrian waits for the moment when he'll be able to see again.
Doctors say it's too risky to try to operate, but they think Adrian's sight won't be permanently damaged.
However, it could take up to a week before he can open his eyes.
A sixty seven year old woman who was raped as she returned home from church on Christmas day has been talking about her horrifying ordeal.
She was held for forty five minutes and at times, she says, she feared for her life.
John Caine reports.
LUDLOW/Shropshire
Police are expected to charge a father with attempted murder after his fifteen month old son was found stabbed in his cot.
Tonight the baby is in a critical but stable condition in hospital.
Gareth Furby reports.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
Det Insp PETER BURROWS/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Police were called to this house in Milton Keynes in the early hours.
The baby's mother, who's a senior nursing sister, had called an ambulance.
Her son had been stabbed twice through the back with a carving knife, as he lay in his cot.
Neighbours are shocked.
She says she's speechless.
He says it terrifies him.
The baby was taken to Milton Keynes General Hospital, where his mother used to work.
Tonight he's in a critical, but stable condition.
He says they don't think the baby is likely to die.
It's a serious attack on a defenceless child.
Police arrested the baby's father at the scene.
He's 30 years old and an unemployed nurse.
He's now being held at Milton Keynes police station and is likely to be charged later tonight with attempted murder.
Store managers are predicting record takings in the post-Christmas sales.
Shops have been packed with customers hunting bargains at some of the keenest prices for years, as the retail trade tries to kick itself out of recession.
Tim Hurst reports.
CHELTENHAM Gloucestershire
NIGEL JONES Store Manager
Voice over
In spite of freezing temperatures, shoppers poured into Cheltenham in Gloucestershire for the second day of the annual sales.
Some stores had started cutting prices before Christmas, but then it seemed customers were keeping their money in their pockets.
That's all changed this week, with managers reporting record takings so far.
The favourite buys overall, appear to be fashion items and electrcial goods, but it seems some shoppers will buy anything if it's on a shelf.
Economists say it's too soon to say if the shopping boom marks the beginning of the end of the retail recession.
Leslie Crowther has’ high hopes’of recovery
FTSE up 20
The hundred shares index closed up twenty point three at two eight four seven point eight 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty and down at two marks, forty three.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Good evening:
HARRIET RYLEY
Now the late news from Central South.
A milkman has been temporarily blinded by two men who sprayed superglue into his eyes.
He was attacked while on his early morning round.
RICHARD BARNETT/Cheltenham/Gloucestershire
ADRIAN STAYTE/Milkman
Ch Insp PETER HOOD/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
A man has been charged with the attempted murder of his baby son.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
The fifteen month-old boy was found with stab wounds at the family's home in Milton Keynes.
He's now in a critical but stable condition in hospital.
The baby's father, who's thirty, was arrested and later charged.
He'll appear before magistrates in the morning.
A pensioner who was raped as she returned home from church on Christmas Day says she feared for her life during her forty-five minute ordeal.
Police are linking the attack with a similar incident nearby.
JOHN CAINE/Ludlow/Shropshire
The family of the entertainer Leslie Crowther, who was critically injured in a car crash three months ago, says he's slowly getting back to normal.
He's been in hospital ever since the accident on the M-Five near Cheltenham, but he was allowed home on two short visits over Christmas.
In a statement the Crowther family said the visits boosted his morale and he's now confident of a complete recovery.
Finally tonight, a local authority has started to promote an unlikely tourist destination.
It's released a video aimed at encouraging people to take a holiday — in Swindon.
COUNCIL VIDEO/ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
MIKE CROWLEY/Thamesdown Tourist Association
COUNCIL VIDEO
MARK FRANKLIN/TV Presenter
Voice over
It'll never rank with the French Riviera, but this council video aims to persuade at least a few people that Swindon's the place to be next summer.
Apparently some have already been converted.
Quite apart from its railway history, the theory goes, Swindon's a perfect base for exploring some of the most picturesque places in England.
But several Swindonites remain sceptical.
Neither Bradford nor Birmingham regrets entering the tourist trade — the industry waits with bated breath to see how Swindon fares.
It's that time of year when theatres everywhere are given over to the mayhem that is panto…when men are dames and the principal boys are girls.
But which one to choose…here's a selection of pantomimes playing in the Central South area.
KAREN CLEGG/Dorothy
SIMON COX/The Prince/POLLY KEMP/’ Foolina’
Voice over
Anything goes in pantoland; a curious place where grown men dress up as dames, Australian soap stars flock to these shores and the old adage about never working with children or animals is brutally ignored.
This year, Cheltenham boasts a panto with a transatlantic feel — with Dorothy's adventures in The Wizard of Oz.
This version has been slightly customized for a British audience.
Meanwhile over at The Theatre in Chipping Norton Mother Goose has found a novel way of beating the recession.
In true panto tradition, Priscilla the goose is played by a boy.
This panto is playing strictly by the rules.
The Playhouse in Oxford presents the adventures of a scatty Princess called Foolina — a fantastical fairy-tale of magic and romance.
But everything turns out all right in the end, after all, this IS pantoland.
Mind you, Pinocchio has some pretty hairy moments in the Oxfordshire Theatre Touring Company's version of his life.
The cast of Jack and the Beanstalk at the Wyvern Theatre in Swindon, is risking all by working with both children AND animals, but Trevor Bannister, veteran of 20 years of panto takes it all in his stride.
Finally, there's a bevy of Aussie and homegrown soap stars in Aladdin at the Apollo in Oxford.
Couple who left children alone are arrested
FTSE down 15
The hundred shares index closed down fifteen point three at two eight three two point five 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty one and up at two marks, forty four.
Finally, twenty three tonnes of baked beans brought traffic to a halt on the M-Five this afternoon.
STRENSHAM/Worcestershire
Fifty three thousand tins spilt onto the motorway when a lorry overturned, completely blocking the southbound carriageway at its junction with the M-Fifty.
A J-C-B digger was brought in, but it still took more than three hours to clear up the mess.
Traffic tailed back for twelve miles.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Get out of town…police tell travellers they must move on.
Under threat…the maternity ward that could face closure
And, by Royal Appointment…the Russian swans fly in through the fog.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
GLOUCESTER
RON DRYSDALE/Markets Superintendent
Voice over
More than 200 travellers have parked up illegally in Gloucester cattle market.
The travellers say they plan to stay until at least the weekend.
But that would disrupt livestock markets.
So this afternoon police served notices on the dwellers in more than 60 caravans, ordering them to leave by lunchtime tomorrow.
Male speaker
If the travellers don't move, the will be removed by force.
They are disrupting the market and there are problems of pilfering and rubbish.
Voice over
The travellers say they'll ignore the notice to quit.
Male speaker
They will move on Saturday, not before.
Voice over
It remains to be seen whether the travellers leave the cattle market by tomorrow's deadline.
If they don't, they face having their caravans towed away.
And under new laws their vehicles could be impounded.
A thirty year old man has appeared in court charged with the attempted murder of his baby son.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
The fifteen month old baby was taken to Milton Keynes General Hospital suffering from stab wounds to his back.
He was released from hospital this afternoon.
The defendant, who can't be named for legal reasons, was bailed to appear in court again on February the twenty-fourth.
A dairy is offering a one thousand pound reward for information about a superglue attack on one of its milkmen.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
Adrian Stayte's eyelids were stuck together when two men pounced on him as he was delivering milk in Cheltenham yesterday.
Doctors have today been examining him again to try to assess whether there's been any damage to his sight.
A woman accused of stealing thousands of pounds from a charity that she helped set up has made a further appearance in court.
WORCESTER
Ruth Hilali, who's fifty and formerly from Worcester, but now of no fixed address, is charged with stealing more than six thousand pounds from the Kurdish Refugee Association and making a false statement to obtain a passport.
She was remanded in custody by Worcester magistrates for seven days.
A hospital's maternity unit could be forced to close after being told its services are too expensive.
A health authority has demanded the unit saves money — hospital administrators say the cutbacks would force its maternity ward to shut down.
Ian Maclaren reports.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
JACQUIE MANNERS/Director of Nursing
Dr ALEX GATHERER/Director of Public Health
HELEN FREEMAN/Banbury Health Emergency
Voice over
Oxfordshire Health Authority's consultation paper estimates that maternity services cost £400 more for every birth at Horton General Hospital compared with the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford.
It wants to see savings of £300,000.
The hospital claims that would mean 20 job losses, forcing the unit to close.
The authority says it's aware of the support for Horton in the community, but changes in health services are inevitable.
Protests like these may have won a first round victory for the hospital, but campaigners say the fight continues.
The consultation document will also consider proposals for a reduction in complex orthopaedic surgery at Horton and more emphasis on day care surgery.
Two Royal swans adopted by the Queen have arrived in the region from Russia.
The Bewicks landed at Slimbridge a few days ago after their two thousand mile flight from Siberia.
Richard Barnett reports:
SLIMBRIDGE/Gloucestershire
JOHN BOWLER/Swan Expert
Voice over
The 2 swans, Coronation and Coronet, were whooping for joy after battling through arctic gales and thick fog to get to Gloucestershire.
Coronation was adopted by the Queen in 1977, his mate Coronet followed in 1985.
And ever since the birds have been coming to overwinter at the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust in Slimbridge.
Up to 600 Bewick swans make the long journey from Russia between October and December and return to Siberia in February.
Male speaker
140 birds have arrived because of the cold weather.
And every one can be recognised individually by its bill markings.
Voice over
Slimbridge is a vital winter haven to thousands of swans, ducks and geese.
8 times a day staff dole out pounds of corn and the lakes turn into watery motorways jammed with traffic.
Female speaker
Slimbridge is crucial for the birds.
It's a place where they are safe and well fed.
Voice over
Not only birds from the chilly Northern hemisphere live at Slimbridge.
These Black Australian swans are quite at home even in sub zero temperatures.
As for these tiny goldeneye and pochard.
There's nothing more enjoyable than diving under the icy waters in search of tasty titbits.
Voice over
Now it's time for the second half of our review of the year.
Simon Garrett has compiled our look back at the most memorable moments of nineteen ninety two.
One of Britain's top comedy actors heads a list of people from the region mentioned in the New Year's Honours List.
George Cole, better known as Arthur Daley in the ITV series Minder, is made an OBE.
We've two reports, the first from Mike Rowbottom.
STOKE ROW/Oxfordshire
GEORGE COLE/Arthur Daley
Voice over
Arthur Daley would be delighted.
It may not be a nice little earner, but a gong's a gong and the OBE is certain to keep her Indoors happy.
At least it's worth a celebration cigar and not just for Arthur Daley, Britain's beat known comedy Crook, but for the man who's played him in the Minder series George Cole, although he reckons Arthur would be knocking out replicas already.
Male speaker
Arthur wouldn't be smoking one of these, he smokes rubbish.
They don't tell you why you are given honours but I would like to think it was because of Minder.
Voice over
At sixty six George is still working hard.
And when he's not he stays put in his South Oxfordshire home.
He doesn't think the OBE will change his life.
He says: It's a nice way to cap your career.
Arthur would probably.
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
MONICA DRINKWATER/Cheltenham Conservatives
BRIXWORTH/Northamptonshire
GORDON DUNKLEY/Master Thatcher
LES PIKE/Publican
HADDENHAM/Buckinghamshire
LES STOCKER/Wildlife Hospital Trust
Voice over
Also honoured in the New Year's Homours List — Monica Drinkwater — the woman who helped steer the Conservative Party through one of its most damaging episodes in recent years.
That prospective Tory candidate for Cheltenham John Taylor survived attempts to deselect him has much do with her efforts as local party chairman.
She's given an OBE for political service.
Meanwhile Gordon Dunkley was the toast of his local pub today, after all, he did thatch the roof and next door's for that matter.
But it was still a surprise to receive a letter from Mr Major's office just when we thought thatchers were going out of fashion.
But Gordon says recognition for thatchers is long overdue…
Back at the Coach and Horses Gordon's British Empire Medal is the main topic of conversation.
Les Stocker is another unsung hero in the Honours List.
This time last year he was caring for injured animals in his back garden in Aylesbury.
Now he's operating from a purpose-built wildlife hospital.
Les is the man who's made Tiggywinkle the patron saint of hedgehogs.
This little fella certainly wouldn't begrudge Les Stocker his MBE.
With two broken legs he'd have starved to death if he hadn't been cared for…now he can look forward to a rather more chirpy 1992.
Nineteen ninety one will be remembered first for the extraordinary events on the international stage — the Gulf War, the Soviet coup and the release of the hostages.
But on the home front, too, it's been a busy year.
Fears over spread of feline AIDS
FTSE up 73
Voice over
And financial news.
There's been a dramatic rise in share prices.
The hundred shares index closed up seventy three points at two thousand four hundred and ninety three point one.
The pound is down at one dollar eighty six, and down at two marks eighty three.
And that's it for another year on Central News.
We leave you tonight with a look through the seasons and a special mention for all the people who help bring our programme to your screen.
Happy New Year.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
GARGY PATEL
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
OXFORD
CLODAGH JAKUBOVICS/Daughter
Det Insp DAVID BUCKENHAM/Thames Valley Police
SHEILA MUIR/Victim Support Group
Voice over
The acid attack on seventy-four year old Joan Cooper took place last Friday.
Appeals for help from the public led to a huge response, including information from known criminals.
This morning detectives, acting on a tip-off, swooped on two houses in Banbury.
They arrested a seventeen year old youth and a twenty-two year old man, who are now in custody.
Mrs Cooper was blinded with acid at the door of her Banbury home.
She developed breathing difficulties and is on a life support machine.
Doctors say it's too early to tell if she'll be able to see again.
News of the arrests comes on the day that another pensioner underwent emergency surgery following a separate vicious robbery.
Doreen Ditchburn, an eighty-three year old widow, was walking home when she was robbed by two attackers and pushed to the ground, breaking her leg.
Mrs Ditchburn had just been to her local shops at Cotteslow to buy her great-grandson a birthday card when she was set upon.
Her daughter says it's a horrifying attack.
Police believe the two attackers followed Mrs Ditchburn in a red-coloured car before attacking her.
Despite the pain she managed to walk fifty yards with a broken leg to get help.
This incident is the latest in a spate of attacks against elderly women over the Christmas period, victims support groups say.
Tonight Mrs Ditchburn is recovering from an operation to replace her hip.
Police are keen to recover her stolen black handbag, which they say could help them find to her attackers.
A man has made medical history by having four organ transplants.In two operations he was given a new heart, two lungs and a kidney.It was the first time in Europe so many organs had been replaced successfully.Richard Barnett reports:
LYONSHALL/Herefordshire
RICHARD ALLEN/Transplant patient
LIBRARY PICTURES
ELAINE ALLEN/Mother
Voice over
Richard Allen went for a bike tide round his home village of Lyonshall in Herefordshire today; a form of exercise up until now he could only dream about.
Because all his life, Richard, who's now 24, has been plagued by serious health problems.
He was born with a blocked artery to his lungs and although surgeons tried to by pass the problem, his lungs deteriorated.
When he was aged eleven, doctors gave him ten years to live.
He says he was very ill and had difficulty climbing up the stairs.
As his condition got worse, Richard's only chance of survival was a heart and lung transplant.
And in March 1988 he underwent a successful five hour operation in Papworth Hospital.
But Richard's elation at regaining his health was short lived because his kidneys started to fail.
He had to spend fifteen hours a week on a dialysis machine.
He says he was shattered by the news that his kidneys had failed and he had to build up his hopes again.
Four weeks ago Richard made medical history by having a kidney transplant in the Queen Elizabeth hospital in Birmingham.
Never before had anyone in Europe been given so many transplants:
She says Richard told her they wouldn't open Heaven's gates for him.
That was his attitude to life.
Now the dialysis machine is about to be taken back to the hospital and Richard is hoping for a healthy future.
He says he's now well and full of energy.
It doesn't feel strange to have so many transplanted organs.
As Richard looks forward to 1992, he also thinks of two people he never met who carried donor cards and saved his life not once, but twice.
The man accused of murdering Gloucester City Council worker Anna McGurk has been committed for trial to crown court.
GLOUCESTER
Twenty five year old Andrew Hagans who used to live in Cheltenham, is accused of murdering twenty three year-old Anna McGurk at Gloucester in August.
He's also charged with raping a woman in Gloucester on the same day and raping another woman in Cheltenham earlier that month.
A car involved in a fatal accident on the M1 Motorway is believed to have caught on fire before it crashed.
ASPLEY GUISE/Milton Keynes
Flames were seen coming from the back of the red Audi on the south-bound carriageway of the motorway near Milton Keynes, before it overturned.
The driver has not yet been identified.
Masked raiders have bound and gagged a shop manager before escaping with two thousand pounds cash.
GLOUCESTER
John Thaw, star of Central Television's Inspector Morse has been made a CBE in the new years honours list.
Among the many others honoured are Olympic oarsman Matthew Pinsent, a lock-keeper who created the Pooh Sticks championships and a typist who works in an insolvency department.
Nick Clark reports.
SHEILA HARROD Kentwood Choir
JOHN THAW CBE
MATTHEW PINSENT MBE Olympic rower
HAZEL COOKE Typist
LYNN DAVID Lock-keeper
Voice over
If you were on the new year's Honours list you'd be pretty chuffed too.
Sheila Harrod certainly is…born and bred in Swindon she's founder and director of the Kentwood Choir, which has raised hundreds of thousands of pounds for charity, her efforts now rewarded with a British empire medal.
Female speaker
I just couldn't believe it.
It was just wonderful.
Voice over
Yes Inspector Morse alias John Thaw is honoured too…in a forthcoming Central Television documentary he talks of the appeal of the award-winning series.
Male speaker
People have always been fascinated by death and murder.
Voice over
While John Thaw is made a CBE Olympic oarsman and President of Oxford University rowing club Matthew Pinsent, who won gold in Barcelona in the coxless pairs, has been made an MBE.
Male speaker
It's fantastic news.
Voice over
From one of olympic fame to another who works in a typing ool. hazel cooke from Gloucester has been given the British empire medal — for her efforts in one of those very few recession beating jobs — she works in the insolvency section of the department of Trade and Industry.
Female speaker
I was very very suprised.
I just do a normal job.
Voice over
Now how about this feller…he's been a lock-keeper for thirty seven years.
In the last 12 he's been here at Little Wittenham in Oxfordshire and has raised £150,000 for charity.
And one of the ways he does it is through the World Pooh sticks championships he devised and now holds every year.
Male speaker
I was delighted, very happy.
Voice over
And if you want to meet the man himself, well on Sunday it's the nineteen ninety three pooh sticks championships, and he'll be there.
Anthony Hopkins knighted in New Year Honours
FTSE up 14
The hundred shares index closed up fourteen points at twenty-eight forty-six point five.
The pound is up at one-dollar fifty-one .
And up at two-marks forty-five..
Wesley Smith
Well that's just about the end of another year of Central News.
It just remains for us to thank you for your support in ninety-two and to wish you a very Happy New Year.
Wesley Smith
We leave you with some the lighter moments from our past and the names and faces who put us on air every night.
New figures have shown that a third more businesses went to the wall during nineteen ninety-two, with this region the hardest hit.
It's meant the misery of bankruptcy and unemployment for thousands of people.
Kim Barnes has been taking a look at what went wrong, and at the hopes for the New Year.
AYLESBURY/Buckinghamshire
ALAN POND/Businessman
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
JASON ASHMALL/Unemployed Bookbinder
RON EDWARDS/TUC
ROGER BARKER/Oxford Economic Forecasting
COWLEY/Oxford
PAUL KIRK/Managing Director
DAVID LIDINGTON MP/Con Aylesbury
Voice over
Alan Pond will be glad to see the back of 1992.
Last month saw his dreams shattered and his printing business in ruins.
Alan was luckier than most in his position.
He's been able to start up again, but the painful end of 11 years' work doesn't fade.
Bad debts and the doubling of rent and rates on this hi-tec factory pushed him into liquidation.
Now he works from what he calls a glorified shed.
Staff have taken a pay cut.
But at least they've got a job.
Jason Ashmall lost his as a skilled book binder with 30 years experience in October.
More than 70 firms a day are going bust.
There's a price to pay and this region is paying it.
Economic analysts saw it coming.
Unemployment has soared in a region used to jobs for all.
In Milton Keynes and Oxfordshire the jobless rate is three times as high as 1990.
And it's more than doubled in Swindon and Gloucester.
But one of the region's major employers Rover is beginning to sound an optimistic note.
They've just announced extra shifts at Cowley and plan to up production by a half in '93.
Managers say what's needed now is a period of calm and a positive outlook.
And the MP who represents Aylesbury businessman, Alan Pond, says he can see the much-heralded green shoots.
Over the worst, he will admit to government failings.
Alan pond started in 81 in the midst of a recession.
Now this recession sees him beginning again.
His only fear is the region could become trapped in a cycle of boom and bust.
As the year turns all sides are holding their breath and hoping it brings the good news the region needs to hear.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Oxford go first footing in Wales this Saturday to second division, Swansea for the third round of the FA Cup.
United knocked them out of the League Cup at the start of the season over 2 legs.
It was 3-1…they lost at Vetch Field, but banged in 3 at the Manor.
Nick Cusack and Chrissy Allen were the scorers.
Let us hope they're still dancing when it is time for the Fourth Round draw.
United keep the team that beat Newcastle, which means Les Robinson gets another game as stand in for Mike Ford, who's suspended and up front, Nick Cusack keeps the number 9 shirt, with David Penney on the bench.
Hereford United are off to Wales too.
They play Cardiff in the league.
Tough game to start the year.
It was 1-1 at Edgar Street in September.
These 2 sides are old aquaintances and they never forget.
Swindon Town are still kicking their heels of course…their cup game at Queens Park Rangers is on Monday night…
Now one side who'll be glad to see the back of ninety two are Gloucester…they start the New Year at Kingsholm on Saturday with Moseley coming to call 
Voice over
The Cherry and Whites can't wait to ring out the old and ring in the new.
1992 has left them on the edge of relegation and out of the cup.
There's one league match in January, but the crunch comes in April.
By then they need to be back on the winning trail which hopefully will start on Saturday against Moseley.
A makeshift team ran in 34 points against the Birmingham boys a couple of months ago, so it should be a Happy New Year for all at Kingsholm.
The cherry and whites have a lot stronger team out this time and the good news is that Marcus Hannaford who fractured his jaw when he was knocked out against the Saracens is back at scrum half.
The bad news there's no Mike Teague in the Moseley team the Gloucester ironman is out in Lanzarote training with the England squad.
before we think too much of the New Year lets see out the old…and first the Central South Sporting Champions…
In Ninety Two we had 12 World…
European…and British winners…and how we loved to see them smile 
Voice over
You know it was once said that the front page of newspapers record man's failures…the back page man's achievements…well this year hopefully we recorded the enjoyment that the challenge of sport brings to all…here's a re-run of the some of the best bits of ninety two…no words from me just the pictures 
Voice over
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
ERIKA BARNES
LUDLOW/Shropshire
MURIEL HARVEY/Victim
A pensioner is in hospital with serious burns after her house exploded as she tried to light a gas fire.
She was rescued from the burning building by a neighbour.
The blast blew out windows, moved walls and lifted the roof — the house is now likely to be demolished.
Tim Hurst reports.
SLING/Gloucestershire
TERRY PRICE/Neighbour
PAUL GAZE/Glos Fire and Rescue
Voice over
The explosion wrecked the semi-detached house at Sling, near Coleford in Gloucestershire shortly after breakfast time.
The occupier, Mrs Thelma Burton, who's 77, was lighting a gas fire in the front room when the explosion happened, blowing out windows, moving walls inside the house and lifting the roof.
Mrs Burton was found lying in the front room by a neighbour.
The front room was on fire when Fire and Rescue crews arrived.
Neighbours were evacuated in case of further explosions and engineers isolated the gas supply to the house.
The local council, which owns the house, is considering a complete demolition.
The injured woman was admitted to hospital in Bristol with serious burns, where her condition is said to be comfortable.
British Gas say they're investigating the possibility that a fire had been left on, and unlit, all night.
Hundreds of travellers, parked illegally in a cattle market, moved off peacefully today…but only to a new site sixty yards away.
They've promised to move on again by next week.
Ian Maclaren reports.
GLOUCESTER
RON DRYSDALE/Gloucester City Council
BOBBY RICHARDS/National Gipsy Council
Voice over
The travellers had vowed to stay put, despite a warning they'd be forcibly evicted by the police.
But after a hurriedly arranged meeting, involving the national gipsy council, an uneasy truce was reached.
The travellers did move, but only about 60 yards to an adjacent site that'll at least allow tomorrow's livestock market to go ahead.
But gipsy leaders say the problem won't go away.
The police are happy with the compromise.
The travellers have promised they'll be gone by the end of the weekend.
An animal rescue centre says its at bursting point after taking in a record number of stray dogs.
The centre says the recession may be forcing more people to abandon their pets.
Gareth Furby reports.
EVESHAM/Worcestershire
ALISON SMITH/Assistant Manageress0
Voice over
So many abandoned dogs are being treated in the hospital section of the Canine Defence League kennels at Evesham in Worcestershire, that one of them, a deaf and blind poodle, is living in the operating theatre because there's no other room left.
A record number of former pets, including a mother and her 9 puppies, have been abandoned over the holiday and in bitterly cold conditions.
The Canine Defence League refuses to find new homes for abandoned animals until well after the holiday, in case the same dogs are given as presents and then dumped again.
For that reason, the kennels will remained closed to customers until next week.
Now to our exclusive look at Rover's new MG sportscar in action.
Last night we looked back at the history of the MG, which appeared to have died a death when the factory at Abingdon closed in 1981.
But after an eleven year break, a new MG will be unveiled at the motor show.
Richard Barnett reports on a remarkable comeback.
MINSTER LOVELL/Oxfordshire
STEVE SCHLEMMER/Rover Special Products
DON HAYTER/Designer
RON GAMMONS/MG Enthusiast
Voice over
This is the MGB 1990's style; the MG RV8.
It's the most powerful production MG ever built, powered by an uprated 3.9 litre Range Rover engine.
Rover has spent 18 months restyling the bodywork to give the car a more chunky up to date look.
And soon 15 MG RV8s a week will be handbuilt on a new low volume production line at Cowley in Oxford, using bodies built at British Motor Heritage in Faringdon.
Despite the restyling, underneath the RV8 is still an MGB; the car the company killed off when it closed the MG factory at Abingdon 11 years ago.
So why has it been revived?
Male speaker
The new car is to mark the 30th anniversary of the MGB.
It's the car that would have been built if production had continued.
Voice over
For reaction to the new car, we took it to the MG Car Club's headquarters on the site of the old factory in Abingdon.
First to view the car was Don Hayter, who helped design the original MGB 30 years ago.
Male speaker
It looks chunky and powerful.
That's the image that will sell the car.
Male speaker
They have made a wonderful job of restyling the MG.It still looks like an MGB.
Voice over
The RV8's performance is in the supercar class, taking under 6 seconds to race from nought to 60 and with a top speed of 135mph.
It goes on sale from next March.
And despite a price tag of over £26,000, Rover say hundreds of orders have already been placed.
And even those MG enthusiasts who can't afford the new model can drive their older classics with a new pride; after all, the MGB is the car that refused to die.
A disused RAF station is to become the home of Britain's newest Army Corps.
The corps was formed as a result of lessons learned in the Gulf War and brings together hundreds of soldiers from Germany and the United Kingdom.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
Col TIM CROSS/Station Commander
Sq Ldr MIKE LAWRANCE/RAF Station Commander
Voice over
RAF Abingdon has been like a ghost town since the summer.
The RAF has deserted what was once one of its busiest stations.
But while the roar of aircraft has gone for good, the station will live on.
The Army moves in 2 regiments starting in December.
Male speaker
Some of the smaller buildings will have different uses, but the messes will stay, and the main hangars will be used to house our vehicle fleet.
There are no major changes.
We may have to make a few small changes but generally speaking we can get in pretty cleanly
Voice over
The RAF has been at Abingdon since 1932.
At their height they had 1,300 people on the station, servicing hawks, Buccaneers and Jaguars.
The Army will be bringing in 1,400 men and women.
They'll be storing hundreds of vehicles at the site and using the 700 acres for military exercise.
2 Regiments are coming and they'll form part of the new Royal Logistic Corps.
Gulf war experience has led the army to believe they'll be more efficient if they keep everything under one command.
They've been formed from separate corps looking after Transport, Ordnance, Supplies, Catering and Military Mail.
The 2 regiments at Abingdon will concentrate on transport and supply.
Male speaker
I'm sure that the Army coming in, with about the same sort of strength as the RAF, is going to be good for the community and local economy.
It is after all a suburb of Abingdon
Voice over
The army recognises that shoe-horning young junior ranks into a place used to dealing with qualified RAF technicians could be a problem.
Male speaker
I hope the transition will go well but we'll have more people and a lot more younger soldiers and that will bring certain difficulties
Voice over
It will be a staged move over 5 months.
The Army expects to spend £1million on accommodation and modifications in the first year with more to follow.
Fans of electronic games can now live their very own video war!
A high-tech battleground's been built where the meekest would-be gunfighter can become the new Arnold Swarzenegger.
Simon Garrett reports 
OXFORD
NICK BRUNT/Laser Quest UK Ltd
Voice over
In a dimly light upper room in an Oxford office block bolts of laser light flash out.
Each contender in the Laser Quest wears a front and back target and carries a laser gun; the object to hit and not to be hit.
Male speaker
It's absolutely excellent, really good fun, very realistic.
Female speaker
It's a good laugh; good team game, loads of spirit.
Male speaker
You've got a total adrenalin rush when you get in here, you're trying to wipe out your opponents and they, you.
It's a hell of a game.
Male speaker
It's great it's just like being in a video game except you're completely involved in it.
It's like virtual reality I suppose.
Voice over
Individuals can play eachother; an entire office can stalk their boss, or up to 20 at once can indulge in the mayhem of all against all.
Male speaker
It's absolutely excellent, really good fun, very realistic.
Female speaker
It's a good laugh; good team game; loads of spirit.
Male speaker
You've got a total adrenalin rush when you get in here, you're trying to wipe out your opponants and they you.
It's a hell of a game.
Male speaker
It's great it's just like being in a video game except you're completely involved in it.
It's like virtual reality I suppose.
Voice over
So if you think you're harder than Scwarzenneger or meaner than Bond this may be the game for you.
But if you come to play laser quest one word of advice — don't wear a white shirt or everybody shoots at you.