

New move for cancer victims
A COURSE in cancer counselling is to be run at Magee College in Londonderry for the first time.
The half-year course begins next month and offers tuition on counselling skills, while concentrating on issues relevant to working with cancer sufferers.
It is believed the open-entry course is the first of its kind in Northern Ireland.
The idea came from the cancer support group which meets every fortnight at the Derry Well Woman centre.
The group is made up of 20 women who suffer from the disease.
Trained counsellors
Many felt they would benefit from the assistance of trained cancer counsellors, so work began on setting up the course.
Now, Derry Well Woman has combined with the University of Ulster and representatives from the Western Health and Social Services Board to arrange the 24-week course at Magee.
Derry Well Woman co-ordinator Karen Meehan said today: ‘To the best of my knowledge there is no other course like this.
We have been planning it for more than a year.
‘We hope it can help improve cancer counselling in the North West.’
The course is aimed at people with either a personal or professional interest in the counselling of cancer-sufferers.
Application form
The course has room for 20 students and applications are invited from men and women.
Selection will be based on an application form and an interview.
Admission is free although a commitment of a specified number of counselling/ training hours per week will be required on completion of the study.
Application forms and further information from Karen Meehan on Derry 360777.
By Mark Simpson
Natural farming
THE STEWART-MOORE farm at Ballycastle won the coveted All-Ireland Farming and Conservation award earlier this year.
So 200 people came to an event, organised by the Farming Wildlife and Advisory Group — FWAG — to see for themselves what made it so special.
And as they walked around the 230 acre farm, all of it in the extended Less Favoured Areas, they were able to see at first hand why Hume Stewart-Moore and his son Michael were so successful.
On the farm many conservation measures have been undertaken, including extensive tree plantings; restoration of traditional stone walls and the creation of two ponds, one for ducks and the other as a rich habitat for a range of aquatic flora and fauna.
The Stewart-Moore farm is now widely recognised as one of the best examples in Ireland of commercial farming complementing conservation.
INDIANA
Feast for boffins
A 40-lb mushroom that was going to be dried and stored at a US university as an educational specimen was instead sauteed in butter and eaten by three scientists.
The mushroom, at 26 inches across, was too big to fit in a special dryer at Purdue University's plant and fungi collection in West Lafayette, Indiana.
‘It's edible, you know, so there were three professors up here and they decided to divide it up and eat it,’ said Joe Hennen, a professor of botany.
JAPAN
Breeding like gibbons…
TAKA and Mari, a pair of gibbons, both at least 31 years old, have had their 29th baby and could win a place in the Guinness Book of Records as the world's most prolific monkey parents, said a vet at a zoo in Hyogo, Japan.
LOCH LOMOND
‘Pea soup’ threat to loch
LOCH Lomond is in danger of turning into ‘pea soup’, a scientist warned.
Dr Kevin Murphy, of Glasgow University, said algae was covering plants with thick furry slime.
If plant life is killed off, the eco-system could be permanently damaged, said Dr Murphy, of the University's Centre for Research in Environmental Science and Technology.
Flu germs link to schizophrenia
WOMEN exposed to flu germs in the fifth or sixth months of pregnancy risk having a schizophrenic baby, researchers warned today.
Schizophrenia, or split personality, is the most common serious mental illness and studies carried out so far hint at a genetic link, although no susceptible genes have yet been identified.
Professor Robin Murray, of the Institute of Psychiatry and King's College Hospital, London, told the annual British Association Science Festival, at Keele University, Staffordshire, the flu risk to unborn babies seemed to affect girls rather that boys following four studies he had carried out in England.
Abnormal
And investigation of brain cells showed abnormalities in sufferers.
He told the conference pre-natal viral illness may explain the higher rates of schizophrenia, found in city-born people and in Afro-Caribbean immigrants in England.
Professor Murray believes the root of the problem lies in a fault with the child's immune cells in the brain.
If a ‘schizophrenia’ gene is involved in the immune response to viral infections, it could explain the persistence of such a seemingly disadvantageous gene in the population, he said.
‘Thirty years ago Julian Huxley and Eliot Slater speculated that the reason why the disadvantageous schizophrenia gene was not progressively eliminated from the gene pool was that it conveyed some biological advantage such as resistance to infection.
‘My study reviews the evidence that a genetically-determined maternal response to influenza results in production of an antibody which crosses the fetal blood-brain barrier and, by acting as a fetal auto-antibody, induces neurodevelopmental damage,’ added the Professor.
Siamese twins ‘doing well’
DOCTORS were today carefully monitoring the progress of Siamese twin boys who have been successfully separated after a 16-hour operation.
The 10-month-old Italians were said to be ‘stable and doing as well as can be expected’ at London's Great Ormond Street children's hospital.
Doctors said the boys had an equal chance of survival.
Beniaminio and Mario Di Conza have been in the hospital since June, undergoing investigations to find out the extent of organ sharing, before the operation which was completed yesterday.
They were joined from the upper chest to the pelvis and had two arms and one leg each.
They had two hearts but shared a fused liver and lower bowel.
Pedigree Charolais heifer helps boost African project
A PEDIGREE Charolais heifer has been donated by Harry and Jean Marguess of Muckamore for the ‘Farm for Africa’ project, part of an overall drive spearheaded by Magheralin Parish Church to buy a 100-acre farm in Uganda and stock and equip it.
Many organisations and businesses have joined the project and already Automart Livestock have organised a ‘Farm for Africa’ sale of dairy stock.
Harry Marguess says: ‘Our own sale was being held at Automart and when we heard the ‘Farm for Africa’ event was the following day we decided to donate a heifer to this very worthy cause.’
The Marquess production sale will offer 80 head of quality Charolais which will include young bulls, cows with calves and heifers.
Two other leading breeders, Andy Adair, Antrim and Pat McAllister & sons, Glenarm have also been invited to join the sale.
It will be at Automart on September 29 at 7pm and is being run under the auspices of the British Charolais Cattle Society.
Vauxhall Cavalier Turbo 4x4 — Practical Caravan's Top Towing Car.
VICTORY FOR VAUXHALL…
VAUXHALL has won a top towcar award for the third year running, scooping five of the seven trophies in the process.
Readers of ‘Practical Caravan’ magazine not only voted the Cavalier Turbo 2.0i 4x4 their Top Towing Car, but also Best Large Family Car.
The Cavalier's victory follows similar overall wins by the Senator CD 3.0i and Cavalier 2.0i 4x4 in 1992 and 1991.
THEY used to be considered dirty, slow, noisy and uncomfortable.
But these days new technology has transformed oil-burning cars into one of the most civilised forms of personal transport.
And the result is that more motorists than ever are opting for life behind the wheel of a diesel vehicle.
That trend is demonstrated in a sales bonanza which saw 142,000 people in the UK opting for a diesel car in the first half of this year.
That figure is remarkable when compared to just 87,000 during the first six months of last year.
And the dramatic rise in popularity of some makes is sensational — such as Nissan, whose sales increase is more than 3,000 per cent.
Even the already-established big sellers, like Renault, have sold 200 per cent more diesel models so far this year.
But even these figures, impressive as they are, are likely to be merely the tip of the iceberg in comparison to the huge gains yet to be made.
All of a sudden, diesel motoring has moved into overdrive, bringing us into line with most of our EC counterparts.
The cars themselves are shaking off their old image, too.
In many cases they are now actually quicker than their petrol-engined equivalents, despite offering considerable gains in economy.
The advantages of diesels, in addition to better fuel consumption, are reliability (because there are no ignition components to go wrong), longevity (because the engines are very low-revving), and excellent trade-in values (because they are highly desirable on the secondhand market).
Several companies, such as Citroen, have started to offer diesel models for the same price as petrol-powered ones.
For example, the new Citroen Xantia diesel costs exactly the same as the 1.6-litre petrol version.
The fact that even companies with strong sporting images, such as BMW, have now decided to enter the UK's fledgling diesel market is another indication that it is only a matter of time before there is a diesel option of every car currently on sale in petrol guise.
In addition to better economy, diesel cars use cheaper fuel and are no less environmentally-friendly than petrol-engined models fitted with catalytic converters.
Nowadays as many as one in five cars on UK roads is a diesel.
That seems a far cry from just a few years ago when the only diesels were lorries, buses and the occasional taxi.
So, to meet the demands of the diesel boom, oil companies have installed diesel pumps alongside those for petrol.
They have also developed additives which prevent the fuel from frothing so that it no longer spills over your shoes every time you fill-up.
And they have agreed a uniform black colour scheme for all garages to prevent mix-ups with petrol, which used to be common in the early days of the diesel revolution.
The best-selling small diesel model is currently the Ford Fiesta, followed by the Peugeots 205 and 106, and the Renault Clio.
The most popular small family models are the Vauxhall Astra, Citroen ZX and Ford Escort.
In the upper-medium sector the big sellers are the Peugeot 405, Vauxhall Cavalier and — during the first half of this year — the Citroen BX.
A rapidly-increasing number of executive models are diesels too, with the Mercedes 200 and 190, and Vauxhall Carlton being the favourites.
Latest tests indicate that Citroen's new Xantia diesel model is actually quieter than a petrol-engined Ford Mondeo.
Another common feature of all new diesels is instant starting.
Formerly there were glow-plugs which had to be warmed before the engine would fire.
The performance of diesels has been transformed by the availability of turbochargers on most models, giving the majority of them cruising capabilities in excess of 100mph.
Some now come with the option of automatic transmission, and a small number are even available with air conditioning — previously the exclusive domain of the ultimate petrol-engined executive express.
DIESELS GO INTO OVERDRIVE
The glass mystery:
MYSTERY glass explosions have occurred at a number of UK buildings constructed during the last decade.
Landmark buildings such as the Reuters offices in London designed by Richard Rogers, and Sir Norman Foster's Standstead airport terminal have been affected.
A packed restaurant was sprayed with glass at the £300m Lakeside Shopping Centre in Thurrock, Essex.
A shopper was injured at the Harlequin centre, Watford.
Nine panels exploded at the Scottish Exhibition Centre, Glasgow.
The company behind three affected British shopping centres have now spent thousands of pounds installing wire mesh nets to protect shoppers.