

Garda probe priest sex abuse claims
A GARDA investigation was underway today into an allegation of child sex abuse involving a former religious principal in a secondary school in the west of Ireland.
And a health board inquiry centring on several allegations of abuse against teenage male students by the same Catholic priest is also being carried out.
The priest, highly regarded in educational circles, was transferred from his school position by church authorities to work as a curate in a country parish over the summer.
He had worked in the school for several years but so far neither gardai nor health board officials have contacted the school authorities about the case.
Rumours of sex abuse allegations against the priest have caused shock waves among local people.
But a Gardai spokesman, said: ‘There is an investigation by gardai as a result of a complaint made by a member of the public.’
The senior Garda officer said a file on the allegation against the priest would go to the Director of Public Prosecutions, Eamon Barnes.
Counselling
The allegations are believed to involve several teenagers aged from 12 to 18.
At least some of the abuse is claimed to have taken place last year.
The complaint to gardai is believed to involve only one teenager.
It is understood that early this year both local gardai and Catholic Church officials were told of the allegations; the health board became involved and the priest received counselling.
A spokesman for the local Catholic bishop, insisted: ‘No such complaint has been made to him and if you have any information he will investigate it.’
He said switching the priest from his school position to a country parish was ‘in the ordinary course of events’.
He was unaware that a Garda inquiry was being conducted into the allegation, he added.
The Catholic Press Office said that new guidelines on child sex abuse involving religious orders would be available to bishops before the end of the year.
But a spokesman said if any complaint was received it would be taken very seriously and investigated; it would also be acted upon if found to have substance.
By Gail Walker
A bees' knees service for honey worshippers
THERE will be a special buzz at the harvest service in Magheralin Parish Church.
For the only produce safely gathered in and on display around the pulpit will be — honey.
And the congregation will be made up of beekeepers from all over Ireland.
It's going to be a service of thanksgiving for the work of the bee in the church on Sunday November 28.
The font will be decorated with honeycombs, hives and beekeeper's equipment like veils and smokers.
And baskets of flowers and an Irish shamrock sculpted from the bee's wax by Ulster's only qualified honey judge, Michael Young, from Hillsborough.
Young, a Croft Inns catering manager and Les Simms, a BBC engineer, have each won the world championship for honey making for their Dromore Beekeepers Club in the past two years.
Only the bees themselves will be missing from the service.
‘It wouldn't be practical to have them in church,’ said Dean Roland Hutchinson.
‘They might sting a worshipper.’
A beekeeper himself with 10 hives in the manse garden it was the Dean who dreamed up the idea of a honey service four years ago.
Beekeepers of all denominations will be at the harvest with a difference and the preacher will be the Rev Sam Millar, of Hazelbank Presbyterian Church, in Coleraine — another beekeeper.
Overtime
But there won't be too much honey to give thanks for this year.
‘It's an atrocious season,’ admitted Dean Hutchinson.
The offering at the honey harvest service will help finance a scheme to teach Indian tribes in Argentina good bee-keeping husbandry.
CREGGAN
Praying together
CREGGAN Historical Society has announced plans for an ecumenical service next Sunday at Creggan Parish Church near Crossmaglen.
People from both sides of the south Armagh border are being invited and a special preacher will be Dr William Marshall, vice principal of the Church of Ireland Theological College, Dublin.
Pope's first trip to former Soviet Union
POPE John Paul this weekend starts a trip that was once only the stuff of his dreams and prayers his first visit to the former Soviet Union.
His September 4-10 tour of the Baltic States of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia under Moscow's rule until 1991 would have been impossible before the 1989 fall of the Berlin Wall.
Meanwhile, the Vatican said it had accepted an unprecedented Chinese invitation to send a top official to Peking to attend a sports ceremony this weekend and meet government officials.
Cardinal Roger Etchegaray is the highest Vatican official to go to China since the communists came to power in 1949.
The visit is the latest sign of a thaw in relations between the world's smallest and largest nations, long soured by a row over the role of the Roman Catholic church in China.
Churches widen horizons to boost job hopes
AN unemployment initiative was launched today by the four main Churches in Londonderry.
The Wider Horizons Programme has been set up to fund 22 young unemployed people from all over Ireland to travel to Louisiana in the United States.
They will be trained in the care of the elderly, outdoor pursuits, the shop industry, arts and crafts and video and music reproduction.
Study
The youths will also study at the University of Southwestern Louisiana where they will be able to improve their employment opportunities.
It is a cross-community and cross-border project.
One of the directors of the Churches Voluntary Work Bureau said the project would be an invaluable experience.
Welcome
He said: ‘We are delighted that as well as this being a cross-community project we take a further welcome step in entering into partnership with the Republic.’
The £100,000 funded trip leaves for the US on October 9 and the participants return to the province just before Christmas.
By David[ Walmsley
Focus on world's faiths
THE common ground between the world's faiths is much more important than the differences, the Londonderry Baha'i Community has been told.
Dr Keith Munro said people regarded religion as a cause of division and argument, as a result of prejudice and misunderstanding.
But he said the main purpose of the Baha'i Faith was to bring people together.
At their meeting in the Central Library, a video describing the life of the faith's founder Baha'u'llah was shown.
It also described the work of the international Baha'i community from Albania to China.
British children saved from religious sex cult
BRITISH children are believed to be among 160 being held in care today after being rescued from a religious sex cult in Argentina.
About 30 adults were arrested in raids on ten Children of God homes on Wednesday night by police investigating claims of child abuse.
British diplomats in Buenos Aires were awaiting a list of names and nationalities to establish how many British children are involved.
One report puts the number of British children at three, all from the same family.
Meanwhile Scotland Yard confirmed that officers from the Obscene Publications Squad have been closely monitoring the activities of the Children of God cult in Britain.
According to reports, the investigation has centred on the activities of the cult at an address in north London and more recently at a manor house at Lutterworth, Leics.
Reports say material has been seized by police, but Detective Superintendent Mike Hames, head of the squad, said no decision had been taken on any police action.
Scotland Yard has been in touch with the Argentine inquiry.
Argentine prosecutors have already said some of the children showed signs of sexual abuse.
The UK branch has since changed its name to The Family, which today strenuously denied the allegations in Argentina and accused a ‘small group of disgruntled ex-members’ and anti-cult organisations of spreading ‘outrageous’lies.
Conference venue plan for border church
A CHURCH of Ireland minister is proposing to use a border church in Monaghan as a conference and concert venue.
The Rev George Knowd, who is curate-in-charge of the Muckno, Ballybay and Clontibret parishes near the south Armagh border, has just completed an £80,000 restoration project at St Maeldoid's Parish Church in Castleblayney.
Monastery
The church is the only one in Ireland dedicated to St Maeldoid, who founded a monastery in the area during the seventh century.
Mr Knowd said he was anxious that the church would be used not only as a place of worship, but also as a conference centre and concert venue by both sides of the community.
‘Heritage’
Outlining plans for a rededication service by the Bishop of Clogher, Dr Brian Hannon, next Sunday, Mr Knowd said: ‘We want to make this the beginning of a new chapter in the life of the church, which is a vital part of the heritage of the area, reaching back to a time when there was no denominational difference among Christians.
‘We are making it a centre where all people can come together without fear of being forced to convert to any particular denomination.
‘Peace’
‘This is the beginning of real interdenominational activity, the foundation of a process wherein lies the real path to peace.’
Meanwhile, people from both sides of the border attended an ecumenical church service at Creggan Church of Ireland near Crossmaglen in South Armagh yesterday.
Cross border church service
COMMUNITY leaders from both sides of the border have been invited to an ecumenical church service at Creggan in south Armagh today.
It has been organised by Creggan Historical Society and the vice-principal of the Church of Ireland Theological College in Dublin, Dr William Marshall, is to deputise for Bishop Gerry Clifford, who is ill.
There's no God, says sacked Minister
A CLERGYMAN who trains priests yesterday said he was saddened but not surprised that he had been sacked after admitting he does not believe in God.
The Rev Anthony Freeman said he felt a great sense of relief when he admitted to himself he did not hold to the traditional view of God.
He was dismissed from his post as director of post-ordination training by the Bishop of Chichester, Dr Eric Kemp, after being told his views were incompatible with his job.
‘I was saddened that it was felt I had to go but I suppose it was unsurprising,’ he said.
Mr Freeman said he believed in a Christian humanism which meant God was merely ‘the sum of human aspirations’ rather than‘a supernatural being intervening in man's affairs’.
In a book, God In Us, published next month, which his refusal to withdraw from publication led to his sacking, he said: ‘There is nothing ‘out there’ and if there is, we can have no knowledge of it.’
Mr Freeman, 46, is being allowed to stay as priest-in-charge of St Mark's, Staplefield, West Sussex, for a year.
‘The bishop said he would review my situation after Easter.
I infer from that that if my views are modified in a direction he approves of, I might stay.
‘But probably the chances are that I will be looking for some sort of change,’ he added.
Mr Freeman said some parishioners were upset by his views but the majority were supportive.
‘What I am pleading for is a widening of belief from the received views of God.
I have been released to find a new sense of freedom in prayer and worship.’
Clergy silent on drink craze
CLERGYMEN have been condemned for failing in their duty to help stamp out under-age and open-air drinking in a Co Tyrone town.
Not a single priest or minister has condemned the craze from the pulpit, despite the fact that the local cemetery is the favourite venue for regular weekend binges, according to local councillor Walter Greer.
Now the council is considering the introduction of alcohol-free zones in a bid to crack the problem.
‘The people who are failing miserably are the clergymen of the town.
They are not condemning or denouncing this from the pulpit,’ said Mr Greer.
Gravestones and wreaths have been wrecked at the town's public cemetery on a number of occasions by drunken youths.
CANON ATTACKED
A SENIOR Anglican clergyman who declared that sex outside marriage should not necessarily be considered a sin has come under fire.
Canon Anthony Harvey, sub-dean at Westminster Abbey, said in an article in Theology magazine that the Church should rethink its attitude to extra-marital sex and whether marriage was for life.
But the Evangelical Alliance UK, which says it represents a million churchgoers, immediately responded by saying the Church must not adopt society's view of marriage as disposable and pre-marital sex as inevitable.