

THE jail complex was built in 1853.
The final cost was £23,000, £5,000 more than what was first estimated.
According to local folklore the contractor, who went bankrupt, was the first inmate detained for non payment of debts.
Only one prisoner is known to have escaped unaided in 1875 after scaling the 20 ft boundary wall.
The jail was the scene of a hunger strike during the War of Independence after it was taken over by the military authorities in 1915.
During the 1921-23 Civil War, more than 100 prisoners escaped when a mine blew a hole in the perimeter wall.
In 1923 three prisoners were executed by firing squad.
In 1991 the jail was opened by Louth County Council as a Civil Defence Training Centre.
The former jail infirmary was converted into offices and stores are housed in the basement of one of the two cell-blocks.
Dunnes get fine for beetle infested soup
DUNNES Stores has been fined £100 after 14 beetles and 24 larvae were found in a packet of dried soup being eaten by a Kilkeel woman.
The firm was also ordered to pay £110 costs at Newry Magistrate's Court yesterday.
Dunnes Stores was charged with selling Knorr Bavarian dried soup not of quality demanded, at its shop in Greencastle Street, Kilkeel, to Mrs Lorraine Trainor of Fearon Park, Kilkeel, last January.
Strange
Rory McShane, for Newry and Mourne Council, said Mrs Trainor's daughter noticed something rather strange about it when she started to eat the soup.
She discovered the material was rotten and that it was contaminated.
The public analyst found it contained 14 beetles, 24 larvae and nine pupal cases, also that it had the characteristics of the Australian beetle, which attacks and infests dried food products.
Infestation
There was a small hole about one-and-a-half millimetres wide in the packet, through which the initial infestation could have arisen.
Counsel for Dunnes, which pleaded guilty to the charge, said this could not have occurred in the store at Kilkeel.
It seemed certain it happened at the time of manufacture.
Regional Magistrate Gerry Harty agreed that the firm had a good record and said it bought vast quantities for distribution to its various stores.
Rail scheme aims to get elderly on the move
THE EUROPEAN Year of Older People is getting on the move in Ulster with the introduction of special cheap fares to the Republic.
‘Come And Go Week’, which starts of September 29, is being organised by Co-operation North, to encourage contact between elderly people on both sides of the border.
The organisation is hoping people will use the event to visit places of interest which may hold special memories for them.
A voucher booklet offering special rates for accommodation, meals, entertainment and leisure activities is also available.
To take part in the event, pensioners in Northern Ireland need to produce their Ulsterbus concession fare pass, when they are buying a rail or bus ticket to the Republic and they will be given a discount voucher booklet.
Tony Kennedy, chief executive of Co-operation North, said: ‘Co-operation North…was especially keen to become involved in this major event, because we believe that older people have a vital role to play in promoting understanding and tolerance between the people of Ireland, North and South.
‘We hope that thousands of older people from all parts of the island of Ireland will be taking advantage of this exceptional opportunity.’
Ulster children still keen on books
THE television, the cinema and computer games have not managed to prise Ulster children away from book-reading habits, a straw poll shows today.
While a recent survey in England showed that many youngsters found books ‘boring’ compared with space-age games, films and TV programmes, there has been no decrease in public-library borrowing by children in Belfast over the last five years.
Liam Parker, assistant chief librarian with the Belfast Education and Library Board, said: ‘On average, up to 25pc of our book borrowing would be by children and in some branches the figure is as high as 35pc.’
Comics
He conceded there was less reading of ‘non-purposeful’ material, such as comics, but added that this did not necessarily mean there was less literacy.
‘Schools and the education system in general now promote a more appropriate book for the child to read.’
Mr Parker added that while TV might have been substituted for the Beano and the Dandy, perennial favourite authors, such as Enid Blyton and Roald Dahl, were still very important to young people in Ulster.
‘Blyton’
Keen reader Laura McAdam (9), from Lisburn, backed his views.
‘I sometimes watch television, but I love reading books, particularly by Enid Blyton, when I have the chance,’ she said.
Omagh sisters Olivia (15) and nine-year-old Laura McGuckin also still make time for story books outside the classroom.
‘Films’
Olivia said: ‘I have just finished reading ‘Diana — Her True Story’.
While I could not afford to buy new books, I get what I like from the local library.
My favourites are those which films have been made of.’
Laura, who got a Nintendo Super Mario World computer games-system for Christmas last year, said she loved reading Roald Dahl classics such as‘The Big Friendly Giant’ and ‘Witches’before going to sleep at night.
By Oliver McGuckin
Sun lovers hit the beach
AS temperatures soared into the 70's all across the north west, sensible people headed to the nearest beach.
For many that was Buncrana or Fahan in County Donegal where they surfed, skiied, took boat trips or just lay in the sun.
Our photographer, complete with knotted hankie, was there…
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE
Pet loss help
A SUPPORT group has been set up to help animal lovers get over the death of a pet.
Vets and police refer grieving owners to the voluntary bereavement group set up by Yvette Price-Mear, of Mansfield Woodhouse, Nottinghamshire.
‘The loss of a pet can be just as upsetting as the death of a member of the family because people become so attached to them,’ she said.
The volunteers also help people whose pets have been stolen.
A degree of frustration With the influx of students from the Republic what does the future hold for Ulster's high-flyers?
THE 2,000-odd students from the Republic who choose to study in Northern Ireland are a streetwise crowd.
They know all about how to exploit the EC rules in order to obtain a free university education, all fees paid by the Department of Education at Rathgael, outside Bangor, Co Down.
This should not surprise you, for it happens also to be the case that they tend to be an exceptionally well-qualified crowd.
My authority for saying that is the Reader in Sociology at Queen's University, Robert Cormack, some of whose latest findings have been discussed in this newspaper by Claire McGahan this week.
Mr Cormack is just back from a conference of academics held at Turku, a Finnish port on the Baltic coast east of Helsinki, where he and his colleague, Robert Osborne, gave a paper on the pattern of higher education here.
It is fascinating stuff, both for what it says and what it leaves unsaid.
He makes the point that the arrival of these southerners (and westerners) has enabled the University of Ulster to push up the minimum entry grades for some courses.
He says this has been a deliberate policy at UU for some time.
But the obvious question arises: if the bright sparks from the Republic are coming in, who here is being crowded out?
Because we know that, as Mr Cormack puts it, ‘not all leavers’ who go to England and Scotland to take their degrees ‘are willing leavers’.
He points out that the young fellow or girl with only modest ‘A’ levels now has little choice: they have to do without — or go across the water.
But if that is so, who are they?
Here comes the rub.
Mr Cormack does not say.
But I have digested his paper and, well loaded with statistics, have been making one or two inquiries of my own.
His figures show that very many students from working-class homes tend to do less well in their ‘A’ levels than the rest.
So any shortage of places will be likely to hit them hardest.
Mr Cormack, however, shows that nearly half the Roman Catholic students entering higher education here (43pc) come from working class homes, but only a little over a quarter of the Protestants do (27pc).
The conclusion is obvious; and it is that those local searchers for a place here, who are being crowded out by the southerners, are most likely to be northern Catholics.
Moreover they will tend to be Catholics from just the sort of background the universities here have for years wished to see represented more adequately among students.
One effect of this new competition for places locally is that the students who go to England or Scotland no longer automatically represent the elite they tended to in the 1970s and 1980s.
They still include many high flyers; but Mr Cormack shows that an appreciable number are now likely to be modest attainers who were crowded out of a place at home.
It is astonishing that more Protestants now study in universities on the mainland — more than a quarter — than are to be found in the University of Ulster; and if we take the total, only 55pc of Protestant students now study here.
So much for bridge-building and healing local divisions; and cross-border traffic going south is barely a trickle.
The Protestants are scarcely measurable and the Catholics (3pc) amount to only a quarter of the proportion who went 20 years ago.
With the cost to the student of a higher education tending to rise sharply, fewer in future may be able to afford the luxury of studying across the water.
Mr Cormack foresees school-leavers having to fight even harder for a place here.
It may well be, in any case, that we now have a high enough proportion of school-leavers in cap and gown.
Only a generation ago there were barely 2,000.
This autumn we have 10,000.
Perhaps we need more technically-orientated vocational courses.
Perhaps the way of opportunity is the old American system: a year's study, followed by a year out to earn some money.
Jobs, I know, have been very hard to come by this summer.
But we must hope this will change next year with economic revival abroad.
Graduates, too, face increasing job problems.
A degree is no longer the magic key to a lifetime's well-paid security.
There are now BA (Hons.) staffing supermarket check-outs.
Are we turning out too many?
What baffles me is how few of them can spell.
The local office of a body which shall remain nameless was awarding competition prizes the other day.
One class was for the most original entry; another was limited to the tots; a third to the over-8s.
A final class sought to find the most ‘humerous.’
I hope the over-8s didn't notice.
New plea to ‘help potential criminals’
CHILDREN in danger of growing into young criminals should be identified and helped before they start school, a leading academic said yesterday.
Professor Fred Stone of Glasgow University called for a countrywide network of agencies made up from the police, social workers, teachers and other agencies to spot potential troublesome children.
‘At this early stage positive intervention, while not easy and which demands sensitive work with child and parent or parent substitutes, can succeed.
More effective is pre-school intervention,’ he told the annual British Association Science Festival at Keele University, Staffordshire.
He said there was too much attention paid to child sex abuse and teenage delinquency, when the problem had to be dealt with much earlier on.
Control
One in five children was likely to have behavioural problems due to a deprived home life and other factors, Professor Stone said.
By the time they reached adolescence children were out of parental control.
‘Behaviour begins to improve in mid-life, by which time relationships, work patterns, social adjustment have all suffered, with implications for the next generation,’ said Professor Stone.
Support service meeting
THE Breast Care and Mastectomy Support Service will be holding a meeting in Londonderry next month.
It will be held at the social services room, multi-disciplinary centre at Altnagelvin Hospital on Thursday September 16 at 7.30pm.
The meeting is open to patients, family and friends.
SEAFORDE
Ploughing memories
CHARITY will be the winner when a display of old time ploughing, combining and binding is put on tomorrow by the Seaforde Vintage Steam Threshing Rally.
Proceeds from the event, which will be held on land between Seaforde and Clough, will go to aid the work of the mid-Down branch of Multiple Sclerosis.
Up the walls[with forty shades[of cream
SOME women enjoy a good argument.
Occasionally if one isn't available she will walk around the house arguing with herself.
A husband should never get involved in these intense little debates a woman has with herself.
It is a mistake to take sides.
You will only make a powerful enemy.
Or if she is in a particularly schizophrenic mood — powerful enemies.
Last week Daph kept up an argument with herself that went on for most of the day.
It was one those ‘Should I…
Shouldn't I…
’‘Maybe if…’‘…but on the other hand.’
Married
One minute she'd be putting up a good case for one course of action, then produce an equally convincing rebuttal.
Now Daph and I have been married for 30 years.
It hasn't seemed that long because for ten of them she was on the phone and another ten in shoe shops.
But she was around the house long enough for me to figure out that whatever arguments she has with herself, at the end of the day she will find some really crackerjack reason for doing whatever it is she wanted to do anyway.
Not only is she advocate for both sides, she is the jury as well.
Talking
However when it got to about seven o'clock in the evening and she was still arguing with herself, I made the mistake of getting testy about it.
‘For God's sake,’ I cried, ‘make up your mind.’
She went into the huffs and stopped talking to me.
She told the dog her troubles.
‘He's in a crabbit mood isn't he?
If I were you Dusty I'd be careful not to annoy him today.’
The dog shrewdly declined to get involved.
He went behind the settee and pretended to go to sleep.
Perfect
However this happened at the end of a fraught week.
Daph had decided on cream for the walls of the bedroom but when we went to the paint store she discovered that the word cream covered a multitude of shades.
Rather than risk not having the perfect shade she started buying those little sample containers and trying them out on a wall.
‘No.
Too pink.
Tsk Tsk.
Too yellow.
Too White…
Too Yeuk.’
She rejected about a dozen of these sample shades before she mentioned that they cost sixty or seventy pence each.
I pointed out that the samples cost damn near as much as it would cost to paint the room, but a woman in paint picking mode is not an easy person to reason with.
Eventually she rejected all the samples and chose one off a shade card, that hadn't cost anything.
I'm told that professional painters now have shade cards that provide a selection of 3,000 colours.
If one of those things ever comes into my home, I'm leaving.
Snug with solid fuel
RIGHT now, thoughts are inevitably turning to home heating, and the Coal Advisory Service says for the majority of homes in the province, that means solid fuel
The service also maintains that nothing can beat it for warmth, dependability and value for money.
Roomheaters combine the magic and beauty of the traditional open fire with the economy and efficiency of an enclosed appliance.
The Coal Advisory Service is introducing seven replacement glass-front roomheater packages starting from £599 including chimney test, installation and VAT.
Top quality names include Parkray, Trianco and Charnwood.
The Coal Hotline can be contacted on 0345 125300.
Bereaved loyalist: Prison Service ‘clarifies’
THE NORTHERN Ireland Prison Service today defended itself against claims a prisoner was refused leave to visit his dangerously ill mother.
It is the first time the Service has explained its stand in the dispute, which led to serious disturbances among loyalist inmates in the Maze.
Loyalist sources have also claimed that the murder of prison officer Jim Peacock, whose funeral is taking place today, was linked to the incident.
In a statement the Prison Service said it wanted to clarify the situation in view of misleading accounts of the operation of the Compassionate Home Leave Scheme.
Informed
‘A prisoner, who it was alleged had recently been refused Compassionate Home Leave to visit a dangerously ill relative, had already been allowed three visits over a period of three weeks.
‘On the occasion in question when he was due to go on a fourth visit, the prison was informed that unfortunately the relative had died.
‘In view of this the prisoner was advised that he would now be eligible for an extended period of 24 hours Compassionate Home Leave to attend the funeral, whenever it was arranged,’ it said.
The statement added that this was in line with the Prison Service's policy on Compassionate Home Leave.
By Ian McTear
ACCIDENTS IN THE KITCHEN
THERE are around 6,000 accidents in the kitchens of Northern Ireland homes every year.
Most are caused by cuts and lacerations, burns and scalds, accidental poisoning, falls or struck by an object or a person.
And most accidents involve children under the age of 5.
Caring stranger eases the pain
AN UNKNOWN good Samaritan has unwittingly helped ease the pain of Joan McDermott.
Joan travelled from Scotland with a bag full of gardening tools to tend to her son's grave.
But instead of finding it overgrown with weeds, a pretty posy of artificial flowers stood on the well-groomed plot.
The kindness of this unknown person was too much for Joan who broke down and wept.
Leaving
It is five years since Joan left Northern Ireland to join her husband Ted in Scotland.
Before that she could not bear to leave because it meant leaving Brian behind.
Such was the sense of outrage and feeling for the family after the murder that collections were made in towns across the province.
The money paid for the headstone and Mr and Mrs McDermott's appreciation is obvious in the inscription at the bottom which reads: ‘Donated by the people of Northern Ireland’.
Of the thousands of headstones in Roselawn cemetery Brian's remains the only one which does not carry the date of his death — it is not known.
Leaving the grave was agony for Joan, who felt she was leaving her youngest child behind.
Hard
‘I don't want to leave him,’ she sobbed.
‘I used to visit it everyday and it's just so hard to know I won't see it again for a while.
‘It helps to know that someone is looking after it, that someone cares.
‘I don't know who this person is as we have no family here now.
‘But I would like to thank them and let them know how very grateful I am and how much it helps to know his grave is being cared for.’
ON THURSDAY — exactly 20 years to the day since their son went missing — Joan and Ted McDermott made the emotional journey back to Belfast.
In a scene which would have broken the heart of every parent, the elderly couple cried uncontrollably at the sight of their son's grave.
They laid flowers from Brian's two brothers and sisters, and there was a special posy from mum and dad (pictured top left) with the loving words: ‘To Brian, precious are the memories silently kept of the one we loved and will never forget, lots of love mum and dad’.
ABOVE: Joan places flowers on her son's grave.
Picture By FRED HOARE.]
‘I would give anything to know how he died and when.’
A mother's agony goes on 20 years after her son's death
By STEPHANIE BELL
THE AGONY of what happened to her son is as acute for Joan McDermott today as it was 20 years ago.
Not knowing exactly WHEN Brian died, HOW much he suffered and WHO killed him is torture for her.
There is not a day goes by that Joan does not think of her youngest child.
‘He would have been 30 now,’ she says.
‘He always wanted to be a detective when he grew up.
‘I often wonder if he would have fulfilled his dream.
If he would be married now and have children.
Shouting
‘But I can't picture him any other way than the little boy he was on that last day I saw him.’
Joan remembers that last morning at home with Brian as if it were yesterday.
‘I was starting to make the Sunday dinner and Brian said he was going out to play in the park.
‘I gave off to him about not brushing his hair.
I can still remember standing brushing his hair and then shouting after him not to be long because his dinner would soon be ready.’
Searches
What happened to Brian when he left home that day remains a mystery.
His father and brothers joined police and Army in exhaustive searches of the nearby Ormeau park and river.
In the week that followed before the mutilated remains of his body were found Joan lost two stone in weight.
She said: ‘I couldn't eat or sleep that week.
I just kept thinking who had my son?
Where was he?’
It was on September 9 that a soldier on foot patrol along the Annadale Embankment pulled a sack from the River Lagan.
Joan recalled what happened: ‘Apparently the soldier opened the bag and something fell out and he thought it was a paw and that somebody had thrown a dog into the river.
‘He said he did not think it was human.
When he opened the bag completely he realised it was a human being.
Forensic
‘I heard rumours in the street that a child's body had been found in the river and I asked the police.
‘They said they didn't think it was Brian but asked if forensic could come to take some prints from his toys and school books.
‘When they told me the body had been mutilated and burnt I didn't think it was Brian.
I thought no one could do that to my youngster, and I put it out of my mind.’
The arrival of the police to her Well Street home a short time later started the nightmare which continues for Joan even today.
‘The police didn't have to tell me, I knew immediately.
I was hysterical.
I just couldn't understand how or why anyone would do that to my Brian.
‘He was a lovely child, a typical boy although he was fairly shy and quiet.
Apparently he was unrecognisable.
‘The hand of the arm that was not hacked off was clenched and his thumb tucked inside,’ she said.
‘That's why the skin on his thumb did not burn and they were able to get the print.
‘When Brian used to watch horror movies with us and he was scared that's how he clenched his hands.
He must have been really frightened when he died.’
Brian's body was so badly mutilated and charred that the pathologists could not determine the exact cause or time of death.
This has added to Joan's torment over the years, along with the fact that his vicious killer or killers have not been found.
‘I don't know if he was strangled, shot or stabbed.
I don't know if he was sexually assaulted and maybe died of shock.
‘It kills me to think of what he might have suffered.
I would give anything to know how he died and when.
‘I don't even know if he was killed that Sunday or if he was tortured before he was murdered.
He could have been crying for his mummy.
Conscience
‘I pray that before I die I will know.
There had to be more than one person involved.
‘Maybe one of them did not want to be involved but kept quiet because of fear.
‘Maybe now after 20 years that person may want to relieve his or her conscience and help put me and my husband out of our misery by coming forward.
‘If anyone knows anything that could help and has kept quiet for any reason, I would beg them to please come forward now.’
20.0 LEFT: The last picture ever taken of Brian, in his scout's uniform.
RIGHT: Flashback to the funeral which hundreds of mourners attended.
The importance of sex education
YOUR correspondent M.R. (letters 19/8/93) is being socially irresponsible by exhorting people to join in her/ his ‘battle’ against the Brook Advisory Centre.
The Brook Centre was established in Belfast last year to provide young people with professional advice on all sexual matters.
The Eastern Health & Social Services Board invited Brook here in view of the high incidence of teenage pregnancy in recent years.
Brook's confidential and non-judgmental approach encourages young people to seek the advice of its highly qualified staff, many of whom are parents themselves and are well acquainted with the problems of adolescence.
Furthermore, Brook has also developed a good working relationship with other voluntary groups and welfare organisations.
Its work has been commended by the Church of Ireland's Board on Social Responsibility.
Brook does not actively encourage premature sexual activity amongst young people, contrary to what your correspondent suggests.
Brook staff treat each client as an individual and try to help the person to make her or his own decisions and find solutions to particular problems.
If adult members of society fail to encourage sexual responsibility amongst young people, the inevitable outcome will be more unwanted pregnancies and sexually transmitted diseases.
Is this what ‘M.R.’ and ‘Family and Youth Concern’really want?
Perhaps your correspondent could enlighten us as to the best method of preventing unwanted teenage pregnancy, bearing in mind that young people will always form sexual relationships, regardless of the wishes of their parents or anyone else to the contrary.
Tim Clarke.
Colour of Christmas
PARENTS look closely!
A red vision similar to the one in our picture is likely to be running around your home this Christmas morning.
It may be four months away, but the word is that Captain Scarlet and his team of space warriors will be filling Santa's sack.
And if the successful return to our screens of Thunderbirds last year is anything to go by, then the cartoon characters will be the hottest toys on shop shelves this December.
Phenomenal demand for Thunderbird toys led to shortages across the country and disappointment for many children last year.
Captain Scarlet is to make his comeback to our TV screens on October 1 at 6.30pm on BBC 2 for a 32 week run.
The interest sparked by the new series is expected to rival Thunderbirds and already the province's top toy stores have taken orders for toys to coincide with the TV launch.
However this toy craze will not feature the usual selection of character figures.
‘There was such a hue and cry about the cost of the tiny Thunderbird figures that this time round the toy company has decided to scrap them,’ said Huge Von of Leisureworld in Belfast.
But while Captain Scarlet the Angels will not be immortalised in plastic, there will be plenty of other toys for the kids to collect.
The aircrafts and space vehicles featured in the programme are expected to be in big demand along with the Captain Scarlet costume.
Paul Wright, manager of the Leisureworld shop said: ‘It certainly looks like Captain Scarlet is going to be the big thing this Christmas.
‘Our only hope is that enough toys are produced so that the same problems will not arise.’
His advice: ‘If the kids ask Santa for Captain Scarlet toys get your order in early.’
JOHN Greer has travelled 11,000 miles to find a happy ending to a tragic life story.
The 56-year-old from New Zealand has spent a month in Northern Ireland with the family he never knew he had.
His heartbreaking search across the world has now brought him more joy than he ever wished for — and more than 100 relatives!
One of the so-called ‘war orphans’ shipped out to Australia in the 1940s, John can confirm recent revelations of the exploitation that awaited the children in the false promises of a new life in a new country.
But this weekend those memories seemed a lifetime away as he told Sunday Life of the dozens of relatives he has now been reunited with in Ulster.
‘For years I believed I didn't have even one person I could call family,’ he said.
‘Now I'm surrounded by them — and it is unreal.
Sometimes I have to pinch myself to realise it isn't all a dream.’
John was born in Belfast but placed in care in England when he was less than a year old.
His mother died just three days after he was born.
He recalled: ‘During the war years in the orphanage our staple diet was bread and dripping supplemented with cocoa and porridge.
I didn't know what an egg looked like.
I'd never seen sugar nor fruit.
‘We were often so hungry that we used to actually lick the vaseline mixture that was smeared over our bodies to stop the skin chapping.’
At the tender age of nine, just after the war, he was part of the second group of children from England to be shipped to Australia.
‘I never really thought I would go there,’ he said.
‘A man came and showed us slides of both Australia and Canada.
Of course, it all seemed very exciting.
‘It was so easy to say I wanted to go to Australia, without really knowing what he meant.’
But Antipodean life was a far cry from the lifestyle promised by the picture show.
‘It was definitely a case of exploiting child labour,’ said John.
‘I'm sorry now that I ever went.
We were treated like second-class citizens and accepted by neither the Australians nor the English.
‘We worked from daybreak to dusk on farmland.
We also scrubbed and polished the floors, washed the windows, laid the tables, did the dishes.’
The strain of a foreign country and a institutionalised way of life took its toll.
And in adulthood John moved from job to job without settling.
But now his life story has a happy ending.
These days he lives with his wife, Sonia, in New Zealand and runs a successful painting and decorating business.
He traced his Ulster family with the help of Barnardos and by placing advertisements in Belfast newspapers.
He said: ‘But I'm so happy to know that I have such warm and loving relatives.
This is a dream come true.’
By SUE CORBETT
Join with us in the battle against Brook
ALMOST one year ago, the Brook Advisory centre opened it's doors in Belfast.
Brook has been in operation in Britain for 27 years, and the evidence suggests that Brook has contributed to the decline of sexual health there.
Brook dispenses contraceptives to all, regardless of age or status, and including under-age girls.
Brook will also make all the necessary arrangements for its young clients to obtain abortions.
Brook operates without parental knowledge or consent, determined that parents should never know that their under-age children are sexually active and receiving contraception, if the child requests confidentially.
Brook is equally determined that parents should have no say over their children's exposure to permissive sex-education material.
Those areas where Brook's influence is strongest have particularly high abortion rates.
However, readers may be glad to know that Family and Youth Concern are hosting a one-day conference at the Wellington Park Hotel on 11th September, when Mrs Victoria Gillick, the arch-enemy of the Brook Advisory Centre will tell of her battle with this agency over the years.
Also, Mrs Valerie Riches will speak on the content of many of the sex-education programmes used in British schools, which in practice offer only a moral sexual instruction, and subject the young to ideas which would not normally occur to them.
The conference is open to all those people of good-will, who recognise the challenge to traditional family values, and appreciate the danger in allowing the breakdown of the social ecology to go unchecked.
M.R.