

Warning on Orange rubbish proposal
RATEPAYERS in Ards may have to foot the bill if the district council goes ahead with a proposal not to charge for collecting rubbish from Orange halls, it has been disclosed.
A spokesman for the Department of the Environment said people living in the Ards Council area could pay the price for the motion, proposed at last week's council meeting.
Motion
The motion, proposed by Ulster Unionist Ronnie Ferguson, stated that the council should offer free collection of waste to the Orange Order.
The DoE spokesman said: ‘This issue is governed by the Waste Collection and Disposal Regulation (1992), which sets out various categories of waste that are lifted.
They are laid down as commercial, industrial and household waste.
‘This is a matter which requires a good deal of research into the over-all implications of introducing free collection of refuse.
‘Each council can decide what to do and interpret the regulation and law to fit its own area, but we would point out that if the council goes ahead with the plan, it will be ratepayers who are going to bear the cost.’
Blitz on Ulster's fighting ‘devil dogs’
USPCA officials today promised to track down hundreds of illegally-owned Pit Bull Terriers trained in Northern Ireland for big-money fights throughout the Republic and Britain.
Their attempt to stop Ireland's most popular ‘blood sport’ follows the province's longest and most expensive courtroom battle involving dogs.
The ‘devil dog’ test-case trial ended yesterday in Antrim with Matthew Patterson and his daughter Joy found guilty of illegally having four Pit Bulls.
Children
In an exclusive interview with the Belfast Telegraph, Francis Fox, senior inspector of the Ulster Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, said an estimated 900 Pit Bull Terriers were being kept illegally throughout the province.
Just 90 Pit Bulls have been registered under the Dangerous Dogs Act, introduced in 1991 following public outrage against attacks on children and adults on the mainland.
‘Many of the illegally-owned dogs would be used for fighting,’ he said.
‘This result of this case has given us hope and will give us confidence in bringing more investigations to the fore.
This is only the tip of the iceberg.
‘Delighted’
‘I am delighted with the result.
I have been involved in many cases over the years, but nothing like this one.
This has been extraordinary.
I've known nothing like it in all my career.
‘This outcome of this case will make people think, but it is up to the local councils to bring the cases.
But most of the councils have proved unwilling until now.
‘Antrim Borough Council need to be commended for having the guts to take the case and see it through.
From our point of view, this case was very important.
Important
‘We are not interested in the pet-owners who have registered their dogs.
We want those who are keeping the animals illegally.’
However, the outcome could also have important legal ramifications throughout the UK.
In England, Scotland and Wales, more than 800 dogs are awaiting similar courtroom battles in Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals shelters.
‘This case could be valuable to those involved in cases on the mainland,’ Mr Fox said.
Mr Fox added that dog-fighting was ‘a big problem’ in the province.
‘Syndicates’
‘There are fights held here, but the South is the premier hunting ground.
That's where the big money is being made.
‘A huge number of spectators would travel from the province to these fights, where thousands of pounds change hands.
They are all well-organised and involve big-money syndicates.
‘Europe, particularly Holland and Germany, is also a big dog-fighting ground.
‘A lot of money can be made by the dogs' owners.
Dogs in the premier division can fetch thousands of pounds.
‘Power-houses’
‘Pit Bulls are the best fighting-dogs in the world.
They are power-houses.
They have massive shoulders and a good jaw.
‘Those used for fighting are trained like professional boxers.
They are put on special diets and must be in tip-top shape before they go into the ring.’
Loyalists ‘mirror’
IRA, mourners told LOYALIST murder gangs are simply doing the work of and for republican terrorists, a bishop told mourners today.
Speaking at the funeral of UVF victim Jim Peacock, the Bishop of Connor, Dr Samuel Poyntz, said their ‘bestial and barbaric acts are only mirror images of PIRA bombers and murderers’.
And he condemned ‘the perverted logic of loyalist terrorists’, describing the four murders they carried out this week as ‘evil and inhuman’ outrages.
Hundreds of people followed the cortege of Mr Peacock, a prison officer, from his Joanmount Park home where he was shot in the back to the Holy Trinity Parish Church on the Oldpark Road, in north Belfast.
All visits and parcel deliveries to prisons and the Young Offenders Centre were cancelled today to enable many of his former colleagues to attend the funeral.
Inside the church, mourners heard Dr Poyntz say that the unionist cause was in itself a legitimate cause and, if pursued by non-violent means, honourable.
Odium
But he said loyalist terrorists ‘sullied the terms Protestant, unionist, Northern Ireland and British while in reality they are pagans, no friends of Northern Ireland and in the end enemies of all its people.
‘Like the Provos, they are hell bent on destabilising the union, holding the name of all the good and decent people of the province up to the odium of the world.’
The bishop described this weeks four loyalist murders as ‘rank sectarianism’ in a ‘dark and barbaric’seven days.
But he praised the forgiveness of Mr Peacock's wife, Sandra who had told him: ‘There is no hatred in my heart for those who killed my husband’.
And Dr Poyntz also paid tribute to the 3,000 members of the Prison Service, 29 of whom had been murdered in the past 24 years.
He said officers led ‘lonely and bruising’ lives.
After the service Mr Peacock, a father-of-five, was being buried in Ballymoney Cemetery.
Fury as SF leader refuses to meet victim's parents
SINN Fein president Gerry Adams has been condemned by the parents of Warrington bomb-victim Tim Parry for refusing to meet them face-to-face and explain why their son died.
During an interview in a television documentary about the Parrys' struggle to understand why Tim was murdered, his father, Colin, explained why he wanted to meet Mr Adams.
‘We indicated we would be interested to talk to Gerry Adams, because I wanted to look at the man and hear his voice and ask him directly about how he could be in league with an organisation like the IRA.
‘Uncomfortable’
‘I feel that he would be extremely uncomfortable looking back at me, holding my gaze and trying to tell me that the loss of Tim was merely the unfortunate by-product of a war against Britain.
‘The answer that we received was that to talk to us on film would be voyeurism at its worst.
I think that that is an absolutely disgusting thing to say, to appear to make voyeurism a greater sin than the murder of my son,’ he said.
America
The Parrys visited Ulster, the Republic and America, to meet people from all parts of the political spectrum.
During their trip, they also met world-famous peace campaigner Gordon Wilson, whose daughter Marie died in the Enniskillen massacre.
He said: I found them very pleasant and articulate people.
They came over to meet some people and they seemed to be interested.
‘Relate’
‘They lost a son so they can relate to families in Northern Ireland who have lost loved ones.
I hope that they got something out of it.
‘They realised just what the people in Northern Ireland have been going through for 25 years.
It helped them get the over-all view of what was happening here,’ he said.
TD's crime crackdown call
OUTSPOKEN Dundalk politician Brendan McGahon has backed the British Government's call for a crackdown on hardened criminals.
The Fine Gael TD wants the Co Louth border town's former jail re-opened to lock up thugs who are terrorising the local community.
He echoed Home Secretary Michael Howard's views that Britain needs a stricter prison regime to deal with an epidemic of crime.
Dundalk Urban Council is seeking a meeting with the Justice Minister to discuss a wave of assaults, break-ins and robberies in recent weeks.
Mr McGahon's controversial proposal comes at a time when the British Government is under mounting pressure to radically review what many perceive as an outdated judicial system.
Guilty
A recent Gallup Poll in Britain found that 96 per cent of people believe the guilty go free from court, and 76 per cent feel it is right to take the law into their own hands.
Mr McGahon said: ‘There is a high level of crime in this area, but it is a microcosm of what is happening all over the Republic.
‘I believe we need to have jails in every county as we have inadequate space in our prisons.
‘We have the ‘revolving-door’ syndrome where people who have been sent to jail go in one door and come out the other.’
He added: ‘Society has gone soft and doesn't seem to know how to deal with hardened criminals.
Nowadays, prisons are like leisure complexes, with snooker tables and televisions.
It's a joke.
‘I believe a jail should be a penitentiary where inmates are not ill-treated, but where the going is so rough they would not want to come back again,’ he blasted.
Converted
The Dundalk complex, situated on Gallow's Hill, has not been used as a jail since 1931.
Two years ago the basement of the northern cell block and the former jail infirmary were converted into stores and offices for a Civil Defence Training Centre.
But the law-abiding people of Dundalk agree urgent action needs to be taken.
Thugs
‘There are some really bad thugs about the town.
It's time some proper justice was done,’ said one barman.
Another local man added: ‘People have been attacked in the streets an robbed.
It's not safe to walk the streets at night.’
But a Garda spokesman in Dundalk said: ‘There has not been any notable increase in crime, certainly no more so than in any other area.’
Major ‘poised to intervene on talks’
JOHN Major is ready to personally intervene to break the deadlock over political talks in Ulster.
According to a report in The Times, the Prime Minister is determined to get the talks going again before the end of the year.
The rising level of violence, strained relations between London and Dublin and fears that failure to restart the talks will lead to President Clinton's plans for a peace envoy being revived, all appear to have prompted Mr Major to take a personal interest.
It also emerged today that former US congressman Bruce Morrison will be among a group of Irish-Americans visiting Dublin and Belfast next week.
They are planning to meet leading political figures including Eire President Mary Robinson, Taoiseach Albert Reynolds and Secretary of State Sir Patrick Mayhew.
The Republic's Foreign Minister Dick Spring yesterday insisted that Dublin was not pressing for a US envoy ‘for the present’.
We will never forgive killer: family
THE family of the young Donegal woman dismembered by a 19-year-old man today slammed the three year prison sentence given to the killer.
In the first major interview since Conor Downey was convicted, The Belfast Telegraph spoke to the Reddan family at their remote home in Gweedore, Co Donegal.
The family said they would never forgive Downey for what he had done to Suzannah.
He strangled her before dismembering her body.
Disappeared
Suzannah Reddan had been working at a pub in north-west London for six months when she disappeared in March 1988.
She was the eldest of six children.
The mystery only ended when Downey — racked by guilt — confessed to the killing earlier this year.
Suzannah was strangled by Downey in the block of flats where they both lived.
Jimmy Reddan said the three year sentence for killing and dismembering his sister was ‘a disgrace’ and would not act as a deterrent.
‘Risk’
He said: ‘We have been waiting since April for the sentence but another man could do this.
The sentence is a risk to other women.’
Jimmy had been staying with Suzannah days before she was killed.
He said Downey must have known his sister, despite Downey's claims to the contrary.
He said: ‘I have never seen Downey's picture but I would think I may know him.
We could have passed in the corridor.
I'm sure Suzannah must have known him.’
Kathleen and Jimmy both visited London a number of times to find their sister but she had vanished.
She said: ‘I went round to her house a couple of days later to see her but no-one knew where she was.
‘I reported it twice to Kilburn police station in London and the Salvation Army but I never saw her again.
‘Nobody had heard a thing and the landlady couldn't help.
We looked for years but couldn't find her.
Nobody knew her.
‘But what annoyed us most is Downey could have made a phone call to us.
That would have been enough.
But he didn't even do that.’
Tim's parent's hit out at Adams
SINN FEIN president Gerry Adams has been attacked by the parents of Warrington bomb victim Tim Parry for refusing to meet them face-to-face and explain why their son died.
During an interview in a television documentary about the Parry's struggle to understand why Tim was murdered, his father Colin explained why he wanted to meet Mr Adams.
‘We indicated we would be interested to talk to Gerry Adams, because I wanted to look at the man and hear his voice and ask him directly about how he could be in league with an organisation like the IRA.
Disgusting
‘I feel that he would be extremely uncomfortable looking back at me, holding my gaze and trying to tell me that the loss of Tim was merely the unfortunate by-product of a war against Britain.
‘The answer that we received was that to talk to us on film would be voyeurism at its worst.
I think that that is an absolutely disgusting thing to say, to appear to make voyeurism a greater sin than the murder of my son.’
PLO fails to agree on peace accord
PLO LEADER Yasser Arafat's mainstream Fatah movement ended its third meeting in three days early today without taking a decision on a self-rule accord with Israel, a senior PLO official said.
‘We are to hold a fourth meeting this evening,’ Fatah central committee member Hakam Balawi said.
‘We are discussing the issues with a high sense of responsibility and in a way to permit a successful future for Palestinian-Israeli peace,’ Balawi added.
Arafat, determined to rally Palestinians behind the deal, began the round of meetings on Thursday and has been struggling since then to overcome opposition of at least four of the 12 members attending, Palestinian sources said.
Important
‘Discussions are very frank, analytical, detailed and objective…
Of course, for such an important issue, it is indispensable that we talk frankly,’ Balawi said.
Meetings on Thursday night and Friday morning also ended without a decision to accept the deal which provides for Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
Earlier, Arafat appeared to be winning approval of key Palestinian leaders for the historic peace accord with Israel, despite anger over his secret peacemaking methods.
Arafat adjourned the meeting in Tunis yesterday after two officials of the 18-member ruling body stormed out, PLO officials said.
By Press Association
PLO, Israel plea on peace pact
ISRAELI and Palestinian leaders today urged their peoples to embrace a historic bilateral agreement to be signed soon, saying the chance of peace was worth sacrifices.
The two sides yesterday took dramatic strides towards ending a century of hatred as the Palestine Liberation Organisation and the Jewish state negotiated recognition of each other.
Both sides hope they can sign that agreement in Washington during the current 11th round of the official Middle East peace talks sponsored by the United States and Russia.
Egyptian Foreign Minister Amr Moussa carried a new version of an announcement on recognition with him when he returned home from hastily-arranged talks in Israel.
PLO leaders in Tunis were now studying it, a Palestinian source said.
Determined
The Palestinians are determined to reach agreement on Israel recognising the PLO before they will sign a historic declaration of principles on Palestinian self-rule worked out in months of secret talks between the two sides.
Washington said it knew for months that secret PLO-Israel negotiations were going on in Norway, but was surprised by the level of detail in the agreement hammered out in those Oslo talks.
WHAT to do when a bomb goes off:
Contact a loss-adjuster.
The Compensation Agency will pay the fees.
Contact your solicitor.
These fees will also be covered by the agency.
Your solicitor will be your best friend during the claim process, so make sure you keep him supplied with all the information required and see that it is being filed promptly with the agency.
Contact your accountant.
The agency will require full financial details for ‘consequential loss’(loss of business as a result of the bomb).
Make sure your notice of intent and application form are filed as quickly as possible.
The agency cannot start work on a claim until it has received these documents.
It may be necessary to open a ‘bomb damage account’ at the bank.
Interest charges incurred on loans taken out to cover the cost of repairs, etc, will be covered by the agency.
Dogs put on ‘death row’
FOUR dogs are today on ‘death row’ after a court decided they were illegally-owned pit bull terriers.
Lasting 13 days and costing thousands of pounds, the ‘devil dog’ trial, which ended in Antrim yesterday, was Ulster's longest and most expensive court case involving dogs.
Resident Magistrate Harry McKibbin, ordering the animals to be put down, said the decision was ‘the most painful’ part of his duty in the entire case.
The dogs were impounded last December.
Licences
Matthew Patterson, from the Railway Gate Lodge, Castle Road, Antrim and his daughter, Joy, of Oriel Park, were found guilty of having pit bull terrier type dogs and not having dog licences for the animals.
Both had argued that three of the dogs were in fact American Staffordshire terriers while the other was a stray.
But in his judgment the RM said the defendants had failed to satisfy him that the dogs were not pit bull type terriers.
They were fined £100 on each charge and ordered to pay a total of £1,500 in costs.
Threats
Defence barrister Connor O'Kane said it was costing Mrs Patterson a total of £2,500 to fly over expert witnesses during the case.
He said she had received threatening phone calls and that the whole experience had been most unpleasant.
He said she was ‘absolutely devoted’ to the dogs.
The magistrate described the case as a ‘marathon’ with evidence heard from eight prosecution witnesses and four for the defence.
The court had earlier heard that the dogs were found at Mr Patterson's home and that among other items recovered were a treadmill, a set of turkey scales and wedges.
Drugs
In his judgment the magistrate said a large quantity of drugs, including pentobarbitone, had also been found and that evidence was given that it was used mostly for ‘the humane euthanasia of badly injured or ill dogs or other animals.’
And he concluded: ‘I find that the defendants have failed to satisfy me that the dogs are not of the type known as the pit bull terrier.
‘I am further satisfied that all four dogs were in the possession and custody of both defendants within the meaning of the statute.
‘They were physically present and kept on Mr Matthew Patterson's lands and Joy Patterson admitted to the ownership of them.
It was also admitted by both defendants that they do not hold licences for any of the four dogs’.
Rapper arrested after MTV show
SHORTLY after appearing live on MTV, Snoop Doggy Dogg was charged by police investigating the death of a man shot by the rap performer's bodyguard.
David Kenner, the rapper's lawyer, said the bodyguard was defending Snoop Doggy Dogg from the man, who, he said, had been threatening to kill him.
The singer, whose real name is Calvin Broadus, then was released on £750,000 bail.
TV man on wrong side of the law
ITV's Crime Monthly star Paul Ross found himself on the wrong side of the law after hitting a cyclist as he drove his car on a roundabout near London's Waterloo station, a Westminster court heard.
But the brother of chat-show host Jonathan Ross lived up to his crime-busting image and immediately pulled over to lend a hand and give himself up to police.
Ross (36) from Wandsworth, south London, who told police he tried to brake to avoid the accident, pleaded not guilty by post and did not attend.
He was found guilty of driving without due care and attention.
His case was put off for a print-out about his driving licence to be obtained.
Victoria honour
TV comedienne and writer Victoria Wood will be happy to have just a walk-on role when she appears at Sunderland's Empire Theatre later this year.
The former TV Times Funniest Woman award-winner will go on stage to be handed an Honorary Doctorate of Letters during Sunderland University's annual degree ceremony at the theatre.
Scargill book
MINERS leader Arthur Scargill has slammed an unauthorised biography which is due to be published later this month and which he claims contains ‘major factual errors’.
The National Union of Mineworkers' president said the book by Observer journalist Paul Routledge, due to be published by Harper Collins on September 13, cannot be taken seriously.
Extracts from the book, entitled simply Scargill, are to serialised in The Observer from tomorrow.
Chippendale charges
THE founder and owner of Chippendale's, California's most famous male strip club, has been charged with hiring hit men to kill three former staff.
Somen ‘Steve’ Banerjee was remanded in custody by a Los Angeles court yesterday on six charges including conspiracy to commit murder.
Prosecutor Sally Meloch claimed Banerjee plotted to kill a choreographer and two other dancers from a competing male dance show called Adonis in 1991.
The Chippendales troupe is currently on tour in Europe.
Ford blunder
HARRISON Ford must have wished for a second take during a speech in London to promote his new film, The Fugitive, based on the hit 1960 television series starring David Janssen.
Fans shouted ‘cut’ as the star started describing an earlier film, Witness, as exciting and a must for cinemagoers instead of praising his latest blockbuster.
The Indiana Jones star shook his head sheepishly when he realised his mistake during a five-minute appearance yesterday at the new £15m revamped Warner Cinema in Leicester Square, central London.
Defiant angel
BRITISH nurse Sally Becker (33) who has rescued five critically-ill children from the besieged Bosnian town of Mostar, returned to Britain today — and dismissed fears for her safety in Bosnia.
Miss Becker, dubbed the ‘Angel of Mostar’, made headlines by driving a borrowed ambulance with the children — two of whom had lost an arm — and negotiating her own ceasefire between the warring Muslim and Croat forces.
She said that espionage allegations against her by Spanish UN personnel were ‘rubbish’.
Pupils at risk: warning
THE Dairy Council for Northern Ireland today warned that moves to reduce the school milk subsidy would affect children most at risk in Ulster.
Mike Johnston, the Council's chief executive, said they were ‘dismayed’ at a European Commission proposal to cut the money available for school milk by 50pc.
A total of 700 schools, both primary and secondary, use the scheme — which works out at 8p for a third-pint bottle — throughout Northern Ireland.
Free milk to pupils was abolished in 1981 and now applies to a few very special cases.
‘The nutritional value and importance of milk to schoolchildren is well established medically and scientifically’, said Mr Johnston.
Unemployment
‘In 1989 the Department of Health, in a report on diets of schoolchildren in GB stated: ‘milk was one of two foods that varied most with social class and other socio-economic variables.
Those with unemployed fathers or from families receiving supplementary benefit had the lowest consumption of milk’.’
He pointed out that Northern Ireland has one of the highest levels of unemployment in the UK, at around 14pc, and the majority of households were in the lowest socio-economic groups.
Emphasis
‘The Department of Health report also showed that milk was a major contributor of calcium, thiamin, riboflavin and vitamins, and that differences in milk consumption were reflected in the falling intakes of these nutrients in lower income families.
‘The Commission itself has placed a great emphasis on the promotion of milk and it is ironic that it is now undermining that investment with a proposal which could result in further reductions in the intake of milk by those who need it most’.
Mr Johnston appealed to parents and the province's MPs to ensure that local pupils would continue to have milk in schools.
By Oliver McGuckin
DEVON
Hospital worker stabbed in neck
A 27-YEAR-OLD hospital worker was ‘stable’ in intensive care today after being stabbed in the neck.
The woman was attacked yesterday afternoon while working in the psychiatric unit of the Torbay Hospital, Torquay, Devon.
Police said a 36-year-old man, an in-patient at the unit, had been arrested on suspicion of attempted murder.
JAPAN
Dove-tees
TRADITIONAL English dovecotes are being used as tee-markers on Japanese golf courses.
More than 50 of the handcrafted wooden dovecotes have been exported to Japan by husband and wife team Robert and Cindy Pellett of Great Chart, near Ashford, Kent.
STAFFORDSHIRE
Getting more scientific
CITIZEN'S Charter Minister William Waldegrave is today expected to announce a cash boost for the Government's campaign to increase public awareness of science.
Mr Waldegrave, in his role as Science Minister, will be making a keynote speech to hundreds of the country's top scientists.
He will be addressing the British Association Science Festival at Keele University, Staffordshire, in the wake of Labour criticism of Government plans to privatise some of the country's top research laboratories.
DROMORE
New church hall
WORK is to start later this month on the building of new church halls for Dromore Cathedral Parish.
They are to be erected on the site of an old Masonic hall which had been used by the congregation as parochial rooms.
Sit-in by protesters
PROTESTERS have occupied an 18th century thatched cottage due to be demolished to make way for a by-pass.
Members of the Earthfirst group have taken over The Willows, near Wymondham, Norfolk, which is in the path of a new five-mile stretch of the A11 Wymondham by-pass.
A spokesman for the Department of Transport, which owns the building, said it would seek a court order to evict them.
Kidnappers strip victim A 26-YEAR-OLD man turned up naked on a garage forecourt after being held by a kidnap gang for three hours.
He was abducted by three men and beaten up when he went with his girlfriend to collect clothes from the house where she used to live in Trowbridge, Wilts.
The man, who has not been named, was taken to hospital with a fractured cheek and ribs and severe bruising.
Thief thumbs a ride
A CONMAN stole cash from a restaurant manager…then demanded a lift into town because his car had broken down.
The man posed as a gas board official when he turned up at the restaurant in Tarrant Street, Arundel, Sussex.
The restaurateur handed over £500 after being told he needed a new gas pipe immediately.
He then gave the thief a lift to nearby Worthing.
Clean sweep for coastline THE National Trust launched Beach Clean Day with a sweep by volunteers along miles of Britain's coastline.
BBC Radio 2 presenter Ed Stewart joined volunteers at Studland beach, near Poole, Dorset, for the operation to clear up litter from the Bank Holiday.
The stretch of beach attracts a million visitors a year and wardens collect an average of two tons of litter each day.
TEMPLEPATRICK
Take a letter
A pub that nearly has a famous name comes under the auctioneer's hammer tomorrow.
The Beecher's Brook on the Seven Mile Straight near Templepatrick was called after the famous Grand National jump, but the spelling ability of a previous owner wasn't as good as his racing knowledge and he added an extra ‘e’ to Becher's Brook.
ARMAGH Appointment THE newly opened Navan Fort Visitors Centre is to get a new director.
Armagh businessman Mr Adrian Stinson will step into the shoes of Mr Brian Musgrave, who will be returning to the Department of Economic Development.
Open only two months, the centre has already attracted more than 20,000 visitors.
TRALEE
Wife killer
It could be months before wife killer James Rudman is returned to Britain from the Republic.
A court ordered the extradition of Rudman (40) from Leicester, who absconded to Tralee from a psychiatric hospital last month.
His solicitor quickly gave notice of an appeal on the grounds that he is not mentally ill, a process that could take months to complete.
Farmer is cleared of assault
A 26-YEAR-OLD Keady man walked free from court yesterday after being cleared of fracturing a man's skull in a pub brawl.
Unemployed farmer Francis McKeever, of Clay Road, denied assaulting Paul McNally causing him actual bodily harm on August 9 last year.
A jury at Armagh Crown Court heard how Mr McNally suffered head injuries during an incident in the Derryvale Inn outside Keady.
McNally alleged he was the victim of an unprovoked blow to the face which caused him to fall hitting his head on the floor.
The court was told Mr McNally had consumed more than three times the limit for driving.
McKeever was cleared of the assault charge after he said Mr McNally had approached his table in an aggressive way with his fists up and all he had done was push him away.
Sting in tail of the hot weather
ALL summer, sun-worshippers have been itching for a break in the rainfall.
The belated heatwave has left many of them still itching — from insect bites.
The sting in the tail of the recent good weather has been noticed in the casualty units of at least two local hospitals.
At Ards, doctors have reported an increased number of patients coming forward for treatment for insect bites and stings.
One doctor said: ‘There has not been a dramatic increase, but more people are definitely coming into casualty.
‘This is only to be expected with more people taking advantage of the good weather to get out and about in the countryside.
‘Most patients don't require any treatment, but occasionally bites become infected and we have to intervene.’
At Downe Hospital, it is the same story.
A casualty officer there reported seeing ‘quite a few’ patients suffering from bites and stings in recent days.
‘Most are people who previously had a bad reaction to stings from wasps or bees.
They had been warned to report any further attacks and obviously don't want to take any chances.
Horseflies can also produce a nasty reaction’.
Women worried about the cosmetic effects of insect bites on the face make up a significant proportion of those seeking medical assistance.
Doctors say there is little that can be done to help.
‘The most effective treatment is an anti-histamine cream, which is freely available in chemists.
Normally patients require no other treatment’, said one.
By Laurence White Health Correspondent
Tragic women terror victims
THE funeral of loyalist terror victim Teresa Dowds De Mogollon was held today.
She was the latest woman to be claimed by the Troubles.
OLIVER McGUCKIN reports.
THE women of Northern Ireland, who have so often spearheaded peace initiatives, know very well the anguish and pain caused by terrorist violence.
According to official figures, more than 200 women and young girls have been killed during the 23 years of the Troubles.
Female members of the security forces were deliberately targeted by republican paramilitaries, while other women were killed simply because of their religion.
In some cases — such as that of Roman Catholic mother of four Teresa Dowds de Mogollon in north Belfast on Monday evening — the terrorists responsible said they had meant to murder someone else and expressed their ‘regret’.
Tragic accidents
A number of women have died at the hands of the security forces and in tragic accidents.
The first RUC woman to die was Reserve Constable Mildred Harrison, who was caught in a bomb blast at a Bangor pub in 1975.
The IRA had already shot dead UDR Greenfinch Private Eva Martin in Clogher a year earlier.
Also in 1975, four women were among the five people killed in an explosion at a bar in the Short Strand area of east Belfast.
The horrific La Mon massacre near Comber three years later claimed the lives of seven women.
Like the seven male victims of that massive fireball, they never stood a chance.
Plastic bullet
In the late 70s, west Belfast housewife and mother Norah McCabe died from injuries caused by a plastic bullet fired by a member of the security forces.
She was on her way to the shops during rioting when the incident happened.
In 1978, civilian searcher Norma Spence was shot dead near St Anne's Cathedral by gunmen posing as university Rag Day students.
In 1984, Marie Travers, daughter of Magistrate Tom Travers, was shot dead as she walked home from church in the Malone area of Belfast.
Her father was seriously injured in the attack.
Cecily Gibson, Lord Justice Maurice Gibson's wife, died alongside him when the IRA blew up their car at the Killeen border three years later.
Ruthless
In a similar attack at the same spot, Robin Hanna, his wife Maureen and their son David (6) were killed in 1988.
So ruthless was the IRA in its all-out onslaught against the police and the Army, it didn't care who got in its way.
The Provisionals displayed scant remorse when Sister Catherine Dunne was murdered along with three RUC men near Armagh.
There was world-wide revulsion when the IRA exploded a bomb during a Poppy Day service in Enniskillen in the late 80s.
Five of the 11 people killed were women.
Terrible day
The final words of one of them — Marie Wilson — are etched in the memories of all who recall that terrible day.
As she lay dying in the rubble beside her father Gordon, she turned to him and whispered: ‘Daddy, I love you’.
The 90s were to feature more women victims of violence.
Kathleen Lundy (40) and her 16-year-old son Colin died when their home in Glengormley was firebombed in November, 1991.
Last year RUC Constable Colleen McMurray (34), from Portadown, was killed in an IRA mortar attack in Newry in March.
‘Good Samaritan’
Exactly a month later ‘Good Samaritan’ Philomena Hanna was shot dead in the Springfield Road chemist's shop where she worked.
Teresa Fox (54) and her husband Charles (64) were shot by the UVF in their Moy farmhouse in September.
Sinn Fein activist Sheena Campbell (29), from Craigavon, was assassinated by a masked loyalist gunman in the south Belfast hotel.
Ironically, before Monday night's murder in north Belfast, the only other woman to be killed by terrorists this year was singled out at a flat a short distance away.
Sharon McKenna, a Catholic, was shot dead by the UVF as she helped an elderly Protestant friend on Belfast's Shore Road.
Police call for owners of cash
TWO substantial sums of money found in Londonderry city centre have been handed to police.
The money, including a substantial amount in punts, can be claimed by contacting the desk sergeant at Strand Road RUC station on (0504) 367337.
An RUC spokesman said: ‘It is surprising that in many cases, people who have lost quite large sums don't take the trouble to check with police to find out if their money has been handed in.’
If the money remains unclaimed for a certain time it is returned to the finder.
Detectives are investigating a spate of thefts from a new housing development in Derry.
Fireplaces, interior doors and electrical goods have been taken from the new houses at Woodbrook, off the lower Galliagh Road.
Detectives are eager to hear from anyone who is offered such goods in suspicious circumstances.
There have been a number of burglaries at the Springtown and Pennyburn industrial estates.
Police believe children, some as young as 14, are responsible for taking small amounts of food and money.
A sheep and pig trailer was stolen from a farmyard at Vale Road, Greysteel, between 6pm on Sunday and 7pm on Monday.
Last week, the RUC warned of an upsurge in trailer thefts in the North West.
Father ‘beat up prisoner in jail’
A MAN passed himself off as a solicitor to get into a prison and beat up a prisoner accused of molesting his daughter, it was revealed today.
The Sun said the man who assaulted the prisoner conned his way into Elmley Jail on the Isle of Sheppey using forged notepaper.
The paper cannot name the man for legal reasons, but says he is a father of four and lives in New Cross, south-east London.
He is quoted as saying: ‘The fact that he will get away with attacking my daughter is obscene.’
According to the Sun the man walked free after telling guards he had been attacked in the incident on Tuesday.
And a Home Office spokesman said an inquiry was under way into the incident after a complaint made by a ‘legal visitor’ that he was assaulted by a prisoner on remand for assaulting a nine-year-old girl.
A rail success
A BOOK on railways which has raised £2,000 for the Foyle Hospice, is to have a second printing.
‘Railway Days in Strabane’ by local enthusiasts Willie Carlin, George Hare and Jim Tinniney, has already sold out of its first print run of 2,000 copies issued last November.
The authors give the Hospice £1 for each copy sold.
Earlier this year the book received Western Education and Library Board and Adult Book Meritorious Certificates.
Cookstown man remanded on bail
A COOKSTOWN man was remanded on bail when he appeared at the local Magistrates Court yesterday charged with handling stolen goods valued at £20,000.
Daron McReynolds (28), unemployed of Central Close, is accused of handling the goods — video tapes, compact discs, records and electrical goods — between July 3 and August 25.
Family die in blaze horror
A MOTHER and her three children died in a fire at their home last night.
They were trapped as the blaze broke out at the house in Farnborough Close, Matchborough, near Redditch, Hereford and Worcester, just before midnight.
Three of the firefighters who smashed their way into the house and searched for the family through thick black smoke needed hospital treatment for shock and exhaustion.
The dead were named by West Mercia Police as 29-year-old Helen Willis, her baby daughter Joanne, aged about 11 months, and her sons Christopher, five, and Jonathan, seven.
Passengers back Dublin railway link
NORTHERN Ireland Railways passengers are defying the bombers by using the Dublin-Belfast route in increasing numbers.
The company's annual report revealed not only an increase in the number of people using the cross-border service, but also a rise of 3.8pc in overall passenger income to £7.2m.
A total of £13.6m was spent on capital expenditure, including £7.8m on the cross-harbour rail bridge.
Prospects
However the income from the freight side of NIR's business showed a decline of 11pc falling to £653,000.
This was blamed in a general downturn in the market.
William Smyth, the company chairman, said: ‘It is difficult to imagine any time since 1967 when our prospects for the future look brighter.
‘Much remains to be done to grasp the opportunities that will arise, but I believe that we have made real progress in starting to do just that.’
Upgrading
He also praised his staff for their dedication in the face of continuing terrorist disruption and described the increase in cross-border traffic as ‘particularly gratifying’.
‘During the year, work also commenced on the upgrading of the Belfast-Dublin service, a four year project being carried out jointly will our colleagues in Irish Rail.
‘Initial work has focused on infrastructure improvements to track and bridges, but we are already drawing up detailed specifications for the locomotives and coaching stock, which will be introduced on this flagship service in the next few years,’ he said.
By Ian McTear Transport correspondent
Unionists ban Mary Robinson
UNIONISTS in Belfast have banned the Republic's President, Mary Robinson, from city council properties and events.
Despite opposition claims that the move would build a ‘Berlin Wall’ between the two communities, DUP and UUP councillors voted unanimously for the motion condemning Mrs Robinson for ‘giving credibility’to Sinn Fein during her last visit to the city.
They agreed last night that while she remained head of a ‘foreign and oppressive state which had an aggressive, irredentist claim’ to Northern Ireland, she would not be welcome at the City Hall or any other civic property.
SDLP, Alliance and Sinn Fein members voted against the proposal by the DUP's Sammy Wilson, but unionists won by 22 votes to 16.
Status
Mr Wilson said the Press had encouraged people to focus on Mrs Robinson's ‘attributes’ while the Northern Ireland Office and the ‘Anglo-Irish mafia’promoted her to the status of an ‘Irish monarch’.
He claimed her handshake with Gerry Adams was part of a deliberate attempt by Irish and British Government officials to ‘clean up’ the image of Sinn Fein.
‘Wherever she goes, she carries the banner of her state's claim to Ulster, and I don't believe this council should play any part in giving her a platform.’
Ulster Unionist Jim Kirkpatrick said Mrs Robinson's visits were deliberately timed to follow visits by the British Royal family, and he claimed the move was part of a ‘joint sovereignty policy.’
SDLP councillor Jonathan Stephenson described the motion as ‘deeply offensive’ and said it would create a ‘Berlin Wall of implacable opposition’between the two communities.
‘We don't need metaphorical walls in this council, there already too many real ones in the city,’ he said.
Contribution
Alliance leader John Alderdice said he did not find Mrs Robinson's handshake with Gerry Adams a ‘helpful’ contribution and the same thing applied to the Republic's constitutional claim.
But he said the real reason for the motion was the DUP's wish to embarrass the Ulster Unionist party and ‘tweak them back into line.’
Ulster Unionist Jim Rodgers who has visited President Robinson in Dublin, said he had several times tried to dissuade her advisers from allowing the meeting with the Sinn Fein leader, and was ‘angry and disappointed’ that she went ahead.
To jeers from the opposition benches, he said he had found her ‘charming’, but the Adams handshake had changed his opinion.
‘She had done something which the Protestant community can never forget,’ he said.
MAGHERA Traders in police plea
TRADERS in Maghera are pleading with the RUC to clamp down on vandals persistently targeting business premises.
More than half a dozen traders had their shops damaged.
The RUC say they are investigating a number of complaints.
BELFAST
Arsonist jailed
A TWINBROOK man was jailed for two years yesterday after pleading guilty to three charges of arson.
David Paul McKnight (27), of Juniper Park was said by his solicitor at Craigavon Crown Court to be ‘a virtual alcoholic’ and was drinking heavily at the time of the offences on January 4.
DONEGAL
Victim named
A cyclist killed in a road accident in Donegal earlier this week was from Londonderry.
Cornelius Doherty,(34), died in an accident at Fahan on Tuesday afternoon.
Back Lagan Valley: plea
PEOPLE from the Lisburn area were today urged to keep up the fight to safeguard Lagan Valley Hospital's acute status.
A public meeting is to be held at the hospital next Tuesday morning to outline how services there can meet the challenge of reform in the Health Service.
The Eastern Health Board is due to meet later this month to decide its future acute hospital services strategy.
Councillor George Morrison, chairman of Lisburn Council's ad hoc health committee, said: ‘I believe there is a real danger of the smaller local hospitals being run down to the level of glorified health centres.’
Brothers are buried
HUNDREDS of mourners attended the funeral in Tandragee yesterday of brothers Winston and William McConville, who drowned on a fishing trip at the weekend.
The Co Armagh men were boating on Lough Lannagh in Co Mayo at the time.
Several hundred people crowded into Ballymore Parish Church for the funeral service for 53-year-old Winston, a photographer for the Ulster Gazette newspaper, and William (52).
Standstill
The small town came to a standstill as the two coffins were carried from the family home on Markethill Road.
Sportsmen, journalists, newspaper photographers and local political figures were among the many walking in the cortege.
The brothers were buried in Clare Presbyterian Churchyard, a few miles away, beside their mother, Jean, who died 18 years ago.
DUNDALK
Peace train group on the move again
THE PEACE train organisation is renewing its campaign for more people to sign a Declaration for Peace petition.
Members of its executive council have been collecting signatures in the border region.
Joan Brady, who lives in Dundalk and is spearheading the campaign in the Co Louth town, said there are plans to run a peace train between Belfast and Dublin next month.
It is also proposed to hold a brief peace ceremony at Portadown, in protest against bombings and sectarian murders in the province.
ARMAGH
Family stress help
A CHARITY helping families with young children cope with stress has started in the Armagh and Dungannon area.
The Home Start office, based in Argory, will be the eighth such scheme in the province.
The charity helps young and single-parent families cope with day-to-day problems such as transport to clinics and shops, as well as offering practical parenting advice.
Call for Gaelic seminar invite
SINN Fein councillor Mairtin O Muilleoir has called on the Republic's semi-State body Bord na Gaeilge to invite Belfast nationalist councillors to an Irish language seminar in Donegal, despite the city council's refusal to attend.
He said unionists had voted to send representatives to events in Hong Kong and France, but refused to spend a few hundred pounds on the bilingualism conference in Gweedore.
‘This is in line with the council ban on Irish since 1988 and underlines the failure of unionists to recognise the existence of a nationalist tradition,’ he said.
He is urging Bord na Gaeilge to show its support for Belfast's Irish speakers — estimated at 28,000 in the last census — by inviting one SDLP and one Sinn Fein councillor to attend.
By Mary Kelly
Ballyclare
THE combination of excellent weather and the bank holiday resulted in a smaller show of cattle at McClelland's Mart, Ballyclare.
However, trade continued very sharp in all sections.
Top price in the dairy ring of £1,130 was paid for a choice calved Friesian heifer and a calved Ayrshire heifer sold at the second top price of £1,070.
Calved Friesian cows were also in good demand and sold to a top of £1,050.
In the suckler ring, another good entry of 35 continued to meet a sharp trade and sold to a top of £960 paid for Limousin heifer with bull calf at foot.
In the fat cow ring an entry of 40 easily cleared in another very sharp trade, with cows selling to £116.10 for a Charolais 672kg at £780.
Cow heifers sold to £115.60 for a Charolais 640kg at £740.
Friesian cows sold to £103.40 for 624kg cow at £645.
In the store rings an entry of 175 bullocks continued to meet a very sharp trade especially for beef types which sold to £134.40 for a 506kg Simmental at £680 and to £805 per head for 626kg Limousin.
There was also an excellent entry of just over 200 heifers which continued to meet a good trade.
Beef types sold to £125.70 for Simmental 460kg at £578 with conditioned heifers to £132.40 for a Simmental 405kg at £536.
Mid-weights sold to £147.10 for a Simmental 325kg at £478.
Lightweight heifers also met an excellent trade selling to £139.40 for a Belgian Blue 165kg at £230 and to £138.70 for a Limousin 225kg at £312.
There was another sharp trade for an entry of just under 100 calves, which sold to a top of £312 for a Belgian Blue with Friesian bulls to £215.
Continental heifers sold to £170.
An excellent entry of almost 2,500 hoggets, ewes and ewe lambs at the Braid Sheddings second sale met an excellent trade.
Top prices of the day were recorded in the blackface hogget section which was topped by J Davidson, Glenarm, who presented an excellent draft of horned hoggets and received the following prices, ten at £94; ten at £90, tree pens of ten at £89 each and ten at £88.
The 700 hoggets on offer averaged £64 each.
Cast ewes also met an excellent trade and sold to a top of £49 each paid to G Robson, Doagh, for a pen of ten Cheviots.
C J White, Killycarn, received £42 each for a pen of ten correct blackface ewes.
In the blackface ewe lambs section top price of £50.50 was paid to T McKillop, Glenarm, for a pen of ten horned lambs and store lambs sold, to a top price of £27.80 paid for a pen of 25 Cheviots presented by J McCurdy, Broughshane.
Crossbred wether lambs sold to £27 paid to B McLoughlin, Aughafatten, and blackface wether lambs sold to a top of £24.50 for a pen of 18 presented by H McMullan, Glenarm.
HEREFORD
Volunteer crime-busters
A POLICE force has launched Britain's first parish wardens to stem the rising tide of rural crime.
The unpaid volunteers will not wear uniforms and will not have any special powers over and above those of ordinary citizens.
But police in West Mercia, which is England's largest inland force area, hopes its first three wardens and others to be appointed shortly will have a significant impact.
Grandfather and retired clergyman Stanley Parrett, farmer's wife Hilary Havard and former publican Margaret Fitness yesterday collected their special identification cards to carry while patrolling their Herefordshire villages Pembridge, Weobley and Eardisley.
SUSSEX
Drugs-in-prison talks
OFFICERS from a Sussex prison are meeting the Governor to discuss the problem of drug and alcohol misuse among inmates.
Prison officers at Ford Open Prison claim every drug that can be bought on the street is available inside Ford.
Inmates are able to scale prison fences at night to collect drugs and alcohol, say the officers.
MIDDLESBROUGH
Freak accident kills child
A MIDDLESBROUGH child has died from head injuries after a metal fence-panel at a sports centre crashed down on him.
Three-year-old Daniel Hampton was crushed when the 9ft-high and 8ft-wide panel toppled on to him as he tried to climb it at a recreation ground.
DOWN
EC funds appeal
AN appeal has been made for Down District to be given ‘a reasonable share’ of European Community Structural Funds.
Councillor Malachi Curran, the chairman of the Down Economic Development Agency, claimed the area had not received a fair share in the past and there was an onus on the government to ensure Down was not neglected.
Mr Curran revealed the council was advancing a number of projects for the district including a major new tourist facility in Newcastle and a marina for Killough.
Naval search
I AM seeking information from remaining relatives, friends or ex-shipmates on SBA George Gepp, Royal Navy D/MX553308, killed aboard LST 404 on August 24, 1944.
He formerly lived at 29 Euterpe Street, Donegall Road, Belfast.
Any information would be greatly appreciated.
J PATTERSON 61 Hughes Court, Belfast BT6 0LX.
Ambulance cars
YOUR correspondent ‘Puzzled’(Writeback, August 19) complains that an elderly lady of her acquaintance was discharged from hospital on Friday, August 13, by ‘taxi’, shared with three other disabled senior citizens.
The writer also complains that the lady had to travel via Comber, en route to Newtownards.
Unfortunately, in the absence of all the facts, it is not possible for me to comment on the individual case, nor would I wish to do so in a public forum.
I can, however, comment on the general principles on which our Patient Transport Service operates.
As far as possible, the trained staff on our non-emergency vehicles are reserved for high-dependency patients, travelling on wheelchairs, or even stretchers, or who require significant assistance on or off the vehicle.
All other patients are carried by Ambulance Car Service.
This is not a taxi service, but a group of volunteers who are carefully chosen by the Ambulance Service for their caring attitude to patients.
Their driving is tested thoroughly, and they receive a full medical examination.
Their cars must meet strict criteria, and are tested by our mechanics.
This service is used to provide a higher quality of service to all our patients.
Firstly, it reduces the demand on our Patient Transport Service, and enables it to provide a more timely and personal service to those who need it.
Secondly, the Ambulance Car Service provides a number of advantages to the patients it carries:
1.
A car carries a smaller number of patients than an ambulance, travels fewer miles on its journey to hospital, and is therefore more likely to be punctual.
For the same reason pick-up after treatment and time of return home may also be better than is the case with the larger non-emergency ambulance.
2.
Cars have a lower centre of gravity than ambulances, and are less likely, as a result, to cause travel sickness in sensitive patients.
3.
Some patients are anxious that their neighbours should not know that they have hospital appointments, and therefore prefer an unmarked car to an ambulance.
Of course, it is vital to ensure the car service is only used for patients who are suitable.
Some less obvious conditions, such as arthritis of the shoulder, can make it very difficult to get into and out of a car.
As a result, decisions about suitability are left to the doctor booking the transport.
It has been our experience that our car service patients like and appreciate the service they receive, and actually prefer it to being carried by ambulance.
If your correspondent would like to contact me at Belfast 246113, I would be happy to discuss the circumstances of the case to which he/she refers.
W.A. MURRAY Chief Executive, Eastern Ambulance Service, Broadway, Belfast BT12 6BA.
Treatment service boost for the Royal Victoria
A NEW hospital service which will dramatically improve treatment for up to 1,000 people a year has been launched in Belfast.
The technique known as open access endoscopy, which has been introduced at the Royal Victoria Hospital, means that the inside of a patient's stomach can be examined using a tube-like lens.
Gastro-enterologist consultant Dr John Collins said: ‘GPs can now send patients with ulcers and indigestion problems up to us directly, bypassing out-patient clinics and reducing the waiting time by several months.’
RVH chief executive William McKee said last night the service would bring undoubted major advantages for GPs, faster diagnosis and treatment for patients and shorter waiting lists.
It is the first medical technique of its kind to be practised by a major Belfast teaching hospital.
Mr McKee, speaking at the official launching ceremony, said the Royal had a crucial role to play in the provision of health care, not just for the local community but for people from throughout the province.
Developments
‘We also play a major role, of course, in teaching and research and are at the forefront of developments right across the spectrum of medical and surgical care’.Mr McKee referred to the Royal's ‘recent difficulties with one particular health and social services board’ and said the media's assistance in highlighting their problems contributed greatly to bringing about committed support from their own staff, the public and the GPs of the area.
‘This combined to help us become even more determined to continue to lead the way in the provision of high quality care for the community’, he added.
By-election line-up:
SDLP likely to provide opposition ‘Blanket’ protester is Sinn Fein runner
THE Sinn Fein leader on Derry City Council said today he is confident the party will win next month's by-election.
Mitchel McLaughlin revealed that the party will be nominating former blanket-protest prisoner Cathal Crumley to run for the party in the October poll.
Failed
Sinn Fein failed in an attempt to co-opt him on to the council on Wednesday night.
No other party has officially confirmed they will be contesting the election but the SDLP are expected to put up a candidate.
Resigned
The poll is being held to replace Sinn Fein 's Hugh Brady who resigned his seat last month after a drugs conviction.
Mr McLaughlin believes Sinn Fein will hold the seat in the by-election, which is likely to be held on Thursday October 21.
He said the party has a good record in recent by-elections and he was confident this success could be repeated.
At Wednesday's council meeting, Mr McLaughlin described Cathal Crumley as a ‘well-known Gael and language activist’.
He added: ‘He has previously been a candidate for Sinn Fein in the Assembly elections.
He is a married man living with his family in the Creggan estate where he himself had been born and reared.’
Sentence
‘Cathal Crumley is a political activist of long-standing having served a sentence in the H-Blocks on the blanket protest.’
Hugh Brady topped the poll in last May's election in the Cityside ward although the SDLP gained the most votes in the five-seat constituency.
If Sinn Fein do not hold the vacant seat, the DUP will become the second largest party in the Guildhall with five representatives.
The SDLP currently hold 17 of the 30 seats in the Guildhall chamber.
By Mark Simpson
Death of top judge Higgins mourned
ONE of Northern Ireland's most senior legal figures, Lord Justice Iain Higgins, has died.
Lord Justice Higgins (66), who was the target of a number of assassination attempts, was recently appointed Lord Justice of Appeal.
A ceremony to swear him into the post was to have been held tomorrow.
In July 1988 the IRA claimed he was their intended victim when a family of three was killed by a 1,000lb roadside bomb detonated at Kileen, south of Newry.
Attacked
Lord Justice Higgins also had to move house after his home was attacked with rocket grenades and guns in 1987.
He was educated at St Columb's College in Londonderry and at Queen's University.
He was called to the bar in 1948 and became a QC in 1967.
Lord Justice Higgins was appointed as a county court judge in 1971 and in 1975 he became a member of a special committee set up to review the Emergency Provisions Act.
After working in Armagh he became Recorder of Belfast in 1982 and was appointed to the High Court two years later.
Controversial
He also heard the controversial UDR Four Appeal and was a former chairman of the Mental health Review Tribunal.
Paying tribute to him a colleague said today: ‘He was a man of the highest integrity and his death represents a great loss to the Northern Ireland legal system.’
Health council member
THE Western Health and Social Services Council has appointed an additional member.
Marie Timoney has joined the council which recommends improvements to the health board in catering for health and social care.
Arafat fights to win
PLO approval for new deal
PLO CHAIRMAN Yasser Arafat was in Tunis today trying to unite his fractious organisation behind the proposed Palestinian self-rule deal with Israel.
Palestinian sources said Arafat, back from a visit to Morocco where he briefed King Hassan, was chairing a meeting of the central committee of the Palestine Liberation Organisation's mainstream Fatah movement.
‘Meetings of all the Palestinian institutions are starting in order to clarify and decide the prospects for the political action in the future,’ Arafat aide Hakam Balawi said last night.
Reputation
Arafat has gambled his reputation on a plan for interim Palestinian self-rule in the Israeli-occupied territories, starting with an early Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.
But the plan has drawn criticism from the Palestinians' Arab peace talks partners, who accuse Arafat of lack of consultation, and from hardline Palestinian groups who denounce it as a sell-out.
PLO executive committee member Yasser Abed-Rabbo said the organisation, which has held secret negotiations with Israel in Norway, planned to gather its 100-strong Central Council to discuss the agreement.
The meeting would probably be held next week at PLO headquarters in Tunis, he said.
Peace
Arafat earlier visited Sudan, Egypt and Yemen to brief leaders on the agreement.
In Yemen, he informed PLO fighters about Palestinian plans for peace with Israel.
Palestinian sources said Arafat was likely to win Fatah's support for the plan, despite some internal opposition.
But the response of the PLO Central Council, which includes radical movements opposed to the deal, was much more problematic.
Internment in the wings?
AFTER a week like the present one, how relevant is it to talk about political talks or solutions?
They wouldn't include anyone representing the murderers or the bombers, so how could any agreement stick?
I know the argument that it is necessary to look as if you are filling the political vacuum — if only with hot air — but I'm beginning to wonder if it is worthwhile.
The two sides are as far apart as ever and the latest developments on the Dublin and London fronts are not likely to bring them closer.
In Dublin, there has been renewed talk — that's all it is — about joint authority.
Dick Spring has even suggested that something might be imposed by the two sovereign governments, if the stalemate continues.
In London, this has been firmly put down — along with Kevin MacNamara's musings on the same subject — and the Unionists' support for Mr Major is expected to yield some unmentionable dividends.
A title for Jim Molyneaux has been speculated upon — it will fall in his lap whenever he wants to retire — but certainly the Government is not likely to offend unionist sensibilities for a time at least.
So we're more or less where we left off last November.
The unionists are still trying to replace the Anglo-Irish Agreement with a devolutionary plan that is too wishy-washy for the SDLP and Dublin.
Meanwhile the SDLP proposal is still based on joint authority — cutting Dublin, London and Europe into the running of Northern Ireland.
UNLESS there are people in Norway at the moment doing an Israeli-type somersault — why wasn't our last attempt at reconciliation based there, rather than in Duisburg, Germany?— the prospects look bleak.
The one hope is that Sir Patrick Mayhew will finally deliver on his promise to give the talks process ‘direction and focus’, rather than act as an interested observer.
We shall see.
But for the talks to be resumed in a favourable climate, there would have to be more confidence that the violence could be contained, agreement or no agreement.
That confidence is lacking and there is nothing — except Sir John Wheeler's unwise comment about the IRA's defeat — to suggest that it can be restored.
We live in hope that John Hume's mission to the Provos will succeed, like we always wish for a good summer.
Failing that, and with bombs and murders still the order of the day, the old instrument of internment may have to be taken out of the cupboard.
At the very least, both communities should be thinking seriously about the possibility — and how they would react to it.
They have had time, unlike the situation in 1971, to assess how much damage has been done, in a material and spiritual sense, by these shadowy paramilitaries who can never be brought before a court.
If selective — and effective — internment were to be introduced, the reaction of ordinary people would be crucial.
Would they riot or would they be relieved that an even-handed exercise had removed their tormentors?
Would the Republic join in, when some escapees fled south?
I'd like to think there was another way, but the sickening sound of another big bomb, news of sectarian shootings and the threat of more television exposures of the State's powerlessness are getting to me.
If the paramilitaries are really as untouchable as they seem, the world will begin to draw parallels between the PLO, the ANC, the IRA and the UDA.
Clinton in Bosnia warning
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton has stepped up the pressure on Bosnia's warring parties to forge a peace agreement, urging Serbs and Croats to be more flexible and warning that a NATO military response is possible.
He issued a stern warning that western allies could intervene militarily if fighting resumes and humanitarian relief efforts are thwarted.
‘If, while talks are in abeyance, there is abuse by those who would seek to interfere with humanitarian aid — attacking protected areas, resuming the sustained shelling of Sarajevo, for example— then first I would remind you that the NATO military option is very much alive,’ Clinton said.
Talks in Geneva among the leaders of Bosnia's warring factions collapsed on Wednesday over how Bosnia-Herzegovina will be divided among the Bosnian Serbs, Muslims and Croats.
Bosnian Muslims said they wanted more territory than had been offered under a proposed peace plan.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher said he was sending strong messages to Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic and Croatian President Franjo Tudjman.
Clinton has been under growing pressure to take a tougher stand including NATO air strikes against Bosnian Serbs to end the bloodshed in the 17-month-old war.
Meanwhile, two British aid workers held by Muslim forces in Bosnia after they became involved in gun-running have been released, it was disclosed today.
Stephen Pinnock and Lawrence Foster were under the protection of the British United Nations forces in Vitez, Bosnia, today, after more than a week in detention.
They were due to be escorted to Croatia where they were expected to be handed over, possibly later today, to British consular officials.
A spokesman for the British UN forces in Vitez said the men gave themselves up into their protection after making their way from Travnik, where they had been held.
LONDON
Indiana buries time capsule
THE Fugitive handcuffs and a message from the Lord Mayor of London were among time capsule contents being buried today by Indiana Jones star Harrison Ford.
Ford was making a flying visit to London to stash the capsule, containing the cuffs from his new film based on the cult 1960s series, at the £15m Warner West End cinema complex.
KENYA
Kenya may pay Ward
BRITISH BUSINESSMAN John Ward may be reimbursed by the Kenyan Government for the £500,000 he says he has spent investigating the murder of his daughter Julie in the Masai Mara reserve five years ago.
He raised the claim at a meeting with Kenyan President Daniel Arap Moi.
‘I also showed him proof of the cover-up I uncovered,’ said Mr Ward (60), from Brockley, near Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk.
Farmers' help sought
THE Ulster Cancer Foundation is seeking a helping hand from North West farmers.
In a bid to raise funds, the foundation is asking farmers to donate £1 for each animal or pen of animals sold through livestock auctions next week (starting September 6).
This year is the Foundation's silver anniversary and funds raised will be used to boost the 25th anniversary appeal.
The cancer charity expends all its funds within Northern Ireland to support research, prevention, care and rehabilitation services.
Further information about the new fund-raising scheme for farmers can be obtained from the Foundation at 40 Eglantine Avenue, Belfast.
Bombers cut down warnings
THE 1,000lb bombing of Armagh was the latest in a spate of IRA attacks in which warnings have been described by police as grossly inadequate and inaccurate.
The huge device which wrecked the town's courthouse and surrounding buildings early today, exploded just 19 minutes after a telephone warning, as police were evacuating residents from the area.
Three days ago, a 400lb bomb which destroyed the Stewarts supermarket in Derriaghy went off just 15 minutes after what the terrorists had claimed was a 45-minute warning.
Exploded
Security forces had been clearing the area when the bomb exploded.
Police criticised the bombers for putting lives at risk with ‘totally inadequate and misleading warnings.’
It has been a similar story in most other IRA bombings over the past year, during which warnings have been cut drastically in an attempt to outwit the security forces.
These include:
May 20 — 500lb bomb which wrecked the Grand Opera House.
The Provos in the first of several warnings said the device had a 20-minute timer.
The hotel and nearby buildings were still being evacuated when it exploded.
May 22 — Portadown devastated by 1,000lb bomb.
Police were clearing the area when a warning came, just minutes after the bomb exploded.
June 22 — 300lb bomb at Mourne Country Hotel, Newry.
A warning was given but residents had only a few minutes to get out before the blast rocked their houses.
July 3 — 100lb van bomb in Strabane.
Stormont Minister Lord Arran visiting the scene said the warning given was ‘totally inadequate’.
July 6 — 1,500lb bomb exploded in Newtownards.
Police were clearing the area when bomb went off.
A 20-minute warning had been given, but the device went off after just 10 minutes.
July 11 — 500lb van bomb exploded in Regent Street, Newtownards.
Terrorists' 20-minute warning was cut in half.
August 13 — 250lb car bomb at Barclay restaurant exploded five minutes into 15-minute warning.
August 22 — 20 to 40lb bomb went off in Gloucester Street in the centre of Belfast.
Police were still clearing the area when the bomb exploded five minutes after a telephone warning.
August 24 — Police hit out at the IRA for ‘inadequate warning’ after being given just eight minutes to clear the area at Ormeau Road.
They were still evacuating the area when a device exploded at the Northern Bank.
Opera House: The bomb went off as security forces were still clearing the area.
Ex-prison officer's sentence cut
A SENTENCE for indecent assault passed on a 47-year-old former prison officer has been cut by a half on appeal at Craigavon Crown Court.
George Henry Adams, of Portadown, had been sentenced to a total of 12 months, made up of three consecutive terms, each of four months.
Yesterday Judge John Curran QC reduced each of the three sentences to two months imprisonment, making a total of six months.
Adams had been charged with indecently assaulting three children.
Defence counsel stated that Adams had made a full admission.
He requested the judge to give Adams credit for having pleaded guilty, together with the fact that he had lost his job and because his marriage had broken up.
Residents to be asked for views
DEVELOPMENT ideas for a Londonderry housing area are to begin by residents being asked what they want.
More than 200 householders in Strathfoyle and Maydown are to be questioned.
The survey is being funded by Derry City Council, the Northern Ireland Voluntary Trust and the Community Relations Council.
Backing has also come from the Strathfoyle Community Association, which has just celebrated its 20th anniversary.
Residents will be asked how they view present services and facilities in the area and how the public perception of the area can be improved.
The first results of the survey are expected by Christmas.
Jail for dealer in £40,000 drug haul
A BANGOR man found in possession of cannabis worth a street value of £40,000 has been jailed for 18 months.
Belfast Crown Court heard that James Wilson (36) of Ballyquinton Gardens, was ‘not in the premier division of drugs dealers in Belfast.’
Wilson pleaded guilty to three charges of possession of drugs, one of possession with intent to supply and two charges of unlawfully supplying drugs.
Lifestyle
A defence lawyer said Wilson's activities had been ‘nipped in the bud’ and his lifestyle had altered dramatically since the offences three years ago.
Prosecution said a police search of a house in Mayo Street, Belfast on November 27, 1990, in which Wilson was present, uncovered a small amount of cannabis hidden in the kitchen waste bin.
The Crown said Wilson co-operated fully with detectives and although the total amount of drugs had a street value of £40,000, the ‘relative margins’ for each link in the chain meant Wilson would not have been making significant money.
‘Premier’
‘He was not in the premier division of drugs dealers in Belfast and police have no reason to contradict his assertion that he had been involved for a short time,’ the Crown lawyer added.
The court heard that Wilson, who had been in South Africa since the offences, married in May of this year.
Judge John Petrie said he took account of Wilson's admissions to police but he could see no alternative to imprisonment, especially since some of the charges involved supplying other people.
War tale is true today
ALTHOUGH set in 1914, Jennifer Johnston's ‘How Many Miles to Babylon?’ carries in it notes that still strike a chord today.
The Lyric Theatre has chosen this war time story of love and loyalty to launch its 25th anniversary season.
The tale of two young men, friends in boyhood, who serve together in the First World War may sound like something Rolf Harris would sing about, but there's more to it than that.
Ms Johnston's stage adaptation stays true to her novel — almost too true, as Alec tells the story of his friend and his life.
There is a strong contrast between Stuart Graham's wet and weedy Alec, who lives in the big house, with Peter O'Meara's boyish Jerry, who comes from more humble stock.
Domineering
While Alec is despatched to the front by his domineering mother, Jerry opts for the King's shilling so that he may learn to fight, and return home to free Ireland.
Director Caroline Fitzgerald has coaxed fine performances from a generally strong cast — in particular from O'Meara and Graham Arnold as the colourful butterflies that fly so distractingly around Alec's head.
Ms Johnston uses the world war as a springboard into other conflicts; that between England and Ireland; between Ireland north and south, and even within the south itself, as the English officers look down on the Irish men, and the northern Irish sergeant barely conceals his contempt for the southern Catholics in his ranks.
Trenches
Throughout everything, the divisions of class act as trenches as surely as those dug by the soldiers.
Graham Arnold portrays Bennett, the English officer who serves with Alec, as a delightfully privileged young man, a Sebastian Flyte character who dismisses war as a ‘form of population control.’
Liz Cullinane's grey set evokes the trials and terrors of the trenches, where the men dance ‘ignominious attendance on death’.
As the play builds to its climax, loyalties are strained, and it is only when Alec decides to cast aside the chains of a lifetime's obedience that his character truly comes to life.
The powerful closing scenes provide a sense of drama lacking from early sections of the play.
For despite its re-working, this is still essentially a novel, and radio would have been a more comfortable medium for it.
Impact
But the lack of visual impact is compensated in part by the richness of the language and the calibre of the performances.
If Stuart Graham can find the passion of his final speeches a little sooner in the play, and if Peter O'Meara can keep his enthusiasm on the boil, Ms Johnston's endeavour will not have been in vain.
Unionists under fire on EC cash
A FORMER spokesman for the EC Commission today blamed the British Government for the lack of European funding coming to the province.
The province's two unionist MEPs, DUP leader Ian Paisley and Ulster Unionist Jim Nicholson, were also accused of not doing enough to obtain a greater say in the Brussels corridors of power.
John Cooney, a former EC spokesman on Agriculture and Rural Development, made the comments in a lecture at Queen's University today.
His remarks came as the DUP leader accused the Government of withholding a £15m EC windfall for Northern Ireland.
Mr Cooney said the reason Northern Ireland had received only £1.04bn European funding for the next seven years, while the Republic got £7.8bn, was because the province did not have its own negotiators in Brussels.
He said the province had always lost out because it was not represented effectively at the Council of Ministers — where Government Ministers argue the case for funding.
The former Irish Times correspondent said Ulster lagged in ‘the EC second division’ and argued that Northern Ireland needed its own ‘sovereign negotiators’and accused unionists of not doing enough to pursue that goal.
‘Even a cursory glance at the island of Ireland's relationship with the EC since 1973 confirms that Britain has not pursued Northern Ireland's interests anything like the extent which Irish Governments have for the 26 counties,’ he said.
The Ulster Unionists came in for particular criticism, being accused of sacrificing the province's interests in Europe for the prospect of holding the balance of power at Westminster.
But the party's MEP, Jim Nicholson, dismissed the claims as ‘utter nonsense’ and said the blame lay at the door of the Northern Ireland Office.
‘The only way we will get a greater say is if there is a devolved Government in the province.
We have been pushing for more effective action from the NIO for years and it is utter nonsense to say otherwise,’ he said.
Mr Cooney's comments came as Ian Paisley claimed the Government was withholding a £15m EC windfall for Northern Ireland.
The DUP leader said the province was due extra funds because of the devaluation of sterling against the ECU — the common European currency used by the EC — since the UK left the Exchange Rate Mechanism last year.
He said funding of £110m worth of ECUs earmarked for use here this year by the European Commission five years ago, was now worth around £125m and warned the Government against using the funds to boost the Treasury.
But a spokesman for the NIO rejected the claim and said Northern Ireland would get any benefits that accrued as a result of the currency exchange rate.
Sinister twist of loyalist violence
FOUR murders, two attempted murders and two major bombings in four days have prompted today's crisis talks by security chiefs.
Security correspondent GARY GRATTAN analyses the increased threat from loyalist paramiltaries.
Security chiefs were meeting today in a bid to counter the current upsurge in loyalist violence which has claimed four lives in as many days.
The UVF and UFF have claimed responsibility for two murders each.
The victims have been a prison officer and three Roman Catholic civilians, one of them a woman.
Ruthless
With a ruthless new breed of killers taking over the leadership reigns, the threat to the Roman Catholic community is now higher than it has ever been.
Loyalists have re-grouped and closed ranks to minimalise the risk of their organisations being penetrated by the intelligence services.
A security source said: ‘Loyalist paramilitaries are becoming increasingly professional in their tactics.’
‘Alarming’
As Ulster Unionist security spokesman, Ken Maginnis, said this week: ‘Loyalist paramilitaries are now a mirror image of the IRA.
It is a very alarming situation as now we have two equally opposed forces.’
The UFF launched the week of blood lust with the callous murder of mother of four Teresa de Mogollon Dowds at her north Belfast home on Monday night —‘in mistake’ for her husband.
And last night the same group claimed responsibility for the murder of Roman Catholic Michael Edwards at his Finaghy home.
Rioting at the Maze prison sparked the renewed wave of UVF action.
Quick to use the incident as a catalyst to step up its offensive, it murdered prison officer Jim Peacock at his north Belfast home on Wednesday and attacked homes of other warders in Belfast, Newtownabbey and Antrim.
Earlier the same day Jimmy Bell was gunned down by UVF gunmen at an east Belfast ice cream factory.
And the sinister new twist to the UVF campaign looks set to continue.
Last night the organisation issued a statement in which it vowed attacks on jail staff would continue until the current dispute in the Maze prison is resolved.
MANCHESTER
Fourth man held in arms probe
A FOURTH man was being questioned today by police investigating gun-running for loyalist terror groups.
He was arrested in Manchester yesterday as police seized a self-loading rifle in a raid.
A Greater Manchester police spokesman said the man was being questioned at an unnamed police station about firearms offences.
Three men held last weekend in the city were making a second appearance before magistrates in Middleton in Manchester today on charges involving procuring firearms.
SCOTLAND
Anglers rescued
SIX men on a sea angling trip were rescued after their vessel went aground off the coast of north east Scotland.
The 30-ft Fleetwood Mac got into difficulties in the entrance to Rosehearty harbour, near Fraserburgh, in heavy seas last night.
Rescue services arrived to find the men had abandoned their boat which was sinking and were stranded on rocks cut off by a rising tide.
The men were rescued by the Fraserburgh lifeboat and taken to Fraserburgh hospital where they were released after treatment for cold.
SHETLANDS
Drifting ship alert
THREE North Sea oil platforms were put on alert today after a cargo ship went adrift.
The Shell-owned Eider oil production platform, with 38 people on board, was shut down for a while.
A coastguard helicopter from Sumburgh in the Shetlands was sent to the platform and other helicopters alerted.
Shell said it appeared the 3,625 ton Danish refrigerated cargo ship Icestar had a fouled propeller.
Later it was reported under tow by the Norwegian tug Viking Queen.
The Eider and the Shell Tern and North Cormorant platforms also on alert are in the Shell Brent Field 100 miles north east of Lerwick in the Shetlands.
CYPRUS
British solicitor held
A BRITISH solicitor wanted in the United States for alleged conspiracy to sell stolen British Treasury bills was arrested yesterday as he arrived in Cyprus.
Jeffrey Anthony Kershaw (45), was later released on bail pending an extradition hearing at the Larnaca District Court on Monday.
Kershaw, from London, is wanted by American authorities over an alleged conspiracy to sell Treasury bills worth £54m which were part of a haul of £280m in stolen bills, police said.
CHINA
Death count error
UN officials in Peking said today 257 people were killed when a dam burst in China last week and not 1,257 as reported by the world body in Geneva yesterday.
UN Development Programme official Antonius Broek said the UN's Department of Humanitarian Affairs in Geneva had misread a Chinese document, which actually reported only 257 people killed.
Lotto double for husband and wife
A HUSBAND and wife won two six-figure sum prizes from the same Republic's national lotto jackpot.
Part-time farmer Michael Murray and his wife Elizabeth, from Athlone, Co Westmeath, received two cheques for more than £100,000 after both unintentionally entered the same set of winning numbers.
Their success revealed the misunderstanding had been going on for six years.
‘It took the win for us to notice,’ said Mr Murray.
Guide rating for 4 Ulster schools
FOUR Northern Ireland secondaries have been included in the new ‘Good State Schools Guide’ published today.
They are Ashfield Girls High and Grosvenor High in Belfast, Cambridge House for Girls in Ballymena and St Cecilia's in Londonderry.
A total of 377 schools are featured in the guide — now in its second edition — from across the United Kingdom.
All the schools were visited by the authors, Phillip Lane Clark and Eileen Round, and their team of field officers.
They said the ‘essential three factors’ in a successful school were the quality of leadership, symbolised by the head, the ethos of the school and the quality of teaching.
Superior
Of the Northern Ireland education system.
the Guide says: ‘The overall structure is redolent of the 1950's: small schools, grammar schools, secondary ‘moderns’ and the 11 Plus.’
The province has a superior examination performance in GCSE and A-Levels compared to England and Wales and higher achievement levels in mathematics and English at 11 and 15 years of age.
‘Latest statistics reveal a considerable improvement in the number of 16-year-old pupils who leave school with some qualifications: the plight of low achievers had for long been a matter of concern,’ it said.
On Ashfield, it states: ‘Many pupils arrive feeling ‘failures’ to depart as ‘mature young women, ready to take their place in an increasingly complex society.’
Achievements
On Grosvenor: ‘Displaying, without generous resources, the range of achievements of a good school — and accepting a much wider responsibility than most.’
On Cambridge House: ‘Traditional success and continuing innovation in a seriously caring community.’
And on St Cecilia's: ‘The school represents ‘the triumph of hope over despair, of faith over doubt’.
It has provided stability and created opportunities for hundreds of girls through decades of disruption.
‘It is wholly appropriate that it should be our final testimony to the qualities that prevail in state education and the resilience and adaptability of ‘ordinary’ children.’
‘Brain drain’ claim
THE Department of Health is encouraging hospital doctors in London to quit the National Health Service for lucrative jobs in the United Arab Emirates.
Officials have placed adverts in the British Medical Journal on behalf of the emirate, in a move which Labour has condemned as encouraging a medical brain drain.
The advert is aimed at doctors threatened with possible redundancy by the Government's programme of London hospital closures and mergers.
It has been placed by the London Implementation Group, a health department unit co-ordinating the London shake-up.
It was approached by the UAE which is offering tax-free salaries of up to £80,000 and free accommodation.
The LIG has found jobs for 19 NHS staff.
Labour's front bench health spokesman Dawn Primarolo has described the move as ‘a government-sponsored brain medical drain.’
But the Department of Health said it was doing its best to help hospital staff cope with change.
EC hearing on Rock deaths trio
RELATIVES of three IRA terrorists shot dead by the SAS in Gibraltar will learn tonight whether a campaign to put the Government in the dock over the killings has been successful.
After an all-day private hearing involving lawyers for both sides, the European Commission of Human Rights will decide if there is a case to be answered before the Human Rights Court.
Danny McCann, Mairead Farrell and Sean Savage died in the 1988 shootings after the SAS were called in by Gibraltar's police commissioner to help round up what was believed to be an IRA active service unit preparing an attack against British troops stationed there.
The killings have been surrounded by controversy ever since, but Government lawyers were arguing before the Human Rights Commission today that a British inquest has already ruled that the deaths were ‘lawful’.
Lawyers representing relatives of the three victims claim the Government was in breach of the Human Rights Convention, article 2 of which guarantees ‘the right to life’.
Britain is a signatory to the convention.
A decision today to send the case to the Human Rights Court would be an embarrassment to the Government which would be forced to mount a vigorous defence of its policy against the IRA to justify the shootings under the human rights code.
It would amount to another legal clash over allegations that a ‘shoot to kill’ policy has been in force against the IRA.
But a victory for the victims' relatives today does not mean the Government will be found guilty.
The Human Rights Court judges are free to ignore the advice of the Human Rights Commission.
EC summit for Hume
SDLP leader John Hume flew to Portugal today for a summit of the leaders of Europe's social democratic and labour parties.
The three-day summit in Lisbon will be attended by EC President Jacques Delors, the Prime Ministers of Austria and Spain, and Government Ministers from Ireland, Belgium and Holland.
Top of the agenda for the party leaders will be a review of the present state of the European Community and the future of the Maastricht process.
Mr Hume said he will also be asking the meeting to address ‘the serious problems of unemployment and social exclusion’.
Gardai warn parents of Satanic ring
A SOUTH Donegal town has been rocked by rumours that a black magic ring is operating in the area.
The discovery of a stone mound, said to resemble an altar, in an overgrown field near Ballyshannon has shocked the local community.
The Garda Crime Prevention Officer in Letterkenny has issued a warning that items which could be used in the celebration of a ‘Black Mass’ had been discovered.
Children
Garda Jim Moore warned parents to keep their children away from the area — a popular meeting place for teenagers.
But today, Superintendent John Duffy at Ballyshannon Garda Station said he had no hard facts to back up the rumours.
He said a mound of stones had been found in the centre of the field, with the body of a dead crow nearby.
Rituals
These had sparked fears that some sort of Black Magic rituals were being celebrated in the field, which is close to a wooded area.
Local priest Fr Dermot Britton said he understood the remains of an altar had been found but he did not think it necessary to talk to his congregation about the issue of Black Magic.
‘There is a holy well in the area and around August time, these take on particular significance.
There are holy wells all over Ireland and they do at times attract strange practices,’ he said.
By Suzanne Rodgers
Beauty tames a beast
HOMES on a north Belfast street have rooms with a beautiful view today.
The 45 residents of Etna Drive in Ardoyne can now look out proudly at shrubs and flowers on land which had been derelict for 17 years.
The £72,000 transformation has been achieved with the help of charity Bryson House, the Housing Executive and local people.
Ardoyne woman Marion Kane, who fought hard to turn the scheme into reality, said: ‘This is a dream come true and goes to show what can be achieved if local people are determined to have what they deserve.’
Mr Pat Davidson, of Bryson House, Belfast, surveys the transformed garden.
Curb pay for bosses—call
LABOUR today demanded a crackdown on ‘huge’ boardroom salary rises.
Shadow chancellor Gordon Brown said there was widespread public concern about such rises in the recession, many unconnected to performance or contribution.
‘Ministers have not only not spoken out against this irresponsibility but now cannot speak persuasively against these boardroom excesses because so many ex-Cabinet Ministers are themselves among the beneficiaries of these excesses,’ he said.
‘The result is that our good companies are embarrassed and undermined by the behaviour of the bad and even the bad by the worst.’
Mr Brown has urged the Prime Minister to introduce rules which would prevent ex-Cabinet Ministers from taking private posts which may have been connected with their work as Ministers for a period of at least two years after leaving office.
ARDGLASS
Travellers move out of town
CLEARING up operations began yesterday after a group of travellers moved, under the threat of eviction, from a site they have been occupying in the centre of the Co.
Down village of Ardglass.
A group of more than 30 travellers' caravans have now set up on a roadside site a mile from the village at Crew crossroads.
DUNGANNON
Shouts lead to jail
A MAN involved in a confrontation between groups of Catholics and Protestants in a Dungannon carpark was jailed for two months at Cookstown Magistrates Court yesterday.
The court heard Brendan Gerard Mackle (26), unemployed of Dunavon Park, Dungannon, who admitted a charge of disorderly behaviour, had three previous Public Order convictions within the past three years.
The court was told Mackle was heard to shout ‘orange bastards’ and ‘yellow bastards’at a group of Protestants.
BESSBROOK
Benefit fraud
A BESSBROOK man has been sentenced to six months in prison after he was overpayed a sum of £5,666.32 by the DHS.
Francis Lawrence Powell (49) of Father Cullen Park, pleaded guilty to eight charges at Newry Magistrates of claiming supplementary benefit by a deception by false representation and making a false statement.
His lawyer said he had agreed to repay to the Department monies wrongfully received.
What next?
THE Anglo-Irish conference meets next Thursday, in London, against a backdrop of almost unmitigated gloom on the security front.
Last night's death and destruction — committed by the UFF and IRA respectively — contributed still more horror and devastation to one of the most depressing weeks in recent years.
It is bad enough when the violence comes from one direction only — the detested IRA.
But when loyalist paramilitaries join in the ghastly fray, turning their guns and firebombs on Catholics and prison officers, the community as a whole is even more appalled and frightened.
Security Minister Sir John Wheeler, who has inherited responsibility for this cauldron of hatred, must have revised his initial appraisal that the IRA ‘has already been defeated’.
The paramilitary organisations, on either side of the political divide, remain active and hard to penetrate.
A most worrying development, from the point of view of community peace, is the resurgence of the UVF and the UDA.
Since last year, when they killed 39 compared with the IRA's 30, they have greatly widened their theatre of operations, taking on targets from Sinn Fein, the SDLP, and the GAA, as well as random Catholics.
Their heartless brutality, copied from the IRA, has spread tragedy, fear and alarm, as it was intended to do.
They have envied the power which violence has seemed to confer on the republican community, and they hope to draw attention to their alienation, too.
Far from winning concessions, however, they will find what they are doing is abhorrent both to the Protestant and Catholic communities.
These are the IRA's methods, and midnight assassinations do just as much damage to the unionist cause as the IRA's bombs and murders.
If they doubt that, there is an ominous warning in today's London Times: ‘Their actions will only increase the mounting pressure upon British politicians to wash their hands entirely of the Irish dilemma; to imitate the IRA's tactics is to play into its hands.’
Against this background, the security crisis is the only item on next week's agenda that matters.
Any attempt by the Irish Government to press on with political talks would be pointless, when politicians here are pre-occupied with the security situation and are still miles apart, politically.
Some will look to selective internment, of loyalists and republicans, to give relief.
Only the security chiefs can guess how effective it would be, but large question-marks remain.
Unless the tacit agreement of the Irish Government and both unionist and nationalist politicians was obtained, it could be another disaster.
Even if such support was forthcoming, is there any surety that it would work?
To many, internment has its attractions but, put into practice, it might prove a short-term expedient that would soon run out of steam.
Regrettably there are no short-cuts to ending Ulster's agony.
Leaving the helm
THE departure of Dr John Parker from the position of chairman and chief executive at Harland & Wolff will be viewed with regret by those at the yard as well as the wider community.
When he arrived at Queen's Island, many saw his task as mission impossible.
The yard had a workforce of 7,000, the market was crumbling, and losses were running at £43m a year.
Shipbuilding was in crisis, and it was clear that only the fittest could survive.
His most difficult hour came with the privatisation of H&W in 1989 through a management-employee buy-out.
Many were sceptical as to whether it could succeed, but with the financial backing of Norwegian magnate Fred Olsen, Dr Parker was committed to seeing the process through.
Half-yearly results which are due to be published next week are expected to see the yard return to profitability.
Given the turbulent times which still afflict the industry, this is a remarkable achievement.
While other shipyards have hit the rocks, H&W has been kept afloat, and the order book is full until early 1995.
However, there will be concern that one of the two Capesize tankers under construction is an internal order — the plan is for the ship to be leased rather than sold.
It also begs the question of what happens after 1995.
Nevertheless, Dr Parker leaves the yard in considerably better shape than he found it.
Where before there was despondency, there is now a new belief in H&W.
His successor, Per Nielsen, comes with impressive credentials but as he will be well aware, he has a hard act to follow.
Killing No.4 sparks Orange call for action
THE head of the Orange Order is supporting the introduction of selective internment following today's murder of a Catholic father-of-six in his constituency.
South Belfast MP the Rev Martin Smyth made the comments after the fourth murder by loyalist terrorists and the second IRA bomb attack in four days.
The UFF has claimed responsibility for the killing early today of father-of-six Michael Edwards, at his Finaghy home, while an IRA van bomb devastated the centre of Armagh.
When questioned about selective internment, Mr Smyth said he believed it should go ahead and be even handed, involving both loyalist and republican terrorists.
Restrict
‘That is something we asked for years ago which has not been implemented, particularly because Dublin is not prepared to co-operate with London in what they would see as interning Irish citizens on Irish soil.
‘I do not think that the situation is slipping out of control.
I think in a democratic society we restrict the security services and that gives the advantage to the terrorists,’ he said.
Manned
Mr Smyth added he believed Treasury cash limits on the amount of money spent on security in the province was a major problem.
‘There are very few road blocks around the city.
Where are the men and women who manned them?
Are they being used for other work?’ he said.
DUP MP Peter Robinson said selective internment should only be brought in as a last resort.
He claimed the Government already had enough evidence to bring terrorists, who were currently free, to court.
‘If there was selective internment it would be for every section of the community,’ he said.
North Belfast SDLP Councillor Alban Maginess said he was totally opposed to internment.
Repugnant
‘All internment is selective, so it is nonsense to describe it in that way.
‘It goes against all the norms of due process.
It is repugnant to those of us who value civil rights in the community and will do nothing to alleviate the immediate situation.
It would make it worse,’ he said.
Mr Maginess added he believed the only answer was to tighten security measures and provide a stable political situation where problems could be solved.
Comber boys eye centenary
NORTH Down have an extra special reason for wishing to haul themselves out of the Harp International League at the third attempt…next season heralds the Comber club's centenary year.
However, first XI captain John Hiles certainly doesn't believe it will be an easy task, pointing out that the standard of hockey has improved greatly.
The experienced goalkeeper reckons RUC, who were relegated from the senior ranks last season, Parkview, Larne and Wanderers will all pose a serious threat to his team's chances.
The North Down skipper reports no new arrivals on the scene and, although Colin Mockford has left to join Holywood, the Harp Senior League champions will have a significant input as Paul Johnston and Kyle Thompson have both been helping out first XI coach Austin Hunter.
In addition, vice captain Simon Quinn is a former Holywood player and Hiles believes that Stephen Brown will also play a key role in his team's midfield.
Caravan moved on
A COUPLE were ordered to remove their caravan from a travellers permanent encampment at St Christopher's Park, Newry, at the local Magistrate's Court yesterday.
Mr Rory McShane, prosecuting for Newry and Mourne Council, said Nora and Patsy Ward had parked their caravan in contravention of the council's regulations.
Defence lawyer Mr Gerry Trainor pleaded that others living there were not objecting and they did not intend any trouble.
I'm not afraid, says brave Laura
LITTLE Laura Davies said today she was not afraid of another major transplant.
‘I'm not worried,’ the five-year-old girl from Eccles, Greater Manchester, told reporters at a news conference at the Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh.
She later closed the news conference with a song she made up.
The US surgeons are on standby to carry out the marathon multi-transplant operation if a suitable donor of the right age and blood type can be found.
Bowel
They confirmed that Laura's best hope of life would be to give her a new bowel, stomach, pancreas, liver and kidneys.
She has started to reject the liver and bowel she received in a transplant last year after a huge fund-raising campaign to send her to America.
The fund to meet the cost of Laura's treatment was relaunched this week and yesterday an anonymous £100,000 donation was confirmed to the organisers, who are confident enough that money can be raised for the new operation and after= care.
Appetite
Laura's parents, Fran and Les Davies, who were also at the news conference, said they did not know how much the next operation would cost.
However, Laura's appetite for life had left them no choice but to go ahead with a second major transplant.
Mrs Davies said of Laura: ‘She's a child that wants to live.
This child wants to get back to school, she wants to be in the Christmas play.’
Laura added: ‘I'm an adult.’
Hospital spokeswoman Margaret Le Masters said: ‘It is going to be a big hurdle for Laura to get over, but the surgeons are confident they can do it.
They are very willing to give her the chance she needs and deserves.’
Survived
One of the doctors in the medical team treating Laura, Dr Jorge Reyes, spelled out why they were going ahead with further surgery.
‘We feel that if we did not pursue this second transplant it would be like, to put it bluntly, pulling the plug on her.
I don't think any of us would be willing to do that.’
Transplant director Dr Andreas Tzakis and his team have carried out similar multi-organ transplants on five children in the past two years.
All have survived and three are at home and eating solid food.
Masked men hijack truck load of beer
DETECTIVES are hunting an armed gang that stole beer worth £20,000.
Three masked men, one brandishing a rifle and another a pistol, hijacked the Guinness lorry in south Armagh yesterday.
The gang forced the vehicle to stop at Newry Road, Silverbridge shortly after noon.
The driver and his mate were bundled into the boot of a black Nissan Bluebird and driven off.
The thieves then stole 160 kegs of beer from the lorry.
The two men were released unharmed in the Crossmaglen area an hour later.
Police at Bessbrook are appealing for anyone with information about the incident to contact them on (0693) 838222 or use the confidential telephone 666999.
Danger!
The home truths
SOME rather frightening statistics indicate that one third of all non-fatal accidents requiring hospital treatment are home related.
In fact, according to ROSPA, the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents, 40pc of all fatal accidents are home related.
In a safety initiative designed to reduce accidents in the home, the Kitchen Specialists Association (KSA) has launched a new booklet — Greater Safety in the Kitchen — which highlights some of the more common causes of accidents in the home and offers advice on how to avoid mishaps in the first place.
KSA members are responsible for the design, supply and installation of hundreds of kitchens every year throughout the UK.
They are keen to help reduce the 2.5 million domestic accidents that will require hospital treatment over the next 12 months, so this booklet concentrates on dangers in the kitchen — the Association's specialist area.
The association can be contacted at Riverbank House, Putney Bridge Approach, London SW6 3JD, or telephone 071 371 9191.
North-South in ‘deadlock’
THERE was a North/South dead heat finish to the Penzance Irish YB National
A total of 898 members of the Irish National Flying Club had 3,290 young birds in Penzance for the event in which they competed for £20,600 and a video sponsored by Salisbury Laboratories.
The convoy was liberated at 8.16am on Wednesday into a south-east wind which turned northerly later in the day.
The end result was so close a finish that, for the moment, the result is being declared a dead heat with birds recording a velocity of 1173.
Interestingly enough both sections are represented with W Buller (Scarva) representing the North section and S Darcy (Greenhills) the South section.
Ulster trio in Greek safari
THREE Ulster boxers have been named to represent Ireland in a team of six at the European Junior boxing championships in Greece starting on September 25.
They are; Oliver Duddy, the Coleraine flyweight, Adrian Patterson the St Patrick's Newry bantam and Brian Magee the light middle from Holy Trinity.
A fourth Ulster boxer was in the reckoning.
He was Richard Brannigan of Belfast Dockers, but this talented light welter was ousted on a show of hands by 19-4 by the Central Council delegates.
The boy to get into the team instead of Brannigan is Brian Crowley of Ennis at middleweight.
Also selected were Johnny Morrissey, the lightweight from Sunnyside, Cork, and Willie Egan of Dublin, Neilstown at welter.
There was a long debate on the question of a sixth boxer being selected following the recommendation for five by the National Coaching Committee.
Settled
A lack of finance in the budget for a busy season of overseas competition was put forward as the major factor in the composition of the team.
The coaching committee in fact, had originally settled for four boxers but then included a fifth and Crowley then got in as a result of tremendous pressure from the body of the floor.
Oliver Duddy stopped his man Noel Higgins of Glasnevin during a series of trials at the National Stadium last night.
Two coaches to travel with the team are Nicholf Cruz and Noel Humpston of Dublin.
Missing woman: police find body
POLICE searching for secretary Kathryn Chappell are believed to have discovered a body at a warehouse today.
A pathologist was called shortly after detectives arrived at the warehouse in Ashton-under-Lyne, Greater Manchester 15 miles from Kathryn's home in Bolton.
It is understood the warehouse search was mounted after police received new information over Kathryn's disappearance nearly two weeks ago.
The 31-year-old was last seen leaving work at a Manchester job agency.
Police said a man had been arrested and was today being questioned.
Residents accuse city airport
Jet fumes made us sick — claim
MORE than 100 people have accused Belfast City Airport of literally making them sick.
In the past four weeks about 130 residents living close to the Sydenham base have complained of nausea and headaches which they blame on aircraft fumes.
Some have suffered symptoms so severe that they have been given medication by their doctor.
Ulster Unionist councillor Jim Rodgers says the situation is so serious he has contacted the airport to see what can be done.
‘At least 130 people have either rang or written to me in the last few weeks.
‘They all live in the Sydenham, Inverary Park, Holywood Road, and Garnerville area and say they have been feeling very unwell.
‘The problem seems to occur when the Whispering Jet 146 is preparing for take off and it depends on how bad the winds are as well.
‘But I know some people have felt so miserable they have seen their doctor for some medicine and have been told that the fumes are the likely cause of their symptoms.
‘I, myself, have been observing this jet as it gets ready for take-off and there is a definite smell of fuel.’
But Belfast City Airport today denied that the Whispering Jet — so named because of its low noise — could cause ill health.
A spokesman said: ‘We have no reason to believe the aircraft has been causing a problem.
‘It has been operating out of the airport for the past five years and on a more frequent basis than it is doing now and we have not had any complaints of this nature in the past.
‘We would like to point out that these residents are also living beside a busy dual carriageway and a railway line.’
The spokesman said airport staff had met with Mr Rodgers and had now asked the councillor to put his complaints in writing.
Mr Rodgers said that he was not an opponent of the airport and added that staff at the base had been very helpful.
‘This airport has brought a lot of employment for both sides of the community and I believe we have to back this.
I am sure the problem can be sorted out.’
Pit bulls in round up
THE USPCA is vowing to round up illegally-owned pit bull terriers being trained in Ulster for fights in Britain and the Republic.
Senior inspector Francis Fox said that there were an estimated 900 pit bulls in the province that had not been registered under the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991.
The move comes after an Antrim father and daughter were found guilty of keeping four pit bulls illegally.
‘The case has given us confidence in bringing more investigations to the fore,’ said Mr Fox.
Talking won't stop violence
DUP leader the Rev Ian Paisley claimed today that conferences of politicians will not stop the violence in Northern Ireland.
Speaking on Radio Ulster's ‘Inside Politics’ programme, Mr Paisley said: ‘If the only hope in Northern Ireland is that the politicians have a meeting and talk then there is no hope for this province from the security point of view.’
‘Mirroring the IRA’
LOYALIST murder gangs are doing the work of and for Republican terrorists, the Church of Ireland Bishop of Connor said today.
Dr Samuel Poyntz was speaking the funeral of Jim Peacock, the prison officer murdered by the UVF in his north Belfast home on Wednesday night.
In his sermon he said that their ‘bestial and barbaric acts are only mirror images of IRA bombers and murderers’.
Peace plan ‘approved’
PLO chairman Yasser Arafat said today that his mainstream Fatah faction approved a self-rule deal with Israel and mutual recognition could be only days away.
He also told reporters he expected Syria, Jordan and Lebanon — the Arab countries talking peace with Israel in Washington — to sign other agreements with the Jewish state simultaneously within days.
Secretary is found murdered
SECRETARY Kathryn Chappell, 31, who disappeared without trace from her home nearly two weeks ago, was found murdered yesterday.
Police confirmed last night that a body found in a storage unit in a partially derelict mill near the centre of Ashton-under-Lyne in Greater Manchester was that of the missing woman.
20 years of torment
NO-ONE can even begin to understand the torment that Edward and Joan McDermott are going through.
Twenty years ago this week their world fell apart when their youngest child, Brian was murdered in the most gruesome of circumstances.
His body was hacked to pieces before an attempt was made to crudely incinerate it.
When that failed his remains were stuffed into a sack and dumped in the Lagan.
But in the two decades since this mindless butchery no one has been made to answer for a crime which sent shockwaves far beyond the shores of Ulster.
Somewhere in this community today there is a person or people who could shed light on this atrocity.
They are now 20 years older and must realise that to remain silent is to prolong the agony for Brian's parents.
To read Mrs McDermott's vivid recollection of those final precious moments when she spoke to her son and tidied his hair before he ran off to play in Ormeau Park where he met his killer would melt the hardest of hearts.
It is a touching scene that every parent can immediately identify with because they have gone through the same ritual with their own children.
The McDermotts returned to Belfast this week to pray by their son's grave and lay flowers.
But they also used the opportunity to make a desperate plea in the columns of this newspaper for information about the murder.
‘If anyone knows anything that could help and has kept quiet for any reason, I would beg them to please come forward now,’ his distraught mother said.
Sunday Life underlines that plea.
If you have the vital clue that will help bring this monstrous crime to a just conclusion it is your duty to lift the phone.
You can talk to the RUC, the Confidential Phone or this newspaper.
The numbers are listed below.
If you remain silent the nightmare will continue for Edward and Joan McDermott who want only justice for an innocent little boy whose young life was snuffed out in a moment of senseless savagery.
RUC Headquarters: Belfast 650222.
Confidential Phone: Belfast 652155.
Sunday Life: Belfast 331133.
Major ‘ready to quit over Shorts’
John Major — huge row with Mrs Thatcher
A SENSATIONAL new book has revealed that John Major nearly ruined his career after a huge row with the then PM Margaret Thatcher on the privatisation of Shorts.
The Belfast aircraft and missile plant became a bone of contention between Margaret Thatcher and John Major in 1988 when he was Chief Secretary to the Treasury.
‘The Major Enigma’, by Penny Junor, to be published tomorrow claims series of bitter confrontations with Mrs Thatcher even spurred him into writing a letter of resignation.
The problems began when Mr Major and Northern Ireland Secretary of State Tom King, negotiated what they believed to be the best deal for the taxpayers and Shorts.
The Belfast company had huge debts and was on the brink of collapse.
But it couldn't be privatised without a large injection of public money.
Mrs Thatcher, however, thought Major was being over-generous.
An angry scene took place in the Cabinet Room at Number 10, and Mrs Thatcher adopted what Mr Major calls her ‘blustering and bullying tactics’.
After two hours, he went back to the Treasury and wrote his resignation letter.
According to the book: ‘He was absolutely furious but was also slightly anxious.
This time I've really blown it,’ he said.
‘But she's wrong and I just know I'm right,’ he vowed.
The following day, however, Mrs Thatcher had a change of heart, and asked him to ‘flesh out’ his figures.
‘He did, she agreed his figures, and the matter was closed.’
20.0 The Major Enigma, by Penny Junor, is published by Michael Joseph tomorrow.
US to re-enact Trade Centre blast
MILITARY and FBI explosives experts plan to re-enact the deadly blast that rocked the World Trade Centre.
Prosecutors may try to present videotape of the test explosion as evidence in the trial of four men charged with the bombing last February that killed six people and injured more than 1,000, New York Newsday said.
The US Attorney's office informed defence attorneys of plans to conduct the demonstration ‘using chemicals similar to those used in the World Trade Centre bombing.’
The bomb was created from a mix of inexpensive chemicals.
The letter did not indicate what would be blown up or where the blast would be staged, one of the defence lawyers, Austin Campriello, said.
Campriello, lawyer for defendant Ahmad Mohammad Ajaj, said he would object to any attempt to introduce the re-enactment as evidence at trial.
‘There is no legitimate reason for the test other than to further fan the fires of prejudice,’ Campriello said.
FBI agents already have blown up a van similar to the rented vehicle that investigators say carried 1,200lb of explosives into the Trade Centre complex's underground garage.
Refugees flee Croat areas
CROAT and government forces slugged it out for parts of central and southwestern Bosnia yesterday, sending waves of bedraggled Muslim refugees fleeing eastward.
The exodus appeared to reflect Croat efforts to purge Muslims from Croat-controlled districts ahead of a possible agreement to divide the Bosnia into Croat, Serb and Muslim ministates.
Talks on the division collapsed last week in Geneva over territorial issues, prompting fears of more intense fighting in Bosnia.
But Bosnia's Muslim president, Alija Izetbegovic, said yesterday on a visit to Turkey that he expected the Geneva talks to resume in two weeks.
Truce
United Nations officials said fighting persisted in Mostar last night, the main city in southwestern Bosnia, after a two-day truce collapsed in intense shellfire on Friday.
Fighting also was heavy in Gornji Vakuf, 40 miles to the north, forcing the closure of a key route used by aid convoys to reach central Bosnia and Sarajevo, the capital.
The Clinton administration on Thursday threatened Croats and Serbs with Nato air strikes if they resumed offensives against key cities, including Mostar.
Students scramble over digs
By NEIL MULHOLLAND
HUNDREDS of Ulster students could find themselves homeless and on the street when university starts back next month.
For comfortable, affordable accommodation around south Belfast is almost impossible to find.
Over the next few weeks thousands of undergraduates will pour into the city after the summer recess looking for somewhere to live.
But cheap ‘digs’ within walking distance of Queen's University is now at a premium.
Many landlords have pulled out of the market completely or have upgraded properties to luxury standard and are now asking rents far beyond the meagre grant cheque budget.
Student leaders at Queen's University say the acute shortage of student houses flats and bedsits has been caused by higher standards for accommodation demanded by the Housing Executive.
For the housing organisation is now stringently enforcing multiple occupation rules which up until recently were largely ignored.
The regulations — intended to see off slum landlords — now insist on minimum standards for safety features such as fire escapes, firedoors and hygiene and toilet facilities in any rented property with more than five tenants.
Queen's students union vice president and accommodation officer Joanne Richards said many students will get a shock when they return from the summer holidays.
‘A large number of properties have been closed down as landlords pull out because they cannot afford to upgrade them,’ she said.
‘Others have understandably wanted to recoup their investment and the rents they are asking are more than a student can afford on a £750 a term grant.’
Students suffer
HARD-UP university students from the Southern Board area may have to wait longer than usual for their grants after Thursday night's bomb attack in Armagh badly damaged the Board's offices.
The warning of delays came as workers tried to get the offices, which are in the devastated area around the Mall, back into working order.
Down in dumps A GROUP of young people from Northern Ireland are setting off this week on a trip to one of the world's poorest regions.
Six members of the Christian Fellowship Church in Belfast will spend two weeks with the people who live on the dumps of Mexico's Reynosa.
Border gang targets elderly
POLICE on both sides of the border are hunting a gang which is targeting elderly folk who live alone in isolated rural areas.
The gang has struck at several homes in Monaghan, Cavan and Armagh stealing money from pensioners.
A detective in the Republic said last night the gang kept elderly people chatting at their door while another member entered the house to search for cash and valuables.
ANTI-RACKETS SQUAD TARGET McGUINNESS
ON behalf of Mr and Mrs McDermott Sunday Life would like to appeal to anyone who thinks they can help to get in touch with us.
It is Joan and Ted's hope that even now someone may know something that can solve Brian's murder.
If you do not want to go to the police, ring Sunday Life on Belfast 331133 ext 4316 and your message will be passed on to the McDermotts.
RIGHT: Black catsuit reduced to £89.50.
FAR RIGHT: Frill fronted waistcoat, reduced to £72.50 and matching skirt £54.50.
All by Future Ozbek at Earth Clothing.
Police say file still open
SUNDAY Life had hoped to interview one of the RUC detectives involved in the original investigation but unfortunately it was not possible.
Instead, RUC headquarters provided the following statement in response to a number of questions we raised about the case.
‘The murder of this young boy, Brian McDermott, was one of the most ghastly, horrific crimes ever to be committed.
‘At the time there was a prolonged extensive investigation and huge efforts were made through publicity to enlist the aid of the public in solving the crime.
‘Any suggestion or hint of a specific motive for the crime was pursued by the police and the disappearance of other persons at the time of the murder formed part of the investigation.
‘No specific links were found.
‘Since then various investigative leads have been pursued and, to this day, the file remains open.
‘We would still appeal to any member of the public who has any suspicion or information to get in touch and talk to us in confidence.
‘Any new evidence or information will be vigorously pursued.’
Man denies hijackings
A MAN from the market area of Belfast has been remanded in custody on three separate charges of hijacking taxis.
Paul David McGeown, 28, from Stewart Street was accused at the Magistrates Court yesterday of seizing the cars in the Ormeau area during July and August.
He denied the charges and was remanded to appear again on September 17.
TOWN TRADERS FACE IRA ONSLAUGHT
THE 1,000lb IRA bomb which ripped through the centre of Armagh on Friday morning highlighted again the security nightmare facing Ulster towns.
Clearly, the terrorists are intent on wrecking the commercial hearts of Northern Ireland.
Town after town — Coleraine, Bangor, Lurgan, Portadown, Magherafelt, Newtownards — have been devastated.
And the price is a heavy one — compensation pay-outs for 1992-93 alone have been estimated at over £100m.
The Coleraine bomb caused £14m worth of damage alone.
For traders and the RUC, the IRA's relentless campaign against commercial targets poses a security dilemma.
Visible
Too little visible security and the RUC are accused of leaving towns vulnerable to the bombers.
Too much security and traders claim the police are doing the terrorist's job by strangling commercial activity.
That has been the cry recently from some traders in Lurgan as reported in Sunday Life two weeks ago.
Each evening for the past couple of months Lurgan town centre — like many other towns — has been sealed by the RUC from early evening.
Hit hardest in Lurgan are businesses which open late such as pubs, off-licences and fast food bars.
One fast-food bar owner reckons the ring of steel is costing his business about £1,000 per week.
Bombers
And off-licence manager David Bell hit out: ‘It is not as if the bombers only operate after 6pm.
They bombed Portadown at 11.15 on a Saturday morning.’
The RUC, aware of the dilemma, have expressed sympathy for the inconvenience but lay the blame firmly at the door of the bombers.
‘The reality is that ruthless terrorists make this necessary,’ said an RUC spokesman.
The police also stress that although many town centres are sealed at night controversy rarely arises.
Indeed, only in Lurgan and Dungannon has there been serious complaints about too much security recently.
The decision to close town centre gates is taken by RUC Sub-Divisional Commanders after consultation with local traders and public representatives.
The police say the policy is constantly kept under review.
As our survey indicates the policy varies across the Province — but whatever security is employed the police say that there is no such thing as total security.
Warning
And the RUC have reiterated a warning made two months ago that they believe the terrorists have large stocks of explosives.
‘The bomb in Armagh is a reminder that the public should remain vigilant,’ said an RUC spokesman.
UFF STEPS UP TERROR CAMPAIGN
SECURITY sources believe that the UFF managed to locate the new safe house of the IRA's top man in North Belfast within just six weeks.
The house was attacked and another IRA activist escaped without injury.
The ability of the loyalist terrorists to track down the location is an illustration of how much better their intelligence on the IRA has become.
Homework
A Special Branch Officer said: ‘It shows they are driving around nationalist areas, consulting electoral register records and basically doing their homework.’
Uncovering the IRA man's safe house, detectives believe, was basically a case of watching car movements.
‘We're certain the UFF identifies a car used by the target, then they drive through nationalist areas in the city late at night looking for the car.
‘If they locate it outside a house, then they establish when it is there, and prepare an attack for that period.’
Patrols
Police say that one well known UFF figure is regularly driving through nationalist parts of North and West Belfast despite the real risk to his own life.
An RUC officer said: ‘He is regularly stopped at road checks by our patrols.
He even points at houses and tells uniformed officers ‘That's where so and so lives’.
‘He really is constantly targeting the homes of IRA figures, but we can't prove that in court.’
Such is the geography of the area that a top UFF man in the Shankill and the IRA's top man in North Belfast recently became involved in a heated verbal exchange in a bizarre incident while stopped in cars at traffic lights on the Crumlin Road.
Screaming
One RUC officer said: ‘If you wrote that into a play or novel, people wouldn't believe it, but it actually happened.
Here were these two sworn enemies screaming at each other through car windows.
‘It's indicative of a seething hatred and the proximity of loyalist and nationalist areas which enables the killer gangs to drive into one another 's area in a minute and get back whether they are scouting or going in to murder.’
Brian's dismembered body was found in the Lagan after army and police, pictured left, mounted a massive hunt.
MANY theories including black magic were put forward after Brian's murder.
But of them all, Joan and Ted McDermott believe the most likely is that the killing was connected to the Kincora Boys Home homosexual scandal.
‘We think Brian might have seen something or found something out that someone was afraid he would come home and tell us,’ said Mr McDermott.
The McDermott's also called on the police to look at the possibility of re-examining the case now that DNA testing is possible.
Hacked
‘They might be able to test the sack and rope which Brian was found in and find something new.
Anything is worth a try,’ said Ted.
The province was shocked by the sickening details of the crime and one of the biggest murder hunts of all time got underway.
The child's leg and one of his arms had been hacked off.
His body was so badly burned that his features were unrecognisable.
Thousands of people were interviewed in the months and years to follow.
Such was the sense of shock and disgust that a number of RUC officers offered to work on their days off and without pay to help track down the killer.
For the first time ever, the RUC bought air time on Ulster Television to appeal for help.
Giant posters measuring 16ft by 8ft were erected by the army at the entrance to Ormeau Park in another desperate attempt to jog someone's memory.
But 20 years on the killer or killers could still be walking the streets of Ulster.
Parents suspect a Kincora connection
DEATH THREAT TO SEX FIEND By NEIL MULHOLLAND
JAILED: Martin Houston was found guilty of a catalogue of sex crimes
‘I would rip him apart, limb from limb’, say father of victim
ONE OF Ulster's most notorious sex fiends has been warned that he will be ‘ripped apart limb from limb’ if he shows his face in west Belfast.
Martin Houston from South Link in Andersontown who was jailed for seven years last October for a horrendous catalogue of crimes against young boys will be eligible for home leave in just six months time.
He was found guilty on 25 separate counts of buggery and gross indecency on six boys, amid scenes of uproar from distressed relatives of his victims.
But with 50pc remission and consideration of the time he spent on remand, he will be allowed out for weekends by next February.
The fact that he could soon be free to walk the streets has horrified the parents of the children he abused.
One man, whose teenage son was repeatedly sexually assaulted, told Sunday Life that Houston would be ‘killed’ if he returned to the Andersontown area.
‘The man is a monster and I would swing for him,’ he said.
‘The families of the children are still in a bad way over the leniency of the sentence.
It is an outrage that he can be let out so soon’.
He added: ‘People in Andersontown will be queuing up to get their hands of him.
I would personally rip him apart limb from limb for what he did to my boy.’
The evil paedophile, who worked for the prisons charity NIACRO, preyed on youngsters using his position of trust with the St. Lazarus' ambulance corps.
NIACRO knew he was a sex offender but was prohibited by law from passing that information onto the ambulance group.
The charity even allowed Houston to rent its summer home Kiln House near Newcastle to take children on holidays.
At the time he infiltrated the organisation, he was on parole for a serious sex offence against a mentally retarded man.
But because of a break-down in communication, the Probation Service, which could have warned-off the St. Lazarus group, was unaware that he had joined the organisation.
The Department of Health and Social Services Inspectorate is currently carrying out an investigation into the case.
Its report is expected in the autumn.
Ferry ‘will shatter peace’
PEOPLE lured to one of the quietest corners of Ulster by the prospect of a quiet life fear a proposed ferry service development will destroy the peace around their ‘dream homes.’
They moved to scenic Greencastle on the southern tip of Co Down in recent years but now the ‘adopted’ locals are dreading the possibility of the ferry which will operate from Greencastle to Greenore on the other side of Carlingford Lough.
Busy
Said one: ‘Myself and others are opposed to the ferry because it would turn this area into a busy through route.’
One of the ferry's departure points would virtually be on her doorstep.
Situated five mile south of Kilkeel, Greencastle has only one narrow road.
Continued the woman: ‘This is one of the quietest parts of Northern Ireland and that's why we moved here six years ago to get away from the city.
The ferry service will destroy everything.’
But, others have welcomed the unique cross-border service which supporters say would boost tourism.
Greencastle postmistress, Patricia Sloan, explained: ‘The ferry would be great, it would liven this place up.’
Dorothy Hulme, President of Kilkeel Chamber of Commerce said the ferry would ‘help open up the Mourne and Cooley areas to tourists.’
IRA HITLIST FEAR FOR ‘EASY PREY’
By JOHN CASSIDY
UNIONISTS fear low-profile politicians are to be targeted by the IRA.
They are concerned that councillors who keep themselves to themselves are easy prey for the IRA.
Threats
Threats against UUP and DUP councillors in Belfast is a direct response to UFF attacks on Sinn Fein and SDLP politicians.
The loyalist attacks follow a UFF statement in January saying it would target those involved in a so-called ‘pan-nationalist front.’
Sunday Life revealed two weeks ago that up to 10 unionist councillors in Belfast City Hall had been warned about their personal safety.
But in the light of the intelligence falling into the hands of the RUC Special Branch, unionists believe the IRA will switch tactics.
It is understood Special Branch detectives have been charting planned attacks on unionists and advising the politicians on measures to protect their lives and members of their families.
A unionist councillor in North Belfast said the feeling among his colleagues was the IRA will target low-profile politicians.
‘The IRA know that members of our party or the DUP who have a high media and public profile will be well-watched by the security forces either visibly or covertly,’ said the unionist councillor.
‘The republican terrorists will hit the likes of me or other party members who keep themselves to themselves and do their council work without much public glorification.
‘We will have no truck with Sinn Fein.
But we can work and have a good relationship in the City Hall with the SDLP.
‘The whole situation is quite frightening and it is a matter of taking precautions without arousing too much concern with out neighbours or families.
‘At this stage it is hard to know where these threats will end,’ said the councillor.
Brothers drown on fishing trip
‘I've worked with Winston for around 20 years and I still can't believe what has happened.
‘Both Winston and Billy were part of the fly-fishing team for Ireland and were well known in both fishing and other sporting circles.
It's just awful.’
Winston McConville lived with his common-law wife in Lurgan with their family.
His two sons by his first marriage lived with their mother, Norma in Tandragee.
Neighbour John Lavery said the newspaperman was a man ‘who could make friends with anyone’.
‘It probably had a lot to do with his job but he was a fella who always had a word for you,’ said Mr Lavery.
It is understood Winston McConville's son Don travelled to Castlebar yesterday to identify the bodies of his father and uncle.
The family was still too upset to say anything about the accident.
In Tandragee, news of the tragedy spread quickly throughout the small town.
A neighbour of Billy McConville, Alison Kennedy, said the family was ‘totally devastated’.
She said: ‘They were lovely men, and it was great to see brothers still enjoying their own company late on in life.
It's such a great shame.
‘You would have seen them together a fair bit and it's just so sad this should happen while they were on holiday.’
The brothers were also young schoolboy international soccer players for Northern Ireland, according to family friend Stephen Richardson.
‘They were close brothers and it's terrible news to hear for any family.’
Lough Lannagh is made up of a series of lakes containing deep holes and is known as a dangerous area for swimming.
ON THE MARCH
THOUSANDS of Blackmen paraded to six demonstrations in Ulster yesterday to herald the end of the Ulster marching season.
The Royal Black Institution's demonstrations were staged at Antrim, Killyleagh, Saintfield, Castlerock, Donemana and Moy.
The RUC were on duty along part of the Ormeau Road as members of the Ballynafeigh district paraded past.
About a dozen residents stood in protest but there was no trouble.
The marchers returned by a different route last night.
Nazi U-boat declared safe by bomb team
BOMB disposal experts in Copenhagen yesterday said they have removed all the torpedoes and ammunition from the Second World War Nazi U-boat raised from the seabed off Denmark on Monday.
It is now ready to be moved to a dry dock.
Carsten Ree, the Danish publisher sponsoring the salvage project, said 16 torpedoes had been found after four days work inside the sub.
Treasure
It had been rumoured to be carrying Nazi treasures or secrets, but survivors from the German submarine crew doubt whether any major treasure will be discovered.
‘We found 16 torpedoes in all, slightly fewer than we expected,’ said Ree.
‘All in all we have removed 10 tonnes of ammunition from the inside of the U-534.
It will all be detonated underwater near the salvage site.’
Once declared safe the U-boat will be towed on a floating platform to the North Sea port of Hirtshals, 90 miles from where it was brought to the surface.
I won't just ignore these people
A LOYALIST politician has admitted talking to Sinn Fein about his plans to travel into the heart of republican areas of Belfast.
And newly elected city councillor Sandy Blair says he won't be shunning Sinn Fein members even though he loathes their politics.
For the east Belfast unionist, who plans to visit community centres in nationalist areas, has revealed that he knows two current Sinn Fein councillors from his youthful days in the New Lodge area.
‘I grew up in the same street as Alex Maskey,’ said Mr Blair who also knew SF's Paddy McManus many years ago.
‘I didn't know Alex well but you can't not know a lad who lives in the same street.’
Different
Notorious IRA killer Joe Doherty also lived in Upper Meadow Street which Mr Blair's family, like other Protestant families, left in the 1970s.
‘They weren't moved out as some people have claimed.
They left of their own free will,’ he insisted.
‘Obviously, the Sinn Fein people and myself have gone in very different ways since those days.
‘And you couldn't print what I think about Sinn Fein 's politics.
I've had friends murdered by the IRA,’ added the Ulster Unionist.
‘But I wouldn't just ignore these people.
If they come up to me in the members room of the City Hall and say ‘hello’ what am I supposed to?
‘I'm an ordinary working class man.
I'm not going to behave like some councillors who seem to forget where they came from.
‘I was reared with these people and I wouldn't completely ignore them.
But at the same time I won't be throwing my arms round them and kissing them either,’ he said.
Mr Blair also confirmed that he had recently spoken informally to Sinn Fein members in the City Hall about his plans to visit community centres in nationalist areas.
‘I intend going to all 21 community centres across the city in my capacity as community services chairman.
‘I have informed all the parties in the City Hall of my intentions, including Sinn Fein,’ he added.
Represent
‘I've no love for the SDLP either but I still went and spoke to them too.
‘As far as I'm concerned I was elected to represent all of the people of Belfast.
‘As chairman of the community services committee I believe I should go to see all the community centres in Belfast as Seamus Lynch did when he was chairman.’
Details of Mr Blair's conversation with Sinn Fein over his planned visits emerged after Sunday Life received a phone call from a person claiming to be a Sinn Fein election agent.
But Mr Blair says he suspects the caller was a unionist attempting to ‘stir things up’.
‘I'm new to politics but I'm finding out quickly just how dirty a business it is,’ said Mr Blair.
Farmers in water row
MONAGHAN farmers are angry with the county council because officials won't approve a scheme which supplies 650 dwellings for a grant of £250,000.
The council says the water source is too close to another bore hole which has been ear-marked to bring water into Monaghan town eight miles away.
Yesterday the border farmers threatened to block the council scheme unless their own scheme was sanctioned.
A special meeting of both sides has been called for next Tuesday to discuss the crux.
A FORMER Lord Mayor of Belfast is expected to face disciplinary action after a stand up row with a colleague, it was revealed last night.
Belfast councillor John Carson has been reported to his North Belfast Unionist Constituency Association over allegations that he verbally assaulted party member Fred Proctor.
The allegations centre on a meeting of the powerful Policy and Resources Committee on Friday 20 August.
According to sources, a stand-up row developed between Alderman Carson and the UUP committee chairman.
It is understood former Lord Mayor Carson was speaking during a debate on the Laganside Concert complex debate.
‘Fred Proctor asked him to sit down as he had been speaking long enough.
‘But Mr Carson said ‘Are you going to make me sit down?’
Attacked
‘At one stage we thought Freddie was going to get John thrown out but they both calmed down after a few minutes,’ added the source.
Mr Proctor said last night that it was all ‘water under the bridge’.
‘I don't know what got into John and I don't know why he attacked me.
He just seems to have taken the head staggers.
‘He did make things difficult for a few minutes and I did consider having him fired from the chamber.
‘But John calmed down and things were settled amicably at the end of the day,’ he said.
Sunday Life tried unsuccessfully to contact Mr Carson last week to comment on the allegations.
COUNCIL ACCUSED OF ‘WITCH-HUNT’
By NEIL MULHOLLAND
UNIONIST councillors in Lisburn have been accused of launching a witch-hunt against their own staff.
For the council's works committee is to consider taking disciplinary action against employees who made serious corruption allegations against senior officials.
Last year the council called in the police to investigate claims that council-owned building materials had been allegedly misappropriated for private use.
A file was sent to the Director of Public Prosecutions, but the DPP decided not to press charges.
Now the workers whose complaints started the probe fear they could lose their jobs.
Scandalous
Last week's council decision to refer the matter to the staff committee for disciplinary investigation has outraged SDLP, Conservative and UDP members.
Former Mayor Billy Bleakes said it was ‘scandalous that honest men are to be made scapegoats’, and accused the Unionist members of pursuing a vendetta against the workers.
‘It is contrary to natural justice to launch a witch-hunt against the members of staff who made these allegations,’ he said.
Encourage
‘I would certainly encourage all council staff to speak out when they believe something may be wrong.’
He added: ‘I will be demanding a full investigation by the chief executive of the council into every aspect of this affair.’
Peter O'Hagan of the SDLP described the possibility of disciplinary measures against the workers as ‘victimisation of the worst kind’.
Betrayed
‘These men must feel utterly betrayed,’ he said.
And Ulster Democratic Party member Gary McMichael accused the controlling Ulster Unionists of trying to silence the workforce.
‘It is shocking that Unionists should attempt to use bullying tactics to instill fear into staff and stop them from voicing what they believed to be genuine concerns.’
Meeting
Lisburn Council's deputy chief executive Norman Davidson told Sunday Life the council welcomed the DPP's decision not to press any criminal charges.
He confirmed that the staff committee would now meet on Thursday night to consider whether to discipline the workers who made the allegations.
‘It will be up to every member of the committee to decide whether they can take part in the discussions or whether they have a conflict of interest,’ he said.
Peace strategy abandoned
THE GOVERNMENT and army drew up a secret 50-60 point peace plan in a bid to get the IRA to extend its Christmas ceasefire.
The strategy involved removing troops to barracks and standing down checkpoints in nationalist areas.
But it was quickly abandoned when the IRA resumed its terror campaign after just three days.
The detailed plans were drafted by the former army GOC Sir John Wilsey.
A report in the Sunday Times last week, confirming the Sunday Life story of July 11, revealed the plans were drawn up as a result of an intelligence source in the IRA who said the organisation had developed a ‘peace party’ led by Gerry Adams and Martin McGuinness.
But the plans failed because Adams and McGuinness failed to win over the IRA leadership.
Driver is killed by train
AN 18-year-old driver was killed yesterday when his car plunged 40ft from a bridge onto a railway line and was pushed 300ft along the track by a passenger train.
Doctors pronounced Glynn Penn, of High Street, Amblecote, West Midlands, dead at the scene after his mini swerved off the bridge at Redlake Road, Stourbridge, West Midlands.
It was hit by a train from Hereford to Birmingham.
His passenger Anthony Ballard, 17, of Cradley, West Midlands, scrambled free of the wreckage before it was hit by the train, and escaped with whiplash injuries and shock, said a British transport police spokesman.
The spokesman said the mini veered off the road after it was in collision with another car approaching the bridge.
It drove through a hedge and fall onto the line below.
212354 AUG 93
Russian protesters on march
SEVERAL thousand hard-liners demonstrated yesterday outside the Russian parliament building to mark the second anniversary of the August 1991 coup and demand the resignation of President Boris Yeltsin.
Participants in the rally, held by a coalition of opposition movements called the National Salvation Front, waved red Soviet and Czarist flags as speakers accused Yeltsin and his administration of destroying the former Soviet Union and Russia.
An estimated 4,000 people took part in the demonstration, the hard-liners' second in two days.
212119 AUG 93
Nightclub death fight
A MAN was charged last night with murdering a 32-year-old father-of-two who died after a fight near a nightclub.
John Burns, of Mallory Place, Gateshead, died after the incident near the Buzz in Newcastle upon Tyne.
Northumbria police named the accused man as Guiseppi Pino Vecchio, 27, of Ripley Gardens, Gateshead.
He will appear before Newcastle magistrates tomorrow.
Animal test row rages on
I WOULD like to respond to Andrew Blake's letter ‘Testing must continue’(8/8/93).
The last set of Home Office statistics for animal experiments which are for 1991 show that:
131,760 Lethal Dose 50 tests were conducted.
69,520 medical, dental and veterinary products were tested on animals.
6,850 tests were carried out to deliberately give animals cancer.
The BUAV's latest undercover investigation into Wickham Research Laboratories has been sent to the Home Office.
Kevin Daws,
Campaigns Organiser, BUAV.
DEATH CHEAT JUDGE RETIRES
A COURT of Appeal Judge who cheated death in an IRA bomb explosion six years ago is to retire this week.
Lord Justice Donald Bruce Murray will hang up his gowns this Tuesday after a lengthy service at the centre of Ulster's judicial system.
Educated at Belfast Royal Academy, Queen's University and Trinity College in Dublin, he was called to the English bar at Gray's Inn in 1945.
Lord Justice Murray was called to the Northern Ireland Bar in 1953, became a QC in 1964 and was elected a Bencher of the Inn of Court of Northern Ireland in 1971.
The same year he reported his findings into the Ministry of Commerce after his two year probe into company law as chairman of the Company Law Committee.
The father-of-three became chairman of the Bar Council in 1972 and three years later he was made a High Court Judge and was immediately appointed to the Chancery Division.
During a football wage wrangle case in 1983, he took time out to record his delight at Northern Ireland's win over Austria at Windsor Park.
Delighted
As IFA president Harry Cavan took the witness box, the then Mr Justice Murray said: ‘Mr Cavan, entirely without prejudice, I must say I was delighted, as we all were, with the performance last night.
‘It was a great pleasure indeed to see such a splendid game.’
Four years later, just seven days before Christmas, the IRA planted a 200lb car bomb in a hijacked Datsun car outside his Cadogan Park home in south Belfast.
The no-warning bomb exploded just seconds before the end-of-school bell sounded at nearby Richmond Lodge — now part of Victoria College.
School pupils escaped injury but 70 homes were damaged in the blast.
Nine months later he was knighted with four other High Court judges.
In October 1989 he was appointed Lord Justice of Appeal after the retirement of Lord Justice O'Donnell from Northern Ireland Supreme Court Bench.
During his distinguished career he questioned whether the UDA should remain a legal organisation after he heard that the murder of a man was hatched in a UDA drinking club.
And one famous quote during a court case he presided over was: ‘The old law of the eye for the eye and a tooth and for a tooth has no place in civilised society.’
Last week the Northern Ireland Court Service said it couldn't comment Lord Justice Murray's retirement.
Lord Justice Murray
Jail justice group calls for inquiry
By JOHN CASSIDY
CAMPAIGNERS have called for an investigation into the cases of ten loyalist prisoners on remand in Belfast Crumlin Road prison.
The Shankill-based Justice For All group says it wants an independent inquiry into the cases following claims by prisoners of ‘cover-ups’ by RUC officers.
The call for a probe follows a letter sent to Sunday Life last week by inmates in the powderkeg jail who have set up the Concerned Prisoners For Justice Committee.
Cover-up
The statement said CPFJC had been formed to try and ‘counteract a cover-up’ in the cases of ten prisoners.
‘So far in our investigation we are aware of at least ten loyalist prisoners who have been interviewed by the same policemen.
‘In a separate case one policeman is in charge of a case where there are allegations of police brutality and pressure being used to extract statements.
‘We appeal to anyone with an interest in British justice to support our demand for an immediate independent inquiry into the RUC frame-ups and present use of supergrasses,’ said the CPFJC statement.
Backing
Justice For All spokesman William Smith said he backed the committee's call for an independent probe into the cases.
‘Justice For All will be doing everything it can to have the cases of these men looked at.
‘There is no point asking the police to investigate itself.
‘We want an outside body to investigate these mens complaints of being fitted up for something they didn't do,’ added William Smith.
COUNCIL AT CENTRE OF WITCH-HUNT ROW
UNIONIST councillors in Lisburn have been accused of launching a witch-hunt against their own staff.
The council's works committee is to consider taking disciplinary action against employees who made serious corruption allegations against senior officials.
Six months ago the council called in the police to investigate claims that building materials had been misappropriated for private use.
A file was sent to the Director of Public Prosecutions, but the DPP decided not to press charges against the individuals concerned.
Now the workers who brought the matter to light fear they could lose their jobs.
For the man at the centre of the police inquiry will be sitting on the committee that could decide their fate.
Last week's council decision to refer the matter to the works committee for disciplinary investigation has outraged SDLP, Conservative and UDP members.
Former Mayor Billy Bleakes said it was ‘scandalous that honest men are to be made scapegoats’, and accused the Unionist members of pursuing a vendetta against the workers.
‘It is contrary to natural justice to launch a witch-hunt against the members of staff who made these allegations,’ he said.
‘I will be demanding a full investigation by the chief executive of the council into every aspect of this.’
Peter O'Hagan of the SDLP described the suggestion that the workers should be disciplined as ‘victimisation of the worst kind’.
He added: ‘It is ludicrous that a man who was the centre of a police investigation should be allowed to sit in judgment against honest men who were following their conscience.’
And Ulster Democratic Party member Gary McMichael accused the controlling Ulster Unionists of trying to silence the workforce.
Laser appeal reaches target
AN APPEAL which touched the hearts of generous Northern Ireland people has reached its target.
Sunday Life helped launch the Laserfair NI fund this time last year when we asked our readers to help bring revolutionary new medical equipment to Ulster.
Now the vital laser needed to treat children with disfiguring birthmarks is already installed at the Ulster Hospital at Dundonald.
The tunable dye laser — which cost almost £250,000 — is one of five of its type in operation throughout the United Kingdom.
Happy
And, although it is to be officially unveiled next month, there is already a waiting list of local people eager to be treated with it.
‘This is a really happy ending to your story,’ said appeal co-ordinator Harry Kearney from Ballymena.
‘We are delighted to have achieved this within a year.
The generosity of the public has been overwhelming.
‘Everyone involved in this project would like to say a big thank you to all who have supported us.
We are also deeply indebted to Dr Grace Allen and her staff at the Ulster Hospital.’
Advantage
There is a 70pv success rate for treatment with the tunable dye laser.
Its main advantage is that it can be used to treat children.
Until now, local adults and youngsters had to travel to Britain for regular treatment.
It is estimated that the incidence of port wine stain birthmarks is three per 1,000 births in the UK.
Roger Cook unlocks his file on Ulster
TAILING THE TERRORISTS
WHAT began for me as a culture shock 25 years ago, has now transmuted into an enduring sense of sorrow and frustration.
Fresh from the colonies, my first assignment in the province was for ‘The World at One’ late in 1968, around the time they were bolting steel plates over the windows of Broadcasting House in Belfast.
Beautiful
I'd driven over, and couldn't believe a country so beautiful could harbour such violence as I was to see then and year after year ever since.
Over the years I and my colleagues have tried to point the finger at some of those at the centre of terrorist activity on both sides of the politico-religious divide.
In 1987, it was the paramilitary extortionists of the UDA who came under scrutiny.
Several senior UDA figures went to prison as a result of that programme.
In 1989, we examined the roles of Fr Patrick Ryan and others in the funding and the arming of the IRA.
Neither programme really effected any change in the course of events, but they did build a sense of trust in those who might one day use us to bear public witness against the Godfathers of terrorism.
In the years since, we've kept a Northern Ireland file, and a few months ago we had collected enough encouraging evidence to make us think that a concerted effort would enable us to name the man most consistently pointed at as being in control of the IRA, Martin McGuinness.
Three months of intensive research on the ground and on the mainland resulted in the programme nearly half the UK television audience watched last Tuesday.
In the decade since Mr McGuinness professed to have turned his back on the IRA and to have become a Sinn Fein politician, more than 40 witnesses and statements placed him firmly at the scene of violent incidents — and at the heart of the IRA's decision-making process.
The programme was dismissed by McGuinness as both ‘rubbish’ and ‘sleaze’invented by paid liars and informers making black propaganda on behalf of MI5.
No one in the programme received a fee, and as for 81-year-old Mrs Rose Hegarty being an MI5 dupe or a liar, nothing could be further from the truth.
Mr McGuinness dismisses other contributors as convicted terrorists.
He is one himself, twice convicted of IRA membership in Dublin in 1973 and 1974 and sentenced to a total of 18 months imprisonment.
This rather contradicts his claim never to have been an IRA member.
His claim that we described him as the IRA's Chief of Staff is untrue.
The programme never described him as such, though he certainly wields the authority you would expect that title would give him.
Justice
I am confident the truth will stand.
Our files have been passed to the RUC.
If the Government is operating, as some fear, a ‘better-the devil-you-know’ policy and McGuinness escapes justice, then the violence will continue with McGuinness at its centre.
He should face justice, and he should face it as an example to the men of violence on both sides.
Maybe then the tide of violence will subside, a political solution can be reached and the most beautiful of countries will at last enjoy peace.
Both Fr Pat Ryan (above) and Martin McGuinness have come under investigation in The Cook Report.
BELFAST BOYS' HOME NAMED IN SEX PROBE
By ALAN MURRAY THE RUC is conducting a nationwide hunt to track down 400 boys as part of an investigation into allegations of sex abuse at a Belfast home.
The probe into St Patrick's juvenile offenders centre on the Glen Road has been launched following a complaint by a former inmate — now living in England — that he was sexually assaulted there ten years ago.
It is understood the allegations relate to the 1981-1983 period, when the man was detained at the home, run by the De La Salle Brothers.
The man who made the original and so far only allegation of sexual abuse is believed to be living in England.
He has convictions there for a number of theft and similar petty crime offences since leaving St Patrick's.
Nobody from the De La Salle Brothers who run the Training Centre has yet been contacted or interviewed by detectives.
Detectives are first trying to locate other inmates in a bid to corroborate the original allegation before making a formal approach to the De La Salle Brothers.
One social services source told Sunday Life: ‘The RUC was given all the names of boys who were placed in the home between 1981 and 1983 and they are trying to track them all down.
‘Only about 40 have been located so far, we have been told.
It is likely to be a very long investigation.’
One senior officer at Police Headquarters commented last week: ‘It's a long job.
If we don't locate and interview every inmate detained there at that time, we'll be accused of some sort of cover-up.’
Bid to stem rising tide of violence SECRET TALKS WITH LOYALISTS
THE GOVERNMENT has used intermediaries to discover what has caused the increase in loyalist violence.
Northern Ireland Office Civil servants have approached a number of community and church groups to act as go-betweens with loyalist paramilitaries.
A reliable source told Sunday Life the Government was ‘deeply concerned’ at the rising tide in loyalist violence.
The NIO wants to know what has sparked the increase and ways of bringing it to an end, said the source.
Views
The peace-brokers were approached within the last two months and asked to ‘seek the views of loyalist paramilitaries’ on the subject.
It is understood the talks have stemmed from a meeting between community leaders and senior NIO officials shortly before Christmas.
Five community leaders and a Protestant minister met to discuss the problem of loyalist violence.
One community leader told Sunday Life last week: ‘We met with senior NIO officials and expressed the opinion that unless something was done for Protestant areas there would be a backlash from paramilitaries.
Apocalyptic
‘We also told them that failure to act would help swell the ranks of paramilitary organisations.
‘The NIO's view was that we were being apocalyptic.’
Another community leader who attended the meeting said the NIO didn't want to know what they were saying.
‘The feeling on the ground in Protestant areas, which you could almost taste, was that unless there was investment, jobs and housing there would be mayhem.
Dismissed
‘Now the Civil servants are looking at the things we put forward before Christmas which they dismissed.
‘When we asked young people why they were joining paramilitary groups they said ‘just look at what the Provos are getting with all their violence.’
It is understood the NIO is studying the feedback from the intermediaries and looking at ways of improving investment, jobs and housing in Protestant areas.
Urgent security review underway STORMONT OPEN TO IRA ATTACK
By ALAN MURRAY
A MAJOR security review is being urgently carried out at Parliament Buildings in Belfast — to keep the IRA out.
And contingency plans has been drawn up to relocate vital NIO departments to nearby government buildings in the event of a devastating bomb attack.
The overhaul was ordered following Security Minister Sir John Wheeler's controversial comments on Wednesday that the IRA ‘had been already defeated’.
Top government officials now fear the IRA could attempt to smuggle in a van bomb to wreck the seat of government and hugely embarrass the new Minister and prove him wrong.
While Stormont has not been specifically targeted by the IRA in the past, it is acknowledged that it is vulnerable because of the relatively open nature of its layout.
Damage
Procedures for examining vehicles are being reviewed around the sprawling Stormont grounds.
The use of some facilities at RUC Headquarters at Knock has also been pencilled in, if there is major damage to both Parliament Buildings and Stormont Castle.
On Thursday night the IRA issued a not unexpected retort to Sir John's comments, saying it was ‘equipped and utterly determined to meet the government head-on’.
Overpowered
Of most concern to the NIO is the relatively lax security arrangements at the main gates to the Stormont estate.
Security guards man barriers at the Newtownards Road and Massey Avenue entrances to the complex, but they are not armed.
The civilian guards could be easily overpowered by an IRA unit which could then drive a huge van bomb virtually unchallenged to the rear of Parliament Buildings.
And while the RUC maintains a permanent guard at the entrance to Stormont Castle it is vulnerable to mortar attack.
Security
Greater examination of vehicles entering the complex is now expected to be introduced, and additional security staff may be deployed.
One security source said: ‘The IRA has got in to much better protected places.
The Massey Avenue entrance at Parliament Buildings is not very secure, to say the least.’
Sir John: ordered overhaul Stormont: subject of an urgent review.
SAFETY ALL CLEAR FOR CASTLE COURT
BELFAST'S prestigious Castle Court complex has been given the all-clear by experts worried by bizarre glass explosions at modern buildings.
Shoppers and workers in similar centres in Britain have been showered with glass when panels of toughened glass have suddenly shattered.
And analysts probing the phenomena believe that hundreds of buildings across the UK could be vulnerable.
But the manager CastleCourt, Belfast's best known glass complex, says his building has been given the all-clear following tests.
Wound
In the most serious incident in the UK six people were hurt when a glass screen exploded above the entrance to The Glades shopping centre in Bromley, Kent earlier this year.
One elderly woman needed 19 stitches to a head wound after being covered in glass.
The British Council of Shopping Centres, of which the showcase Castlecourt is one of 600 members, is investigating 150 malls built since 1985.
Alex Bell, CastleCourt's manager, said: ‘We have been aware of this problem but are satisfied it does apply to us.
‘The glass at CastleCourt is laminated and made to the highest specification.
It has been thoroughly tested and no problem has been found.’
British construction and glazing consultants suspect that the glass may be exploding because of nickel sulphide impurities introduced when the glass is made.
Some believe the exploding glass may have come from China and Eastern Europe.
Probe into MOT racket
An authentic MOT certificate.
THE RUC is probing a fraud racket involving the use of forged MOT certificates.
Up to 20 of the bogus MOT certificates have turned up across the province in the last year, prompting a major investigation by detectives.
The photocopied documents are described as almost perfect and impossible to detect by the ordinary person, and even by MOT staff.
Their one flaw however is that they all bear the same serial number, which has been circulated to all MOT centres across the province.
The forgeries are understood to be changing hands at up to £60 a time across the province in pubs and clubs.
Discovered
But an RUC spokesman warned: ‘The motorist who is tempted to buy one of these will be discovered at some stage, whether it is presented at a police station in relation to an accident or submitted by a new owner to an MOT centre for a test.’
It is understood two cases have been brought by police in relation to the forged documents.
One man was fined £200 at Bangor Magistrates Court on Wednesday for having one of the bogus forms.
An expensive colour photocopier is believed to have been used by the forgers to copy what is thought to have been a genuine blank MOT form.
One official said ‘Twenty or so forgeries have turned up so far, but we believe quite a number more are in the system.’
More glass found inside beer bottles
TWO more brands of Dutch lager were being withdrawn from the UK market after glass splinters were found in some bottles, it was reported yesterday.
The Bavaria brand bottles and Royal Dutch Post Horn Lagers, which are both sold mostly in corner shop off-licences, have been hit by the same problem affecting Heineken Export Lager.
Heineken on Friday recalled three million bottles of Export Lager in eight countries when splinters were found in a drink at an Amsterdam brewery during a routine check.
Overall, the company plans to destroy 17 million bottles.
Royal Dutch Post Horn Lager, brewed by the United Dutch Brewery, has had to take similar action, recalling 200,000 of its 25ml bottles in Britain after reports of glass in some batches.
Problem
Bottle makers Vereenigde Glasfabrieken confirmed yesterday that Bavaria had withdrawn its new 25cl and 33cl export beer bottles from the market because of the same problem.
The Brewers' Society said Bavaria and Royal Dutch Post Horn lagers were not big sellers in the UK.
All three brewers use bottles made by the Dutch glass firm NV Vereenigde Glasfabrieken, which is majority-owned by French food and drink giant BSN.
The company said both Heineken and Bavaria had found and blocked distribution of all their affected bottles.
Halted
The glass firm said all the suspect bottles had come from a new lightweight bottle-making process which had now been halted.
Heineken's operation to recall 240,000 bottles of Export Lager in Britain was going well, according to a spokeswoman.
Bottles were being returned to retail outlets by members of the public and there had been no reports of problems, she said.
SOUTHERN counties will be rather cloudy this morning.
In the north, where the cloud has become more broken, it will be locally misty for a while.
The weather will gradually improve and by early afternoon the sun will be shining practically everywhere.
With dry, mainly sunny conditions lasting through till dusk, the temperature will rise steadily to a maximum of about 18 celsius.
The westerly wind will remain light so it will feel pleasantly warm in the sunshine.
TONIGHT: Clear periods and light winds after dark will lead to a marked fall in temperature.
By dawn it will be down to 8 celsius.
Consequently mist will form over low ground and patchy fog can be expected before the night is out.
Rainfall probability: Belfast, light rain 10pc, heavy rain 0pc; Derry: light rain 0pc, heavy rain 0pc.
OUTLOOK: There is every prospect of the weather remaining dry this week.
Cloud amounts will vary but we can expect some warm sunshine.
CHILDREN fled in terror when a gala fireworks display went horribly wrong in Larne on Friday night.
Ten youngsters and their parents were injured when a rocket failed to take off and exploded among spectators at the firework show in the town park.
Firemen gave on-the-spot First Aid and the injured were rushed to the Moyle hospital by ambulance and treated for minor injuries after the accident at 10pm.
Centenary
The fireworks extravaganza was organised by the local council to celebrate the centenary of the Girls Brigade.
Larne Mayor Rosaline Armstrong said many of the young children were frightened and crying after the freak accident.
‘Thank God no-one was badly injured.
It was just one of those things — a chance in a million,’ she said.
Mrs Armstrong said most of the crowd of 300 spectators were ‘very calm’ despite what happened, and after a brief interruption organisers continued with the display.
Fireworks show ends in terror
A child is rushed to hospital in an ambulance after the explosion.
Picture by PETER RIPPON]
‘One of Shankill Butcher gang there too’, claims terrorist McGlinchey admits having access to RUC files
By NEIL MULHOLLAND
A CONVICTED terrorist and bank robber has confirmed the astonishing breach in RUC security revealed by Sunday Life.
Paul McGlinchey, the brother of former INLA chief of staff Dominic McGlinchey, has admitted he had access to police personnel files via a computer modem.
His work as a sales representative for Cornhill Life Insurance enabled him to obtain personal details on members of the police.
Writing from his prison cell in the Republic where he is serving 10 years for armed robbery, McGlinchey claimed he could easily tap into a central databank of RUC files.
10.0
And he claimed an alleged member of the notorious Shankill butcher gang was also employed by the same company in Belfast.
Clients
As Sunday Life revealed two weeks ago, McGlinchey worked for over a year as a sales representative for Cornhill, which has hundreds of RUC men as clients.
Cornhill Insurance claimed they had no idea who he was and insisted they had no knowledge of his terrorist background at the time of his employment in 1990.
The company said standard vetting procedures were followed, which did not reveal any adverse information about him when he applied for the post.
But McGlinchey, who was convicted of IRA membership and possessing weapons in 1976, insisted the company was fully aware of his republican background and his terrorist conviction.
And he maintained he was sacked on the direct orders of the RUC because they knew he was a security risk.
Threat
The 35-year-old Bellaghy man, who was jailed in July in Dublin for armed robbery, strenuously denied that he was dismissed because of a financial dispute with his employers.
He further denied claims by former colleagues that he threatened senior staff after leaving the company in 1991 after a year's employment as manager of its Magherafelt office.
‘I was sacked because I was known to the local RUC as an ex-republican prisoner,’ he said from Portlaoise Prison.
‘They became alarmed because I had access to security force files of theirs, and all security force personnel through the central computer if I wished.
‘So the RUC asked the company to remove me as I was, in their view, a security risk.’
Business
McGlinchey further alleged that senior company officials knew exactly who he was — a claim which they have already denied.
‘I was personally told he was not concerned about my past so long as I kept up a volume of business,’ he said.
In his letter McGlinchey claimed he was wrongly blamed for removing files on members of the security forces from the company's Ballymena branch.
A former soldier was later sacked for the offence.
In a statement faxed to Sunday Life on Friday, Cornhill's public relations manager, Geoff Mayhew, reiterated that the company had no knowledge of McGlinchey's background when they employed him.
The statement added that McGlinchey's contract was immediately terminated once they learned who he was.
Confirm
Mr Mayhew insisted his company was unaware of any connection between its employees past or present and the Shankill Butchers gang.
‘Cornhill has no knowledge of the events referred to by Mr McGlinchey,’ he said.
However Mr Mayhew did confirm that after McGlinchey's sacking several of the company's senior executives were threatened.
‘The threats were sufficiently serious to involve security forces who advised on necessary precautions,’ he added.
Gang steals cars to order
A GANG stealing to order are believed to be behind the theft a £28,000 Mercedes from an Ulster garage.
And the professional job has other garage owners in the Omagh area worried.
The brand new white Mercedes 300D was stolen from the forecourt of Prentice's in the town.
Garage manager Mungo Sloan says the robbery bears all the hallmarks of thieves stealing to order.
Model
‘It looks as if they new exactly what they were after — a new white Mercedes,’ says Mr Sloan.
‘They also broke into a similar car but appear to have lost interest in it when they realised it was a used model.
Mr Sloan believes the thieves were probably working for someone who has bought a similar Mercedes which has been badly damaged or written off.
And he suspects the stolen car has now long disappeared across the border.
Wrecked
‘All they want from the wrecked car is the log book, which they can transfer to the stolen car,’ says Mr Sloan.
‘Even the engine and chassis numbers offer no protection against the professionals who go to this much trouble.
They simply buff them off.
‘Right-offs should really be totally destroyed by insurance companies, but a lot of them end being bought for repair.’
Prentice's are now reviewing security at their Omagh Garage following the incident.
‘It is the first time this sort of thing has happened at our Omagh garage but unfortunately people in the motor trade are all too familiar with this kind of theft,’ said Mr Sloan.
‘HEARTLESS DENIAL’ LED TO JAIL RIOT
By STEPHEN GORDON
RIOTING by loyalists at the Maze Prison this weekend was sparked by a ‘callous decision’ by the authorities, it has been claimed.
Trouble erupted on Friday night after a row about a prisoner's appeal for compassionate leave.
According to loyalists, prisoner Gary Fulton had been granted leave to visit his seriously ill mother on Friday.
But as the Portadown man was about to leave the jail he was told that his mother had died and ordered back to his cell.
‘I can't think of anything more callous,’ said Jim McDonald, chairman of the Loyalist Prisoners' Welfare Association.
‘We don't know whether it was the NIO or someone within the Maze who took this decision.
‘But whoever took it acted totally inhumanely.’
Mr McDonald called on the NIO to grant Gary Fulton immediate compassionate leave.
‘That would defuse the situation.
Otherwise I'm afraid the situation will only escalate, inside and outside the Maze.’
Ten prison officers and three inmates needed treatment for minor injuries following the all-night clashes.
Furniture was smashed and fists flew in the most serious trouble at the Maze in recent months.
Trouble began when loyalist prisoners refused to lock up their cells at around 8.30pm.
A Prison Service spokesman said order was restored in the early hours of Saturday morning.
Domestic visits to the four wings concerned have been suspended while an inquiry takes place.
Little Laura in transplant op ordeal
LITTLE Laura Davies, who is critically ill following rejection of her transplanted small intestine, was last night facing a massive new operation, to replace her entire digestive system.
The five-year-old from Eccles, Greater Manchester, who underwent a liver and bowel transplant in the United States last year, has been relisted for another multiple organ transplant.
Doctors at the Children's Hospital in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, said the small intestine she was given was no longer working properly.
In a statement, the hospital said that if a new drug did not help, a multiple transplant — possibly including her liver, small intestine, stomach, pancreas and kidneys — was now necessary to save her life.
Frightened
Laura will receive the drug, Cisapride, which helps with the movement of her small intestine, for a week, after which doctors will decide on the transplant, the hospital said.
Her mother Fran, 27, said: ‘Laura is not well at all now.
She really is back to square one.
‘It is all a bit overwhelming and we are more frightened now than we were at the start because we know so much more about her condition.
‘There is a high risk of her not surviving the transplant but she is in a hole now.
There is hardly any chance of her surviving as she is in the long term so we hope she will be able to have the transplant soon.’
Mrs Davies said Laura nearly died last week as complications from her transplant rejection set in.
‘I am worried that she would not make it if she went down like that again.
CHILD EXILE'S LIFETIME OF HEARTACHE HAS HAPPY ENDING AROUND THE WORLD TO FIND FAMILY JOY
Sex assault in lavatory
A MAN was sexually assaulted yesterday when he was pounced on by two male attackers.
The 30-year-old victim was using a public lavatory in Leyton, east London, shortly before 6am when the two men struck, pushing him into a cubicle and subjecting him to what Scotland Yard called a ‘serious sexual assault’.
The incident was the latest in a series of sexual assaults by men on men in the capital in recent months.
Soak 'em up Tragic trend
WHEN Susan Allen decided she had had enough of life at the age of 25 her method of ending it was all too easy.
The young prison officer simply signed out her personal issue pistol from the Maze armoury and shot herself.
Her actions were typical of a growing number of members of the security forces and prison service who take advantage of the availability of firearms to commit suicide.
It is a worrying trend which the authorities — despite past assurances — seemed to have failed to get to grips with.
Susan Allen's sister quite rightly asked why she was allowed to draw her gun from the armoury with such apparent ease.
Did no one— superiors or colleagues — realise that this young woman was undergoing tremendous emotional problems following the breakdown of her marriage?
The prison authorities are carrying out their own investigation into what went wrong.
They must establish that all the proper procedures for handing over the firearm were strictly adhered to.
And if they weren't then disciplinary measures should be taken against the person or people responsible.
But the matter cannot end there.
Without adequate built-in safeguards, there will be other Susan Allens who will pull the trigger before they cry for help.
The authorities must see to it that there is a tried and tested method of reading the danger signals and offering counselling to those with access to firearms.
Anything less will simply result in more tragedies.
THE GREAT trek back to school begins in earnest this week.
And, as if by way of celebration, summer's arrived.
Mother Nature served up some pretty lousy weather during the eight-week break.
But now she's in a more sympathetic frame of mind.
So, kids, soak up those glorious rays.
It will be a whole year of hard slog before you see their like again…if you're lucky!
Fury at RUC station plan
THE Police Authority has been given the go-ahead to rebuild a controversial RUC base bombed by the IRA — despite widespread opposition from local people.
Planners have given permission to replace the blitzed station at Coagh in Tyrone, insisting they have no knowledge of a 220-name petition opposing the construction.
But an irate local councillor is adamant that a letter objecting to the plan, and signed by hundreds of local residents, was handed to DoE chiefs.
Victor McGahie said the rebuilding of the station, destroyed in an IRA bomb attack five years ago, will set local people up as targets for further terrorist attacks.
‘No objections have been received by the Divisional Planning Office,’ said Chief Divisional Planning Officer Hilary Heslip.
Now a delegation from Cookstown District Council is to meet the Northern Ireland Police Authority for crunch talks on the issue.
Rebels seize Georgian towns
REBELS yesterday seized control of two towns in the strife-torn former Soviet republic of Georgia.
Forces loyal to ex-President Zviad Gamsakhurdia entered the towns of Senaki and nearby Apasha in several tanks and armoured vehicles.
They met with no resistance from government troops.
Blaze leap
TEN tourists were injured yesterday when they jumped off a chair lift to escape a brush fire on Mount Solaro in the Mediterranean island of Capri.
Prison riot
At least 12 prisoners were killed yesterday and 40 other people were injured in clashes between rioting inmates and police in a Punjab jail.
Nurses murdered
GUNMEN in Sierra Leone yesterday killed two nurses and two drivers working for the Red Cross, ICRC staff said.
Algiers violence
ALGERIAN security forces shot dead eight Muslim extremists in running gun battles in the streets of Algiers yesterday.
Axeman confesses
A RUSSIAN sailor charged with murdering five shipmates on a German freighter found drifting in the North Sea last week has confessed to killing two of the crew with an axe, Danish police said yesterday.
By STEPHEN GORDON and ALAN MURRAY
‘She never would have done it without such easy access to a gun’ Woman used jail issue weapon to take her own life
THE DISTRAUGHT family of a young woman prison officer who shot herself dead last week have demanded to know why she was given a gun.
Flamboyant Susan Allen, 25, withdrew a pistol from the Maze Prison armoury on Monday night and shot herself in the head hours later at her Banbridge home.
Mrs Allen, who had been suffering emotional problems following the collapse of her marriage, was given the weapon after claiming she feared an attack from paramilitaries.
Last night her grieving sister Julie Ross said:
‘Susan would never have killed herself if she hadn't had such easy access to a gun.’
And Miss Ross called for an inquiry into prison service procedures for issuing personal protection weapons.
A colleague at the Maze, said: ‘We all knew Susan had matrimonial problems but we didn't suspect she was so depressed.
‘All her colleagues are devastated, she was a popular wee girl.’
He sister Julie, said: ‘They would never have realised Susan was depressed.
She covered it so well.
She had been covering it up for years.
‘Just before her death she appeared her normal flamboyant self.’
Mrs Allen's body was found at her Harberton Park home on Tuesday morning after a senior officer at the Maze informed Banbridge police that she had not turned up for work.
The night before she had had calmly ‘booked out’ a personal protection weapon after, it is understood, telling a senior member of staff that she feared she was under surveillance from paramilitaries.
But detectives investigating her death believe she invented the story just to get the gun to take her own life.
Miss Ross said: ‘I am not sure just what the procedures are for getting hold of a gun.
‘But I believe a senior officer should make the decision to issue a weapon only after investigating both the seriousness of any threat and also the personal circumstances of the person concerned.
‘If those are the current guidelines then they should be followed.’
‘But obviously it is a difficult decision for anyone to take.
They would have to live with the consequences if someone was attacked after being refused a weapon.’
Miss Ross said her sister had kept a personal protection gun at home previously but had returned it some time ago to the Maze for safekeeping.
According to reliable sources in the Northern Ireland Prison Service, weapons are only issued to officers from the armoury after careful consideration of a written request.
‘They are not handed out like sweeties.
When a prison officer requests a gun the reasons given are closely scrutinised,’ he said.
‘We will investigate the circumstances with the RUC, and check whether the officer concerned is mentally and emotionally stable.’
It is understood most prison officers have personal protection weapon certificates, but not all carry guns.
Many leave their personal weapons for safe keeping in the armoury, as happened in the Susan Allen case.
An inquiry is now underway to find out if the rules were strictly adhered to in Mrs Allen's case.
By BRENDA O'NEILL
TWO CO ARMAGH brothers drowned in a tragic boating accident while on a fishing trip in Co Mayo.
The bodies of anglers Winston McConville (53) of Ballmore Drive, Lurgan and his brother William (52) of Markethill Road, Tandragee were recovered from Lough Lannagh, near the holiday town of Castlebar yesterday afternoon.
Adrift
Gardai launched a full scale search for the men when their empty boat was spotted adrift in the water on Friday night.
It is believed the brothers, who were keen anglers, went for a swim but got into difficulties in the lake which is renowned as a dangerous swimming area by locals.
The dead men's bodies were recovered by police divers a short distance from the shoreline.
Clothing found on the strand along with a stray dog, helped to identify the men, said a Garda spokesman.
A Northern registered car, believed to belong to the men, was discovered at Annagh, a few miles from the town.
Shocked
Shocked friends and colleagues spoke last night of the two brothers who were keen sportsmen.
Stephen Richardson who worked alongside Winston McConville, a photographer at the Ulster Gazette newspaper in Armagh, said the brothers were keen and experienced anglers.
GLENAVON IN DREAM LAND…but Eachus has another nightmare
BANGOR 1 GLENAVON 6
Jim Gracey reports
THE result that will send shockwaves through the Irish League was a dream for Glenavon and an absolute nightmare for Bangor and their keeper Stephen Eachus.
Giant Eachus, blamed for the second goal in Cyprus which sent Bangor crashing out of Europe in midweek, gifted Glenavon two goals yesterday and is clearly suffering a crisis of confidence.
Not so Glenavon.
The early season jungle drums which had sounded so ominous for manager Alan Fraser after two dodgy defeats, now beat out a different message.
Glenavon are on the march again with a Gold Cup quarter-final place in the bag and a £1,000 jackpot as the first team to score ten goals in the tournament.
Add to that a £60 bonus for each away goal and Glenavon left Clandeboye £1,360 richer.
More important they signalled their re-emergence as a force again.
The Lurgan side won back their confidence and respect in front of a big travelling support with a clinical display that included three goals of sheer class.
Bangor handed them another three on a plate and the Seasiders may well have been leg-weary after their exertions in Cyprus on Wednesday.
No matter.
They were overwhelmed by a side in unstoppable form.
This was vintage Glenavon, recovering from a rocky start to take apart a team who had built up a fearsome reputation in a 26-match unbeaten run locally.
Ironically their last home defeat was by Glenavon in January this year.
Glenavon were mean at the back, bar one early slip which let in Johnny Magee, to give Bangor a ninth minute lead.
Striker Glenn Ferguson was drafted into an unusual midfield role and responded with two goals, a penalty and a brilliant 30-yard drive.
McCoy, McBride and Ferris tormented Bangor's usually solid defence and Glenavon were also rewarded with a sparkling first appearance of the season by young midfielder Peter Kennedy.
The first slip by Eachus was a turning point in the match, bringing Glenavon back into contention after they had fallen behind in a bright start by Bangor.
McBride rose to challenge the keeper for one of many McCoy crosses which had Bangor in a spin.
The keeper fumbled and defender Nigel Quigley leapt in to head home the equaliser.
A Ferguson penalty after Canning had fouled Ferris needlessly in the corner of the box made it two.
And Ferris added a stunning third before half-time, rushing in to head home an inch perfect McCoy cross.
Bangor had to abandon caution to rescue the match but they didn't reckon on another Eachus blunder putting it beyond their reach.
This time the keeper made a hash of a back pass from Brown.
Ferris stepped in and with Eachus stranded, floated over a cross for McBride to score with a diving header.
Ferguson blasted home a 30-yard drive with six minutes remaining, and there were only two minutes on the clock when substitute Trevor McMullan hit the jackpot from 20 yards.
Glenavon keeper Robbie Beck was a virtual spectator but earned his pay-packet with a brilliant one-handed save from sub Michael Surgeon.
The worry for Bangor is how they recover from two devastating defeats in a week.
The last time they came home from Europe two seasons ago, they went 13 matches without winning, ironically ending the run against Glenavon.
BANGOR: Eachus 5, Canning 6, Glendenning 6, McGuinness 6, Brown 6, O'Connor 6, Hill 6, Kenny 5, McCallen 5, Magee 6, McEvoy 5.
Subs: Surgeon 5, Slaney 5.
GLENAVON: Beck 7, Byrne 7, O'Hagan 7, Quigley 8, McKeown 8, Kennedy 8, Dennison 7, McCoy 9, Ferguson 8, McBride 8, Ferris 8.
Subs: Williamson 5, McMullan 6.
Referee: Tom Deegan (Ballynahinch) 7.
AT FULL STRETCH…
Glenavon's Davy Dennison denies Bangor opponent Ricky McEvoy Picture: FRED HOARE