

Figure queried
THE Livestock Marketing Commission has taken issue with some figures quoted by John Ramuz, of the British Chicken Information Service, at the Poultry Association of Northern Ireland biennial conference this week.
‘We are concerned about the claim that 44pc of the primary meat market is accounted for by poultry meat,’ a spokesman said.
‘The figures we have access to put it rather lower than that.
Total poultry meat consumption was 30pc of all UK meat consumption in 1992.
‘If one excludes bacon/ham and offal and confines it to red meat plus poultry, then the figures rise to 35pc, still some way short of the 44pc mentioned.’
Elwood ready to prove Eaton Park ‘magnet’
THE visit of Ireland's new out-half Eric Elwood to Eaton Park tomorrow will be an added attraction when Ballymena take on Division One side Lansdowne.
Elwood brings his will o' the wisp style of play into direct opposition to the more solid technique of home skipper Derek McAleese who is keen to give early notice that his side are worthy of a higher standing.
McAleese has a new-found enthusiasm for the game now that he has the captain's tag alongside his name, and was in irrepressible form last week when Ballymena hammered Hawick.
Ideal
Tomorrow's game will be the ideal preparation for Ballymena's opening Division Two League clash next week with Ulster rivals Malone at Gibson Park.
New capture Terry McMaster from Bangor is immediately brought in at full-back, while Jonathan Bell, after a marvellous senior baptism last week, moves to his favoured centre position.
Wayne Pollock returns to add pace to the back-row.
Bangor's new coach Duncan Dysart was happy enough with the first sight of his charges last week and he will have a good opportunity to identify some grey areas when they make the trip to a high-scoring City of Derry tomorrow.
The seasiders showed a new sense of purpose in dispatching top Junior side Banbridge last week, but will find that Derry will be slightly more demanding.
With Mark Tinman unavailable and the versatile McMaster now away, Alan Millar steps into the full-back's role.
Young Irish Schools' flanker Kieron Dawson, who had a storming two-try senior debut last week, is again in the back-row alongside Stephen McKinty and the very fit Don Whittle, while Michael Patton is at hooker.
North travel to play Cork Constitution and will be missing try-scoring winger Crawford Dobbin who received a serious jaw injury in an off-the-ball incident last week against Ballynahinch.
Fixtures — Ballymena v Lansdowne; Ards v Sligo, Armagh, Ballynahinch v Collegians, Cork Con v North, Derry v Bangor, Dungannon v Instonians, Malone v Greystones, Portadown v CIYMS.
Eric Elwood: set to illuminate Eaton Park with his skills
Census shows 8pc less arable crops
FARMERS have grown 8pc less of arable crops this year, according to census figures just released by the Department of Agriculture.
While preliminary results indicate only a slight decline — 1pc — in the total area of cereals grown in Northern Ireland, there are large falls in the areas under all other arable crops.
Grass
It is estimated that the total area under crops — 61,000 hectares — is 8pc smaller than last year, with 2pc more farmland now under grass.
Only a slight change is forecast for the area of cereals this year which at 46,300 hectares is estimated to be less than 1pc below that for last year.
Cereals
This year's cereals area includes 31,800 hectares of spring-sown barley (up 1pc), 6,500 hectares of winter barley (a rise of 20pc) and 6,100 hectares of wheat, which represents a fall of 18pc.
The area of oilseed rape grown this year is believed to be less than half that for 1992 and the area of potatoes (7,500 hectares) is down by 30pc.
Livestock
On the livestock scene, total cattle numbers are estimated to be 1pc lower.
The main reductions are for slaughter cattle, with the number of those aged more than two years down by 13pc and the total of those aged between one and two years down by 5pc.
Farmers are keeping 2pc more breeding ewes.
There is little change in the number of pigs and the poultry-laying population is estimated to have remained unchanged at 3.1m.
Pullets
There were significantly more pullets not yet at point of lay, their total being up 21pc; breeding birds, up 26pc, and broilers up 20pc.
The total number of persons working on Northern Ireland farms is believed to be 1pc higher due to an increase in the number of casual and seasonal workers.
There has been no change in the total number of farmers and those in their families — 47,800 who work on the land.
Counting cost of dairy-cow mastitis
MASTITIS in dairy cattle could be costing Northern Ireland milk-farmers thousands of pounds a year.
That is the opinion of Alan Doyle, senior veterinary adviser with SmithKline Beecham Animal Health, who has worked out how much cell-counts are costing farmers in the province.
He says: ‘Northern Ireland herds with a cell-count over 200,000 could be losing at least £857 in milk income a year.
‘That's the value of a milk-yield loss of 4,825 litres from a 40-cow herd with cell-counts between 201,000 and 400,000.
‘Losses’
‘The higher the cell-count goes, the higher the hidden losses in yield and quality, which are probably greater than most people realise.
‘The importance of a low cell-count has never been so critical.
There are many Northern Ireland milk-producers who will fall into one of the MMB's penalty bands for cell-counts over 401,000 at certain times of the year.’
Underlining the importance of dry-cow therapy as a seasonal part of mastitis control, he adds: ‘Effective use of a product like Orbenin Extra Dry Cow will reduce, or help to maintain, a low cell-count.
‘Isolation’
‘Dry-cow therapy, however, should not be used in isolation but together with the other well-known mastitis-control measures, and don't forget to talk with your vet first about the antibiotic treatments available.
‘Many farmers think it saves money only to treat the best cows in the herd — those which have had clinical mastitis or those with a known high cell-count.
‘Roulette’
‘Many sub-clinically infected cows never show signs of clinical mastitis, making them very difficult to identify.
But you're playing Russian roulette if you choose to treat cows individually, rather than the whole herd,’ he warns.
‘Untreated cows can act as a potential source of infection to cows that aren't infected and may go on to develop clinical mastitis.’
Rate move raises hopes
THE stock market received a lift today on news of a cut in German interest rates which raised hopes of a similar reduction in this country over the next few weeks by Chancellor Kenneth Clarke.
Immediately before the rate cut was made public, the FTSE index of the 100 biggest companies was down 4.4 points at 3031.0 having been 10.8 lower at its worst in early dealing.
But the losses were quickly reversed and within minutes the index had recovered to be 4.7 ahead at 3040.1.
The move by the German central bank to cut by 0.5pc its key discount rate leaves Mr Clarke greater room for a similar move.
Shares have risen sharply since the effective collapse of the European exchange rate mechanism at the end of July as interest rates throughout continental Europe have come down.
The stock market reached a record high on August 21 when the FTSE soared to 3115.1.
Economist Simon Knapp, of brokers BZW, said today's move was unlikely to affect rates immediately in the UK.
‘UK rates are largely independent of what's going on in Germany,’ he said.
‘Continental Europe is still in the middle of an interest rate cutting phase and the UK is towards the end of it.’
However, Mr Knapp believed rates in the UK would be cut further in response to moves in November's Budget to control the ballooning borrowing requirement.
Mr Clarke is watching a range of indicators on the economy before deciding whether it is safe to cut here.
Among the indicators is the Treasury's monthly monetary report which said yesterday that there were many encouraging trends in the economy, but in some cases figures were weaker than before.
The Treasury said inflationary expectations had improved and that downward pressure on inflation continued.
Action days at Magheralin
THERE will be a weekend of special activity and entertainment in Magheralin — September 17 and 18 — in aid of the ‘Fields of Life’ project.
Magheralin Parish Church plans to buy and stock a 100 acre farm in Uganda and already support has been promised from many sections of the community.
Members of the meat trade, auctioneers and the dairy sector are planning major fund-raising activities on a province-wide bases.
A grand variety auction of offers and opportunities will take place on September 17 at 7.30pm.
This will be followed by a round-Ireland tractor drive by the Rev Trevor Stevenson, who will leave Magheralin on September 20.
COOKSTOWN
Land charge
A plant fitter appeared at Cookstown Magistrates Court yesterday charged with dishonestly obtaining 26 acres of land valued at £35,000 from a retired farmer.
Neville Boyd (51) of Killyman Road, Dungannon is accused of obtaining the land at Derrylee Road, Dungannon from Mervyn Joseph Farquhar between January 1 1991 and August 24 last.
He was remanded in custody to September 22.
All at sea
BEHIND the war of words over their respective performances, there is good news for all three ferry operators on the Ulster-Scotland sea-route.
The number of passengers using the service has grown by just over 16pc this year.
The Northern Ireland public knows a good deal when it sees one.
The increased number of sailings and competitive pricing means more people are turning to the ferries for their journeys to Britain.
There had been fears that the entry of SeaCat into the cross-Channel route would mean more companies competing for business in a static market.
Instead the market has expanded, giving all operators the opportunity to make a profit.
Yet there is a downside for the companies.
Competition and special deals mean that they can depend no longer on customer loyalty.
When money is tight, passengers are looking for the best deal.
That locks the companies into an unstable pricing war.
Customers, of course, are delighted with the competition.
It offers them an alternative to expensive air fares.
Ulster's geographic isolation means it needs the best possible transport links.
These have improved in recent years, both in the air and on the sea, and that is good news for everyone here.
Jobs lost in firm's £3m expansion
THE Government is backing a £3m investment in a Newry company — but the result will be up to 30 job losses.
However, a European firm is set to create up to 100 posts in the town, it was revealed today.
Electrical products manufacturer Glen Dimplex — part of the Glen Electric group — is extending its factory and installing new equipment to upgrade and expand production.
The investment is backed by the Government's jobs creation agency, the Industrial Development Board.
But the introduction of automated machinery will lead to a reduction in the workforce, the company admitted today.
Glen employs 380 people at its two factories in Newry.
When the investment project is completed at one of the plants in 1995, around 30 people will lose their jobs.
A spokeswoman for the Department of Economic Development — the Government department which controls the IDB — said the job losses were ‘ironic’, but an inevitable result of the new technology.
The £3m project to upgrade and expand production at Glen was announced by Economy Minister Robert Atkins.
Hinted
‘The introduction of robotic systems and the automation of some operations are key elements in safeguarding the company's competitive position and securing its future,’ he said.
Brand name products made by the Glen Electric group include Dimplex, Glen, Burco Dean, Belling and Morphy Richards in the UK; Siemens in Germany; Hamilton Beach and Silex in the United States, and Westcan Chromolox in Canada.
Meanwhile, up to 100 jobs will be created in Newry by a European inward investor.
The Economy Minister revealed that ‘further good news’ was in the pipeline, and hinted that a couple of projects were being negotiated.
Industry sources in Newry said today that negotiations with a European company were at ‘an advanced stage’, while a second project was also being negotiated.
DUBLIN
Golden oldie rugby bash
A 90-YEAR-OLD three-quarter from Japan is expected to be the oldest player on view in an international Golden Oldies rugby festival in Dublin later this month.
Raw deal on home insurance: Labour
POLICYHOLDERS with some of the country's biggest insurance firms are getting a raw deal as premiums rise steeply, Labour claimed today.
The criticism by Shadow Trade and Industry Secretary Robin Cook followed the disclosure by Which? magazine that some premiums had doubled since 1987.
He said a Labour survey of household contents insurance costs at nine of the top British firms showed the average family would be paying a 19pc increase this year alone.
Inflation
This was more than 13 times the inflation rate, he complained.
‘The average increases are bad enough.
But, in one case, we found an increase in premiums of a staggering 78pc — that's 55 times the rate of inflation.’
‘Customers are getting a raw deal and have a right to be angry.
Justify
‘I want to see these insurance companies make clear to their policyholders by how much premiums are being increased, and then to justify their behaviour,’ said Mr Cook.
‘They should not get away with exploiting consumers in this way,’ he said.
By Desmond McCartan
Aluminium worry
Although primary aluminium prices are likely to be significantly higher in 1994 than 1993, it will be 1995–96 before the industry enjoys the full benefit of rising demand, according to analysts at Billiton-Enthoven Metals in their latest review.
Enterprise up Enterprise Oil is set to report first half net earnings of £60–67m on Thursday, boosted by tax changes and higher oil revenues after sterling's depreciation, analysts say.
Enterprise made £34.6m net in the six months to June last year and £50.9m pre-tax against an estimated £80–87m this time.
Cut forecast London-based analysts at Union Bank of Switzerland forecast that the Bundesbank will cut its discount rate by the end of December to 5.5pc from the current 6.75pc.
The German central bank will lower rates ‘in response to evidence of continued recession.’
EBRD loan
The London-based European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is to make its first 100 million US dollar loan ‘soon’ to Uzbekistan.
It said the money will go to the National Bank for Foreign Economic Activity to fund private-sector projects.
Venture deal
Murray Johnstone, leading Glasgow-based fund manager, and AIB, Ireland's largest financial services group, have signed an agreement under which there will be ‘ongoing close co-operation’ between the venture capital activities of the two companies.
New director
Property group Five Oaks Investments has appointed Tom Frost, former chief executive of National Westminster Bank, a non-executive director.
Drug sales boost Fisons
STRONG growth in drug sales in the UK, the US and France provided a welcome shot in the arm for Fisons, the group revealed today.
The 22pc jump in sales balanced a 23pc drop in trading profit in its scientific equipment division because of a loss in Fisons Instruments.
The group predicted the poor trading conditions would continue with full-year profits in the division likely to be significantly lower than the previous year.
In the first half of the year, the group made taxable profits of £42.3m compared with £40.4m in the corresponding period last year.
The interim dividend is maintained at 3.3p and earnings per share were unchanged at 4.2p.
‘THE shareholders must be hoping the bank hasn't gone as far as to give him a company credit card’— Labour leader John Smith, on ex-Chancellor Norman Lamont's new employer, Rothschilds Bank.
‘THE one thing I will never do is change my appearance and live in a blond wig in another country’— Author-in-hiding Salman Rushdie.
‘MAY the best man win’— Peter Stothard, editor of The Times, opening the World Chess Championship between Nigel Short and Garry Kasparov in London.
‘HERE is the new Shorter Oxford Dictionary of which the first thing that can be said with confidence is that if you drop it on your foot you will never walk unaided again’— Commentator Bernard Levin.
‘IF YOU were going to have trouble you could tell as soon as the meat arrived.
It would smell like a hyena’— Food Minister Nicholas Soames, after relishing a plate of six-year-old beef, on being asked whether there might, however, be after-effects.
‘THERE has to be something wrong with a tax system in which a police sergeant falls into the same tax bracket as a multi-millionaire’ —Tory MP Keith Hampson.
DUNDONALD
Strategy talks
RESIDENTS of Tullycarnet will next Tuesday attend an information evening to discuss a strategy with statutory agencies for improving life on the estate.
Belfast Action Team said agencies would answer queries and encourage the formation of residents' groups to involve them in decision-making.
ULSTER
Payments
SOUTH Down MP Eddie McGrady has called on Agriculture Minister Lord Arran to ensure that the first instalment of the Beef Special Premium is paid at the beginning of November.
Mr McGrady said: ‘It is important that farmers receive this premium as it is the time of the year that they take land in conacre.’
Business flights boost British Midland's new fare
BRITISH Midland has fired the latest shot in the battle for business on the Belfast-Heathrow route.
The airline has introduced a new return fare of £159 — a saving of £45 on the flexible ticket which is aimed mainly at business travellers.
BM's price also undercuts the new Saver Fare announced last week by bitter route rival, British Airways.
The BA fare is £163.
Both tickets allow the traveller to make one change of reservation on the outbound or inbound flight.
The airlines will continue to offer more expensive fares for busy executives who need to keep their options open.
The fares war took a new twist last week when Jersey European, one of the most aggressive of the UK's small regional airlines, announced the introduction of free rail tickets from Gatwick to Victoria station for passengers flying from Belfast City Airport.
Meanwhile, speculation continues to grow that British Airways is considering plans to operate services from the Shorts-owned Belfast City Airport.
It was revealed in the Belfast Telegraph last month that the airline was looking closely at the facilities on offer at the harbour terminal.
Travel industry sources say a BA technical team has assessed the airport's capacity and believes that the present terminal building would need to be extended.
There are also concerns about parking facilities — the car park is already full to overflowing on weekdays.
It is thought that British Midland considered the City Airport some time ago, but decided against moving in at that stage.
By Yvette Shapiro
S is for Stocks and Shares and Stability
STOCKS and shares have been hitting the headlines recently as FTSE has been hitting record levels.
This is all a far cry from the halcyon days of the mid 80s when investors almost felt they had a vested right to 20 per cent per annum plus returns on a year by year basis.
The world stockmarket hiccup of October 1987 pulled people up sharp and the malaise of the six years which followed gave plenty of time for reflection.
Reflection on the basic rationale of equity investment, that is.
You do not invest in the equity market to make capital gains!
You invest in the equity market to provide yourself with a stream of future dividends which will hopefully outpace inflation.
It may be a Victorian attitude, but we live off income, not capital.
If our income is not stable and inflation resistant, then budgeting becomes impossible.
If dividend income rises then the capital will eventually rise to follow the income; as the tail will follow the dog.
And this is precisely what has happened in the stockmarket.
Whilst many companies did not increase their dividends through the recession — indeed, quite a few cut their dividends — the overall dividend income from equities did not fall by an appreciable amount.
Building society and bank deposit investors could hardly say the same.
Massive volatility of income combined with total security of principle is, in the long term, more traumatic than the reverse.
Now that interest rates are at historically low levels, considerable sums of money are moving out of the banks and building societies into equity based investments, the equity message seems to be getting home.
I hope, however, that if there is another hiccup you will all hold firm and not be panicked into selling.
Provided that you keep a suitable emergency reserve in a cash contingency fund to meet unforeseen eventualities, it should never then be necessary to sell on a down-swing.
Record unit trust sales of £900m in July (before FTSE broke into new high ground) show how disenchanted investors are with building society returns.
There is still lots more money on the sidelines waiting to come in.
Before you are lured by the blandishments of the banks and building societies to tie your money up in fixed term bonds, think twice — you may be locking yourself out from some excellent investment opportunities.
Anthony Swanston is divisional director of Towry Law Financial Planning.
Switched on:
Beeb and UTV line up their Friday night stars TV aces battle for ratings
TV'S TWO Gerrys meet head-to-head next week…to find the King of the Blarney.
Gerrys Anderson and Kelly are dropping the gloves in a Friday night ratings war.
In the red corner!
Anderson has Kelly on the ropes with the telephone chat-up technique he started on radio.
And in the blue corner!
Kelly battles back with a satellite link-up and a new look.
‘We're not in direct competition,’ says a Beeb spokeswoman.
‘We produce a programme and they produce a programme.
‘I'm sure there are plenty of people who enjoy both.’
Second
But privately both BBC and UTV want to score a KO and topple the other from the ratings.
Anderson on the Box returns for a 33-week second series on Friday week at 9.30pm — the same night as Kelly.
Anderson, bronzed from a holiday in Florida earlier in the summer, says: ‘My old sparring partner Daniel O'Donnell has promised to drop in at Christmas.
‘We have also signed up a talking cat and a dog that sings the blues!’
And he's asking viewers to write in with things that get right up their noses.
If the complaint sounds familiar, Gerry'll phone you during the show.
Kelly, now on its fifth series, kicks off at 10.40pm.
Series
‘I'm really looking forward to getting back to the hot seat for the new series,’ says Gerry.
‘The new shows will include many of the successful ingredients of previous series, including the top names in showbusiness and music.
‘But we also aim to include some interesting surprise items and human interest stories, too.’
GERRY CAP 
High flier: UTV's chatshow host Gerry Kelly tries out a Biggles outfit at Newtownards Airport to publicize his new series, which begins on October 4.
On the other side: Gerry Anderson, who recently launched his new TV series with the help of his dog Tashi.
By Martin Hill
New man at Treasury
A high flying professor of accountancy has been appointed to one of the top jobs at the Treasury with a salary of £100,000-a-year, the Prime Minister's Office announced.
Professor Andrew Likierman (49) is to take up his post as Chief Accountancy Adviser to the Treasury on December 1 in succession to Sir Alan Hardcastle, who is retiring.
It's full steam ahead at P&O
THE continental Europe recession failed to prevent property and shipping group P&O steaming full ahead in the first six months of the year, pushing interim profits up to £291.6m from £151.2m last time.
Shareholders are to receive an interim dividend of 24p compared with 13.5p although the group will pay an unchanged total dividend of 30.5p.
Earnings per share climbed to 40.1p from 20.9p.
Its cruise operations in the US produced figures well ahead of 1992 and the construction of the 67,000 ton Oriana continues on schedule.
Wall Street sharp fall frightens investors
SHARES came under selling pressure from the start of trading as investors took fright from Wall Street's sharp overnight fall.
With the FTSE staging a modest recovery to be 6.5 down at 3032.1 having been 16.5 off immediately dealing began, City analysts believe the 100-index will fall to the 3000 level if the weakness on the New York stock market continues.
A cautious outlook from P&O's chairman Lord Sterling sent the stock dipping 5p to 663p despite the boosted interim dividend payout.
First half profits from Prudential which were in line with the City's forecasts lifted the shares 6p to 340p.
In the same sector, Royal benefited 5p to 312p following news of the sale of a US reinsurance operation.
Other insurers were firmer in the wake of Prudential's results with Sun Alliance a penny up at 372p, General Accident 2p better at 670p and Commercial Union also 2p higher at 607p.
Investors had already anticipated George Wimpey's return to profit.
The shares were unchanged at 189p.
Pearson, the media group which owns a 17.5pc stake in BSkyB, dipped 3p to 514p despite the satellite broadcaster reporting its first full-year of operating profits.
Companies with substantial interests in Hong Kong enjoyed modest rises after reports that a breakthrough on political reform for the colony might soon be reached with China.
Cable & Wireless rose 3p to 853p, Standard Chartered climbed 5p to 953p, while Midland Bank parent HSBC firmed 10p to 705p.
Oil stocks were looking battered following a slide in the price of crude.
BP lost 5p to 299p, Shell dipped 4p to 659p and Enterprise Oil shed 9p to 478p.
A broker buy recommendation helped conglomerate Williams Holdings inch ahead a penny to 326p.
Words of wisdom about poultry
THE Poultry Association of Northern Ireland only holds its conference every other year.
When it does, the occasion is one to remember and the guidance emanating from it is something to be heeded.
This week's gathering at Greenmount College brought together some of the best brains on the poultry scene and they had much to impart to the industry.
Developments
There were people of the calibre of Martin Shea, British United Turkeys' European director, who focused attention sharply on new developments in his sector.
He told of the advancements made against the backcloth of the Single Market, highlighting how all major EC turkey-producing countries had increased output during the past five years.
Watchwords
He stressed also that ‘quality’, ‘choice’, ‘convenience’, ‘environmental sensitivity’, ‘safety’ and ‘service’would still remain the watchwords for the industry.
Ted Whitaker, of Whitaker's Hatcheries, Cork, had a word or two for egg-producers.
He wanted to know whether they would be prepared to take payment for what they produced after everyone else had taken a cut.
Question
One question from his rostrum, must rank as the most salient of the session.
‘Is it not the time when all those who have an interest in our industry should sit down and discuss our future together and try to get back to the situation where the industry controls and governs itself instead of allowing it to be manipulated by those who purchase our product?’ he asked about 200 delegates.
It must have sent many poultry people away to think more deeply about their future and the industry they labour in.
By Michael Drake
Treasury's optimism brightens the market
THE market bounced back following publication of the Treasury report which painted a more optimistic picture of the state of the economy.
That was sufficient to reverse the market's early 16.5 drop to leave the FTSE 1.4 off at 3037.2.
A cautious outlook from P&O's chairman Lord Sterling sent the stock diving 28p to 640p despite the boosted interim dividend payout.
First half profits from Prudential which were in line with the City's forecasts lifted the shares 3p to 337p.
In the same sector, Royal benefited 5p to 312p following news of the sale of a US reinsurance operation.
Other insurers were generally firmer in the wake of Prudential's results with Commercial Union 3p higher at 608p and General Accident up a penny at 669p and Guardian Royal 3p firmer at 219p.
Investors had already anticipated George Wimpey's return to profit.
The shares drifted 5p lower to 184p.
Pearson, the media group which owns a 17.5pc stake in BSkyB, reversed earlier falls to go 2p ahead to 518p despite the satellite broadcaster reporting its first full-year of operating profits.
Cable & Wireless, whose Mercury subsidiary yesterday heralded a phone war with the introduction of a new service for London, dipped 3p to 848p over fears that the new project might in fact turn out to be a drain on profits.
The other major players in the industry were also weaker over price-cutting worries.
BT, after falling earlier, firmed to its 421p opening price while Vodafone again continued its downward trend with the stock falling 5p to 486p.
Drugs group Glaxo, whose first half results are due tomorrow, lost 6p to 607p.
Other pharmaceuticals were also dragged lower.
Zeneca fell 7p to 754p while SmithKline Beecham reversed 6p to 447p.
Whizzkid chimp fails to impress the City
A CHIMPANZEE financial whizzkid that has beaten stock market experts could not make a monkey of British share analysts yesterday.
Ola, a six-year-old chimp, has become world-famous after making more money in one month than five of Sweden's top financial experts.
His secret?
Throwing darts at company names listed on the Stockholm exchange.
But City analysts were not impressed, and British chimps are unlikely to be asked to swap the tea party for the dealing room.
Jerry Evans, of NatWest Securities, said: ‘I believe that analysts can have a good record, and a better record than throwing darts at the FT.
It's pointless looking at something over a month.
It would be more interesting to see it over a year.’
Shares
Another analyst, who asked not to be named, said: ‘It's not a great surprise.
Nobody suggests you should buy shares over anything less than a three-to-five year period.’
But a third confessed anonymously: ‘I'm glad that I'm not going to be pitted against a chimp.’
John Pullen, of London Zoo, said: ‘There's no way a chimp could understand which company to go for, it has to be complete luck — but then what I understand of trading in that way sounds like complete luck half the time.’
Ola and five Swedish stock exchange experts were each given 10,000 kronor (£816) by Swedish newspaper Expressen.
At the end of a month the chimp's portfolio was up by more than £125, while his closest rival managed only £105.
Kirsten Matz, Expressen's money page editor, said: ‘It proves that sheer luck has a great deal to say about the stock market.’
Foyle Meats boosts sheep association
FOYLE Meats has given a big boost to the National Sheep Association, which holds its multi-breed ram sale at Antrim on September 21.
Terry Acheson, a director of the locally-owned Londonderry processing-plant, said: ‘We have taken the lead in marketing Farm Quality Assured lambs from seven local lamb groups to customers across the water and on the Continent.
‘The NSA helped prepare the ground for the formation of lamb groups and has, like ourselves, always encouraged farmers to aim for the quality end of the market.
‘This ram sale attracts entries from virtually every sheep breed in Northern Ireland and offers commercial flock-owners an opportunity to select quality sires essential for profitable lamb-production.’
Rubbish ‘is going to waste’
RECENTLY returned to Northern Ireland from New Zealand, I am appalled at the waste of re-cycleable material in the province.
On Auckland's North Shore each householder is provided with a small green bin about the size of a fish basket.
In this bin is placed tin cans, washed and flattened, hard plastics and glass bottles.
Newspapers are tied up in bundles, or put into plastic bags.
Unrecycleable material is put into either plastic or brown paper rubbish bags.
Garden rubbish was accepted free of charge, and turned into compost, bagged and put on sale at the tips.
Rubbish bags are on sale at the local supermarket, and labels have to be affixed.
The cost of the bags and labels go towards financing the project.
The success of the scheme depends absolutely on the co-operation of the public, and whether the good folk of Ulster would accept the extra work involved is open to question.
All rubbish is placed on the pavement each week, and is collected by trucks.
One large truck is appropriately named ‘The Paper Chaser’.
Have ticket will travel
THE province's largest independent advice charity has launched a lottery in east Belfast to help raise funds.
Scratch card tickets are on sale from Connswater Shopping Centre at £ each and if your number's up you could win cash prizes from £ to £1,000, even a new car.
‘There is a huge need for our advice service in the east of the city.
In 19992/93, our local office handled nearly 13, enquiries,’ said Richard Stones, appeals co-ordinator for the Citizens' Advice Bureau.
All profits from the sale of the tickets will go towards the work of the bureau.
The east Belfast CAB is at
Newtownards Road; telephone Belfast 739447.
The office is open 9.30am-12.30pm, 1.30pm-4.30pm Monday to Friday.
M&S leading the way
Marks and Spencer is the first Northern Ireland company to enter this year's Employees in the Community Awards.
The chain store piloted a 13-week part-time secondment programme in which five employees spent hours working with five voluntary organisations.
Organised by Business in the Community (BITC), the awards aim to recognise private companies and public sector organisations which encourage and support employees who volunteer help in the local community.
For the first time in their four-year history the awards will have a regional stage; the winners of which will then have a chance to win one of nine national awards in London on November 17.
Trade mission
LOCAL companies will later this year have the chance to take part in an IDB trade mission to three of the fastest growing economies in the Asia Pacific region.
‘We are targeting countries such as Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore because with their rapidly developing economies they have moved centre stage for world business,’ said John Campbell, IDB's director of exports.
A batty idea that works
The first bat brick sculpture in the world has been installed at Belfast Zoo.
The sculpture, created by Irena Adams and featuring giant bat shapes, was built to demonstrate bricks specially designed to accommodate the furry flying mammals in buildings.
The bricks were originally meant for inclusion in Victorian ice houses to provide alternative hibernation sites for bats.
And according to the Corry Group which sponsored the sculpture local householders have been going batty to buy the bricks for inclusion in new buildings and restored properties.
Above, the sculptor shows off her creation to zoo manager John Stronge and Corry Group's Roger Corry.
£1m project will tackle management problems
A NEW £ million computer project will help local industry and commerce tackle management problems.
Based at the University of Ulster, Jordanstown, the Northern Ireland Knowledge Engineering Laboratory (NIKEL) has tapped into the expertise of managers and placed it on software.
Advanced computer technology then uses the information to stimulate human deliberation in tackling management and production problems.
The project is being funded by the European Community's STRIDE programme, computer firm ICL and the university.
‘As industries become more competitive and develop more complex processes, the need to harness the expertise and skills available in our academic institutions becomes vital in order to sharpen our competitive edge,’ said Robert Atkins, Economy Minister.
NIKEL comprises a wide range of work stations and software which collectively provide the tools and capability for Knowledge Based Systems development.
Although based at Jordanstown, the system has links to other sites across the province by utilising the recent advances in telecommunications services supported by the EC STAR Programme.
Jaguar stalks younger market
JAGUAR is to launch a new saloon model, the XJ 4.0S, as part of its changed model range for 1994.
The new XJ 4. litre follows the sales success of the 3. litre model, and it's aimed at the sportier drivers among Jaguar customers, as well as getting younger drivers behind the famous wheel.
It's priced at £33,700, on a par with some higher level Mercedes-Benz and BMW models.
Under the bonnet is Jaguar's hefty 4. litre bhp engine mated to a four-speed automatic gearbox.
A five-speed manual box is a no-cost option.
Also for 1994, there's a package of design changes for the XJ range.
New features include three new alloy wheel designs and much-needed new stalk controls.
A new four-channel engine immobiliser system has been developed and added to the range.
Jaguar XJ
— a new 4. litre model introduced.
p/36/
Mazda launching flagship
THE Mazda range, much changed in recent years, is to get a new flagship model.
It's the Xedos 9, a bigger and better version of the Xedos 6, introduced last year, and Mazda's first entry into the prestige market.
And it seems that the Japanese are confident of success, to such an extent that they're launching the new model first in Germany, of all places.
The Xedos will come with a choice of two engines — a 2.0i V or a 2.5i V
DOHC.
Mazda says that, where the Xedos broke new ground in the executive saloon class, the new model will do the same among the prestige cars, whatever that means exactly.
A new suspension system has been developed for the car, and it also features a four-wheel steering system along with four-wheel anti lock braking and electronic traction control.
So, active safety doesn't seem to have been neglected.
And the safety element doesn't stop at that.
Also part of the package will be airbags for both driver and passenger and pre-tensioned seat belts.
The Xedos is due to be unveiled at this week's Frankfurt Motor Show, and no details have been given yet about price or its date of arrival in the UK.
Stylish new Mazda — the Xedos 9. p/37/
News from Vauxhall
VAUXHALL has been giving more details of changes and additions to its range for the sales year.
Last week, it was news of the Astra, Cavalier and Calibra.
Now it's the turn of the new Corsa and Frontera.
Four automatics have been launched to complete the Corsa hatchback range, which replaced the Nova earlier this year.
In fact, automatic driving is available from as cheaply as £7, in 1.4i Merit form.
Prices then run upwards to £9, for the 1.4i GLS five-door model, with a couple of LS models in between.
All of the Corsa autos, in fact, use the 1.4i single point fuel injection engine.
It is coupled to one of GM's four-speed automatic gearboxes which features a responsive kick-down, what Vauxhall likes to call a ‘seamless’ change-up and lock-up in third and fourth ratios.
Top speed for all the Corsa automatics is mph, while the 0–60 mph time won't break any records at seconds.
But then small automatics aren't for the performance buff!
Economy isn't much different from any similar Corsa at around mpg on average, and there is a choice of three driving modes — economy, winter or sport.
There are very limited changes this time around to the Frontera range.
The £13,
Sport model gains standard electric windows and door mirrors.
Meanwhile, there are signs that sales of the bigger Vauxhalls, the Carlton and Senator, are suffering.
The company has cut the Senator range down to just one model, the 3. litre 24v CD.
The Carlton estates continue to be more popular than the saloons, so a new range-topping model has been introduced, the 3.0i 24v estate which costs a competitive £25,995.
It's something of a performance load carrier, with a top speed of mph and 0– mph sprint time to 8. seconds.
30.
The Vauxhall Corsa Merit — automatic motoring for just over £7,500. p/37/
£100, grant for Somme Association
THE Somme Association has received a £100, grant from the Northern Ireland Tourist Board towards new facilities for visitors to the Ulster Memorial Tower at Thiepval in France.
Built near the site of a fierce engagement in the opening phase of the Battle of the Somme, the tower commemorates the thousands of soldiers of the 36th (Ulster) Division and the other regiments who fell in the successful assault on the German front line in July 1916.
As well as using the grant to provide a new cafe and shop, the association is also planning to stage a new exhibition at Thiepval using the latest state-of-the-art audio-visual technology to tell the Ulstermen's story.
Men of the 16th (Irish) Division suffered similar losses in September 1916, and their story will also form part of the exhibition.
Let's talk about tax
THE taxman is keen to talk to visitors attending this year's Ideal Home Exhibition in the King's Hall.
For staff from the Inland Revenue's Belfast offices are offering free advice to those with tax problems.
They have set up a special stand at the exhibition, which began on Tuesday and runs until next Saturday.
They are answering questions people may have about tax and providing a range of free leaflets.
‘A lot of people feel shy about going into a Tax Office, so this is a good opportunity for them to get any help they need,’ explained Peter Guy, the Inland Revenue's Customer Service Manager in the province.
On the move in Finaghy
HALIFAX Property Services has moved to impressive new premises at 124a Upper Lisburn Road in the heart of Finaghy's busy shopping area, having outgrown other premises which it had occupied in Finaghy for years.
Area manager Beth Robinson says: ‘Our business in Finaghy has steadily increased year by year and for some time we have been looking for premises, in a prominent location, which would give us the space we now need.
‘We are delighted with our new position which underlines our commitment to the area and already the response from the public has been most encouraging.’
The premises, which occupy a corner site in a prime front of the road position, are bright and spacious, creating a most pleasant environment for the display of the many properties offered for sale by the Finaghy branch.
In tandem with the relocation, the office has increased its service to Halifax Building Society customers with the introduction of a computerised banking system.
Advice
Terry Rice, Senior Branch Manager in charge of the Finaghy branch, is enthusiastic about the move.
‘Our clients will very quickly recognise the advantages of the additional space and the agency terminal for Halifax investors.
‘We have also been able to provide dedicated space for Daniel Rodgers, our Mortgage Consultant, who is able to offer free and professional advice on all financial aspects of a move.
‘With the continually changing mortgage market, Daniel, having discussed each client's requirements, is then able to search out the most advantageous mortgage, whether from Halifax Building Society or other major lenders.
‘Senior Valuer Peter Ferguson and I will be very happy to talk to anyone from the Finaghy area who is considering a move in the near future and, of course, we offer a free valuation service at a time to suit any potential vendor.
‘We feel that the convenience of having house sales, mortgage and building society services all available under one roof makes Halifax the number one choice in the Finaghy area.’
Halifax Property Services is at the forefront of the housing market in Northern Ireland.
The province's Group Business Executive Herbie Hunter said the future for the company has never looked brighter.
‘In the last financial year we were delighted to be the second most profitable group in the network,’ he explained.
‘I think that is a just reward for all the work which has been carried out, especially over the last two years.
‘To us, performance on the ground at branch level, backed by the old style of entrepreneurial local leadership, with the additional benefit of major financial and brand backing, has to be a winning combination.’
Ladas Drive station closes but…
FIRE FIGHTERS GET SPECIAL PAYMENTS
FIREFIGHTERS who have lost their jobs as a result of Castlereagh Fire Station closing will receive a form of redundancy pay, thanks to east Belfast MP Peter Robinson.
The jobs of men were threatened when it was announced last year that the Ladas Drive facility would be replaced by a £250, fire station at Carryduff.
There was also controversy at the time when the East Belfast MP claimed the new station, with its one fire engine, could not provide as much cover as Castlereagh, which had two appliances.
Despite a campaign to save the Ladas Drive station, the closure went ahead yesterday evening.
It marked the end of years of service, signalling the new facility at Carryduff to begin fire cover for east and south Belfast.
Mr Robinson took up the case for a majority of the Castlereagh firemen who left the Fire Service because they were not prepared to uproot their families and move to Carryduff.
Case
This week, the government decided to award the men payments, and the move is a coup for Mr Robinson and the firefighters, as they had no legal requirement to redundancy pay.
The MP wrote to Environment Minister Robert Atkins pointing out that although the men were retained firemen and the only hours that count are when they are ‘on duty’, many have up to years of service under their belts.
Mr Robinson said: ‘The Brigade and the Fire Authority accept that there is a special case for the payment of an extra statutory amount equivalent to redundancy pay to Castlereagh personnel.’
‘They have been forced to close the Castlereagh Station otherwise their employment would have continued,’ he added.
‘If the savings by the closing are in the order that the authorities are suggesting, then the small payment being suggested would appear to make a lot of financial sense, while at the same time recognising the very valuable contribution of men who have given many years of service.’
The Fire Brigade Union has requested one and a half weeks pay for each year of service, plus the annual bounty payment.
And Department of the Environment officials have agreed to the extra statutory payment, under the Local Government Superannuation Regulations.
A Fire Authority divisional officer at Bangor confirmed the majority of firemen from Castlereagh have left the service.
He added, however, that a handful of men did commence training a year ago for the new station and have moved home.
The fire official also refuted past claims of a lack of fire cover, insisting: ‘In many ways, it is now better.’
Carryduff will provide fire cover as far down as the ring road, with other stations, including Knock, Central and Cadogan acting as a back-up.
The fire official said the new station was situated in Carryduff because of boundary changes in the area.
He added that a new station would also be opening in Comber next year.
‘There are no cutbacks in the Fire Service,’ he insisted.
‘A survey has shown that the move is for the better, rather than the worse.’
Report by Helen Carson
Cut down on heating bills, says Parkes
A SERIES of information films with advice on cutting down domestic heat loss will be running at four Belfast leisure centres next week.
The project has been welcomed by DUP councillor John Parkes, who says it is ‘high time’ people in Belfast took more steps to combat this problem.
‘Belfast is at the top of the league for wasted energy in the UK,’ he said.
‘These films offer practical advice to help people cut costs on heating and help improve the environment.
‘I would encourage people to visit the exhibitions to see for themselves what can be done.’
The films will be shown at Maysfield on September to 6, at Olympia from September to 7, at Andersonstown from September to 10, and at Shankill from September to 14.
Awards for coaches
THE search to find the
Coaches of the Year has begun.
The Northern Ireland Institute of Coaching presents eight different awards each year with the winners automatically going forward to the UK finals.
The awards will be presented at the House of Sport on October with each category winner receiving an engraved Wassail goblet donated by sponsors Tyrone Crystal.
Nominations are invited for any part-time or voluntary coach who has made an outstanding contribution to sport.
Nomination forms, and further details, are available from the Northern Ireland Institute of Coaching, House of Sport, Upper Malone Road, Belfast, BT 5LA.
They should be returned before September 17.
Strike threat looming
MORE than 500, UNISON members began voting last week to decide on industrial action over the government's 1.
per cent pay offer.
Social workers, librarians, planners, architects, housing staff, tax, careers and school officers will be taking part in the vote for six days of strike action over a six week period from October 4.
UNISON members have already voted by per cent to per cent to reject the local government pay offer.
‘This ballot is about the right of our members to have their pay determined by free collective bargaining and not by government diktat.
It concerns the right of UNISON members to a decent wage,’ said Inez McCormack, Northern Ireland regional secretary for UNISON.
She added that her members were ‘tired’ paying for the government's economic mistakes and trying to provide services under ‘virtual siege conditions’.
‘They are not going to be bullied by this ‘couldn't-care-less’ government,’she added.
Voting ends on September 24, and the result of the ballot will be announced on September 27.
New opportunity for local home buyers
WITH major re-shaping of the seafront and development plans for the town centre, Bangor is fast becoming one of the most sought after areas to live in.
And now FT Ferguson and Co is giving home buyers the opportunity to view a brand new collection of detached houses in the Ashbury Avenue area of the town.
Set in a quiet, in-fill development of only dwellings, these houses are in a mature, residential area.
Convenient to Bloomfield Shopping Centre and only yards from the town's new primary school, due to open next year, prices start at £51, for a four bedroomed 1,200sq foot detached chalet home.
Viewing times for the houses are Monday to Thursday 1pm-4pm, Wednesday from 7pm-8.30pm and Sunday from 3pm-5pm.
For further information contact the FT Ferguson and Company sales centre on Bangor 465516.
Report by Maria Husin
Advice service under threat?
NEW proposals for a shake up in the support arrangements of advice services may mean reduced cover at such centres across Belfast.
Announcing the proposals Education Minister Michael Ancram acknowledged the importance of the voluntary sector as a source of independent advice.
However, he made no mention of providing additional funds to support the new proposals.
In response to a General Consumer Council report published in 1991, the proposed restructuring includes new arrangements for: Giving district councils a key role in shaping the development of their areas' advice services.
An emphasis on deciding development strategies at local level, in the light of local circumstances.
Designating the Department of Education as the leading co-ordinator of funding.
Altering the grant scheme to offer a standard grant of 16.4p per capita to all District Councils, adjusted to incorporate a premium reflecting variations in social need.
Grant
The minister believes these changes will provide a fairer distribution of grant money to less well provided for parts of the province.
However, because no additional money has been made available to establish a central development fund to extend services in these areas, the money may have to be taken away from existing services in other areas.
Services in Belfast, Banbridge and Strabane — with an expenditure of 33p, 39p and 51p respectively per capita— stand to lose out if no additional money is available to extend services to other parts of the province.
‘Although we welcome the government's recognition of the importance of the voluntary sector's advice services, we are concerned about the lack of additional finance to extend the services in less well provided for areas,’ explained Tim Attwood, director of CAB.
The Department of Education is inviting interested parties to submit comments on the new support arrangements by October 31.
Enjoy a brand new start
THE Co-Ownership Housing Association is celebrating the success of its Brand New Start Scheme launched in April this year.
Intended for first time buyers, the scheme aims to make house buying easier and to ease the burden of a full mortgage.
Because of its popularity, many of the association's new homes have already been snapped up.
Kevin Butler, director of the association, said: ‘We have been confident from the beginning that the Brand New Start Scheme would be successful.’
Funded by the DoE, Co-Ownership's scheme enables applicants to part-buy, part-rent their home, with a built-in option to buy out the rented part.
House-hunters in the Castlereagh area still have the opportunity to purchase a few remaining properties through the scheme and can get further information by ringing freephone 333644.
In the Dundonald area a number of semi-detached bungalows at Grangewood Lodge, Ballyregan Road, are being offered through agents McQuitty Ross, for £36,000.
ACE effort
BELFAST'S Lord Mayor Reg Empey presented certificates and diplomas earlier this week to former ACE employees at the East Belfast Mission.
Qualifications ranging from accounting to supervisory management, catering and word processing were awarded to the former employees.
The participants completed the courses during their year's work experience on Training and Employment Agency-sponsored Community Employment schemes all over east Belfast.
Moving up in the world
BIGGER, brighter premises and a service to match are what Halifax Property Services in Finaghy are offering.
They have just moved from their Finaghy Road South base at the crossroads, to the corner of 124A Upper Lisburn Road and Mount Aboo Street — in the heart of the Finaghy shopping centre.
‘The bigger, brighter premises will be a great help in our work in the Finaghy area,’ explained area manager Beth Robinson.
‘And the more prominent position in the middle of the busy Finaghy shopping area will let people know we are here and publicise the services we offer.
‘This is a sign of our commitment in the Finaghy area.
Business has steadily increased year by year and we have now outgrown our existing Finaghy branch.
‘These new premises have been on the cards for some time.’
Link
The Finaghy branch has become an important link in the chain, as far as the Halifax Property Services operation in the south Belfast and Lisburn area is concerned.
Marketing manager David Stewart said: ‘Finaghy is the link between our branches in Stranmillis and Andersonstown and out to the Lisburn area.
‘That places the very busy Finaghy area at the heart of a wide catchment sector.’
Halifax Property Services offer much more than the traditional role of the estate agent.
The roles of estate agent are combined with an experienced financial services adviser, as well as a building society service.
‘The convenience of having all these services available in a ‘one-stop shop’ makes Halifax the right choice for many people,’added Mr Stewart.
Advice
‘We offer sound financial advice and consider mortgages from all the leading banks and building societies, as well as from our own.’
Halifax Property Services is at the forefront of the housing market in Northern Ireland.
The province's group executive Herbie Hunter said the future for the company has never looked brighter.
‘In the financial year just completed we were delighted to be the second most profitable group in the network,’ he explained.
‘I think that is a just reward for the work which has been carried out over the two years following our restructure.
‘To us performance on the ground at branch level, backed by the old style of entrepreneurial local leadership, with the additional benefit of major financial and brand backing, has to be a winning combination.’
Export seminar plan
THE IDB is organising a seminar to encourage local companies to take advantage of the major export opportunities in three of the fastest growing economies in the Asia Pacific region.
‘We are targeting countries such as Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore because with their rapidly developing economies they have moved centre stage for world business,’ explained John Campbell, IDB's director of exports.
First hand information about opportunities in the three countries will be provided by a panel of experienced exporters, including Gordon Welsh, the DTI's export promoter for Thailand.
The seminar will be held in the Novotel Hotel at Belfast International Airport on September 6.
Northern Ireland companies will also have the chance to take part in the IDB's trade mission to the three countries from November to December 10.
Information on training
A ‘TRAINING and Information’ Day will take place at Ballybeen Activity Centre tomorrow (Friday).
There will be three sessions, between 10am and 12pm, and 4pm and 8pm.
The need for training in the area was identified through the Ballybeen Estate Strategy Steering Group and as a result a ‘Training and Education Working Group’ was established.
It is made up of representatives from further education colleges, the Flexible Learning Centre, adult education centres, the Education and Library Board, the Outer Belfast Action Team and women's education organisations.
‘The take-up of education and training courses by adults in the Ballybeen area is very low, and the Training and Education Working Group saw a need to uncover the reasons behind this,’ said Gillian Spence, OBAT marketing co-ordinator.
The forum is aimed at overcoming these problems and the initiative is the first of its kind in the area.