

Peace moves
LOYALIST politicians are engaged in behind-the-scenes talks with the Northern Ireland Office in a bid to halt the recent upsurge of violence, it was claimed today.
According to a highly-placed political source in west Belfast, councillors and community workers have been acting as intermediaries between the UFF/UVF and senior Government officials.
Gun attack girl lucky to be alive
A 10-YEAR-OLD girl narrowly missed death in an IRA gun attack on police, it was revealed this afternoon.
The RUC said that some of the bullets fired at Woodbourne police station struck two houses last night.
One round went through a bedroom window of a house at Upper Dunmurry Lane and struck the wall beside where the young girl was sleeping.
Another bullet penetrated the bathroom window of another house in the same area.
The shots were fired from the Horn Drive area of Lenadoon.
A police spokesman said: ‘These wild gun attacks by terrorists place the whole community at risk.
Only good fortune prevented two stray rounds from killing or injuring an innocent child and people in their own homes’.
TUNIS
Arafat to sign deal in Washington
PLO chairman Yasser Arafat will go to Washington to sign a historic self-rule deal with Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin on Monday, Arafat aide Hakam Balawi said in Tunis today.
‘PLO chairman Yasser Arafat will head the PLO's delegation which will go to Washington to sign the peace deal for the Palestinian side,’ Balawi said.
In Jerusalem, Rabin's spokesman Oded Ben-Ami said today Rabin would go to Washington to sign the self-rule deal.
Rabin, accompanied by Foreign Minister Shimon Peres, will leave Israel for Washington on Sunday.
NEW DELHI
Seven die car bomb
AT least seven people were killed in a car bomb attempt on the life of a politician in Delhi today, police said.
The target was thought to be the Sikh president of the youth wing of India's ruling Congress Party.
The Press Trust of India news agency said as many as 12 people were feared killed in an explosion which destroyed at least five cars and blew out windows of surrounding buildings, including a five-star hotel popular with tourists.
The Youth Congress president, Maninder Singh Bitta, said that Sikh militants fighting for independence in the north Indian state of Punjab had tried to kill him 11 times previously.
SOMALIA
Warlord calls for Carter
SOMALI warlord Mohamed Farah Aideed has asked former US President Jimmy Carter to intercede in the conflict between Aideed's Somali National Alliance and United Nations forces.
In a three-page letter to Carter in Atlanta, the Somali general accused the United States-led UN force in Somalia of a series of abuses and said the United States and UN have threatened his life.
Carter said had not decided how to respond to Aideed, but said the conflict in Somalia should be settled through negotiation.
He also referred to an attack on Thursday by US Cobra helicopter gunships on Somalis in which as many as 100 people, including some women and children, were killed or wounded.
A UN spokesman had said the women and children joined an attack on UN peacekeepers.
PHILIPPINES
Briton gets life
A BRITON has been sentenced to life imprisonment by a Philippine court for drug smuggling, it was reported today.
William Robert Burton of Edinburgh was also ordered to pay a fine of 20,000 pesos (£450) for trying to smuggle 5.6 kilos of hashish onto a flight to Sydney, Australia, last December.
Judge Alfredo Gustilo said in Manila Burton's claim that he did not know the contraband was among his belongings was ‘absurd’ because customs police found four blocks of hashish hidden in the pair of shoes he had on at the time of his arrest.
EAST LOTHIAN
Sons' horror as dad goes up in flames
TWO sons watched in horror as their dad was engulfed in flames following an explosion in East Lothian.
Panel beater Gordon Reid (32), had just set fire to rubbish in the old oil drum while clearing up at his car body repair garage at Fenton Barns.
Mr Reid of North Berwick, suffered serious burns to his hands, arms, chest, back face and head in the incident last night.
His two sons Graham, aged eight, and Craig, six, witnessed the accident.
CAVAN
Pickpockets head south
DETECTIVES in the Republic believe a gang of pickpockets which struck recently at shopping centres in Newry have now moved to Cavan where several stores were targeted in recent days.
BALLYRONEY
Last survivor
LACKAN Bog at Ballyroney, near Rathfriland, is one of the largest single blocks of lowland peatland left in Co Down, according to the Department of the Environment.
Banbridge Council has now agreed to a request that the bog be designated as in the area of special scientific interest on account of its wild flowers, fauna and geological features.
LISBURN
New rector
ST COLUMBA'S Parish Church, Derryvolgie, Lisburn is to get a new rector.
The Rev Chris Pollock, curate in St Patrick's Church, Ballymoney, will succeed Canon J N B Wilkinson who retired in June.
LIVERPOOL
Mums save lifeguard
TWO Liverpool mothers who cannot swim a stroke saved a lifeguard from drowning in a North Wales holiday camp pool.
School dinner lady Linda Ellis, 32, and nurse Marie Fisher, 38, saved Tom Friday after he passed out and toppled into the pool at the Ty Mawr Holiday Camp, in Towyn, near Rhyl, North Wales.
New twist in strangled Donegal woman's case
JAIL REVIEW FOR KILLER
THE Attorney General is to review the three year sentence given to a killer who strangled and dismembered a Co Donegal woman.
A spokesman for Sir Nicholas Lyell's office said today that Conor Downey's sentence will be examined by the country's senior law officer.
Downey was jailed last week after he admitted killing Gweedore woman Suzannah Reddan five years ago.
The Attorney General's spokesman said Sir Nicholas had been asked to look into the case after receiving a letter from an Irish TD.
‘Urgent’
He refused to disclose the identity of the politician.
Donegal Fine Gael TD Dinny McGinley is understood to have written to the Attorney General raising the case.
He was unavailable for comment.
The Attorney General's spokesman said a decision on whether or not to appeal the sentence would be made ‘urgently’.
An appeal must be lodged within 28 days of a sentence being passed.
The spokesman said: ‘It is an urgent matter.
The Attorney General is on holiday at the minute.
‘But we can guarantee either he or the Solicitor General will consult all the papers.
‘It will then be up to him to decide, in his view, whether he thinks the sentence was unduly lenient or not.’
Downey strangled Donegal woman Suzannah Reddan at a flat in north London in March, 1988.
The Old Bailey heard he then cut her up before taking parts of her body on the Underground system to be dumped outside a women's refuge.
The case was solved when Downey finally walked in to a police station earlier this year and confessed to the killing.
He was sentenced to three years for manslaughter and perverting the course of justice.
Suffered
In the first detailed interview since Downey was sentenced, the Reddan family last week told the Belfast Telegraph of the hurt they had suffered.
They condemned the three year sentence as ‘totally inadequate’.
Suzannah's mother Cassie said she wanted to shoot Downey for what he had done to her eldest daughter.
And Kathleen Reddan, who last saw her sister the day before she was killed, said the sentence was ‘an insult’.
A spokesman for the Crown Prosecution Service confirmed it had decided against referring the sentence to the Attorney General.
By David Walmsley
Dog attack
TWO-YEAR-OLD Nicola Brady was today recovering from a serious attack by a stray dog near her home town of Monaghan.
The little girl is being treated at Monaghan General Hospital for head and facial injuries.
‘Debate on Ulster's prisons needed’
IN HIS speech to the House of Commons debate on the Draft Appropriation No 2 (Northern Ireland) Order, in July, DUP leader, the Rev. Ian Paisley welcomed the appointment of Sir John Wheeler as NIO Security Minister adding that he hoped he would bring the benefit of his experience in prisons to bear.
In recent weeks the whole issue of prison conditions has been pushed to the forefront of public debate, following reports that Home Secretary Michael Howard is said to believe that conditions in many prisons are ‘too lax’.
From what I have read and seen of Crumlin Road Prison, the conditions there could hardly be more austere, particularly for remand prisoners (who, let it not be forgotten, are innocent until proven guilty).
I was therefore interested to read the reply of the then NIO Security Minister, Michael Mates, to a Parliamentary written question by Ulster Unionist Home Affairs spokesman, David Trimble in Hansard earlier this year, when Mr Trimble asked the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland when he intends to end slopping-out at each of the province's prisons.
Mr Mates replies that the target date for doing so at Belfast Prison is not until the year 2000.
Given that Northern Ireland was excluded from the recently-enacted Prison Security Act, the conditions in Northern Ireland's prisons have largely escaped the Parliamentary scrutiny that conditions in prisons elsewhere in the UK have received.
I hope, therefore, in the new session of Parliament, time will be set aside for a debate on current conditions in, and the future of, Northern Ireland prisons.
Belfast Prison: Slopping out will continue until the end of the century
Loyalists seek to end the spiral of murder
LOYALIST politicians are involved in secret talks with senior Northern Ireland Office officials in a bid to halt the recent upsurge in violence, it was claimed today.
A highly placed political source said politicians and community workers, while opposed to the violence, had been acting as intermediaries between the UFF/UVF and senior Government officers.
The disclosure comes after last night's announcement by the UVF that it has lifted its death threat against prison officers.
‘There is a lot going on behind the scenes.
A number of meetings have been held and certain loyalist politicians are talking to senior NIO officials and telling them what is causing the violence and that, unless these problems are addressed, it will get very much worse,’ said the source.
Situation
‘Many people in the Protestant community were outraged at the murder of prison officer Jim Peacock.
‘People are very concerned at what is happening.
It is a very bad situation as loyalist paramilitaries feel that violence will pay, as they believe it has done for the IRA through the setting up of the Anglo-Irish Agreement.
‘There is a growing feeling of alienation in loyalist areas which is boosting the ranks of the paramilitaries.
‘The problems are wide-ranging and cover the whole social and economic spectrum.
Protestants feel their areas are being deprived of housing improvements and job creation skills.
They don't believe there is a fair allocation of funding.
Comment
‘But, if this situation can be addressed, there is a big possibility we could see a cessation of the violence,’ added the source.
An NIO spokesman said he was not aware of any such talks taking place.
But loyalist sources were adamant that the UFF will continue its campaign of violence until the IRA lays down its arms.
Squash's new body
THE formation of a single national governing body for squash in Ireland to replace the Irish Squash Association and Irish Women's Squash Racquets Association will be announced in Dublin tomorrow.
Talks between the ISA, IWSRA and the Provincial associations have been held in a bid to formulate a new constitution together with a set of policies and financial implications for the new body which will be known as Irish Squash.
The new constitution was agreed at a meeting in Athlone last month and the present councils will stand down tomorrow when a new council will be elected.
This is a giant step forward from the position two years ago when 67 clubs called a special general meeting to save the ISA from extinction.
Nominated
Former Irish international Dr Geraldine Barniville from Dublin has been nominated as the new president but it is understood that Ulster's Billy Bell and Paddy McAuley the outgoing treasurer and secretary will not be standing for election., It is widely acknowledged that Paddy McIlroy, past president of Ulster, and the outgoing Irish vice-president, made a major contribution in drafting the new constitution and by-laws.
He wants your body!
DERRICK Evans is shaking the bleary-eyed world of breakfast viewing awake.
He tells MATT HORAN why he is Mr Motivator.
‘YO, this is Dalek exercises, mon!’ booms Derrick Evans, his skin-tight leotard stretching in impossible directions as he throws himself around the GMTV studio.
A Dalek rescued from the set of Doctor Who is feebly trying to keep up with GMTV's Mr Motivator, squarking an occasional electronic ‘Yo!’.
If GMTV, wilting under the barrage of free-based wackiness from Channel 4's Big Breakfast, wanted an early-morning crowd puller, this is it.
Derrick Evans is Roland Rat with pecs appeal — and the housewives love it.
Guru
His outrageous leotards, sexy routines and snappy catch-phrases —‘I want your body!’— have made him into a sort of Linford Christie with a breakfast box.
When Jamaican-born Derrick filled in for GMTV's pint-sized fitness guru Tonya Czerniawskyi, so many female fans jammed the switchboard that Tonya was sacked and Derrick given the £50,000-a-year job.
So how does a 40-year-old separated dad with thinning hair and tinted specs get all this adulation?
‘I don't know about being a sex symbol — I just want to be the sprinkling of sunshine in your cornflakes,’ he laughs.
Derrick took up fitness training just 13 years ago after his jewellery importing business folded.
He started running an aerobics session in a church hall in Neasden, North London, and soon expanded.
Now he's one of the top personal trainers in the country.
Through his training, he met Olympic javelin gold medallist Tessa Sanderson.
He dumped his beautician wife Jewel for her three years ago — but his relationship with Tessa has now ended.
Schedule
‘Tessa's fine, we still get along together fine,’ he said.
The split was caused mainly by work — both his and Tessa's hectic schedules never seemed to meet.
When the split happened he said: ‘There was no one else involved.
Neither of us had the time.
‘We were together for a long time but we grew apart and we have both been working hard.’
He still lives in Kingsbury, near Hendon, with his children James (nine), Ebony (16) and Caroline (21).
Derrick got his break with GMTV after helping train presenters Eamonn Holmes and Lorraine Kelly in his usual style.
‘I would just take them out into the park behind the studios, no matter what the weather.
If it rained, we went out — they needed someone to push them to get fit,’ he says, struggling to pull his sweat-pants over his beer keg thighs in a GMTV office.
But mention Tonya and he puts his hands up.
‘What can I say?
I feel very sorry for anyone who loses their job.
I didn't know Tonya very well, but I wish her the best.’
GMTV staff look very sheepish when you mention Tonya, like embarrassed parents forced to talk about their pregnant daughter.
Then again, after Linda Lusardi and Tonya in just eight months, health and fitness advisors don't have a long life expectancy on GMTV.
Message
‘But they've never had me!’ says Mr Motivator.
‘Exercise is a way of life and if this station wants to provide a good service they'll always need it.
‘I may die in five years time — hopefully someone else will be there giving the same message.’
Dying isn't on the agenda.
Ignore the receding hairline and funny glasses.
This man is seriously BUILT.
‘If you don't use it, you're going to lose it,’ says Derrick.
‘I'm 40 but I'm still fit.
There are 600-plus muscles in our body and whether they're smile muscles or frown muscles, if you use them you'll keep them.
‘I work every single muscle in my body.
You've got to keep that heart muscle moving, got to get the body working.
‘There are a lot of late bloomers now.
Look at Linford Christie, he's in his middle 30s.
In principle, we all have it in us.’
What he does have is all packed away inside his leotard — destined to be cult items.
‘Hey you know man, what happens to us men if we do exercises with just shorts on,’ he grins, then proceeds to explain in detail as the young female press officer from GMTV squirms with embarrassment.
‘I like bright colours.
I have a friend who runs a company in Portsmouth called Bodyline and he makes all my leotards.
‘I go down and say ‘every single offcut of lycra you have — and make it into one for me!’.’
Stomach
His routines —‘sensuous,’ scream the housewives — are delightfully off-the-cuff in a world of TV micro-management.
‘I don't know how I do it,’ he says.
‘I just get out there and it comes about.
‘I select all the music myself but I don't have any idea of what exercises I'm going to do.
If I'm doing the stomach, well I've got dozens of routines for the stomach so I just do what feels good.
‘If I choreographed it it wouldn't look natural and I could really just be taping it the day before.
‘When I come to on set I want to feel good.
As far as I'm concerned if I come into the studio and everyone's smiling, hey, that's great.
But if we've had a really serious news bulletin that just makes me feel more jolly.
‘We don't want people going to work feeling depressed.
‘We'll be concentrating on developing certain areas of the body on the show.
The next thing is to go out on the road and into people's homes and offices, where they've written us letters saying they want to get fit.’
Raw sex: Derrick Evans during one of his housewife-tormenting routines.
I just want to be the sprinkling of sunshine on your cornflakes!
Carrick man on murder charges
A 49-YEAR-old Carrickfergus man was due to appear at Belfast Magistrates' Court today charged with two counts of murder.
The man is also accused of attempted murder and rape.
Bodies
The charges arise out of incidents in the town on Thursday when the bodies of two women, one in her fifties and one in her thirties were found in a house.
Another woman was discovered injured at her home nearby.
SECRET BID FOR PEACE
Loyalist move to end vicious spiral of killing
LOYALIST politicians are involved in secret talks with senior Northern Ireland Office officials in a bid to halt the recent upsurge in violence, it was claimed today.
A highly placed political source said politicians and community workers, while opposed to the violence, had been acting as intermediaries between the UFF/UVF and senior Government officers.
The disclosure comes after last night's announcement by the UVF that it has lifted its death threat against prison officers.
‘There is a lot going on behind the scenes.
‘A number of meetings have been held and certain loyalist politicians are talking to senior NIO officials and telling them what is causing the violence and that, unless these problems are addressed, it will get very much worse,’ said the source.
Situation
‘Many people in the Protestant community were outraged at the murder of prison officer Jim Peacock.
‘People are very concerned at what is happening.
It is a very bad situation as loyalist paramilitaries feel that violence will pay, as they believe it has done for the IRA through the setting up of the Anglo-Irish Agreement.
‘There is a growing feeling of alienation in loyalist areas which is boosting the ranks of the paramilitaries.
‘The problems are wide-ranging and cover the whole social and economic spectrum.
Protestants feel their areas are being deprived of housing improvements and job creation skills.
They don't believe there is a fair allocation of funding.
Comment
‘But, if this situation can be addressed, there is a big possibility we could see a cessation of the violence,’ added the source.
An NIO spokesman was not immediately available for comment.
But loyalist sources were adamant that the UFF will continue its campaign of violence until the IRA lays down its arms.
After two weeks of loyalist murders, the sources said that the UFF ‘was going to rise to every challenge the IRA would set them’.
And they said that the loyalist killers would only be called off the streets after the IRA expressed a willingness for a ceasefire.
Acquired
‘It would have to be ascertained, however, that the IRA's weapons were not being handed on to another group,’ it was stated.
They refused to be drawn on reports that the UFF had acquired quantities of commercial explosives.
Mother-of-four Theresa de Mogollon, Glen Road newsagent Michael Edwards and Falls Road hairdresser Sean Hughes have all fallen victim to UFF gunmen in an orgy of killing in the past two weeks.
Further reports on Page 7
School lashes out over councillor's ‘filth’ claim
AN Ulster school is considering action against its town's deputy mayor for saying it should be shut down for teaching a new sex education project.
In his attack Antrim DUP councillor Jim Brown said: ‘If this is the kind of filth they are feeding to our children then the quicker they close the better.’
But George Acheson, principal of the town's Ardnaveigh High School, said he had contacted the North-Eastern Education Board about the comments.
Closed
‘I have also been in touch with our board of governors.
Everyone feels we should react in a very strong way to these remarks.’
Mr Brown's comments referred to a recent Education Board recommendation that both Ardnaveigh and Antrim High School should be closed and a new school opened on the Antrim High School site.
A decision on the issue will only be taken after a formal consultation process involving all the interested parties.
Ardnaveigh High is one of four schools in the Bannside Health Area which are to introduce the Health Board/ Education pilot sex education project.
Its administrators say the programme will provide accurate and up-to-date information on issues related to teenage sexuality.
‘Mr Brown's remarks reveal he has no idea what he is talking about.
If he is so concerned, why did he not come and talk to us?’
Mr Acheson asked.
Involved
‘Under the National Curriculum every school must provide sex education and it is important that we teach it properly and in a responsible way.
‘That is why we have decided to get involved in this new project.
‘We have had no complaints from any parent.
In fact since Mr Brown made his remarks some parents have rang me to lend their support.’
Mr Brown said he had no further comment to make on the matter.
Law chief to rule on 3-year term for killer
THE Attorney General is to review the three year sentence given to a killer who strangled and dismembered a Co Donegal woman.
A spokesman for Sir Nicholas Lyell's office said today that Conor Downey's sentence will be examined by the country's senior law officer.
Downey was jailed last week after he admitted killing Gweedore woman Suzannah Reddan five years ago.
The Attorney General's spokesman said Sir Nicholas had been asked to look into the case after receiving a letter from an Irish TD.
‘Urgent’
He refused to disclose the identity of the politician.
Donegal Fine Gael TD Dinny McGinley is understood to have written to the Attorney General raising the case.
He was unavailable for comment.
The Attorney General's spokesman said a decision on whether or not to appeal the sentence would be made ‘urgently’.
An appeal must be lodged within 28 days of a sentence being passed.
The spokesman said: ‘It is an urgent matter.
The Attorney General is on holiday at the minute.
‘But we can guarantee either he or the Solicitor General will consult all the papers.
‘It will then be up to him to decide, in his view, whether he thinks the sentence was unduly lenient or not.’
Downey strangled the Donegal woman at a flat in north London in March, 1988.
The Old Bailey heard he then cut her up before taking parts of her body on the Underground system to be dumped outside a women's refuge.
The case was solved when Downey finally walked into a police station earlier this year and confessed to the killing.
A spokesman for the Crown Prosecution Service confirmed it had decided against referring the sentence to the Attorney General.
By David Walmsley
Teenage missionary dies of malaria
SHOCKED fund-raisers who sponsored caring teenager Katy Hicks to help famine victims in Africa are being urged not to feel guilty over her death from malaria.
Katy (19) who left home to work with missionaries in Uganda, contracted the disease a month ago.
Her twin sister Sally, of Penarth, South Glamorgan, south Wales, begged school-friends and neighbours not to feel guilty about sending her on the venture.
‘Friends have rung to say how awful they feel about what has happened.
But they helped Katy realise her dream of helping the poor and needy in Africa.
We will always be grateful for that,’ said Sally.
Studying
Katy announced plans to become a missionary while studying for her A levels and joined the Christian organisation Youth with a Mission.
Pupils at her former school, Stanwell comprehensive in Penarth, held discos and other fund-raising efforts with her local church to pay her air fare.
She had been working at the Hopeland missionary camp, helping educate teenage boys.
Her family received letters from Katy on Wednesday saying she had been seriously ill with malaria.
Later that day they had a phone call with news of her death.
De Lorean death claims
DISGRACED car tycoon John De Lorean claims he would be assassinated by ‘British agents’ if he returned to Northern Ireland.
In an exclusive interview with the Belfast Telegraph, Mr De Lorean said he regretted missing the De Lorean owners' club annual meeting in Belfast this weekend.
Tickets scramble
THOUSANDS of Gaelic football fans in Co Londonderry today scrambled for tickets to next weekend's All-Ireland Final at Croke Park in Dublin.
With only 9,000 tickets allocated to the county, many are faced with the prospect of watching the big match on television.
Bishop's recovery
BISHOP Edward Daly is back to work seven months after suffering a stroke.
The Bishop of Derry talks exclusively to the Belfast Telegraph about his illness and the road to recovery.
Rally in wake of race riot
AN ANTI-RACIST rally was being planned for later today following a night of unrest outside a hospital where an Asian teenager is fighting for his life.
Twenty five officers were injured when police moved in to disperse a crowd of 200–300 youths, mainly Asian, outside the Royal London Hospital in Whitechapel.
Five officers needed hospital treatment for head injuries, including one female officer who needed nine stitches to a mouth wound after being kicked.
One civilian was treated for minor injuries, and was later arrested.
In all police made 10 arrests.
Two juveniles were released on police bail, and early today eight were still in custody.
A spokeswoman for the Anti-Nazi League, which co-ordinated last night's vigil, said today's rally was to be held in Millwall Park.
The youths had been holding a vigil for student Quaddus Ali, who remains ‘critical but stable’ after reportedly being attacked by a gang of white youths in Stepney, east London, on Wednesday.
Spontaneous
The protesters attacked at least two public houses, The Alma and the Queen's Head, smashing windows in a hail of bricks.
A regular at The Alma said: ‘This was spontaneous action by young kids running down the road and sorting out anything that was not Asian.’
Feeling in the East End Bangladeshi community has been running high since Quaddus, 17, was kicked and punched, suffering serious head injuries, after he and three friends were set upon.
The four, of Bangladeshi origin, were returning a video to a store when they were attacked at the junction of Commercial Road and Deancross Street.
Police said earlier there were no developments in the investigation into the attack by eight white youths and a woman near Quaddus's home in Stepney.
Police seek witnesses as Asian youth fights for life
POLICE investigating the attack which left a 17-year-old Asian youth fighting for his life today made an urgent appeal for two potential witnesses to come forward.
The call came after a vigil last night ended in violence when 25 police officers were injured in clashes with up to 300 mainly Asian youths who waited outside the hospital where Quaddus Ali is being treated.
Mr Ali, a student, remains ‘critical but stable’ after Wednesday night's attack.
Meanwhile, police are keen to interview two men who chased another Asian youth after the attack on Quaddus.
Friends
One of them grabbed the youth by the neck as he approached a police van in Tarling Street, Stepney, east London, telling officers he believed the youth had been involved in an attack on an elderly woman.
The Asian youth told officers he had not been involved in the alleged attack, but that he himself and his friends had been set upon by a gang.
The officers released all three and, directed by the Asian youth, went to a neighbouring street where they found Mr Ali lying injured.
A Scotland Yard spokeswoman said there was nothing to suggest the two men who chased the youth were involved in the attack on Mr Ali.
A spokeswoman for the Anti-Nazi League, which co-ordinated last night's event, said another rally was to be held in Millwall Park today.
Education leader in swipe at politicians
TEACHERS of young children are being looked on by the Government as ‘not a lot more than well-disciplined child-minders,’ a senior Belfast education adviser claimed today.
Eric Wood's stark appraisal of the pace of reform programmes came at York, where he became president of the 2,000-member National Association of Educational Inspectors, Advisers and Consultants.
He accused successive Education Secretaries of serving the UK poorly, listening only partially, and having ‘an apparent determination to push through so-called reforms with a consultation process which is at best minimal and at worst cynical.’
Mr Wood works with the South Eastern Education Board and said Northern Ireland's Education Minister, Michael Ancram, had by contrast taken consultation seriously and announced a slowing up of the reform process to get it right.
Recent national reforms had undermined teachers' morale, he said.
Despite this, there was no shortage of people coming forward for teacher training.
But he warned about arrangements for them.
‘This is not the time to revert to a non-graduate teaching force which would undermine and dilute the profession as a whole,’ said Mr Woods.
It would restrict promotion prospects and seriously endanger young children's education, with ‘potentially disastrous consequences’ throughout the whole educational process and the country.
Eric Woods: Accusation By David Watson
Grassroots demand: Tories pressure Major for UK parity
‘Integrate Ulster’
JOHN Major is facing a powerful Tory grassroots demand to govern Northern Ireland on the same terms as the rest of the United Kingdom.
The strong integrationist call dominates two-thirds of the 37 resolutions on Northern Ireland affairs submitted for next month's Tory conference.
In almost identical terms, constituency parties in the province and Britain have stepped up the pressure for a decisive Government move.
Goal
For the first time for many years, there is no specific motion supporting the long-standing policy goal of devolution, based on agreement between local parties.
The distinct shift in the grassroots mood will put pressure on Sir Patrick Mayhew at the Blackpool conference, which opens on October 5.
Ulster Unionist leader Jim Molyneaux is billed to speak at two conference fringe meetings.
Strategy
The similar wording of many resolutions clearly points to a deliberate strategy.
The strength of the demands also appears to reflect growing Tory doubts about the scope for success in revived inter-party negotiations, if they take place.
South Belfast Conservatives urge the conference to note Sir Patrick's ‘great patience’ in organising last year's talks.
But it argues that, in the light of the repeated failure of the ‘four main constitutional parties (sic)’ to agree, the onus in future should be on them to settle.
‘Until such times as they can do this, Her Majesty's Government should get on with the task of governing Northern Ireland in a positive fashion, including the alternative means of returning powers to locally-elected representatives.’
Like South Belfast, the motions simply urge the Government ‘to govern Northern Ireland on the same basis as the rest of the United Kingdom’.
Lagan Valley party deplores the fact that local Tories have been left out of the new regional Conservative structure.
And the motion adds: ‘The continued exclusion of Northern Ireland from the political mainstream of the United Kingdom gives succour and comfort to the IRA and is, therefore, to be deplored in the strongest possible terms.’
North Down Conservatives urge Sir Patrick and his colleagues to treat the Unionists, SDLP and Alliance in the same vein as ministers regard Labour and the Liberal Democrats in Britain.
By Desmond McCartan
Ulster's Bush men on road to success
IT IS an incongruous connection…the link between Madrid, majestic capital of Spain, and the tiny Tyrone village of Bush.
But it is real nonetheless and may shortly yield a long sought after victory in the Spanish rally championship.
For it is from the Meeke Motorsport workshops at the Bush that the championship leading Opel Astras of GM Spain emerge, built by a team of Ulster engineers under the direction of Sydney Meeke.
Sixth year
Spanish operation, Meeke is on the verge of winning Spain's international rally title for the first time although as he left again for Madrid yesterday, he sounded a word of caution.
‘We're in a strong position but there is still a fair bit to go…
’ Not as far, however, as the road from Dungannon to Madrid which his engineers know so well.
They make the 2600 kilometre trip regularly, transporting the GSi Astras from their base near Dungannon to GM Spain's headquarters in Madrid and on to events throughout the country — even as far as the Canary Islands.
It was through his partnership with Bertie Fisher that Meeke's Opel connections were established in the early Eighties and when the Spanish arm of the operation needed assistance he was asked to take on a supervisory role.
That was in 1988 and soon after he was given the task of running the show.
Spain's gain was Ireland's loss as Meeke virtually quit the Irish scene.
The man who had raised Irish rally engineering to a higher plain and produced more winning cars than anyone before, headed for Europe with some regrets.
Amateur price
‘I would like to have continued producing cars to win Irish rallies but apart from Bertie Fisher too many people wanted a professional job at an amateur price,’ he says.
But the Spanish were different.
They appreciated his talents.
Six years in the job confirms their satisfaction.
But until now the Spanish title has always eluded them, more because the Opel range did not have an outright winning car than any shortcoming on Meeke's part.
And it was the arrival of one of the men who had denied them victory in the past that helped to spark off the renewed challenge in 1993.
Mia Bardolet, who was responsible for the first ever victory of Ford's Escort Cosworth, found himself without a contract this year and Opel snapped him up.
‘We had planned to run a single GM-backed Astra this year for Luis Climent but when Bardolet became available it was decided to provide a second car for him supported by an outside sponsor,’ explains Meeke.
‘On the first stage of his first rally in an Astra he was 19 seconds faster than anyone else.
That gives you some idea of his ability.’
Bardolet has gone on to win three rounds in a row — the first hat-trick by a GM Spain driver — but remarkably he isn't leading the championship.
It is team-mate Climent who is in front.
‘Bardolet's co-driver made a timing error on the last rally which dropped them from first to fourth and that cost them the lead in the championship,’ explains Meeke.
They resume the battle this weekend on the Asturias Rally, a round of the European series, in the north of Spain.
After that it is on to Valencia in mid-September followed by Spain's round of the World championship at Cataluna.
European-style
Even though Climent and Bardolet appear to be a long way in front — over 250 points — Meeke explains that Spain uses a European-style co-efficient scoring system.
‘This week's Asturias Rally is a European round and therefore worth more points than, say, Valencia.
Cataluna, being part of the World championship, is worth even more.
‘So there are a lot of points still at stake and I won't be happy until we are far enough in front to make sure we can't be caught,’ he says.
The main opposition comes from the Group N Ford Escort Cosworths of Daniel Alonso (3rd) and Jesus Puras (5th) as well as Borja Moratal (4th), who was once part of the Meeke team but is now driving for Peugeot.
Any one of them could still deny Opel the title but it won't happen — not if Ulster engineering skills prove to be the deciding factor.
Ready for the road: Sydney Meeke and his team (from left) Jimmy Murray (Omagh), Peter Pedlow (Waringstown), Ian Bishop (Killinchy), Adrian Kirkland (Benburb) and Wesley Emerson (Portadown).
Missing from the picture is foreman Robbie McGurk
Plan would completely change beauty spot:
A NEWTOWNABBEY beauty spot would be completely changed if a £6m council development is given the green light, a public inquiry heard yesterday.
The claim was made on the fourth day of a public hearing into Newtownabbey Borough Council's controversial plans to build a town hall and civic centre at the Hazelbank Park on the shores of Belfast Lough.
The proposals have provoked protests from local residents and environmentalists.
More than 2,800 people have written letters to the planning authorities slamming the move.
Shoreline walks
But council leaders claim the centre is essential to improve the service they offer to local ratepayers.
At yesterday's hearing Mr Robert McCartney, QC, who is representing the objectors, pointed out that the park was a unique combination of shoreline walks, a beach and wooded areas widely used by local people.
‘I suggest that Hazelbank Park is not only unique but especially well placed to afford enormous benefits to Rathcoole estate,’ he added.
Benefit
Mr McCartney said a survey revealed that 40pc of households in the estate had no car and 60pc could not afford an annual holiday.
‘Those are the ones who benefit.
Hazelbank Park is not only unique but necessary,’ he said.
Mr McCartney claimed the 24-hour security surveillance which would be implemented at the park as part of the development would ‘change utterly the ambience of this unique open space’.
Surveillance
But Mr Norman Dunn, Newtownabbey's Council director of leisure and technical services, said the impression had been given that‘security cameras were going to hide from every tree.
‘That is wrong.
The proposals involve the appropriate security arrangements for a building of this kind.
There will be no extraordinary surveillance.’
The hearing continues next week.
Eight years jail for bank raider
A 20-YEAR-OLD Belfast man has been jailed for eight years for his part in an armed robbery of more than £6,000 from an Ulster Bank.
Martin Kenneth Munn, of Shaw Street, admitted he was one of three masked men who raided the bank in the Diamond, Rathcoole, on February 9, 1993.
Sentencing Munn at Belfast Crown Court yesterday, Judge Anthony Hart said the defendant acted ‘purely out of greed’ in the attack which ‘terrified staff and customers’.
He said Munn drove his car during the robbery, provided one of the robbers with a sledge hammer, used to smash down the bank counter screens, and he also knew the other had an imitation gun.
The judge said Munn went to the bank twice before the attack and was involved in the planning of what was ‘clearly a well-organised robbery’.
‘Bank robbery is a very serious crime and he must have known considerable violence would be involved as he provided the sledge hammer,’ said Judge Hart.
He said Munn got involved in the plan after meeting two men in a pub in Belfast and ‘bemoaning’ he could not afford his car insurance after a court appearance for non-payment.
The judge said during the raid Munn stood in front of the counter and the man who had broken down the screen handed him out the £6,460 from the teller's cash drawers.
The men made their escape in Munn's car, which he had reported stolen earlier that day, but witnesses contacted police with the registration number.
Judge Hart said Munn confessed all when interviewed by police but no-one else had been charged with the robbery.
Politics broke up marriage —Wilson
OUTSPOKEN DUP politician Sammy Wilson has revealed how politics contributed to the break-up of his marriage.
In an interview with a Dublin magazine, Mr Wilson said his wife disliked the effect his political career had on their relationship.
He said: ‘She didn't like the kind of lifestyle I led, particularly in terms of politics.’
The former Belfast Lord Mayor paid tribute to DUP leader Ian Paisley for his support during his divorce.
Mr Wilson said: ‘I've never discussed his religious view of this but, as a person, he understood the situation and was very supportive.
Interview
‘I doubt very much if, even given his religious beliefs, he would have wished to impose that upon me.’
In the interview in the latest issue of ‘Hot Press’, the DUP councillor also hit out at the Republic's strict divorce laws.
He said: ‘I'm divorced.
I got married and it didn't work out.
Now I would not want to live in a country where my ex-wife and I were denied the right to another chance.’
He added: ‘This is a central issue to me.
And I don't think any politician, or any religious leader has the right to say ‘you've got to stick with that son’.’
Trendy
On his attitude to Sinn Fein, Mr Wilson said: ‘I see them as fascists.
They like to wear the cloak of socialism because it's trendy on the international stage.
But their record on the rights of ordinary people proves to me they are nothing but fascists.’
The DUP man admits in the interview he has considered legal action against newspaper reports which have linked him with paramilitaries.
Hot Press is a fortnightly publication which concentrates on music and current affairs.
It sells more than 1,000 copies in Northern Ireland, and more than 20,000 in total.
Battle Royal
AUSTRALIAN Prime Minister Paul Keating visits Britain this week to meet Prime Minister John Major and to stay at Balmoral with The Queen — with his plans to turn Australia into a republic very much in mind.
In the first Assignment (BBC2 7.40pm) of the new season, his predecessor, Bob Hawke, examines Keating's vision for a new Australia and the two rivals come face to face.
US visitor fends off speculation
AS former US Congressman Bruce Morrison today continued his trek round Ireland talking to leading political figures, the question being asked by many is ‘Bruce who?’.
The American claims to be acting purely as a private citizen but clearly his fact-finding mission has some clout if both Taoiseach Albert Reynolds and Secretary of State Sir Patrick Mayhew agreed to speak to him.
His support for the idea of sending a US special envoy to Northern Ireland has attracted the most attention during his three-day visit, which ends today.
Claim
The fact that he is no longer an elected representative has fuelled criticism from the DUP of his fact-finding visit.
In a statement confirming the party's refusal to meet the American delegation, Ian Paisley Jnr was quick to claim that Mr Morrison had been ‘trounced’ in a congressional election and was nothing more than a ‘trouble-maker’.
Mr Morrison is an attorney.
He left Congress in 1991, having made his name as a specialist in immigration work for individuals and businesses.
He became highly acclaimed amongst the Irish-American community for his so-called ‘Morrison visas’.
After leaving Congress he established his own private law practice, but did not cut his political ties.
During last year's presidential election he gave vociferous support for the Clinton-Gore ticket.
He led the ‘Irish-Americans for Clinton-Gore’ faction and received a personal letter of thanks for his support from Mr Clinton himself.
This link with the President has given rise to speculation that Mr Morrison may be acting as a pathfinder to the appointment of a special envoy.
But the theory was directly rejected by the American visitor in an interview yesterday.
Result
He said: ‘I'm here to learn about the situation on the ground beyond things that I've known from previous trips and a long-term study of the issues.
‘I'm not a pathfinder for any particular final result, and certainly the President of the United States has not sent me here.
‘I've come here on my own.
If I learn something of importance I'll certainly communicate it back home.’
So who will he be giving the information to?
‘Public officials and private officials’ was the reply.
He was speaking after a meeting with Sir Patrick Mayhew which lasted more than an hour.
Mr Morrison said: ‘He (Sir Patrick) explained to us his confidence that the talks would go forward in one form or another.
He expressed his scepticism about the usefulness of techniques such as the envoy.
Friendship
‘We reiterated our support for US help and our reasons for seeing the envoy as one way in which the United States should express its friendship to Ireland and to Britain.’
Mr Morrison was adamant that the envoy idea was an act of friendship and should not be seen as a ‘hostile act’.
He also stressed that an envoy should not supplant any talks process.
The former Congressman is head of a visiting group of Irish-Americans which includes Nial O'Dowd, publisher of the weekly US newspaper ‘The Irish Voice’.
Bruce Morrison: Fact-finding.
Speed penalty for Brooking
FORMER England soccer star Trevor Brooking was yesterday fined £600 for driving at 96mph on a 70mph dual carriageway.
BBC commentator Brooking (44) admitted speeding at Ketteringham in Norfolk.
He did not appear before the magistrates.
He was also ordered to pay £25 costs and received six penalty points on his previously clean driving licence.
Newsbeat celebrates
RADIO 1's Newsbeat programme — a show DJs initially resented because they thought listeners just wanted music and chat — is 20 years old tomorrow.
The 15-minute bulletin, which this year won the final of Radio 4's The Year in Question, beating the flagship Today programme, has been presented by Ed Stewart, Noel Edmonds and Richard Skinner.
‘Spare my son, kill me’
A BELFAST mother begged UFF gunmen to kill her instead of her schoolboy son, an inquest heard yesterday.
Gerard O'Hara (18) died in a hail of bullets as he sat watching television with his mother Bridget at their home at North Queen Street, Belfast, almost a year ago.
Coroner Clifford Tughan heard yesterday that two masked gunmen burst into the house and shot the Belfast Telegraph newsboy, who was wounded 17 times by bullets and fragments.
The UFF later said it carried out the killing, claiming their victim was a member of the Provisional IRA who had taken part in coffee jar bomb attacks on security forces.
Arrests
A detective inspector said, however, that Mr O'Hara had no known connection with terrorist activity and police viewed the killing as purely sectarian.
He said a number of people had been arrested in connection with the crime but were later released without charge.
He also said that two guns used had a history of previous use.
In a statement read out at the Belfast inquest, Mrs O'Hara described how her youngest son had popped out to the shop moments earlier to buy cigarettes and sweets.
When he came back he sat down with his mother to watch television.
‘Next thing I heard noises in the hallway and shots being fired.
The glass in the door shattered and fell in.
Gerard threw himself on the floor.
I don't know if he hit his head or a bullet hit him.’
Dead
Mrs O'Hara said she could see a gunman kneeling in the hallway firing into the room, and another gunman further along the hall.
She cried out ‘Don't shoot my son, shoot me instead…he's only a wee boy.’
She added ‘I knew in my heart Gerard was dead.
He was lying on the floor with blood coming from his head.’
Mr Tughan said ‘He was, without mercy, executed even as his mother pleaded on his behalf that she might be taken instead of her boy.
‘It was a killing which defies understanding and exposes the capacity for cruelty and evil within man which ultimately affects everyone in our community’.
Angola bid
THE United States yesterday threw its support behind what it said was a new effort by UN special Angola envoy Alioune Blondin Beye to revive Angolan peace talks.
It urged Angolan rebel leader Jonas Savimbi to accept Beye's invitation to a meeting in Libreville, Gabon, with African heads of state.
DUP leader joins hospital campaign
DUP leader the Rev Ian Paisley has joined the campaign to save the Downpatrick hospitals.
Members of a hospital support group in Castlewellan wrote to all three European MPs in the province and Dr Paisley is the first to respond, saying he will lobby the Eastern Health Board to prevent the proposed run-down at the hospital.
Dr Paisley told campaigners: ‘I have campaigned very hard indeed for the retention of acute services in local hospitals as I believe that is the best means of serving the needs of local communities.’
ARMAGH
Special day planned at Navan Fort centre
NAVAN Fort Centre outside Armagh will mark Heritage Day on Sunday with four guided tours of the historic site.
Two experts in the archaeology and mythology of the seat of the ancient kings of Ulster, Dr Chris Lynn of the DoE and Dr Jim Mallory from Queen's University will act as guides.
Study scheme
ADULTS who would love to return to study can now learn in the comfort of their own home.
Armagh Language Centre, based at the local College of Further Education, has come up with two courses in European Studies and English Language.
Spokesman Paul Smith explained that students could work at their own pace and return their work to the centre for correction, annotation and comment.
Hospital gets to grips with treatments
A shot in the arm for cancer patients
THERE has been a dramatic four-fold increase in the number of patients being treated by chemotherapy at Belvoir Park Hospital, Ulster's regional cancer unit.
Around 27 in-patients are receiving this treatment in the hospital each week compared to six or seven only two years ago.
New drugs and new work practices have combined to produce the increased workload.
The new drugs mean that treatment can now be offered to patients suffering from different types of the disease.
Previously chemotherapy was most commonly used to treat men suffering from testicular cancer.
Doctors now find that chemotherapy — an injection of a powerful cocktail of drugs — can be successful in cases of bowel and abdominal cancer.
But there have been two other significant developments which have boosted the treatment rate at Belvoir.
The first was the creation of a single chemotherapy in-patient unit.
The 14-bed Ward 5B is now used exclusively for this type of treatment.
The second advance was the training of nurses to administer the drugs.
Previously this was done exclusively by doctors.
Dr Seamus McAleer, one of six consultants using the unit, explains: ‘The number of patients being treated by chemotherapy has increased steadily as new and better drugs have become available.
There are also a lot more things we can do to make this treatment more tolerable.
Patients used to be quite sick after chemotherapy.
Now that is less common.
‘The creation of a single unit for in-patient treatment was a great help.
Previously patients were admitted to whichever ward had free beds.
That was disruptive to them.
‘Now we operate a hotel-type reservation list.
Patients are admitted regularly — every two or three weeks — for treatment.
We can draw up a full list of patients so that every bed is filled every night.
That means we make best use of our resources and offer help to more and more patients.’
Sister Margaret Murphy was one of the first nurses in Ulster to train in administering chemotherapy.
She and another nurse went to the Royal Marsden Hospital in London to learn the latest techniques in erecting and inserting drips.
‘We now have 19 nurses trained in these techniques at Belvoir,’ she said.
‘With more people administering the drugs more patients can be treated.’
It is specialised work.
The drugs used are highly toxic and those in charge have to learn the dangers both to themselves and to patients.
The medical professionals say the new system has been very beneficial to patients.
They have the same consultant and same nursing team treating them every time they are admitted.
The system has also allowed the hospital to develop fringe benefits.
Staff Nurse Edna Wilson has taken a diploma in aromatherapy — massage with exotic oils.
‘The aim is to reduce anxiety and help patients relax.
Obviously they undergo considerable trauma when the disease is diagnosed and they are admitted to hospital.
‘The benefit of massage is that it allows patients to talk to someone on a one to one basis.
I have no research to prove that it is an effective relaxation technique, but everyone who has experienced it asks for it when they come back for more treatment.’
Another nurse has been trained in reflexology — foot massage.
Patients Norman Cowden and Eric Mann agree the new unit is a good idea.
Says Norman: ‘The staff are brilliant.
They do everything to put me at ease.
It is great to see the same faces each time I come back.
I am now on my fourth course of treatment.’
Watchdog group in pledge to consumers
THE General Consumer Council for Northern Ireland today vowed to ensure people here had strong protection in the greater European market.
It is one of several key areas the group has earmarked for attention during the next 12 months.
Lady McCollum, chairman of the watchdog body, said the completion of the Single Market and the fact that trade was crossing new borders meant it was crucial consumers interests were not overlooked.
‘Both Government and the European Commission must recognise that the consumer is an essential part of the marketplace,’ she said, introducing the group's annual report.
‘Our concern must be to ensure that the Northern Ireland consumer has strong protection in this greater European market, including clear guidelines about systems of redress.’
Funded
But Lady McCollum warned that if the GCC, which is funded by the Department of Economic Development, is to be able to take these issues — and more — on board it must be properly resourced.
Other areas to be pursued in the coming year include the needs of older consumers, with the GCC's study on the elderly due for publication shortly.
Economy and Environment Minister Robert Atkins, speaking at the launch of the report, said he was pleased to see the Council was taking an interest in energy conservation.
Monitor
The GCC says it will also continue to monitor water privatisation, food scares, and independent appeals procedures in education.
Pilot makes pilgrimage
A UNITED States air force pilot forced to crash land in Donegal 50 years ago has returned to Ireland.
Harry Ford, who now lives in Santa Fe, New Mexico, met those who helped him and his 10-strong crew after their giant B17 crashed.
Mr Ford's plane ran out of fuel after it had taken a battering in Atlantic storms in May 1943.
It was forced to touch down at Killyhoy Beach, north west Donegal.
The pilot had been flying spare parts to the European frontline when the 2,500 mile trip from Newfoundland ended.
Mr Ford made the pilgrimage on his own after another officer, who was planning to return to Port-na-Blagh, died last year.
Two other crew members died in action over Germany and several others were taken prisoner.
Hotelier Dermot Walsh organised the trip.
People still getting too fat, warns health chief
CLEARER food labelling, less fatty products and greater official support are needed to help people lead a healthier lifestyle.
That is the shopping list of demands made today by Dr Jane Wilde, director of the province's health promotion agency.
Responding to a national survey which showed a modest improvement in lifestyles over the past seven years, Dr Wilde said individuals needed greater help from retailers, food producers, planners, teachers, environmental health officers and politicians.
Fatter
‘Many people are reporting that they have changed their eating habits.
That is encouraging, yet we are concerned that people are still getting fatter.
‘That shows that people want to adopt a healthier diet and lifestyle but are not finding it easy to make the change.
‘It is not just a question of raising awareness.
We need more support from food producers and retailers.
Information
Shops should provide greater information on healthy foods at the point of sale.
There should be clearer labelling of food so that people can determine what is best for them.
‘Producers should concentrate on making available less fatty foods and reducing sugar content.’
She added: ‘People might want to choose healthy food but often they find it is either not available or is more expensive than their ordinary purchases.’
£1.4m hostel opened
NORTHERN Ireland's newest youth hostel has been officially opened in Londonderry.
The Oakgrove Manor in Derry's Magazine Street has been developed at a cost of £1.4m.
Mainly funded by the Northern Ireland Tourist Board, the hostel has been equipped with luxury en-suite rooms and cooking facilities.
Popular
Philip Daly, who owns Oakgrove Manor, said all age groups were welcome at the hostel.
Since it first opened in April, almost 5,000 people have been through the doors.
Mr Daly said the hostel had proved to be popular because of the range of facilities offered.
He said: ‘All types of accommodation from self-contained double rooms to dormitory accommodation are available at very competitive rates.
‘Oakgrove Manor was developed by Derry's Inner City Trust as part of a wider programme of regeneration.
‘It aims to use the youth hostel as a crucial part of a drive to bring more tourists to the city.’
Success
It is one of the most modern hostels in Northern Ireland.
It was opened by the chairman of the Northern Ireland Tourist Board, Hugh O'Neill.
He said the modern tourist demanded high standards.
But, he said, Londonderry's newest tourist venture would be a success.
He said it offered high quality accommodation, was being marketed internationally and was strategically located.
Gifts exchanged: Derry's Mayor Annie Courtney and Hugh O'Neill, the Chairman of the Northern Ireland Tourist Board, at the official opening of the Oakgrove Manor International Youth Hostel in Londonderry's Magazine Street.
Restored manor: The £1.4m youth hostel in Derry By Suzanne Rodgers
Clean-up campaign
THE North West is being targeted next week in an attempt to get rid of litter louts.
The message from the organisers of Tidy Travel Week — Litter: Don't go home without it — has been backed by a group of North West based enterprises.
Eglinton Airport, Foyle Hill Environmental Group and Shantallow Environmental Group have joined Limavady and Derry councils in backing the week long initiative.
Almost 250 car parks across the province will be cleaned to help raise awareness of the litter problem in the transport network.
TIPPERARY
Bank dispute man sets himself alight
A MAN who doused his clothes with petrol and set himself on fire in a bank in Co Tipperary was under intensive care in hospital today.
The incident occurred after a dispute between the man and staff at a branch of the Bank of Ireland in Cahir.
He left the bank after he was refused access to his file and returned carrying a bucket of petrol and a cigarette lighter.
Staff and customers watched in horror as he poured the petrol over himself and set himself alight.
On off-duty garda who was in the bank knocked the burning man to the ground and doused the flames with a fire extinguisher.
He was taken to Our Lady's Hospital in Cashel where he is being treated for burns to his upper body.
His condition was described as ‘stable.’
DUNGANNON
Forged notes
TRADERS in Dungannon have been warned to be on the lookout for counterfeit £20 notes after ten forgeries were passed in business premises in the town.
The RUC said the notes were of poor quality and did have a water mark.
NEWTOWNABBEY
Fireworks fun
NEWTOWNABBEY mayor Alderman Arthur Kell will send a rocket into orbit this Saturday when he lights the first firework at the Valley Leisure Centre's annual display.
The fun gets under way with an indoor charity fair in the main hall from 7pm and the fireworks will start at 7.30pm.
BELFAST Research donation
GLENTORAN Football club chairman David Chick and his son, Philip, have raised £2,000 for research into Parkinson's Disease.
The money was handed over to the Geriatric Unit at Belfast City Hospital by Mrs Alison Chick.
Apartments opened
A £725,000 sheltered housing scheme for the elderly was officially opened in Irvinestown today.
Lowtherstown Court has 25 private apartments designed to meet the needs of older people.
Banger warning
THE RUC has warned of the potentially tragic consequences of children throwing bangers near security force patrols.
The warning follows a number of incidents in Coalisland when fireworks were thrown.
Chairman honoured
MEMBERS of Newry Drama Festival and friends have held a dinner in Newry Arts Centre to honour Owen Mooney, who was chairman for 27 years.
Present chairman Sean Hollywood said Mr Mooney succeeded in making the festival one of the best in all Ireland.
Vice-chairman Violet Durkan presented him with an inscribed gold watch on behalf of the members.
Birds of prey under threat
HUNDREDS of Ulster's birds of prey are at risk from thieves cashing in on an illegal money-spinning international market.
Wildlife conservation sources say that the province, with its enrichment of peregrine falcons and hawks, could be a prime target for overseas dealers in protected birds.
It is understood there are up to 500 peregrine falcons in Northern Ireland.
These birds, which can reach speeds of more than 100mph, are known for their hunting prowess.
A number of peregrine falcon nests on the mainland have already been raided to supply the illegal falconry trade to the Continent and the Middle East.
‘There are peregrine eggs disappearing regularly every year,’ one source said.
‘There are indications that some peregrines are stolen by foreigners.
‘For some of the buyers, especially the Arabs, money is no object.
If they want the bird, the sky's the limit.’
The USPCA say birds of prey in the province are also being shot or poisoned, and in the latest incident a buzzard starved to death after being maimed.
Jennifer Riley, USPCA Inspector in Larne and Carrick, said she was ‘horrified’ at the shooting.
Starved
‘The bird was found in the Glens of Antrim,’ she said.
‘There were pellets in its head and chest.
‘It would not have been able to fly and starved to death on the ground.
‘I am horrified that somebody would do such a thing.
They are protected birds — you cannot kill them.’
And the RUC is urging for public help to clamp down on the level of incidents throughout the province.
‘We need people to help us,’ a spokesman for the force's wildlife branch said.
‘I would have thought this latest case was deliberate.
It is easy to tell the difference between a buzzard and an ordinary bird.’
The buzzard population in the province has been growing over the last few years and is believed to currently stand at 650.
A spokeswoman for the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds said it had a network of volunteers ‘monitoring the situation’ throughout the province.
‘We work with other bodies in the province — joint action is the way forward,’ she said.
‘The thing we would stress is that this sort of thing is against the law.
‘Having said that, fines imposed are not as strong a deterrent as they should be.
‘Magistrates have to crack down.’
Protected species: USPCA inspector Jennifer Riley, with a buzzard
Horne hammers referee
WELSH captain Barry Horne slammed Spanish referee Juan Roca after the decision which robbed his country of a crucial World Cup victory at Cardiff Arms Park.
Wales were leading the RCS 2–1 in the crunch group four qualifier when Roca gave a 67th minute free kick for a tackle by Eric Young on sub Tomas Skuhravy.
RCS danger man Peter Dubovsky, who had an outstanding match, stepped up to curl a superb free kick past Neville Southall and earn his side a vital point.
But Horne complained bitterly: ‘It was not a free kick.
It was a disgraceful decision and not the first of the night.
‘You have got to accept it but it's absolutely maddening that 30,000 people saw a good tackle but the referee gave a foul.
‘I thought the ref was consistently poor and biased against our type of game.
Even when we were not even looking like fouling them he was giving free kicks against us.
It was disrupting our rhythm.
You expect in matches that you get a few breaks going your way and some against you but this was hard to take.’
The draw means Wales' bid to qualify for the USA finals is now partly out of their own hands.
They are relying on the RCS and Romania dropping points in their remaining games because they have an inferior goal difference to both sides.
It was a night of frustration for Wales, who knew beforehand that if they won and then registered wins in their final two home games against Cyprus and Romania, they would qualify.
And they looked on course when goals from Ryan Giggs and Ian Rush put them in front after the RCS had taken a 16th minute lead through Pavel Kuka.
Horne added: ‘I'm very, very disappointed.
It's the lowest I have been after a Wales game for at least 18 months.
The fact that we didn't win when we were so close and then let it slip is very disappointing.’
But Wales manager Terry Yorath insisted: ‘Our chances of going to the United States now are as good as they were before the game.
‘I said if we drew it was not the end of the world.
We have got Cyprus at home and anyone watching tonight should know we are capable of winning that one.
Then we have got an outstanding chance because we have got Romania at home in the last game.
‘I'm disappointed but not with the performance.
I said before the game it was going to be difficult.
Going to the USA is not going to be decided by this one game.’
Clarke splits Tories over budget changes
CHANCELLOR Kenneth Clarke today waded into a fresh Tory rift over public spending after delivering a broad hint that his November Budget will bring rises in indirect taxes.
And the signals suggested Mr Clarke may opt to extend the scope of VAT to newspapers, food, children's clothing, and could also tinker with tax allowances to pull in extra revenue.
Mr Clarke threw down the gauntlet to a trio of Cabinet colleagues in the vanguard of demands for deeper spending cuts instead of higher taxes to tackle the projected £50bn deficit.
Support
His remarks, in a Daily Telegraph interview, triggered protests from right-wing Tory MPs and pitched the Cabinet into more controversy as it met for the first time since the summer break.
But he was strongly supported by Transport Secretary John MacGregor.
Mr MacGregor said the Cabinet had agreed a clear spending totals in the summer ‘and we are sticking to those.’
Mr Clarke effectively slapped down the Cabinet dissenters — John Redwood, Peter Lilley and Michael Portillo — who have been calling for the already-tight £254bn spending target to be cut.
Anxiety
The Chancellor also caused further anxiety by strongly backing the VAT levy on domestic fuel and power.
Mr Clarke allayed some Tory fears of a rise in direct taxation, indicating he preferred to raise taxes on spending — such as widening VAT.
The Chancellor also signalled he did not favour an early cut in interest rates.
Aide got off on wrong foot
COUNCILLOR John Adams, a Unionist member of Derry City Council, got on well with Mrs Jean Kennedy Smith, the US Ambassador to Ireland when she visited the maiden city.
It was one of her aides who got slightly up his nose.
‘Mrs Kennedy Smith and I chatted about the people who had left the area for America in the 1800s.
Then one of her aides came along and must have thought from the name Adams that I was a nationalist.
He said to me, ‘You know, we really need a United Ireland’.’
‘So I said to him,’ said John, ‘do me a favour and go back to America and give the Red Indians home rule.’
There is, as they say over here, no answer to that one.
John Adams: Chatted with US Ambassador Smith.
US visitors to meet SF delegates
IRISH-Americans on a fact-finding mission to Ireland today will meet a Sinn Fein delegation which includes Martin McGuinness.
The group has already met the Republic's Taoiseach, Albert Reynolds, and Ulster Secretary of State Sir Patrick Mayhew, and today it completes its three-day visit with talks in west Belfast with Sinn Fein.
Mr McGuinness, who is one of four in the delegation due to meet the Americans, was branded ‘Britain's number one terrorist’ by a TV documentary last month.
He vociferously denied the claim.
Adams
Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams will lead the team which meets the Irish-Americans, who are led by former US Congressman Bruce Morrison.
Sinn Fein plans to host a reception for the US visitors before the afternoon talks.
A party spokesman said: ‘It will involve community activists from nationalist parts of west Belfast.
It is not an exclusively republican reception.’
Mr Morrison will also meet the Alliance Party today — despite a rebuke for him and his colleagues yesterday by the party chairman, Dr Philip McGarry.
Dr McGarry claimed Alliance had been snubbed by the US visitors and said: ‘Mr Morrison's credibility as a supposedly independent observer must be called into question when he finds it important to meet Sinn Fein, a party which appears to condone the murder of Irish people, but not the Alliance Party, the foremost advocate of peace.’
Alliance
However, it emerged today that the Irish-Americans had since contacted Alliance.
Dr McGarry claimed it had been in response to the earlier statement and he welcomed the decision.
Mr Morrison and his colleagues travelled to Londonderry to meet SDLP leader John Hume this morning.
The former US Congressman was unavailable for comment.
The DUP has refused to meet the US visitors because of their intention to speak to Sinn Fein.
The Ulster Unionists yesterday met the group at its Glengall Street headquarters.
Mr Morrison said yesterday the group was in Ireland in a purely personal capacity, but would be reporting its findings to public and private officials on its return to the United States.
The group supports the idea of a special US envoy being sent to Northern Ireland.
By Mark Simpson
TV star's home burgled
TELEVISION star Eamonn Holmes had his golf clubs stolen in a burglary at his home outside Belfast, the Magistrates Court heard today.
Nineteen year-old Anthony Moore, from Dawson Street, Belfast, was charged with stealing the clubs last March.
Moore and Robert Smyth, aged 17, of Hartwell Place, Belfast, were also charged with receiving the clubs knowing or believing them to have been stolen.
The case was adjourned until September 23.
Moore was remanded in custody and Smyth was released on £200 bail.
Blackmail charge
A MAN was charged today with blackmailing a Belfast businessman for £20,000.
Thirty-three-year-old Matthew Kincaid, from Forthriver Road, north Belfast, was alleged to have demanded the money with menaces from the businessman, described as ‘Witness A’, between February 7 and March 9 this year.
A detective inspector from the RUC anti-racketeering squad, C-13, told the Magistrates Court that when Kincaid was charged yesterday he replied: ‘Not guilty.’
He was remanded in custody to appear at Crumlin Road court on September 17.
Warning of ‘imported’ cattle diseases
ULSTER cattle herds could be under threat from ‘imported’ bovine diseases which may not show themselves for several years.
That was the warning sounded by Milk Marketing Board chairman Robin Morrow, when he addressed the annual dinner of the Northern Ireland branch of the British Veterinary Association.
‘Certification’
He told vets: ‘How much can certification tell us?
Farmers are worried now with the ‘open borders’ that there is a possibility of importing diseases, in particular Johne's Disease, which wouldn't manifest itself until two or three years after animals had been purchased.
‘Will certification pick up ‘carrier animals’?’ he asked.
‘Devastation’
Mr Morrow said he was worried also about other diseases such as virulent IBR (Infectious Bovine Rhinotracheitis).
‘Few farmers in Northern Ireland have even seen this disease and don't appreciate the devastation it could cause in the dairy herd, with pneumonia, abortion and subsequent infertility and mastitis.
Research
‘Importation of animals carrying Bovine Mycoplasmas, especially Mycoplasma Bovis, could cause major problems in dairy herds.’
Questioning the future of the Veterinary Research Laboratory, he said: ‘Will the professional help continue to be available to veterinary practitioners and farmers?
‘Will fewer and fewer veterinary surgeons be employed in veterinary research laboratories?
I understand that two of the biggest departments at the Veterinary Research Laboratory are headed by two non-veterinarians.
Are there no suitably qualified veterinary surgeons?’
Failure
There was considerable worry regarding the apparent failure to control bovine TB, despite the fact herds were being tested more often.
‘The repeated testing is leading to problems in that animals now associate being put in a crush with being tested and one can get considerable stress in older animals.
‘Complacent’
‘It would seem that for too many years little or no research was done on TB and now we don't seem to have the answers when the questions are being asked.
‘Was the veterinary profession complacent in the certainty it could eradicate tuberculosis rather than just control it?’
By Michael Drake
How to eat well for less
A FAMILY of four can enjoy a healthy diet for less than the Government's estimated £10 a person a week, according to a new recipe booklet from The Sugar Bureau.
The recipes, based on rice, pasta, bread and potatoes, would allow a family of four to have two nutritional meals a day for around £30 a week.
‘Easy Cooking on a Budget’ uses mainly carbohydrate foods.
One day's menu could include dishes such as Moussaka followed by Banana Rice Pudding for lunch with Cheese and Tomato Bake for supper.
Choice
The recipes are cheap because they focus on increasing the amount and proportion of filling starchy carbohydrate foods which means you need less of the more expensive meat, fish, eggs and so on.
The 30 recipes are divided into five soups, 24 main courses and five desserts.
They are easy to follow and use ingredients most people have in their cupboards.
Each recipe has been coded into price bands based on the cost (at June '93) of the ingredients for four people and range from very economical at less than £1.50; economical from £1.50 to £2.50; and good value at more than £2.50.
A nutritional breakdown of each recipe is provided so that people can check how their choice of dish matches with current government advice on healthy eating.
500 copies
The Belfast Telegraph and The Sugar Bureau are offering 500 FREE COPIES of Easy Cooking on a Budget.
The first 500 readers to write to The Sugar Bureau will get a free copy of Easy Cooking On A Budget.
Print your name and address clearly on a postcard and send to: Belfast Telegraph/Sugar Bureau Booklet Offer, Department EC-26, Duncan House, Dolphin Square, London SQ1V 3PW.
RULES: Employees of Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd and their immediate families are not eligible to enter.
Entrants must be 18 years or over.
Lorry driver in ‘good health’ before crash
THE driver of a runaway lorry which ploughed into a van and shop killing six people had no history of heart trouble, a doctor told an inquest yesterday.
Derek Waterworth (63) was in good health as he drove his 22-ton lorry carrying shale into Sowerby Bridge, West Yorkshire, just after 9am on Monday.
He died of a crushed chest, moments after crashing into a newsagent's shop.
Tests
Consultant pathologist Dr Alan Edwards said tests revealed there was no alcohol present in Mr Waterworth's blood.
Mr Waterworth worked for an agency and had been driving for the Fewston Transport Company, of Skipton, at the time of the tragedy.
Coroner James Turnbull spoke of the community's sorrow as he opened the inquest in Halifax.
‘Grief’
‘The tragedy which caused the deaths of six people at Sowerby Bridge brought tremendous grief to the families of those who died and was a tragedy to the community itself.’
The crash killed mother-of-two Ann Crossley, 32, of Sowerby Bridge, and her two-year-old daughter Karen.
Barmaid Beryl Rose (46), BT van driver Peter Stott and mother-of-three Angela Rooke all died of multiple injuries.
Mrs Rooke (28), of Sowerby Bridge and Mr Stott (42), of Luddendenfoot, died instantly.
Mr Turnbull adjourned the inquest, which was not attended by relatives of the victims, to a date to be fixed.
Belfast route plan: Local people will suffer — claim Councillor threatens airport protests
AN EAST Belfast councillor said today he will organise a massive protest if British Airways moves its London flights to the City Airport.
There has been growing speculation that the airline intends to transfer its Heathrow shuttle service from Aldergrove to the harbour route.
BA technical experts have already carried out an inspection and it is believed the east Belfast airport is upgrading facilities to deal with an extra 100,000 passengers next year.
These could come from switching BA or British Midlands Heathrow flights from Aldergrove or the new five-times daily Jersey European service to Gatwick.
But Ulster Unionist councillor Jim Rodgers strongly opposes the plan, saying the increase in road and air traffic will make local people suffer.
Worried
‘I've already been contacted by people as far away from the airport as Holywood and Cultra, as well as many businesses, worried about this possibility,’ said the City Council Ulster Unionist deputy leader.
‘I am a staunch supporter of the airport as it is a valuable amenity which has created jobs for both sides of the community.
‘But I'm not prepared to have this new expansion with all the congestion and noise it would cause and 90pc of people in the area will be up in arms.
‘I will fight this tooth and nail and won't hesitate to organise a demonstration right outside the airport if necessary.’
A BA spokesman said the company was looking at Belfast City Airport but no decision had been reached.
Jobs
Such a move would cost jobs at Belfast International Airport and South Antrim Ulster Unionist MP Clifford Forsythe said it would be a ‘tremendous blow’ to his constituency.
The UUP transport spokesman urged airport management to do ‘all in its power’ to persuade British Airways to stay at Aldergrove.
‘They should stay where they are so that Ulster people can continue to enjoy the excellent facilities and services available.’
Aviation firm Shorts Bombardier might have to spend millions of pounds on development, including access roads and extension of the terminal if the transfer goes ahead.
So far, the City Airport has not applied for building approval for new roads, or additional car parking which would be necessary for the move.
By Rosie Cowan
‘QUANGOS have become an extension of the honours system, through which the Government can reward loyal supporters.
For many Tory appointees, getting a place on a quango is like being given a gong that pays’— Labour MP Jack Straw.
‘HUMANITY is not impelled on an unstoppable journey to global disaster’— Chris Patten, Governor of Hong Kong.
‘IF the thing is any good you don't get the credit because it is very much a director's medium.
And if it is bad you get all the blame’— Playwright Larry Kramer on the disadvantages of writing for the cinema.
‘IF anyone thinks the bald figures tell you anything about the quality or hard work of the consultant, then they are living in cloud cuckoo land’ —Karl Fortes Mayer, 51, a general surgeon at Walsall Manor Hospital in the West Midlands, commenting on publication of his patient waiting times.
‘I HAVE been portrayed as some sort of tyrant landlady.
I am not, I have just been duped by a clever story-telling girl’— Jean Wallace, who runs the Blackpool hotel where runaway schoolgirl Nicola Rogers, 13, stayed.
Dublin traders hit by crime wave
FOUR out of five shopkeepers in Dublin have been victims of crime, a new survey has revealed.
The survey carried out by the traders' magazine, ‘Checkout Ireland’, came up with the ‘alarming result’ that 80pc of retailers have been affected by crime.
It found that retail newsagents and the operators of off-licences and cash-and-carry outlets were repeatedly targeted.
The magazine said: ‘There seems little the authorities can do about it.’
Michael Campbell, director general of RGDATA, the small grocers' association, said his members felt utterly powerless when faced with naked violence.
By Michael Devine
Court told how gunmen took over Tory's home
FOUR would-be killers took over Ulster Tory Lawrence Kennedy's home but were thwarted by his wife pressing a secret alarm button, Belfast Crown Court has heard.
Crown counsel said the Belfast men bound and gagged Sarah Kennedy, her two young sons and a school-friend and held them at gunpoint in the house at My Lady's Mile, Holywood, on November 27, 1991.
John Glennon (28) of Ballymurphy Parade, Francis Maher (27) of Monagh Road, John Kennaway (31) of Moyard Parade and 24-year-old Damien Morgan from Wyndham Street deny attempting to murder Dr Kennedy.
They also deny possessing a Ruger revolver with five rounds of ammunition, an imitation semi-automatic pistol, and falsely imprisoning Sarah Kennedy, her sons, Christopher (ten), Jonathan (six) and a ten-year-old school-friend of Christopher's.
Crown counsel claimed the four masked men intended to lie in wait for Westminster Conservative candidate Dr Kennedy, shoot him ‘ruthlessly and pitilessly’ and then ‘escape at their leisure’.
But the lawyer told the court how Mrs Kennedy managed to press a panic button without the gunmen knowing when she was answering the telephone.
He said police then surrounded the house and the men got rid of their guns and masks and ‘attempted to improve their situation by masquerading as robbers’.
A priest was then brought in to mediate and the men gave themselves up.
But the lawyer said that earlier one of them told ten-year-old Christopher: ‘It looks like we'll not be seeing our children at Christmas but you're going to have your daddy after all.’
The Crown described how Maher held a gun to Mrs Kennedy's neck when the men first arrived, bundling her and the three terrified boys upstairs to the bathroom, where they bound and gagged them.
The lawyer said Mrs Kennedy pleaded with them not to gag young Jonathan, who told his assailants he was only six, but they ignored her.
He said the phone then rang and Maher took Mrs Kennedy into the front bedroom to answer it.
She managed to push a silent panic button linked to the police station while doing so.
Counsel said she repeated the caller's number incorrectly to try and alert him something was wrong but this did not appear to work.
He said the men began to ‘panic and swear’ when police arrived at the house and Maher appeared at the window, saying: ‘This is something which has gone terribly wrong.’
He said the men made Mrs Kennedy phone Ulster Television and ask for cameras but then agreed to speak to a priest and gave themselves up.
He claimed the masks and guns were found in the house and forensic evidence connected all four defendants to the revolver and a getaway car parked outside.
Loan to collect Lotto winnings
THE winner of the jackpot prize of IR£418,000 in the Republic's midweek lottery draw had to borrow money to buy an airline ticket to fly to Dublin from London to collect her prize.
As she celebrated with champagne, emigrant Deirdre Donovan (30) revealed that she was about to give up entering the draw.
She said: ‘I had just been saying that I was giving up the lotto, but my husband, Martin, encouraged me to keep trying.’
She moved to London from Dublin four years ago with her widowed mother.
‘I had only returned from a holiday in Dublin and hadn't the price of the airline ticket, so I had to borrow from my mum,’ said Deirdre, who is the mother of a five-year-old daughter, Emma.
She will use part of her winnings to buy a new house and a garden flat for her mother.
By Michael Devine
Man hurled bomb at patrol, court told
A WEST Belfast man threw a coffee jar bomb at a police/Army mobile patrol before escaping with an accomplice, Belfast Crown Court was told.
Stephen McMullan (23), of New Barnsley Crescent, is one of the so-called Ballymurphy Seven, who deny attempting to murder security forces at the junction of Springfield Road and Divismore Crescent, on August 2, 1991.
Also in the dock are Brendan McCrory (26), of Dermothill Road; Hugh McLaughlin (20), of Ballymurphy Drive; Anthony Garland (19), of Divismore Crescent; Michael Beck (20), of Ballymurphy Crescent; and 18-year-olds Ciaran McAllister, of Divismore Park, and Daniel Pettigrew, New Barnsley Crescent.
The seven deny attempting to wound security forces, and causing an explosion and actual bodily harm to a local man, who had to be taken to hospital with head injuries when the coffee jar device exploded.
Police and soldiers escaped with minor cuts and bruises.
Photographs
McMullan and McCrory deny possessing the bomb, and McMullan, McLaughlin and McCrory deny IRA membership.
Garland denies possessing two photographs and information about the security forces likely to be useful to terrorists and making his house available to the IRA on August 2, 1991.
McLaughlin denies 31 other counts, including three attempted murders, 10 charges of possession of firearms between December 1990 and August 1991, conspiracy to murder security forces in July and August 1991, and hijacking, arson and petrol bombing offences from 1988–1990.
Planned
Beck also denies conspiracy to possess rifles with intent to endanger life between February and June 1991.
Crown counsel said the defence would question the admissibility of statements allegedly made to police but it was the prosecution case that the attack had been carried out on behalf of the IRA.
The lawyer said the bombing was planned at Garland's house the day before and McMullan and McCrory obtained the device on the morning of the attack.
He said McMullan hurled the bomb while McCrory stood with him and the two men escaped through Garland's garden and house, the doors of which had been left open as pre-arranged.
Counsel said a soldier fired at one of the men but both got away.
He said McMullan discarded a white scarf and cap later found by detectives.
The lawyer claimed McAllister and Pettigrew acted as lookouts at Whiterock post office, waving to another man when the patrol passed, and that Beck kept watch in an alleyway between Divismore Crescent and Springfield Road.
The trial is expected to last several weeks.
By Rosie Cowan
BELFAST
Two Japanese are robbed
A MAN was charged yesterday with robbing two Japanese tourists in Belfast on Monday, the day after they arrived in the city.
Twenty-four year-old Joseph Patrick Mackin, from Farnham Street, Belfast, was accused of stealing their passports, credit cards and £150.
Opposing bail at the Magistrates Court, a detective said the two women had been left penniless and without passports but were planning to leave in a couple of days.
Mr Francis Keenan, defending, said Mackin denied any involvement in the robbery.
He was remanded in custody for a week.
FINAGHY Murder appeal
POLICE have issued a new appeal for information about the murder of Michael Edwards.
Mr Edwards was killed by UFF gunmen while he lay in bed with his wife at their home in Finaghy Park Central last Friday.
Last night police staged a reconstruction of the incident.
They are appealing for anyone who saw anything unusual in the area between 9pm last Thursday night and 12.30am the following morning to contact them.
ARMAGH £5m bomb bill
THE bill for bomb damage to the Mall in Armagh could top £5m.
Workmen have started removing the courthouse's Georgian portico stone by stone.
The Northern Ireland Court Service puts the cost of damage to the building at £1m.
The old Sovereign's house — now the Royal Irish Fusiliers' Museum — will cost £500,000 to restore.
BELFAST
UFF admits attack on family's home
THE UFF has admitted carrying out a bomb attack on the home of a Roman Catholic family in south Belfast.
The device, weighing 150 grams and packed with shrapnel, was thrown at the bedroom window of the house at Farnham Street, off the Ormeau Road, on Wednesday night.
It missed the target and exploded against a garden wall shattering windows.
A couple and their four young children were unhurt.
LONDONDERRY
Pet-owner plea
A LONDONDERRY school head has called ‘foul’ over dog owners who allow their pets to run free over a play area.
Fearing a health risk Mervyn Calvert of Maghera Controlled Primary School today pleaded with dog owners to tidy up after their pets — for the sake of his pupils.
COOKSTOWN
Vandals strike
DRUM Manor Forest Park near Cookstown has been the target of vandals.
They caused damage to a log cabin in the forest and set litter bins alight.
A fire was also started in a nearby telephone kiosk.
DUNMURRY
Club objection
STRONG objections from residents have failed to stop a house at Lagmore Road in Dunmurry being used as a youth club.
Councillor William McAllister said residents did not want the club and the granting of full planning approval has caused grave concern in the area.
LISBURN
Games donation
LISBURN Borough Council is to donate £2,500 to the Northern Ireland Commonwealth Games Council to help send a team to the 1994 Games in Canada.
Nurses hit by health fears: claim
NURSES are literally worrying themselves sick trying to cope with the increased pressures of their job, according to an alarming report published today.
And another study coming out next week reveals that health service employees are turning to medication because of high levels of stress resulting from staffing cuts and increased workloads.
Some are resorting to alcohol or cigarettes to help them overcome work pressures.
Local unions said overwork, fears about job security and poor management support are blamed for the staff crisis.
The Institute of Manpower Studies survey of nurses reports: an increasing number of nurses are taking time off sick.
the length of absence averages 14 days for qualified nurses.
Stress, illness, poor morale, family commitments, back injuries sustained at work and the need to prevent cross infection with patients are the reasons given for absence.
absenteeism among nurses costs the service millions of pounds annually.
Jim Buchan of the Royal College of Nursing, co-author of the report, said: ‘Rates of absence are highest among nurses who reported concern over excessive workloads.
‘Most said that they felt guilty about taking time off, even when they were ill.’
The report surveyed nurses throughout the United Kingdom, including Northern Ireland.
Frances Donaghy of the RCN in Northern Ireland said 2,000 beds had been removed during the past four years yet hospitals were still handling the same volume of patients.
‘The increased workload puts a lot of pressure on nurses.
A combination of pressure, staff shortages and the feeling that no-one is listening to them makes many more inclined to take a day off.
‘Then they feel guilty because they realise patients have to be treated and their colleagues are having to do extra work.
It is a vicious circle.’
Mrs Donaghy and Patricia McKeown, deputy regional secretary of health service union, UNISON, agreed that management do not do enough to support staff.
Ms McKeown said: ‘No-one is better placed to look after the health of their workers than NHS employers, yet they are almost wholly negligent in this area.
‘They run stress courses for senior management but offer no real help to other workers’.
She added: ‘Stress is a big problem in the NHS workforce.
Our surveys on this issue get the best response from staff at all grades’.
‘They feel guilty because they realise patients have to be treated and their colleagues are having to do extra work.
It is a vicious circle.’
Bottom rating for Bottomley
HEALTH Secretary Virginia Bottomley's bedside manner has failed to capture the hearts of the British public, an opinion poll suggested today.
Mrs Bottomley, with her reputation as the Cabinet's ‘golden girl’, came bottom of the pile in a Gallup survey for the Daily Telegraph.
Her insincerity rating of 59pc is higher than any of her Cabinet colleagues.
Only 27pc judge Mrs Bottomley, who has had widespread TV exposure over NHS issues, to be sincere.
Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown headed the Gallup ratings, with 73pc regarding him as sincere, following by Labour leader John Smith at 58pc.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd is the only Cabinet Minister to achieve a positive rating, with 43pc against 37pc who believe he is insincere.
Over half of those polled do not believe John Major usually tells the truth as they see it.
Mr Ashdown's personal popularity is also reflected in a separate Gallup poll measuring the standing of the parties.
A total of 25.8pc now think he would make the best Prime Minister — up 0.8pc from July, while Mr Major's rating has fallen again, from 17.7pc to 16.1pc.
Mr Smith has dropped from 30.2pc to 27.9pc.
According to the latest Gallup snapshot survey, the Tories have edged back into second place, ahead of the Liberal Democrats but well behind Labour.
The positions (with the August figure in brackets) are: Labour 46.5pc (44.5), Tories 25.5pc (23), Liberal Democrats 23pc (27).
Virginia Bottomley: Fails to impress.
By Desmond McCartan
Students' neo-Nazi invitation under attack
INVITATIONS to a prominent neo-Nazi to address student groups in Ireland has come under attack from politicians and academics.
Demands have been made for a withdrawal of the invitation to controversial historian, David Irving, to address student societies in Dublin University, University College Dublin and University College Cork.
Relatives
Mr Irving's denial that the Holocaust never happened and his defence of Adolf Hitler has incensed the relatives of those who died in death camps.
He has claimed: ‘This myth of mass murders of Jews in the death factories of Auschwitz, etc, never took place.’
By Michael Devine
Fortune tellers had warned stab victim
THE mother who was stabbed shortly after a double killing in Carrick was told by fortune tellers that an attempt would be made on her life before the New Year.
Patricia Caldwell was slashed in the neck and wrists at her Coronation Road home yesterday.
Earlier, her younger sister Angela and her mother Kate were killed nearly two miles away.
Kate Curran and 32-year-old Angela were in Mrs Curran's Edenvale Avenue home in the village of Eden near Kilroot, when the killer struck.
Officers smashed their way into the bungalow where they found the victims' bodies in separate rooms.
According to a friend Patricia had been to two fortune tellers recently.
‘Patsy was told by both fortune tellers that something would happen to her before the New Year — that an attempt would be made on her life,’ he said.
‘She had been pestered by threatening phone calls recently and harassed.’
US visitors fly home amid new DUP censures
IRISH-Americans on a fact-finding trip to Ireland flew back to the United States today with more DUP criticism ringing in their ears.
Former US Congressman Bruce Morrison and his colleagues have been slated for their meeting with Sinn Fein 's Gerry Adams and Martin McGuinness in west Belfast yesterday.
Vindicated
The DUP was the only party to refuse to meet the four-man US delegation during its Irish visit, and justice spokesman Ian Paisley Jnr insisted today his party had been vindicated.
He said: ‘They have wasted their time coming to Northern Ireland with their agenda of trying to bring peace.
Peace can only come when the terrorists are thoroughly defeated by the forces of law and order.
‘These people can't just blow in with their grand illusions about what they can do in Northern Ireland, with this ‘big brother’ attitude that America can solve everyone's problems.
They should start sorting out their own.’
Private
The Irish-American group claimed to be acting in a purely private capacity on its three-day trip, which included talks with Taoiseach Albert Reynolds and Ulster Secretary of State Sir Patrick Mayhew.
It met SDLP leader John Hume in Londonderry yesterday before travelling back to Belfast for discussions with Alliance and Sinn Fein.
Throughout the visit, Mr Morrison stressed he was not a ‘path-finder’ for sending a US peace envoy to Northern Ireland.
Nonetheless, he said he backed the idea.
Music
In west Belfast, the American delegation was given a lively reception with traditional music before retiring for private discussions with Mr Adams, Mr McGuinness and two other Sinn Fein members.
Mr Adams later described the meeting as a useful exchange of views.
He said: ‘Up to now, the Irish-American lobby in the US has been unfocused and largely impotent in relation to the Anglo-Irish conflict.
‘Influence’
‘However, the election of President Clinton with a very clear Irish agenda provides an opportunity for Irish-Americans to influence, in a direct and constructive way, the political situation in Ireland.’
The Irish-Americans said that on their return to the United States they would be reporting their findings to ‘public and private officials’.
By Mark Simpson
Praise for city zoo
AS A regular visitor back to Northern Ireland to visit family, I would like to congratulate Belfast Zoo.
When I was a child in Ulster, I remember visiting Bellevue, with its cages and old fashioned layout.
In the past few years I have been amazed at the transformation of the zoo, to a very modern, progressive and caring institution.
While zoos have limitations in what they can ever achieve, Belfast is demonstrating how the modern zoo is thinking of the welfare of its animal population first and the possible benefits to conservation of its work.
The free ranging lemurs are particularly memorable.
The keepers also appear to be a knowledgeable and dedicated group of people, for whom I can only express my admiration of their hard work.
TURKEY
Search is launched for missing tourist
POLICE in Turkey are carrying out a nationwide search for a missing British tourist.
Checks are being carried out at hospitals, hotels and police stations after designer Roy Dingley, 36, failed to return from his holiday last weekend.
AUSTRALIA
Move to drop Queen
AN AUSTRALIAN state has proposed the country adopt a bill of rights and replace the Queen as head of state with an Australian president.
In a submission to Prime Minister Paul Keating's republic advisory committee released today, South Australia said sweeping reform of the constitution was needed.
MEXICO
Killer bees on attack
A SWARM of killer African bees attacked some 70 children on a school playground in a northern Mexico village, officials said.
‘It was terrible…the school simply erupted with bees, stinging children everywhere,’ said a spokesman.
INDONESIA
Sex hotlines cut
INDONESIA has blocked access to sex hotlines from Hong Kong after MPs said such telephone calls could damage morals in the mainly Muslim country, the state telecommunications company said today.
MOROCCO
Breaking the habit
THE European Community will provide finance over five years to help Morocco eradicate cultivation of cannabis in the Rif mountains in the north, the EC announced.
Tourist murder suspect sobs in Miami court
THE teenager charged in the murder of a German tourist sobbed at his first court appearance last night as police staked out several Miami sites searching for his girlfriend and suspected accomplice.
At one point, in an announcement broadcast live in special television and radio reports, Miami police said they had the girlfriend, Patsy Jones, in custody.
But a few minutes later they said they had detained the wrong woman and the real suspect was still at large.
Police said they are still trying to determine whether a third suspect, a male, was also involved.
They have not said who they believe actually fired the single fatal bullet at Uwe-Wilhelm Rakebrand (33), of Adendorf, Germany.
Suspect Ricondall ‘Rico’ Wiggins (19), appeared in court on charges of armed robbery and first degree murder.
He is not required to enter a plea at this point.
In his court appearance by a television hookup from a podium in the jail chapel, Wiggins bowed his head and mumbled: ‘I don't know,’ when asked if he had a lawyer, and ‘No’when asked if he had money for a lawyer.
Wiggins, an unemployed tyre mechanic, will get a court-appointed lawyer.
UN expects new clashes after Somalia shoot-out
UN troops were braced for more violence today after they fired at Mogadishu gunmen trying to end their peacekeeping role in Somalia.
Somali residents said 100 civilians were killed when UN helicopters fired into a crowd which mobbed a stricken UN patrol on the capital's October 21 Road in the heartland of fugitive warlord Mohamed Farah Aideed.
There was no way of verifying the report.
UN military officials acknowledged that their troops fired on civilians they said were being used as human shields by gunmen who ambushed the patrol.
They said one Pakistani soldier, five of his countrymen and three Americans were injured in the three-hour clash, the worst since the weekend killing of seven Nigerian troops trapped by a mob and then gunned down as they tried to flee.
Maj David Stockwell, the UN military spokesman, said the crowds, which included women and children, were viewed, ‘armed or not, as being combatants and posing an imminent threat against our soldiers’.
‘It was apparent from the air what their intentions were,’ he told reporters.
‘It's entirely possible women and children could have been killed.’
Smear test blunder nurse says ‘sorry’
THE nurse at the centre of a smear test blunder has apologised for the anguish she caused the victims.
More than 1,000 women have been recalled for a repeat smear test after it was revealed Practice Nurse Ina Gordon used a wooden spatula designed for holding down the tongue instead of special metal spatulas made for the vital tests.
‘…
I would wish to express my very great anguish to all those women concerned if I have been taught an inadequate technique,’ she said.
Statement
The nurse, who was dismissed, claimed she was trained to carry out the tests by the doctor who employed her, GP Dr Ashok Kumar.
Mrs Gordon (61) who lives in Kingshurst, West Midlands, and now works at a nursing home, admitted in an official statement released by solicitor Steven Jonas that she had not carried out a smear test before joining Dr Kumar's practice, but claimed she followed a technique he taught her.
Robbers hold family hostage
REPUBLICAN terrorists held a west Belfast family hostage overnight before forcing one of them to hand over several thousand pounds from an off-licence business.
The family was held prisoner in a house in Clowney Street, in the Beechmount area, by a number of men who claimed to be from the republican movement.
They were kept in the house overnight and yesterday morning one was told to go to work as normal at the west Belfast shop.
Drop-off
The woman took the money — understood to amount to several thousand pounds — to a pre-arranged drop-off point and handed it over to a member of the gang.
The police were then called to the house and found two people tied up in a back bedroom.
No-one was injured, and police at Grosvenor Road are asking anyone with information about the incident to contact them.
By Ian McTear
Joyriders' victim still critical
A 35-year-old woman struck by a joyrider's car in west Belfast was today in a critical condition in hospital.
The woman suffered head injuries after she was mowed down by a car which mounted the pavement.
The victim had been walking along the Springfield Road with her four-year-old daughter when the accident happened on Wednesday.
The child was also taken to hospital but was later discharged.
A 72-year-old man who was knocked down in the north of the city yesterday by a stolen car was today stable in the Royal Victoria Hospital.
He is suffering from leg and arm injuries.
By Marie Foy
Two die in road accidents
THE province's roads yesterday claimed two more lives, a teenage girl and a pensioner.
Emer Tracy (14) died after she was knocked down by a lorry as she crossed Dungannon Road, Portadown.
The teenager, from Druminally Road in the town, had just got off a bus when the accident happened at 4.30pm.
Anyone who witnessed the accident is asked to contact police at Portadown 332424.
In Lisburn, a 70 year old woman died after she was struck by a car at Queens Road shortly after noon.
She was Elizabeth Gallagher, from Hancock Street.
WESTMINSTER
Backing plan
THE Ulster Unionist Party has welcomed calls by the Liberal Democrats to offer men and women the choice to retire at any age between 60 and 70.
South Antrim MP Clifford Forsythe pointed out that his party had backed a similar retirement policy in its General Election manifesto last year.
The Liberal Democrats called for a ‘flexible decade of retirement’ in a new policy blueprint published this week.
Club robbed
THIEVES broke into the social club of Cookstown United FC at Drapersfield by forcing the front door.
Money was taken from the till, pool table and pay phone.
Rector on the move
THE Rev Brian Harper, rector of Ballygawley, is moving to Mullavilly Parish near Tandragee.
The institution has been provisionally fixed for December
2.
Originally from Dungiven, Mr Harper began his ministry in St Columba's Parish, Portadown, where he met his wife Heather.
He then served a second curacy in Drumglass Parish, Dungannon.
Museum place for new bike
THE Ulster Transport Museum is looking to the future — with a state of the art bike.
Raleigh's Activator Two, the first mass-produced bicycle with full front and rear suspension for better handling and greater control, which is now on show in the museum, was voted the Best Bike of 1993 at the Harrogate Cycle Fair.
John Beatty, managing director of Raleigh Ireland, said it was impossible to think of a bicycle design innovation in the past which had as much impact on the performance and comfort of cycling as full suspension will have.
Clarke warns trade unions over pay fight
CHANCELLOR Kenneth Clarke today warned trade unions to think again about a strategy of industrial action against the Government's squeeze on public sector pay.
Mr Clarke said last night that the pay of five million workers, ranging from teachers to nurses and civil servants, would be curbed for the second year in a row.
It provoked rumblings of unrest from some trade unions, including the Fire Brigades Union which is fighting the present 1.5pc pay rise ceiling, at the TUC conference in Brighton.
Rights
But Mr Clarke scorned Labour leader John Smith's speech to TUC delegates earlier this week.
‘The sort of people John Smith was winding up at the Trade Union Conference about a return to a Golden Age, when they were back in the driving seat and great rights for their members, and a friendly government again — some of those people are beginning to make noises.
‘But I think the average employee in the public sector, who has a job, knows perfectly well that, in the public services nowadays, you have to accept the same sensible level of settlements that people do outside, where things are going hard.
‘We have got to get used to a climate in which Britain is now in control of inflation.
‘John Smith was getting a bit nostalgic and remembering those days, but they are certainly not going to come back.’
RUC ‘clampdown’ on loyalist areas condemned
TWO Ulster Unionist councillors claimed today a decision to ‘swamp’ loyalist areas with police was ‘playing into the hands of paramilitaries’.
Jim and Fred Rodgers maintained that the RUC's presence in loyalist areas had doubled since SDLP and Alliance Party delegations met the Security Minister, Sir John Wheeler, earlier this week.
Warned
They warned that ‘a major political row’ would erupt if it emerged that Sir John had met the SDLP and Alliance at short notice — after receiving a letter from an UUP delegation requesting a meeting.
Jim Rodgers, who represents the Victoria Ward in east Belfast but works on the Shankill, said: ‘We have been told by reliable police sources that the assistant Chief Constable for Belfast had a security briefing with his divisional commander to increase patrols in loyalist areas.
‘They have brought in divisional mobile support-units from other areas, and on many roads — particularly the Shankill and Crumlin — you can't go 50 yards without meeting another patrol.’
‘Even-handed’
Mr Rodgers stressed he and Fred Rodgers, who represents the Oldpark area, were staunch supporters of the RUC, but believed policing should be ‘even-handed’.
‘I have been inundated with complaints from local people who feel this ‘over-the-top’ action will only play into the hands of loyalist paramilitaries.
They see it as another example of the Government jumping to the tune of the SDLP.
‘I condemn violence from whatever quarter, but it seems to me that the Government only responds when there is an outbreak of loyalist activity.’
Awaiting
Jim Rodgers said a delegation of UUP councillors was still awaiting a meeting with the Security Minister after writing to him ten days ago.
‘If we discover the SDLP and Alliance Party requested their meetings at the same time or later, there will be one major political row,’ he said.
Fred Rodgers said it took him 30 minutes to travel half-a-mile this morning.
‘Embittering’
‘I protested to police at Tennent Street this morning, but they told me it was a divisional reployment.
‘We feel it is only further embittering loyalist paramilitaries and will make them even more hard-line.
They will feel the Government is heeding Dr Hendron and the SDLP and it will only heighten tension,’ he said.
The two councillors are to monitor the situation over the next few days before seeking a meeting with the RUC's assistant Chief Constable.
‘Erroneous’
Sinn Fein has claimed UFF gunmen who murdered hairdresser Sean Hughes at his Falls Road salon on Tuesday gleaned ‘erroneous details’ from RUC files that he was a republican.
A West Belfast councillor, Una Gillespie, claimed the circumstances of the shooting also pointed to the killers having details of patrol patterns in the area.
A police spokesman said: ‘We have a policy of not responding to Sinn Fein statements.’
By Gary Grattan
Rabin signs historic deal
ISRAELI Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin today signed a letter recognising arch enemy the Palestine Liberation Organisation at a ceremony in his Jerusalem office.
Rabin signed after receiving a letter from PLO chairman Yasser Arafat who recognised the right of Israel to exist, renounced violence and promised to push through amendments to parts of the PLO charter offensive to Israel.
The letter was brought from PLO headquarters in Tunis by Norwegian Foreign Minister Johan Joergen Holst, who played a key role in secret Israeli-PLO contacts which lead to the agreement.
‘It's an historic moment that hopefully will bring about an end to 100 years of bloodshed, misery between the Palestinians and Jews, between Palestinians and Israel,’ Rabin said.
Rabin was also flanked by his Foreign Minister Shimon Peres, who met in secret with PLO officials in Oslo to clinch the accord on recognition and agreement on limited self-rule for Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Rabin said the agreement was only the first step towards a hoped for comprehensive Middle East peace.
‘It's only the beginning but a tremendous, important beginning,’ a stern-faced Rabin said.
‘I see in it a big step towards the achievement of these goals knowing that still it's a long way to go with obstacles on the road that we shall have to remove — and it is possible to remove them,’ Rabin added.
Peace move: PLO leader Yasser Arafat receives a gift from Rabbi Moshe Hirsch, head of the anti-Zionist column ultra orthodox Heturi Karta during a meeting in Tunis.
By Press Association
Anti-terror
LIKE death and taxes, criticism is one of life's certainties, at least as far as the RUC is concerned.
In recent weeks the force has been accused by some in the Protestant community of being ineffective in the fight against the IRA, and by some Catholics of being less vigorous in tackling loyalist violence.
The Chief Constable, Sir Hugh Annesley, is particularly infuriated by the charge of bias.
He described it as ‘neither accurate nor fair’ and has produced telling statistics to refute the allegation.
Of the 259 people charged with terrorist offences this year, 166 were loyalists and 93 republicans.
That is a clear indication that the RUC is even-handed in its pursuit of terrorists.
The escalation in loyalist terrorism presents an enormous problem for the police.
Security forces have to deal with two fronts at a time when the threat of IRA bombings is ever present.
Nevertheless the force can produce statistics to show that the overall level of violence has fallen and that important arrests and finds of guns and explosives have been made.
The terrorist threat, from both sides, remains high and there is a great degree of fear in both communities.
That is the sort of climate where unsubstantiated claims flourish, and must be challenged and put into proper perspective by the Chief Constable.
He also put some of the onus for countering terrorism back onto the public.
‘In both communities, there are terrorists meeting and plotting outrages, using cars and houses, moving about and acting suspiciously in various ways.
Be vigilant and tell us what you see and hear.’
The RUC needs community support.
It needs a constant flow of information.
It cannot fight the terrorists alone.
The men of violence want to drive a wedge between the forces of law and order and the people they protect.
The ordinary people of Northern Ireland cannot allow that to happen.
They should help and defend the RUC.
This is no time for equivocation.
Historic deal
THE impossible has happened and one of the essential building blocks to peace on the Middle East has been cemented in place.
Two of the world's most implacable enemies, the Israelis and the Palestinians, have recognised each other 's right to exist, preparing the way for PLO self-rule in Gaza and Jericho.
It has been an astonishing transformation in opinions and attitudes, within the course of a few short weeks.
The mutual desire for an end to the perpetual warfare was the starting point, but there were also pressing political and economic factors.
Although Israeli's Labour government, elected last year, was pledged to trade ‘land for peace’, it was unable to deliver amidst continuing unrest.
At the same time, the PLO was at its lowest ebb, starved of Arab support since Yasser Arafat backed Saddam Hussein in the Gulf War, and losing ground to extremists.
Both badly needed a way out — and the agreement on limited Palestinian self-government, brokered secretly by the Norwegians, provided it.
The only major obstacle remaining, mutual recognition, has clinched the deal.
If it sticks — a big if, considering the Israeli government's one-vote majority and Arafat's internal power struggle — the prospect of peace in the Middle East is as momentous as the collapse of Soviet Communism.
Age-old enemies have accepted that compromise is the only peaceful way forward.
There are lessons for Northern Ireland, but it would be a mistake to exaggerate them.
The IRA cannot claim to represent Irish nationalists, as the PLO represents most Palestinians.
The British Government recognises the democratic right to aspire towards Irish unity but also accepts that until a majority here wishes otherwise, Northern Ireland's status will be unchanged.
(Revision of the Republic's constitution, dropping the territorial claim, is as vital to this island as today's historic recognition settlement is to the world at large.)
The struggle here is not about the implementation of democracy, but the upholding of democracy.
Nevertheless, those who respect the ballot box but who cannot agree on any form of self-government could learn from the Israeli-Palestinian settlement.
If moderates fail to reach a compromise, or even to talk, the extremists on both sides will dominate the agenda.
Killer to be extradited today
CONVICTED wife-killer James Rudman today was expected to be extradited to Britain from the Irish Republic.
Forty-year-old Rudman, who walked out of a psychiatric hospital in Leicester last August 1 after being allowed unescorted into the grounds, was recaptured by gardai at a farm in Liscahane, Ardfert, Co Kerry, on August 28.
Under Section 37 of Britain's Mental Health Act, he would have been legally a free man if he had remained at large for another hour.
At the time of his arrest, he had been in Ireland for 10 days.
Appeal
He was brought before the district court in Tralee on August 31, where the judge ordered his extradition to Britain.
He was remanded in custody to allow him to decide whether to appeal.
It is understood that he decided not to appeal after being told that a mental health review tribunal would be held soon after his return to Britain.
Rudman was sent to a psychiatric hospital last year after admitting the manslaughter of his wife on the grounds of diminished responsibility.
Loyalist killings overshadow Anglo-Irish talks
THE shadow of loyalist paramilitary killings today hung over the latest Anglo-Irish talks in London as Ministers struggled to chart a fresh path to political talks.
Security was top of the agenda for the meeting, with the Irish Government demanding further information on the threat of loyalist bomb-attacks in the Republic.
Both Governments regard the current upsurge in loyalist murders as an urgent incentive to get the political parties back around the negotiating table.
The urgency of the issue was marked by the presence of Stormont Security Minister Sir John Wheeler, who broke off his holiday to join his Dublin counterpart, Justice Minister Maire Geoghegan-Quinn, for the talks.
Revived
RUC Chief Constable Sir Hugh Annesley, whose warning of the threat of loyalist bomb-attacks in the Republic has alarmed Dublin, and Garda Commissioner Patrick Culligan were also present.
Speaking before the meeting — which began almost an hour late after the Irish party's flight from Dublin was delayed — Secretary of State Sir Patrick Mayhew spoke of the concern, felt in both London and Dublin, about the upsurge in violence.
Sir Patrick, welcoming Irish Foreign Minister Dick Spring, rejected suggestions that relations between both Governments had been at a low ebb after their last talks in July and stressed that both were treating the worsening security situation ‘very seriously’.
Negative
Speaking before the meeting, he also made clear that, despite a negative public stance by some parties, there were still good grounds for a resumption of the dialogue.
However, the official message belied private concern that the prospects for fresh talks have worsened since the last Anglo-Irish meeting in July and there was little sign that the meeting would result in substantial progress.
Sources predicted that there would be no sign of the frostiness which greeted Mr Spring's suggestion, in a Guardian interview in July, that both Governments might have to bypass the parties and aim for joint rule.
However, there was expected to be friction between Taoiseach Albert Reynolds and Sir Hugh Annesley about the warning of loyalist attacks in the Republic.
Harm
Mr Reynolds said he was ‘disturbed’ by the content of what Sir Hugh said on Wednesday and rebuked him for ‘going public’.
‘This type of information was normally exchanged between Sir Hugh and the Garda Commissioner, Patrick Culligan,’ he said.
‘I am rather surprised that he made it public, but we will be taking it very seriously — have no doubt about that — and it will be raised at the Anglo-Irish Conference meeting in London.’
However, Mr Spring, who co-chaired the meeting, said he felt there was no harm in the public being made aware of a loyalist bomb-threat.
He added that it was an ‘imperative’ for local politicians to resume their talks.
See Viewpoint — Page 14
Albert Reynolds: Friction 
Sir Patrick: Talks hopes
Grief takes time
Last autumn, my son's wife was killed in a road accident.
He was devastated, of course, and now works tremendously hard to look after their two young children.
He is having counselling, but what worries me is his inability to talk to us about it.
Nearly six months after the tragedy, he's still bottling it up.
Is there anything I can do to help him overcome it?
Your son has suffered a terrible loss — six months is not a long period of time to get over such a trauma.
You just have to be there when he needs you, for practical as well as emotional help.
For example, you could offer to look after the children for the weekend while he takes a well-earned break.
By being supportive like this, it will reassure him that his family love him and are there to help him through this difficult time.
Send your problems in confidence to Ask Annie, Options, Belfast Telegraph, 124 Royal Avenue, Belfast BT1 1EB.
Replies can be given through the column only.
Mother of seven on mission to kill
Double life of IRA Mata Hari
GLAMOROUS actress Rosena Brown was ideally suited to her double life as a ruthless IRA terrorist.
To the people the youthful 48-year-old worked with in the theatrical world she was a real professional on stage and a bubbly, friendly extrovert away from the audience.
But caught red-handed with a bomb in the glove compartment of the car she was driving, the mother-of-seven was on a mission to kill.
Theatrical
‘She was one of the nicest people I ever met,’ said a theatrical acquaintance who knew nothing of her terrorist background.
‘It just goes to show she was a better actress than any of us even suspected.’
The west Belfast woman had even appeared in a Northern Ireland Office ‘Crack Crime’ television and billboard advertising campaign.
Among her film credits was ‘Hush-a-Bye-Baby’, which featured singer chart-topping singer Sinead O'Connor.
Arrested
During its making in Londonderry she was arrested and questioned about IRA involvement but released without charge.
She also played a small part in Ken Loach's controversial thriller ‘Hidden Agenda’, based on the Stalker so-called ‘Shoot to Kill’ affair.
But her own life was often stranger than any action-packed fiction plot.
She was labelled the IRA's Mata Hari for her alleged seduction of prison officer Christopher Hanna, who set up colleague Brian Armour to be murdered in 1988.
Trysts
Hanna's trial was told of secret trysts in a Lisburn graveyard with the mysterious brunette, then known as ‘Anne’.
And an RUC Special Branch detective startlingly revealed to the court that police wanted to recruit Brown suspected to be a top IRA intelligence officer, as a double agent.
Brown turned blonde for her own trial at Belfast Crown Court, where she appeared immaculately groomed with co-ordinating clothes and costume jewellery.
Throughout the two-day hearing, she appeared relaxed and confident, often turning to share a joke with her two male accomplices in the dock or smile at friends and family who crowded the court's public benches.
At one point the mistress of disguise demonstrated to her co-accused how the ginger wig she had been wearing when they were stopped by police, fell off as she adjusted her hat.
But during her short acting career, Brown was held in high esteem by the theatrical fraternity in Northern Ireland.
She was a working class woman on her own, looking for that big break.
Her marriage broke up in 1985, leaving her to bring up seven children alone and she worked with local women's theatre group, Charabanc, on a freelance basis.
Finances and family responsibilities were a struggle in those days, with her eldest daughter minding her three-year-old youngest child while Brown was out acting.
Brown acted as an amateur in two Charabanc productions, ‘Now You're Talking’ and ‘Gold in the Streets’, but the company now refuse to discuss her.
Clever actress who played two big roles
IRA bomber Rosena Brown was a better actress than anyone gave her credit for.
She played two roles with theatrical precision: one that of the glamorous actress, the other that of the cold, calculating terrorist.
Star
Her performance as the would-be star of stage and screen was so convincing that no-one ever suspected her darker, evil side.
Acquaintances say it is hard to believe the same charming woman they knew is now a convicted IRA terrorist.
‘I met her a couple of times after shows,’ said one.
‘She was great fun and terribly friendly.
‘It's hard to believe she had this other life and yet if I met her now it would be difficult to dislike her.
‘She wasn't outspoken about her political views.
We chatted about ordinary things, her children, living in Belfast.
She showed a great interest in cross-community projects.
‘She is a very attractive woman for her age and a good actress who played character roles.
‘Cocky’
‘You cannot censor people's backgrounds and it has happened before that, for instance, someone playing a joyrider in a play is an actual joyrider.’
However, one actress, who did a screen test with Brown, said she could not ‘take to her’.
‘She was very sure of herself, a bit cocky and she had a coldness that just put me off her.’
Rosena Brown: Calculating.
Videotape of Warrington bomb suspects
POLICE hunting IRA terrorists who murdered two boys and injured more than 50 people in the Warrington bombing today released video footage of two suspects.
The black and white film was taken by a shop security camera just 20 minutes before two bombs ripped through the town's packed shopping centre on March 20.
It shows two men wearing gloves walking from the direction of the first explosion.
They appear to be veering out to cross the road towards the scene of the second blast.
Questioned
The camera was set up to cover the interior of the store, and the images of the men, filmed as they walked past on the pavement outside, are not clear.
Detectives investigating the explosions have questioned more than 10,000 people but have so far been unable to identify the two men and eliminate them from their inquiries.
Bombers
Three year-old Johnathan Ball died almost instantly in the second of the two explosions caused by a bomb hidden a litter bin.
Timothy Parry (12) suffered massive injuries and died five days later.
Cheshire police stressed that they were not saying that the men pictured were the bombers.
A spokesman said detectives hoped that if the suspects were not the terrorists they — or someone who recognised them — would come forward to eliminate them from the inquiry.
Child sleeps through joyride chase drama
A toddler slept through a car chase drama in west Belfast, it was revealed today.
Joyriders stole a car with the two-year-old in the back — but were then chased by another car theft victim.
The child was recovered in the abandoned Peugeot within a short time — still sleeping.
The series of events began at the CastleCourt shopping complex at teatime last night when a woman, with her one-year-old child, was putting her shopping in the back of her Ford Granada.
Pushed
A youth pushed the woman and her baby against another car, jumped into the Granada and made off.
The car was found just off Upper Dunmurry Lane around 7.15pm — with a chain around the steering wheel.
The woman's husband and a friend hid and waited to ‘ambush’ the joyriders if they returned.
Unlocked
Another man drove into the street, to look at a car he wanted to buy, and left his Peugeot unlocked with the child inside.
The car thieves took the Peugeot, and the waiting men gave chase.
The Peugeot was found just over a mile away in Twinbrook.
Speaking on radio the man, whose wife was assaulted, said: ‘If I had got my hands on them I would have broken their arms.’
By Noel McAdam
Child sex case man jailed
A SHANKILL Road man who molested and took obscene photographs of children was jailed for five years today.
Three girls and a boy, aged between 13 and 15, were abused by George Spence (55), over a five month period, up to January last year, Belfast Crown Court heard.
Spence, of Charleville Street, admitted 30 charges, including unlawful carnal knowledge, indecent assault, taking indecent photographs and buggery.
As he was led away from the dock by prison officer, a woman in the public gallery shouted ‘He deserves to be hanged for what he has done to the children.’
Offences
Passing sentence Judge John Petrie said he took into account the fact that Spence had spared the young people the ordeal of giving evidence in court by his guilty plea.
A Crown lawyer said the offences came to light when the youngsters were interviewed by police investigating other matters.
The defendant's house was raided and photographs of naked girls were found.
It emerged that all four had gone to Spence's house on various occasions where they were sexually abused and some were photographed.
Feature
The lawyer said that it was not possible to say that the young people had suffered any permanent effects as a result of their experience.
A surprising feature of the case, he said, was that the children had returned to the man's house.
‘This may have been a mixture of excitement, curiosity and immaturity — and the payment of money by the accused may have had an influence,’ he said.
Pathetic
A defence lawyer described Spence as ‘a pathetic and lonely figure’.
He did not excuse or condone his client's conduct, but argued that the children had not been coerced.
‘It is not a case of very young children who have no chance to assess what they are doing and the consequences of what they are doing,’ he said.
‘Sack YTP boss’— sex case victim
A TEENAGE girl has won £9,000 compensation after being sexually harassed by a supervisor at a YTP workshop in Lurgan.
The award — one of the highest of its type ever made Ulster — was ordered after an industrial tribunal heard how Patricia Knox was subjected to four ‘coldly manoeuvred’ assaults within three hours.
Today Miss Knox said she was ‘outraged’ to learn that the man who assaulted her, supervisor Brian McConville, was still employed at Lurgan Community Workshop and called for him to be sacked.
‘I think he should have been punished more.
I suffered dreadfully but nothing has happened to him.
I can't understand why he hasn't been dismissed,’ said Miss Knox, who lives in fear of meeting McConville again.
McConville said today that he was considering an appeal.
The harassment occurred just four months after the sixteen-year-old, from Lurgantarry, started her first job as a YTP trainee at workshop in Co Armagh, the hearing heard.
In the first incident McConville, of Lurgan Road, Aghagallon, rubbed his hands up and down her sides as she bent over a dishwasher in the kitchen.
Next he put his hands inside her shirt and on top of her breasts, only stopping when another person entered the room.
The teenager, now 17-years-old, confided in a friend but shortly afterwards had to return to the kitchen to make a cup of coffee for another supervisor.
As she was doing so, McConville came up behind her, put his hands inside her top and felt her breasts.
He left when two girls came in.
Miss Knox told the girls what had happened and then McConville came back into the room and asked whether one of the three would do some photocopying.
At first all refused and then Miss Knox agreed on condition her two friends would follow.
They agreed to, but did not.
Inside the photocopying room McConville put his hands inside her top and felt her breasts.
Afterwards the girl told two other supervisors, one of whom said McConville was ‘not like that’.
She was ‘extremely upset’ and shouted that she knew they would not believe her and left the workshop.
Later on the evening of October 28 last, Miss Knox went to the police station with her father and made a statement.
McConville and Lurgan Community workshop initially denied the allegations but later admitted them.
The five-page judgment sternly criticised the manager of the workshop, William Brady, for his investigation into the allegations, describing him as ‘obstructive and biased’.
Miss Knox's solicitor Rosemary Nelson praised her courage for taking the case and said she hoped who would offer encouragement to other women in a similar position.
She added that Miss Knox, who was represented by barrister Elaine Kelly, had received an ‘unqualified apology’ from Lurgan Community Workshop.
McConville and Lurgan Community Workshop were ordered to pay £7,500 damages, a week's lost pay at £29.50, and £1,500 aggravated damages, making a total of £9,029.50.
Landmark rises up from the ashes
THE landmark spire of Colmcille Roman Catholic church in Holywood has risen from the ashes of the fire which virtually destroyed it four years ago.
But there was another fire this week at the temporary building which the congregation has been using — the disused gym of the former Our Lady's grammar school.
‘Fortunately the fire was discovered in time.
It was a very crude but effective device,’ said curate Fr Anthony O'Connor.
The painstaking restoration of the 125-year-old spire cost £150,000 and building a new church in the next 18 months will total £1.2m, excluding fees.
‘The spire, which stands about 145ft tall, is a much admired landmark and a very beautiful structure,’ Fr O'Connor added.
‘It was felt important to restore the spire as a monument to the old church which is so full of memories for people.’
No one has been charged in connection to the fire at the church four years ago.
Chemist rota
THE chemists on rota duty between 6pm and 7pm on Sunday are: Londonderry: F Murphy, 165 Spencer Road.
Strabane: Strabane Chemists Ltd., The Health Centre, Main Street.
Block travellers, urges councillor
TRAVELLERS who have invaded Downpatrick's main car park should be barricaded in until they move, a councillor urged today.
Up to 20 caravans have parked close to the town's historic cathedral, and opposite the leisure centre and steam train station.
The carpark is also beside the headquarters of the DoE road service which owns the site.
Convoy
Department officials had been monitoring the convoy which spent about two weeks at a roadside halt near Ardglass before slipping into Downpatrick overnight.
The DoE has served a notice on the nomadic inhabitants, pointing out that they are breaching by-laws and that legal action may be taken against them.
Ulster Unionist councillor Jack McIlheron urged the DoE to put gates and locks on the Market Street plot.
‘These people, no matter where they go, seem to leave a mess behind.
Usually it is up to the ratepayers in the area to pay for the clean-up afterwards.
They don't contribute anything no matter where they go,’ he said.
SDLP councillor Dermot Curran, disagreeing with the idea of a barricade, commented: ‘We would be imprisoning people which would be the wrong thing to do.’
But, he added ‘While these people have a right to live as they want, they are infringing on the rights of other people.
‘They are also causing a health hazard as there are no toilet or washing facilities for them.
A spokesperson for the DoE said that because of the large number of people who use the park, they had no plans at present to lock it.
By Marie Foy
Close up site trouble-spot: call
ANGRY Newry residents are demanding the closure of a site for travelling people after a series of clashes involving fire officers, police and cleaning workers.
A catalogue of incidents through the summer has brought unease to the ‘Middle bank’ area near the overcrowded site, St Christopher's Park.
And a pre-school play scheme called the Dove Project has refused to operate from the site after their Portacabin was badly vandalised.
‘Difficult’
SDLP councillor Frank Feely said: ‘The reality is it is not an ideal site for travellers and eventually they will have to go somewhere else.
But it is a difficult situation.’
Chief environmental health officer Hugh O'Neill said firemen who had gone to put out fires on the site had been attacked by missile throwers, and now had to be accompanied by police.
Residents, too frightened to be named, spelt out a catalogue of complaints against the travellers, many of which have been sent to the council.
One said: ‘The whole place is a disgrace.
They just slop out over the walls, and there is litter everywhere — old refuse, bottles and cans, you name it.’
Conditions at the 20-pitch permanent park led to strong condemnation at Newry and Mourne Council.
Councillors said burnt-out caravans and motor vehicles littered the site, while fencing had also been damaged by fire.
By Noel McAdam
YTP ordeal: Teenager tells of ‘nightmare’
Assaults left girl ‘feeling like tramp’
HER first job should have been the greatest break in teenager Patricia Knox's young life.
Instead it became a nightmare.
several years in care, the sixteen-year-old couldn't believe her luck when she landed a YTP place at Lurgan Community Workshop.
But she had only been there four months when she fell prey to supervisor Brian McConville who subjected her to a harrowing sexual harassment ordeal.
Anger
An industrial tribunal this week ordered that McConville and the Workshop pay her £9029.50 compensation for the assaults which left her ‘feeling like a tramp’.
Today, as Patricia, now 17, sets about rebuilding her life, she looks back on the experience with a mixture of hatred, bitterness, anger and irony.
‘I had just left training school and really thought I had landed on my feet.
It was my first job and I thought it would be great,’ she said.
‘I didn't know many people and this seemed like a good opportunity.
It's not easy to find work and I was very thankful.’
‘Terrible’
But gratefulness turned to horror on October 28 last year when, McConville, of Lurgan Road, Aghagallon, assaulted her four times in the space of three hours.
‘It was terrible.
I would never want anyone else to go through that sort of thing,’ she recalled.
Patricia, who lives at Lurgantarry, said the matter was made worse because other senior staff at the Workshop refused to believe her.
In the five-page judgement, workshop manager William Brady was harshly criticised for his ‘biased’ approach.
‘Mr Brady never believed nor attempted to believe her,’ it read.
Brave
Patricia added: ‘I didn't know whether to take a case or not but my solicitor, Rosemary Nelson and barrister Elaine Kelly, were very helpful and supportive.
However, there were still times when I wondered if I could go through with it.’
Ms Nelson has praised her for being brave enough to take the case.
‘I hope this will encourage other women in a similar position to do something about it,’ she said.
And Patricia also wants to see other women fighting back against which she calls this ‘most horrible thing’.
She said: ‘People must stand up for themselves.
I lost my confidence and my job.
Although the money will help, nothing can put that right.’
Justice
Despite the award, the plucky teenager, who has recently started work as a stitcher in a factory in the town, still feels justice has not been done.
She added: ‘I hate Brian McConville for what he put me through.
I am even scared of bumping into him in the street.
‘I lost everything.
I just cannot understand why he has kept his job.
It doesn't seem fair.’
Patricia Knox: ‘I lost everything.
It doesn't seem fair.’
Pupils in Euro talk
THE future of Europe will be debated by pupils of two Northern Ireland schools at a Pan-European Youth Assembly in Brussels in November.
David Wright, of Ballyclare High School, and Gail Muldoon, from St Mary's Girls Secondary School, Londonderry, will be part of a 10-member team.
BELFAST
Help plea
THE Blind Centre for Northern Ireland urgently needs sighted volunteers to help with services it provides.
The centre needs a choirmaster or mistress for its choir, the ‘Visionaires’, and volunteers to aid keep-fit, craft and cookery classes.
Anyone who feels they can give two hours of their time in mornings or afternoons should contact Margaret Fusco at the Centre, 70 North Road, Belfast 0232 654366.
LISBURN
Image boost
LISBURN Borough Council is to hire a public relations firm to help launch ‘Lisburn's Lagan’ in November.
The council hopes the publicity will help its application for European funding for a project on the river.
SCOTLAND
Cost call
SCOTS are being asked to pay 50p each to help a drive for a referendum on Scotland's future.
Scotland United says a three-way choice would be on offer, independence, devolution or the status quo.
Government chiefs say only Parliament has the authority for a poll.
Wife-killer is returned to Britain
A CONVICTED wife-killer who fled to the Irish Republic after walking out of a mental hospital was being flown back to Britain today, police said.
Irish detectives arrested James Rudman at a remote farmhouse in Co Kerry last month, just an hour before he would have been legally free because of a loophole in the law.
On September 1 an Irish judge ordered Rudman's extradition.
Rudman absconded on August 1 from the Towers psychiatric hospital in Leicester, where he was detained after admitting the manslaughter, on the grounds of diminished responsibility, of his wife Susan at their home at Birstall, Leicester.
He had been detained under section 37 of the Mental Health Act, and the order would have lapsed if he had remained at large for 28 days, unless there was fresh evidence of mental illness.
BELFAST
Attacks on police
ARMY experts dealt with a series of hoax IRA bomb alerts at police stations throughout Belfast early today.
Hijacked vehicles were left at York Road, Grosvenor Road, Springfield Parade, New Barnsley, Antrim Road, Tennent Street and Dunmurry stations.
Another vehicle was abandoned at Great Victoria Street.
Shortly after midnight a number of shots were fired at Oldpark and Woodburn RUC stations.
A police spokesman said there were no reports of injuries and fire was not returned.
STEWARTSTOWN
Assault
A STEWARTSTOWN housewife who struck an Army officer on the face was conditionally discharged for a year at Cookstown Magistrates Court yesterday for assault.
The court heard Mrs Irene Veronica Horsfall (42) of Loughview Close had also swung the shaft of a shovel towards members of an Army patrol.
Defence solicitor Paddy Mallon said Horsfall claimed the soldiers had made derogatory remarks towards her and her son.
COOKSTOWN
Bailed
A COOKSTOWN man appeared at the local magistrates court yesterday charged with handling £4,500 worth of cigarettes and cigars knowing them to have been stolen on April 27 last year.
Douglas Gillis (28), labourer, of Queens Avenue, who elected to be tried by a judge and jury was remanded on bail to November 12.
Driver fined and banned
A DUNGANNON motorist who was said by a magistrate to have a ‘dreadful drink-driving record’ was fined £550 and lost his licence for five years at Cookstown Magistrates Court yesterday.
David Samuel Purvis (41), tiler, of Drumreagh Crescent, Newmills, admitted driving while unfit due to drink; failing to provide a specimen of breath; driving carelessly and without a licence and insurance.
Sales rep admits forgery charge
A 23-YEAR-OLD sales representative from Blackpool pleaded guilty at Craigavon Magistrates Court yesterday to charges of forgery and deception.
In addition to the three charges of forgery and four of deception, he asked that seven other charges be taken into consideration.
He was given a six months sentence, suspended for three years.
The court was told that Gordon Beveridge, of Glendale Close, came to Northern Ireland to sell space to firms wishing to advertise in motor trade brochures.
It was alleged that he received payment for two years advertising, but only one year's space was booked.
Resident Magistrate Mr Harry Hall imposed a concurrent sentence of six months imprisonment on each charge.
He suspended the sentences for three years, ordering that the suspension will not operate until repayment of £1,080 is made to the firms which had suffered loss.
WASHINGTON
Arafat may attend White House signing
YASSER Arafat, the chairman of the PLO, long scorned as a proponent of terrorist tactics, may attend the White House signing of the PLO's agreement with Israel establishing Palestinian self-rule in Gaza and Jericho.
‘It is more than just a possibility,’ a senior US official said last night.
He said that the PLO was pushing hard for a role for Arafat in Monday's ceremony and that President Clinton believed that it was up to the PLO to choose its delegation.
AUSTRALIA
Keating defends views
AUSTRALIAN Prime Minister Paul Keating said today he expected to discuss his country's push to become a republic with the Queen during his stay at Balmoral next week.
Keating, speaking before leaving on a two-week trip to the United States and Europe, said he would certainly touch on the republic issue in his talks with the Queen, but his views would be no surprise to her.
He said the Queen, Australia's titular head of state, was always a convivial host whom he would treat with respect, regard and admiration.
SUNDERLAND
Break for theft suspect
MAGISTRATES have changed the bail conditions of a teenager facing robbery and aggravated vehicle taking charges so social workers can take him on a holiday to Spain.
The 16-year-old, who cannot be named for legal reasons, was granted bail at Sunderland, Tyne and Wear, on condition he stayed at a residential school run by the local authority until his next court appearance on October 7.
UNITED NATIONS
New curbs on Libya
TOUGH new sanctions are being planned by the UN to force Libya to surrender the two men wanted for trial over the Lockerbie bombing.
They include freezing Libya's overseas funds and stopping supplies of oil equipment to Tripoli, a draft circulating among UN Security Council members revealed yesterday.
HONG KONG
Patten warns on talks
AFTER 11 rounds of apparently fruitless talks Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten warned that time was running out for Britain and China to agree on Hong Kong's political future.
The Sino-British talks on Patten's plan to broaden democracy in Hong Kong before it reverts to Chinese rule in 1997 have dragged on since April with little hint of progress.
Two get jail for attack on RUC officers
TWO Cookstown men who attacked a pair of undercover police have been jailed by Belfast Crown Court.
Judge Anthony Hart described 28-year-old George Scott, who denied punching and kicking the male and female officers, as an ‘arrogant thug’ as he sentenced him to two years in prison.
Scott was cleared of robbing the Railway Bar and assaulting its owner an hour before attacking the police near his Milburn Close home on May 6, last year.
Raid
Trevor Anderson (23), who admitted involvement in the bar raid and assaulting police, was jailed for a total of eight years.
Another defendant, 25-year-old Noel McKinney, who pleaded guilty to taking part in the robbery, was jailed for five years.
Scott's estranged wife, Yvonne (25), who admitted attacking the RUC constables, avoided prison because she is five months pregnant with McKinney's child.
All the defendants live in Milburn Close, Cookstown.
Judge Hart gave Yvonne Scott an 18-month sentence, suspended for three years, but he said he had no doubt she too was part of the ‘den of thieves’.
Approached
The court heard that the Scotts and Anderson approached the two plain clothes constables and asked them if they were RUC officers.
The officers, who had been observing Scott's house after the robbery, denied this but Scott insisted they were police as he attacked them.
Another man, Leonard Warwick (25), also from Milburn Close, was cleared of involvement in the bar robbery.
Manchester gets Ulster backing…
DICK Palmer (left), chairman of the British Olympic Federation and Peter Knowles of Manchester 2000 are welcomed by North Ireland Sports Council chairman Don Allen and Joan McCloy when they arrived at the House of Sport for their presentation of the Manchester bid for the Olympic Games in 2000.
Sydney remains favourite to stage the Games, but Northern Ireland sport is throwing it's weight behind the Manchester bid.
If the Games come to Manchester Northern Ireland will be able to offer useful training facilities at the Antrim Forum and Mary Peters tracks.
Picture by Mevryn Dowling.
Police name four crash victims
POLICE today named four people who died when a BMW car left the road and smashed into a tree.
The vehicle was being driven on the A273, near Hassocks in West Sussex when the accident happened shortly before 4.30pm yesterday.
Police and firefighters took more than an hour to free the bodies from the wreckage.
The driver of the car was today named as Jason Penter,(24) of Keymer Court, Burgess Hill, West Sussex, who had only recently bought the BMW.
The other victims were Robert Durbin (22) of The Twittens, Burgess Hill, Stephen Barnard (21) of Semley Road, Hassocks, and Jeffrey Gadsten (18) of Downsview Road, Hassocks.
Inspector Graham Cox, of Sussex police, said the cause of the accident was still being investigated and he appealed for any witnesses to come forward.
Adams slams talks
SINN Fein president Gerry Adams has criticised the Dublin Government for supporting a new round of ‘talks about talks’ among the constitutional parties here.
Commenting on the outcome of yesterday's Anglo-Irish Conference meeting in London, Mr Adams said it was obvious that British policy was ‘in tatters’.
He added: ‘The situation is too serious for the Dublin Government to echo the British line.
Everyone knows there can be no progress through the Brooke/ Mayhew process’.
Doubts hang over push to restart talks
BRITISH and Irish efforts to signal a joint commitment to tackling the current political stalemate have masked top-level doubts after the latest talks in London.
Sir Patrick Mayhew and Irish Foreign Minister Dick Spring stressed that they would continue trying to woo the parties back to the table — but neither gave any specific basis for optimism.
Sir Patrick again insisted that there had been no Government deal with the unionists.
Interested
Both governments were fully determined ‘to persevere’ with the three-strand formula set out by his predecessor Peter Brooke, he said.
He had never believed reports that the Irish government was not interested in reviving the talks.
‘It was very important that they (the reports) should be corrected.
Today, they have been corrected in unequivocal terms.’
It was a view based on ‘rational grounds’ and not ‘whistling in the wind’, he said.
Stormont Minister Michael Ancram was making contacts ‘to identify the extent and degree of flexibility’ necessary to overcome present hurdles.
Practical
But Mr Ancram declined to give more specific grounds for optimism.
Sir Patrick said: ‘There is in my belief, and in my experience, a profound desire amongst everyday people in Northern Ireland, right across the community, that the politicians should resume talks, because there is a recognition that there has to be a way of securing a less antagonist way of living in a divided society than we have at the moment.’
But it would be ‘deeply dangerous’ to drag out the goal of political talks without any practical prospect of success, he said.
Mr Spring said people would support the ‘strong reaffirmation’ of their aim of resuming the political dialogue.
‘Contacts will continue in every way possible in relation to getting people back to the table.’
Irish Justice Minister Maire Geoghegan-Quinn and Stormont's Security Minister Sir John Wheeler both maintained that RUC-Garda co-operation had never been higher.
Discussion
The meeting was briefed by the RUC Chief Constable about loyalist violence, but Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn said: ‘There is no new evidence that the threat to the Republic from loyalists has increased.’
But she said there had been no discussion about internment.
Pressed to say if the arrival of a US envoy was now closer, Mr Spring said the issue had been discussed between John Major and President Clinton.
And, referring to assurances that no deal was struck with Unionist MPs, he said: ‘We accept their words on that.’
Mr Spring stressed his belief that the Anglo-Irish Agreement was ‘very important’ and insisted that it had a future.
Top EC job for Dublin Euro-MP
IRISH Labour Party Euro-MP Barry Desmond is to be Ireland's new representative in the EC's Court of Auditors.
Mr Desmond (58) has been nominated for the £120,000-a-year post by Taoiseach Albert Reynolds.
He will succeed former Finance Minister Richie Ryan, who is retiring after seven years as a Euro auditor.
Mr Desmond, a ex-member of the Dail and a one-time cabinet minister, will take up his new appointment next month.
The Labour Party will later name his replacement in the European Parliament.
Billy miffed as hissing pet goes missing
SLIPPERY customers have sloped off with an east Belfastman's six and a half foot corn snake.
Billy Andrews, who lives in the Cregagh area, discovered the three-month-old pet was missing from his garage yesterday afternoon.
The non-poisonous snake, which is worth about £100, is orange and tan with dark triangular markings and lives on dead mice.
‘The thieves knew what they were doing,’ said Billy, who has two other snakes, three Australian tree frogs and a tarantula spider.
‘They turned out the lights, which would slow the snake down, so they could pick it up without it biting, and they shut the sliding doors behind them.’
Billy says his 12-year-old son, Mark, is very upset and he is appealing for anyone who is offered a snake for sale in suspicious circumstances to contact the police.
‘We'd only had it a short time but it was very tame and friendly.
It would sit on your knee and look round at whoever was holding it.
‘Snakes are very intelligent and can tell the difference between people immediately.
We also have a Royal python and a King snake.
‘None of the animals we keep are dangerous and they're no problem if they're well looked after.’
Billy thinks the snake was stolen some time between 11.30am and 3pm yesterday and anyone with any information should contact their nearest RUC station.
Bishop Daly's recovery
BISHOP Edward Daly is back to work seven months after suffering a stroke.
The Bishop of Derry talks exclusively to the Belfast Telegraph about his illness and the road to recovery.
Girl claims £30,000 in bullying case
A FORMER pupil of an Edinburgh school has started a £30,000 damages action after claiming staff failed to protect her from bullies.
In what is believed to be the first case of its kind in Scotland, the teenager alleges that after more than a year of taunting and physical attack she could not continue and left the Royal High School.
Debbie Scott (19), who is now training to be a hairdresser, says her education suffered because of the emotional upset caused by the bullies.
She has been granted legal aid to pursue an action in the Court of Session against Lothian Regional Council.
The girl started at the Royal High as an 11-year-old in 1986.
She claims that two years later pupils began taunting her about her weight both in the playground and the classroom which reduced her to tears.
There were name calling incidents as well as assaults.
During one attack, it is said, she was stripped to the waist and seen by a number of boys and offensive graffiti depicting her appeared on a wall.
After an alleged assault on her birthday in September 1989 she could not face returning to the Royal High and missed eight months of education before starting at a private school.
BELFAST
Inter-party talks to start again: Ancram
THE Government is determined to resume inter-party talks on Northern Ireland's future as soon as possible, political affairs Minister Michael Ancram has declared.
Speaking at a 40th anniversary dinner for Lurgan Rotarians in Belfast last night, the Minister said contacts with the parties were continuing ‘at various levels.’
LISBURN
Urgency on civic centre
A 15-YEAR campaign to have a new civic centre built in Lisburn is taking on a new urgency.
Three possible sites have been identified and the Mayor, Councillor Seamus Close, expects a decision on the location of the building within six months.
HONG KONG
No bridge too far
VOLUNTEER Gurkhas proved there is no such thing as a bridge too far by successfully completing one of the most gruelling tasks undertaken by military engineers in peacetime.
The 89 soldiers from the Queen's Gurkha Engineer Regiment return to their base in Hong Kong today after restoring Nepal's main road link as part of Britain's disaster relief aid to the flood-hit Himalayan country.
Police hurt Several police officers were hurt after demonstrators protesting against
US actions in Somalia tried to storm the American embassy in London last night.
Powering up The Needles lighthouse is being connected with mains electricity for the first time in its 134-year history.
Engineers are running a cable under the sea and through the chalk promontory off the Isle of Wight to replace the existing generator supply to the 33 metre tower.
Soccer fans in Ferry ban
A ban on soccer fans travelling to matches in Europe will not be relaxed for England's World Cup game against Holland on October 13.
North Sea Ferries at Hull said several coach parties and small groups hoping to travel to Rotterdam for the match have been turned down.
The ban was imposed after Dutch fans created a disturbance on a ferry six years ago.
Black day
A funeral home was throwing open its doors today with guided tours around the coffins, memorial stones and hearses.
Young people hoping to work in the bereavement business were being invited to talk to staff at the North Eastern Co-op, in Benwell, Newcastle upon Tyne.
The mortuary is off limits.
Law centres plea
The Law Centres Federation today called for proper funding to ensure everyone had access to high-quality free legal advice through its centres.
Outgoing chairwoman Malika Bediako, publishing the annual report, said: ‘One of the pillars of a civilised society must be that everyone should be able to have equal access to its legal system.’
Homeless drive
SHELTER had launched a campaign to end the use of bed and breakfast hotels for temporary housing after official figures for England showed a 41pc drop from 11,280 to 6,650 in the number of households in B&B accommodation for the year ending June.
Shelter director Sheila McKechnie, welcoming the drop, said: ‘With one last push, we can end the use of B&B once and for all.’
Lawyers ‘in Libya’
EDINBURGH solicitor Alistair Duff and leading Scottish defence QC Lord Macauley have flown to Tripoli to meet the alleged Lockerbie bombers, BBC Reporting Scotland said last night.
The Libyans are accused of bombing Pan AM Flight 103 in December 1988 with the loss of 270 lives.
Cult move FOUR children rescued in raids on the Family of Love cult in Argentina are expected to go to the United States with their American mother, who was freed without charge, the Foreign Office said.
The three girls and a boy have dual British and American nationality.
New officer for Labour
LABOUR has named David Gardner, 33, as its new local officer to head the party's drive to keep its leading role in the control of town and county halls.
He takes over next month.
Hobby scales new heights
I HAVE been hearing about the latest ‘in’ birthday present for dad, and it doesn't matter how old the old boy is.
Not only that, but it is something he will have handled when he was a kid.
Kites are back in again, but they are a far cry from the diamond-shape oldies made from brown paper and with a long tail of twisted pieces of newspaper.
For today's kites have one unique quality which made the old ones so tiresome to fly.
Now you can land your kite and take it off again without having to run with it.
‘The new generation of kites are designed so that there is no need for a huge area to fly them from,’ according to Andrew Spiller, who has opened The Kite Loft at Ballyhackamore in Belfast.
‘They have, you might say, short take off and landing, and once it is landed it can be made airborne again by simply taking one step back and tugging.
Some of them too have fantastic pulling and lifting power,’ says Andrew.
Most kites of the new breed are now flown by adults, though kiddies are still available, and the prices range from about £4 for the basic to £300 for the super models.
They have exotic names too, Delta, Parafoil, Quadrifoil, the biggest being 20 feet by 10 feet by 8 feet tall.
Now a major sport in Europe and America, kite-flying has arrived here now and it is hoped to hold a major rally early next year.
Concern over school leaving age
MAY I draw attention to two areas of concern — the silent, unobtrusive increasing of the school leaving age for some young people and the penny pinching savings through the same process with the changing of the school leaving date.
The young person who, unfortunately, reaches the age of 16 after July 2 has now to return to school for another year and will be almost 17 years of age whenever they leave.
Young people who have been caught in this trap have had no information given to them about this change and cannot avail themselves of the choice of training like colleagues born on or before July 1.
If a young person who reached the age of 16 on July 2 was lucky enough to obtain employment would they be unable to avail themselves of this opportunity and be forced back to school?
The penny pinching arises from the fact that with the change in the school leaving date there is now no Easter leavers.
The Government does not have to pay young people the paltry allowance of £29.50 per week for the normal three months between Easter and the summer leaving date.
A training organisation which normally recruited 20 young people at Easter and cannot now do so saves the Government £7,000.
The question should then be asked: How much did it cost to have them on the streets because they surely were not at school?
There is a train of thought that school or college is the place where young people benefit most from education and training.
Is education for education's sake the best approach?
Experience has shown that employment potential and the needs of the employer require more than just school or college education.
When is the farce of the introduced terms of school leaving to be reviewed so that those young people on the borderline of the system can benefit from their right to leave school at 16 years of age?
Praise for City Hall work
CONGRATULATIONS to the City Hall authorities for repairing the Queen Victoria and Titanic Memorials (damaged by clambering louts).
The temporary displacement of the Union Flag from its normal position is a bonus.
Freed from its hampering proximity to the dome, which caused it to hang limply (and virtually unseen) the flag is now caught by the breeze.
Why not display it in its new position permanently, balancing it with the Northern Ireland banner on the other side of the dome?
JOHN MORRISON Belfast.
‘Place ban on fertilisers’
THERE are two questions upon which I ponder every day and to which I have so far found no reasonable answer.
1.
Why, oh why, does our ‘Government’ not ban the manufacture or the import of fertilisers?
The farmers might suffer some loss of income but no one would starve.
They could be subsidised if necessary and the expenditure would scarcely equal the compensation paid for our wrecked towns and cities.
2.
Why, oh why, is not internment introduced for all known paramilitaries of all kinds.
Would possible street rioting not be a small price to pay to get these sub-normal beings removed from our midst?
BEWILDERED Dungannon.
DoE hires firm in security row
THE Department of the Environment has hired the security firm dropped by Belfast City Council to guard an important depot near Enniskillen.
Safeall Security started work at the Silverhill plant on September 6 — just four days after their contract with the City Council was terminated.
A spokeswoman for the council said: ‘The position is that Safeall no longer provides security for the council as and from September 2.’
Tender
The Silverhill depot is shared by the department's Water and Roads Services and sources said it would house millions of pounds worth of plant and equipment.
A spokesman for the Department of the Environment said: ‘The contract was put out for tender locally by the Roads Service and was awarded to Safeall for three years.’
Belfast City Council cut short Safeall's contract with them after its staff allegedly caught guards in a number compromising situations.
Drink
They included an incident when a guard was said to have been discovered ‘antagonising a gorilla’ at Belfast Zoo.
There were other alleged cases when guards were playing scrabble instead of going on patrol and one was said to be unfit for work through drink.
On the basis of the report, the council's director of client services, Mervyn Elder, recommended that Safeall's contract be terminated.
An earlier document, leaked to the Belfast Telegraph, listed ‘a succession of serious breaches of security’ on council sites guarded by Safeall.
Road death: driver charged
A 25-year-old unemployed Londonderry man was today charged with the manslaughter of a man who died in a car accident near Limavady on Tuesday night.
Kenneth Hazlett, Stevenson Park, Tullyally, Waterside, was remanded in custody until October 5.
The charges arose from an accident Road at Drumrane Road in which Martin Donnelly died.
Hazlett was also charged with reckless driving causing grievous bodily harm to two people.
Other charges include driving while disqualified, driving while unfit due to drink, without insurance and without a licence.
A police sergeant told the court that when charged, the accused said that he was ‘sorry.’
Accused is remanded
Carrick killings —man in court
A 49-year-old Carrickfergus man appeared at Belfast Magistrates' Court today charged with the murder of his mother-in-law and sister-in-law.
William Caldwell, unemployed, of Edenvale Avenue, is also accused of an attempted murder.
The murder charges relate to the deaths of Kate Curran, who was in her 50s, and her daughter, Angela (32), at their home in Edenvale Avenue on Thursday.
Silent
The defendant, who appeared in the dock wearing an open-necked striped shirt, remained silent during the brief hearing.
A detective sergeant told the court that when arrested, charged and cautioned, Caldwell replied ‘No’ to the charges.
The RUC officer said he believed he could connect the accused with the charges.
Agreed
Witness agreed with Caldwell's defence lawyer that police regarded the case as ‘purely a domestic matter’.
Resident Magistrate Harry Hall remanded Caldwell in custody to appear again at Crumlin Road courthouse on October 1.
By Oliver McGuckin
Weak Caolan to wait back home for donor
SICK Belfast baby Caolan McDonald is to return home from hospital in England because he is too weak to undergo a transplant operation, his family said today.
One-year-old Caolan, who desperately needs a liver and bowel transplant, will be flown home from the Birmingham Children's Hospital by air ambulance on Monday.
The little battler, whom doctors feared might never see his first birthday, has been beset by almost continuous infections and his condition has worsened.
Experts
After discussions with medical experts, Caolan's parents, Brendan and Catriona, decided it would be best for the child and family for him to return to the Royal Hospital for Sick Children.
But brave dad Brendan has vowed not to give up hope and a Europe-wide search is still on to find a suitable donor for Caolan.
‘Brendan and Catriona are completely physically and mentally exhausted by what they have been through,’ said Brendan's brother, Patrick.
‘They agree with doctors it would be best if Caolan came home.
‘But he will be given maximum medical support treatment and if his condition improves, the transplant operation will be considered again.’
By Rosie Cowan
LSD prank on teacher ‘stupid’ says schoolgirl
THE girl found guilty of giving a religious education teacher a sweet spiked with the hallucinogenic drug LSD has branded the schoolpals she says tricked her into handing it over as ‘stupid’.
Teacher Martin Lock went on a ‘trip’ at school after accepting the sweet from the girl, had to be taken to hospital and treated with charcoal then spent the rest of the day in a darkened room recovering from the drug.
The girl, who has now left school, said: ‘I think it was very stupid thing to do.
I would never have given him the sweet if I knew there was acid in it.
Dangerous
‘I felt terrible when I realised what had happened.
‘I'm just glad the teacher is OK and I want to put all this behind me.’
The story of Mr Lock's mind-bending trip was told at Bristol Family and Youth Court yesterday, when the 16-year-old girl, who cannot be named, denied unlawfully administering a poison alleged to be LSD with intent to injure, aggrieve or annoy on May 13.
She was found guilty, and sentence was adjourned for reports.
The court heard that the girl and three pals decided to spike a fruit pastille with LSD as an end-of-year prank on Mr Lock, who has a reputation for scrounging sweets from pupils.
Within an hour Mr Lock (46) began hallucinating, throwing books around the classroom and clinging to walls, said Miss Sue Longstaff, prosecuting.
He was taken to hospital where doctors gave him charcoal to absorb the drug and sent him home to rest in a darkened room.
The girl's mother said after the case: ‘She's innocent.
She didn't have a clue the sweet had acid in it.
‘She was duped into giving the teacher the sweet by the three boys.’
Emma puts P&O pal to verse
AS the battle of the sea ferries goes on, P&O European Ferries have gained a new friend, a 15-year-old with a strong poetic streak.
Emma Morwood, from Carrickfergus, was travelling on the ferry with her family and filled in the questionnaire given to passengers.
Here is what she wrote: Beware the feline of the sea; lest might happen to you what happened to me; When once I booked for a short break stay, I found it impossible to get away — Seacat did not turn up to-day.
But to the rescue came P&O, on their fine ship we had to go; This was a blessing in disguise, much better than the old cat's eyes; P&O you are the best — 100pc in the test.
To the question, would she travel on the route again, Emma answered, ‘If I could afford it.’
So the company rewarded her poetic effort with a free travel voucher, accompanied by a verse: Said fairy godmother at P&O; On the Cairnryan ferry you can go; So next time you want to board it, this travel voucher will help you afford it.
‘Jealous farmer’ theory in cow killing
POLICE hunting the killer of a champion Ayrshire cow believe it may have been slashed to death by a jealous farmer.
The 11-year-old cow was found dead in its paddock at a remote farm near Gargrave, North Yorkshire, yesterday.
A post-mortem revealed it had bled to death after being slashed on the udder with a sharp instrument, severing a main artery.
The cow, worth thousands of pounds, had been champion of several shows and was due to appear at the National Dairy Event in Warwickshire next weekend.
Inspector Derek Calvert, of Skipton police, said: ‘There is a possibility it is a rival farmer or owner of stock who is also showing next week.
‘It is the first attack of its kind in this area.
We are keeping an open mind about the motive.’
IRA BREACH SECURITY AT PARADE
By JOHN CASSIDY
A MAJOR breach in security has thrown an RAF parade and church service in Belfast today into chaos.
For details of the secret itinerary for the 75th anniversary of the Battle of Britain are understood to be in the hands of the IRA.
Last night hundreds of extra police and soldiers were drafted into Belfast to mount checkpoints and search buildings and streets along today's parade route for bombs.
Sources have described the incident as a ‘a major breach of security.’
Yesterday Sunday Life learned of the intended parade and church service.
We have been given full details of who is attending, where the various ceremonies are being staged and at what time.
But in the interests of security we are keeping the information under wraps.
Security chiefs are understood to be deeply annoyed that information about today's celebrations has fallen into the hands of the IRA.
‘It has been described as a headache from start to finish,’ a source told Sunday Life.
It is understood the security forces will keep a high profile along the parade route.
A Northern Ireland Office spokesman said last night: ‘We don't discuss the movement of ministers in advance.’
Under attack — actress Liz Kennedy at the moment the device exploded in her face.
On the move: Paul and Jeanne Rankin in search of Gourmet Ireland.
I'd kill to defend Ulster — Wilson
Sammy Wilson: defending liberty.
A FORMER Belfast Lord Mayor has publicly stated that he would be prepared to kill to prevent a United Ireland being forced upon Ulster.
DUP Councillor Sammy Wilson has admitted he would take up arms to resist a union between Ulster and the Republic.
Mr Wilson's outspoken views were made in an in-depth interview in Hot Press — Ireland's top music magazine.
And last night he made no apologies for the controversial remarks in this week's edition of the magazine.
However Mr Wilson did point out to Sunday Life: ‘I would be prepared to defend my country if it was forced into a United Ireland.
‘But if it was the wish of the majority I would have to accept that as a democratic decision.’
Asked by Hot Press magazine if he would be prepared to kill or die for Ulster, Mr Wilson said: ‘I certainly would not allow terrorists to dictate the future that would be for me, my family and my community.
‘So, yes, I would be prepared to resist any kind of armed attempt to take away the liberty which I have to determine my own way in the future.’
Pressed by the reporter if he would kill to protect that liberty, Mr Wilson replied: ‘I would certainly fight and, I suppose, at the end of the day, that would involve the possibility of people being killed.’
Mr Wilson talked frankly to the magazine on a whole range of political issues.
But questioned at length about loyalist paramilitaries, he insisted he had no links with the terrorists.
He condemned their killing of ‘innocent people’ but refused to condemn attacks on Sinn Fein members and their families.
Commenting last night on his willingness to fight for Ulster, he said: ‘I merely pointed out that if that situation was forced upon us I would defend my country.
‘That is why it is important that the democratic process works.’
Man questioned after PC killing
DETECTIVES hunting the killer of a policeman were last night questioning a neighbour.
Pc James Bourke, 50, was found lying in a pool of blood in the hall of his ground floor flat in Tennal Road, Quinton, Birmingham, on Friday morning.
Emperor calls for closer ties
JAPANESE Emperor Akihito has called for closer cultural ties between Japan and the European Community.
At a lunch given by in Brussels Commission President Jacques Delors the emperor, attending his last official function during a visit to Belgium, joined Delors in stressing the importance of greater contacts between young people.
GOVERNMENT CASH TO PROTECT SINN FEIN EXCLUSIVE
THE GOVERNMENT is expected to provide financial assistance to help protect Sinn Fein advice centres from loyalist attacks.
Sunday Life has learned that the Northern Ireland Office will stump up taxpayers' money to the IRA's political wing for the protection of its premises.
Attacks
It is understood the NIO will provide a percentage of the total cost of installing extra security measures at centres.
The change of policy follows recent attacks by loyalist paramilitaries on Sinn Fein advice centres.
Siege
In May loyalists opened fire on the Sinn Fein advice centre in Lepper Street, north Belfast.
Two men were later arrested — one was shot by an Army marksman and the other taken from a house following a siege.
Two months later, in a separate incident, the Lepper Street advice centre was attacked by the UFF.
A blast bomb was thrown but the device failed to explode.
A source told Sunday Life: ‘The NIO will provide financial assistance to Sinn Fein to provide security measures at its advice centres.
‘Even though most of its offices are protected with security grills and reinforced doors, the NIO will provide money for any more security measures that are needed.’
Sinn Fein councillors have also applied to the NIO for financial assistance for security measures at their homes, but this has been turned down.
A number of councillors are asking for a judicial review of an RUC decision not to give them the go-ahead to get personal protection weapons.
A decision on the review is expected in the High Court within the coming weeks.
An NIO spokesman told Sunday Life: ‘The matter of providing financial assistance for security at Sinn Fein advice centres is still under consideration.’
Killer is extradited to Britain
HANDCUFFED wife killer James Rudman was extradited from Ireland early yesterday after giving up his bizarre battle to avoid British justice.
He was flown out from Dublin airport to Manchester after waiving the rights he possessed under Irish law which would have allowed him to stage a marathon legal battle to stay in the Republic.
The operation to ship Rudman back to Britain began after he waived his right to appeal to the Irish High Court, and then the Supreme Court, against extradition, a process which could have taken months.
On Friday, Rudman, 34, who fled a psychiatric institution in Britain on July 31, told a Co.
Kerry Court that he was now prepared to allow himself to be sent back.
He said he had been assured that a hospital place was waiting for him in Leicestershire.
And he revealed that he had been promised that he would be the subject of a Mental Health Review Tribunal to consider his permanent release within three weeks of returning to Britain.
Loyalist terror gang targets wrong man
By ALAN MURRAY
LOYALIST terrorists targeted the wrong man when they murdered Catholic hairdresser Sean Hughes at his salon last week.
Detectives say that had Mr Hughes been the intended target it would have been much easier for loyalists to attack him at his Carryduff home in south Belfast.
Instead they believe the 40 year-old father-of-three was mistaken for another man working in the area.
And a top detective at RUC headquarters has echoed Chief Constable Sir Hugh Annesley's claim that the law is helping the terrorists.
The detective said: ‘The terrorists, loyalist and republican, have more rights than Mr Hughes who was a totally innocent man with no political or paramilitary connections.
‘And unfortunately others like Mr Hughes will lose their lives because the legal system is beating us.
‘The Chief is right when he says it needs to be changed and politicians need to move quickly to seize the initiative from terrorists on both sides by changing the law.’
It is understood police arrested ten men in swoops in loyalist areas on Thursday morning in connection with investigations into the Hughes murder and other killings in North and West Belfast.
One detective who works in the area said: ‘We are working very long hours tracking these people but when we bring them in, legal impediment after legal impediment is thrown up in our faces.
‘We suspect another man who works in that area may have been the intended target but the UFF got the location wrong.
‘The Hughes family is innocent.
They are a lovely family devastated by terrorism and we, as detectives, feel that our efforts and our knowledge of who are involved in these despicable acts are not reflected in convictions.
‘The legal balance has gone in favour of the terrorist.
‘We won't take a step back from pursuing these scum on both sides but the public should know that the legal profession has significantly crippled our efforts against killers on both sides.
‘That the Chief Constable has to face the Press to explain things is a major pointer that the Government and the public should closely examine,’ the detective
MPs flee killer dust in Commons
KILLER dust could force MPs to flee the House of Commons.
Workmen laying new telephone and hi-tec cables in the Palace of Westminster have discovered large quantities of deadly asbestos in the ducts.
Commons authorities had thought they had rid the building of all asbestos — used extensively in the 1920s and 30s — during a big clean-up operation 10 years ago.
But contractors found the dust behind the Speaker's Chair in the ministerial corridor and above the parliamentary library.
A new probe has been ordered to ensure that the Commons debating chamber itself is free of the threat.
If not, there are contingency plans, originally drawn up in the event of flooding, to move MPs to the Connaught Rooms, a plush conference centre nearby.
The latest find is of white asbestos, less dangerous than the blue variety, provided it is not disturbed.
The roll call of terror
45 deaths this year, 16 fewer than last year.
26 carried out by loyalists and 19 by republicans.
172 bomb incidents this year — 54 fewer than for the same period last year.
Republicans responsible for 142 incidents (83 per cent) and loyalists for 30 incidents (17 per cent ).
259 people charged with terrorist-type offences — 166 are loyalists and 93 are republicans.
130 firearms, around 10,000 rounds of ammunition and approximately 32,500 lbs of explosives and bomb-making material seized already this year.
19 murders in Belfast this year — 15 carried out by loyalists and four attributed to republicans.
The figure is down seven on last year.
357 shootings last year compared to 348 for last year.
496 armed robberies totalling £1.3 million last year compared to 375 totalling £900,000 this year.
Ulster's rich run rule over mansion
MOST EXPENSIVE: The £695,000 mansion at Crawfordsburn
ULSTER'S richest residents have wasted no time perusing the most expensive house ever to go on the market here.
Just days after the Ardtullagh mansion was put up for sale, at least a dozen prospective buyers have given its 13 rooms the once-over.
Expensive
At a cool £695,000, the house is Crawfordsburn is thought to be the most expensive ever to go on the market in Northern Ireland.
And selling agents, Eric Cairns Partnership are hopeful that a deal will be clinched within a matter of days.
The Victorian/Tudor style mansion is set in eight acres of mixed agricultural land, woodland and gardens.
The house also comes with a host of outhouses, a gate lodge, cottage, menage and tennis courts.
Interior features include a sun room, strongroom, guest bedroom with its own bathroom and luggage room and the master suite comes complete with its own dressing room and en-suite bathroom.
Estate agent, Eric Cairns, whose company specialises in the more expensive end of the market, said: ‘At the level we are working at you don't get multitudes of inquiries.
Discreet
‘We have a discreet filter system so we know we are dealing with only those who are really interested.
‘We are very satisfied with the level of inquiry and the quality of those inquiries.
‘There appear to be two parties to date who are significantly interested in the property and we expect an offer very shortly.’
Two convicted on drugs charges
TWO ULSTER men were convicted last week for possession and trying to smuggle drugs into the Republic.
William McCutcheon and Edward McHugh appeared at Derry Magistrates Court last Monday to face 10 drug charges between them.
The pair, who gave addresses at Dorset Square, Rathenraw estate in Antrim, were arrested close to the border at the beginning of August by Customs officers.
As revealed in Sunday Life, McCutcheon and McHugh were stopped at Culmore outside Derry on their way to a rave in the Point Inn at Quigley's Point.
The car was searched and officers found drugs with a street value of almost £1,100 concealed in the battery compartment of the engine, the court heard.
Magistrate Paul Copeland was told the drugs were obtained from a man at Kelly's nightclub in Portrush.
But both men told police that the drugs were for their own personal use, said a DPP lawyer.
McCutcheon, 24, who is originally from Dromore, Co Down, faced two Customs charges of attempted exportation of one Ecstasy tab and four LSD ‘squares’ and two police charges of possessing the drugs worth £80.
He was jailed for three months suspended for two years on each of the Customs offences and fined £100 on each of the police charges.
IRA kneecap victim McHugh, 18, faced two Customs charges of attempted exportation of 41 Ecstasy tabs and 16 amphetamine tablets.
He also faced four police charges — two for possession of the drugs and two for possession with intent to supply.
A defence solicitor said McHugh bought the drugs with compensation he had received following an accident and intended to supply the drugs to friends at the Donegal rave.
McHugh, who is now also serving nine months in a young offenders centre for motoring offences, was sentenced to three months in jail on the Customs offences.
Mr Copeland also jailed him for three months for possessing Ecstasy, three months for possessing amphetamines, six months for having Ecstasy with intent to supply and three months for having amphetamines with intent to supply.
All the jail terms are to run concurrent.
Said a Drug Squad source: ‘We are extremely pleased with these stiff sentences and it should send out a warning to those involved in the drugs scene that the courts are coming down hard on them.’
Albert Reynolds: ‘vicious violence’
Reynolds calls for new peace talks
IRISH Prime Minister Albert Reynolds last night said the latest outbreak of murders in Northern Ireland underlined the urgent need to resume inter-party talks on the province's future.
He denounced what he called the appalling upsurge of ‘vicious loyalist violence’, in which four people were murdered in five days.
Vacuum
Mr Reynolds said his government was continuing to press for the negotiating between loyalist and nationalist politicians to be renewed as soon as possible.
‘Without the talks process, there is a vacuum in Northern Ireland politics that can only lead to more violence.’
The Premier also said there was still the option of an American peace envoy being appointed to oversee developments in Ulster — if the talks failed to get under way again.
The idea was suggested by Mr Clinton during his election campaign last year, but subsequently shelved when British opposition to the plan was relayed to Washington.
Parties
Yesterday, deputy Prime Minister Dick Spring said the envoy concept was not being pressed by Dublin at present.
But Mr Reynolds declared: ‘Our first priority is to get all parties around the table, and we would not want to do anything at this stage that might hinder the process.
‘But an envoy is an option that President Clinton has mentioned to me and it is probably one he would look at in the event of the talks not being resumed.
But let us hope they do resume.’
Moves to shatter peace in Palestine
THE nightmare of Israeli and Palestinian peace negotiators is that their history-making agreement on self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip may spark a Palestinian civil war.
Islamic fundamentalists who reject any peace with Israel and secular nationalists who believe this particular deal makes too many concessions are determined to destroy the agreement.
The first shots have already been fired.
Gunmen of the Fatah Hawks, loyal to Yasser Arafat's mainstream Fatah movement, opened fire in a Gaza refugee camp on Friday.
Violence
In another Gaza refugee camp, Israeli troops opened fire on more than 1,000 Islamic Jihad militants demonstrating against the self-rule agreement.
This is nothing compared to the violence that could erupt when Israeli troops withdraw from Gaza and the West Bank town of Jericho, leaving PLO fighters newly recruited as Palestinian police to face Islamic and nationalist guerrillas hardened by five years of the intifada uprising against Israel.
Once before, Israeli troops pulled out of Palestinian refugee camps — in Lebanon during the Israeli invasion of 1982.
The camps were Sabra and Chatila and the result was a massacre: Christian Lebanese militiamen let into the area by the Israelis slaughtered at least 400 men, women and children.
Terry Waite Terry Anderson
He drove us all crazy, says fellow ex-hostage
TERRY Waite, the special representative of the Archbishop of Canterbury and the would-be saviour of the Western hostages in Lebanon, became a burden to them once he became a hostage, Newsweek magazine reports in its latest issue.
Newsweek, available on news stands on Monday, excerpted parts of hostage Terry Anderson's book ‘Den of Lions: Memoirs of Seven Years’ in which he writes: Waite ‘cannot seem to understand that there are things he does that drive the rest of us crazy.’
Wheezing
At one point, with Anderson, Waite and two other hostages chained to the wall of a small cell, Anderson writes: ‘Our biggest problem is TW (Terry Waite).
‘Spends hours, usually late at night, gasping and wheezing until it seems he'll collapse…
TW wants to talk all the time, no matter what we want.’
Hostage Tom Sutherland's ‘dislike for Terry (Waite) deepened into outright antagonism’ and they stopped speaking, Anderson said.
‘That's silly — four men in a room 24 hours a day, and one won't speak to another.’
Early on, after Waite's capture, when he was still separated by a wall from the others, Anderson, who had at that point had spent 2,000 days in captivity, writes of Waite, ‘I knew he was brave, risking his life for us.
Bitterness
‘But he must also be an incredibly tough man.
When I apologised for dragging him into this, there was no bitterness in his gracious reply.’
Anderson was the chief Middle East correspondent for the Associated Press who spent 2,454 days as a captive of fundamentalist Shiite Muslims in Lebanon until his release on December 4, 1991.
Waite and Sutherland were both freed November 18, 1991.
Pope calls for peace on visit to Lithuania
Pope John Paul: historic trip.
POPE John Paul, on his first trip to the former Soviet Union, yesterday called for reconciliation in post-communist nations and said their people should not be divided into ‘winners and losers’.
‘This marks a historic occasion.
For the first time a Pope has set foot in Lithuania and the Baltic countries,’ the 73-year-old Pope said after kissing the ground at Vilnius airport.
Starting a trip that was once only the stuff of his dreams and prayers, the Pontiff said Lithuanians could now enjoy freedom ‘after a long period of sufferings, trials and martyrdom.’
Soviet authorities persecuted the Lithuanian Catholic Church more harshly than those in the other Baltic states of Latvia and Estonia — which the Pope is also visiting — because it had become a rallying point against the communist government.
The Polish-born Pope was driven past jubilant crowds to one of the most potent symbols of Lithuanian Catholicism, Vilnius cathedral.
He told priests the church had to play a role of reconciliation in newly democratic societies trying to leave communism behind them.
Large crowds of Catholics from Poland, Ukraine and Belarus are expected to flock to hear the Pope, although officials in Vilnius said thousands of beds prepared for pilgrims were still unclaimed.
Prisoner faces surgery after violence at Maze
A LOYALIST prisoner may have to undergo neuro-surgery after sustaining a fractured skull during trouble at the Maze prison last weekend.
And loyalists claim a second inmate was blinded for 48 hours after riot squad prison officers turned high-powered hose on his face.
The Northern Ireland Office said ten prison officers and three inmates were injured in the all night clashes.
But the Loyalist Prisoners' Welfare Association chairman, Jim McDonald, accused the prison authorities of turning a peaceful protest into ‘bloody carnage.’
The protest was over the ‘inhumane’ treatment of prisoner Gary Fulton from Portadown.
He had been granted leave to visit his sick mother but when he was ready to leave the jail he was told his mother had died and was ordered back to his cell.
‘When his fellow inmates in H4 and H7 heard of the this callous and deplorable decision they decided to have a peaceful protest.
‘They informed the prison officers that they would not be locking up and that there would be no attacks on staff.
‘The prison staff said that was OK but said they would have to tie back the cell doors.
‘Then the riot squad came in the middle of the night while the men were sleeping in their beds.
‘The whole thing was unprovoked.
There was no security risk as the men could not have escaped from their wings,’ said Mr McDonald.
He claimed one prisoner who suffered a fractured skull may have to undergo neuro-surgery if his condition did not improve.
‘It is touch and go for him.
Another prisoner was blinded for 48 hours by power hoses,’ he claimed.
Safety warning as toddler is crushed by oven in freak accident
TINY tot Stuart McKane is lucky to be alive today after a kitchen oven fell and pinned him to the floor.
The three-year-old bears the scars and bruises from the freak accident that put him in hospital and left his parents in deep shock.
And last night dad Paul McKane warned other parents: ‘Don't let this happen to your child.’
The tragic accident happened ten days ago at the family's Regent Crescent home in Carrickfergus after returning from a seven-day holiday in Jersey.
Said Paul McKane: ‘My wife was cooking a burger for Stuart on the grill.
Handle
‘She was standing about six feet away when Stuart grabbed the handle of the grill door which is about two feet above his head.
‘I heard the bang and the scream of my wife.
When I ran into the kitchen the oven was lying on the ground and thought she had done it.
‘Then I saw a leg and arm sticking out of the side and realised Stuart was underneath it.
‘The oven was so heavy I had to roll it off him,’ said Paul.
‘At first I thought there was blood coming out of Stuart's ears.
I took a closer look and discovered it was blood running from his head.
He had such a huge lump on his head I thought he had fractured his skull.’
Glass
Stuart was rushed to Whiteabbey hospital and later transferred to the Royal Victoria Hospital in Belfast and was kept in overnight.
X-rays were carried out on his neck and spine but nothing was damaged.
A nurse removed small slithers of glass from his head.
‘It appears that when Stuart grabbed the grill door handle the whole unit tilted up.
We have been told there should have been clips at the back to keep it in place.
‘We hope that by highlighting what happened to Stuart, other parents will check the stability and safety of their ovens,’ said Paul.
Susan Ingram of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents said Stuart's accident should be a lesson to all parents.
‘We would warn all parents to check the stability of equipment that has been installed.
The kitchen is a dangerous place for children,’ she said.
By JOHN CASSIDY
LUCKY TO BE ALIVE Paul and toddler Stuart with the oven unit that tipped over.
FIGHT FOR SECT GIRL
By JOHN MOORE
A STUNNED Irish father flew out to Argentina yesterday on a dramatic mission to rescue his six-year-old daughter from the clutches of a bizarre sect.
The desperate dad is to launch a major legal battle to get custody of the little girl from his wife, a member of the weird cult, The Family.
The girl was one of 160 children taken into care after a series of police raids on luxury ranches owned by the sect north of Buenos Aires.
They took place following claims that some members of the cult practice sexual abuse on children as a way to salvation and heaven.
The Irish girl's mother is not among those charged following the Argentinian raids, in which pornographic videos showing young children were said to have been discovered.
But her daughter has been placed into foster care and now the father is making an all-out bid to get legal custody.
The plight of the girl was discovered after her dad, who had been living in Spain, contacted the Department of Foreign Affairs in Dublin.
He told them that he had separated from his Argentinian-born wife four years ago and that she had returned to Buenos Aires.
He said he was worried that his daughter was involved with the sect.
Irish diplomats mounted a full-scale search in Argentina, and eventually found that the girl was among those rescued from The Family during the police raids.
Yesterday Department sources said that the father is launching a legal battle in Buenos Aires to get control of the girl.
Meanwhile fears were growing that the sect has been attempting to recruit followers in Ireland.
Anti-cult leaders warned young people in particular not to be lured into the organisation.
Arson attack on garage
A BELFAST court was told yesterday that there was no terrorist involvement in an arson attack when a garage and a car in north Belfast were set on fire on Thursday night.
A police officer also discounted speculation that the attack was linked to threats against prison staff.
Andrew Thompson, 21, from Manor Street, who denies setting fire to the car and garage in Alexandra Park Avenue, was remanded in custody to September 17.
Schoolboy on robbery charge
A 15-year-old Belfast schoolboy accused of using a carving knife to rob a shopkeeper and a baseball bat to rob an electricity showroom was remanded in custody yesterday when he appeared in court.
The boy, from a children's home in east Belfast, was said to have taken over £1,200 in the two robberies at Ballyhackamore in the past week.
He is to appear in court again in Belfast on September 15.
‘WE WON'T REST UNTIL WE FIND OUT THE TRUTH’
THE barbaric murder of Brian McDermott ensured that his family would never know normality or peace of mind again.
The suffering of both Edward and Joan McDermott still shows in their eyes today.
Their joint wish is that before they both die they will find out who killed their son, when it happened and how it was done.
The many loose ends and unanswered questions continue to prolong their suffering.
It is a tribute to their strength that after all they have been through they are both still together today.
At one time the pressure on the family brought on by Brian's death led to the couple splitting up.
In her despair and grief Mrs McDermott also turned to alcohol for relief.
But the couple, now both retired, have learned to lean on each other for support as they continue to grieve for their youngest child.
Ted who is from Northern Ireland and Joan from Aberdeen were both in the RAF where they met and finally married in 1952.
Brian, their youngest child, was born in Rugby in England and was four years old when the couple decided to move to Northern Ireland.
Turmoil
Looking back 20 years ago, Joan and Ted, who have two other sons and two daughters, recall the turmoil they faced as a family.
‘For weeks I was looking into the face of every stranger thinking ‘you could be the one that killed my Brian’,’ said Joan.
Her husband said: ‘We couldn't accept that there were no clues.
‘For two years me and my sons walked along the towpath and park searching for a zip or the buckle of Brian's belt, anything that would help.’
The family brought every scrap of evidence or information they could find to the RUC, but that much prayed for breakthrough in the case never came.
In her desperate search for clues, Joan visited clairvoyants across the country.
Familiar
After Brian's murder, the couple could not bear to stay in their home in Well Street and within two months had moved to Tullycarnett.
‘We had to move home because I couldn't bear to pass his school which was beside our house in Well Street,’ said Joan.
‘I couldn't bear all the familiar landscapes and even the sight of the park.’
But moving house did little to alleviate Joan's pain.
‘The family wanted to move across the water and try to start again,’ said Joan.
‘I wouldn't go without Brian so I asked if I could have him buried beside my parents in Scotland.
‘The police refused because the case was not closed and I wouldn't go without him.
‘I visited his grave every day and sat and cried.’
Joan's family moved to England and she remained behind.
Alcohol
During that period she turned to alcohol for comfort.
‘I realised the drink was not helping and that I would have to stop it.’
Two years after they separated, Ted travelled to Northern Ireland without telling Joan and persuaded her to leave.
She agreed and the couple have now settled in Dundee.
Said Joan: ‘I kept all Brian's toys and his Boys' Brigade uniform.
‘I give his little cars to my grandsons to play with and when I watch them playing I can see Brian as he was playing with them.
‘I have a Matchbox racing set I had bought and put away for him for that coming Christmas, but he never got to see it.
Live
‘It's still in the box and I wouldn't part with it.
There's not a day goes by that I don't think of my Brian.’
Said Ted: ‘I just want to live as long as possible so that the murderer can be found.’
Joan said: ‘I want people to know that Brian has never been forgotten and that we will never give up hope that his murderer will be found.’
Joan and Ted McDermott — suffering still shows in their eyes.
Picture by FRED HOARE
Police put out an urgent call to public for more four-legged volunteers…
IT'S a dog's life in the RUC — and the 100 Alsatians, Labradors and Spaniels in the
Force are loving every minute of it!
But the boys in bottle green are urgently looking for more four legged recruits to swell their depleted ranks, and have appealed to the Ulster public for new volunteers.
Nearly all the canine members of the police dog section are former unwanted pets donated by families who for a variety of reasons found the could no longer offer a home to man's best friend.
And the skilled trainers at the RUC kennels behind Stormont Castle are again opening their doors.
‘We are always on the look-out for promising pups because every year up to a dozen of our most experienced dogs retire when they are eight years old,’ said a spokesman.
The ideal age for recruitment is nine months old and the upper age limit is two years.
‘Our favoured breeds for general purpose work such as tracking or crowd control are german shepherds, labradors and retrievers, while springer spaniels are excellent sniffer dogs.
Breed
‘But we will take a look at any breed at all,’ he added.
A good temperament is vital.
‘We are simply not interested in vicious brutes who have eaten the leg off the milkman.’
The first stage is a home assessment, when a member of the Dog Squad will visit the pet at the owner's house and make a preliminary study.
However only about one in ten offered is selected for the rigorous 12 week-long initial training course.
Once fully trained, a police dog is a very valuable commodity — worth at least £5,000.
Champion
Two publicly-donated dogs recently came out tops in the national police dog trials at Cleveland Show.
One won the overall champion of champions title and the other finished in third place.
It's a record the RUC Dog Squad is justly proud of.
The police are always careful to look after every dog they accept.
Even those they later reject are found a loving home with a member of the Force.
Because the Stormont trainers are always on the look-out for suitable dogs, they have in the past found that unscrupulous pet owners have taken advantage of their open-door policy to save on kennelling fees.
‘We lost some very promising dogs because owners asked for them back after a fortnight,’ explained the spokesman.
Missing
‘They say the kids are missing the dog, but it usually coincides with the July holidays and we've found the family were away in Spain.
Unfortunately there's nothing much we can do about it.’
Brothers drown on fishing trip
By BRENDA O'NEILL
TWO CO ARMAGH brothers drowned in a tragic boating accident while on a fishing trip in Co Mayo.
The bodies of anglers Winston McConville (53) of Ballmore Drive, Lurgan and his brother William (52) of Markethill Road, Tandragee were recovered from Lough Lannagh, near the holiday town of Castlebar yesterday afternoon.
Adrift
Gardai launched a full scale search for the men when their empty boat was spotted adrift in the water on Friday night.
It is believed the brothers, who were keen anglers, went for a swim but got into difficulties in the lake which is renowned as a dangerous swimming area by locals.
The dead men's bodies were recovered by police divers a short distance from the shoreline.
Clothing found on the strand along with a stray dog, helped to identify the men, said a Garda spokesman.
A Northern registered car, believed to belong to the men, was discovered at Annagh, a few miles from the town.
Shocked
Shocked friends and colleagues spoke last night of the two brothers who were keen sportsmen.
Stephen Richardson who worked alongside Winston McConville, a photographer at the Ulster Gazette newspaper in Armagh, said the brothers were keen and experienced anglers.
Loyalists urged to adopt MacBride Principles
LOYALISTS on Carrickfergus Borough Council have been urged to adopt the MacBride Principles — by the New York-based Irish National Caucus!
And dumbfounded unionist members in Carrick have been sent a book explaining the controversial employment and investment guidelines by the INC's president, Fr Sean McManus.
The Fermanagh-born priest dispatched a copy of his book last week in response to an angry letter from Carrick Council condemning the ‘unacceptable interference’ of the Caucus in the affairs of Northern Ireland.
The council claimed Fr McManus' activities promoting the MacBride Principles had seriously damaged the prospects of American investment in the province.
But the astonished town clerk Raymond Boyde last week received Fr McManus's reply — including his suggestion that they should adopt the Principles themselves.
Explain
He even offered to come over in person to explain them.
‘After all, your employment statistics would indicate that you urgently need the MacBride Principles,’ he wrote.
‘According to the FEC monitoring report of 1992, out of 161 employees less than 10 are Catholics.
‘Think of the magnificent example you would be setting if your council would endorse the MacBride Principles.
Maybe you would invite me over to testify for them.
I look forward to your invitation.’
‘MI5 approached me on Spanish holiday’
A YOUNG Tyrone man has claimed British intelligence officers tried to recruit him as an informer while he was on holiday in Spain.
Anthony Fox, whose elderly parents were shot dead in their Moy home by loyalist gunmen last year, says he was relaxing on a sun-kissed balcony in Mallorca when he was approached by a man who asked him to contact MI5 in London.
Several weeks later he was approached by the same man and a colleague in a Dungannon street, when he was ‘explicitly asked to work for and provide information for them.’
Sinn Fein councillor Vincent Kelly claimed there have been several attempts to pressurise Mr Fox into working for British Intelligence.
‘These attempts have often coincided with significant dates related to the loyalist murder last September of his parents,’ he said.
The Sinn Fein man claimed two plain-clothes men approached Mr Fox in Thomas Street, Dungannon on September 2 and promised him a new house if he agreed to work for them.
‘Anthony was detained at an RUC checkpoint.
RUC personnel, however, backed off, allowing these two individuals to come forward and oversee the search of his car.
‘For 10 minutes they attempted to engage Anthony in conversation before explicitly asking him to work for and provide information to them.
‘One of the men involved was the same man who asked Anthony to contact MI5 in London when he was on holiday in Mallorca earlier this summer.’
The case has been taken up by Sligo TD Declan Bree, who said serious questions may have to be asked about how British intelligence knew about Mr Fox's movements, since he travelled through Dublin on his way to Spain.
Councillor demands anti-joyrider barriers
UNIONIST politicians are demanding crash barriers be erected on pavements to save pedestrians from joyriders.
Deputy Lord Mayor of Belfast Alderman Hugh Smyth said the barriers would the public's only defence against the ‘kamikaze joyriders.’
The Shankill councillor said he wants the crash barriers erected on the Springfield Road close to the scene of an accident last week when a woman and her young child were struck by a stolen car.
Mary Tully and her daughter, from West Circular Road in West Belfast, were knocked down on Wednesday afternoon.
They were hit by joyriders almost opposite Springfield Primary school where Mrs Tully's four-year-old daughter was a new-start pupil.
The mother is seriously ill in hospital.
Said Alderman Hugh Smyth: ‘Joyriding affects the whole community in West Belfast.
‘If the joyriding can't be stopped then preventive measures on the streets are needed.
‘I believe crash barriers, similar to those in use on carriageways and motorways, should be erected on the edge of pavements.
‘It will save the lives of pedestrians.
If these joyriders crash into the barriers they will know what has hit them.
‘I am taking this matter up with the DoE Roads Service as a matter of urgency,’ said Alderman Hugh Smyth.
LOYALIST SHOPPING LIST
1.
An end to Republican violence so peace talks could begin.
2.
No return to Stormont rule.
3.
IRA put 32-county solution on the table for discussion.
4.
Protestants guaranteed civil and religious liberties.
REPUBLICAN SHOPPING LIST
1.
Removal of British troops from Northern Ireland or confine them to barracks.
2.
Removal of partition.
3.
32-county all Ireland state.
4.
No Stormont rule.
The father of murdered Catholic Sean Hughes is comforted by friends after finding his son shot dead
Recent killings back up terror group's threat
Frightening spiral of Loyalist murder ‘
‘YOU ain't seen nothing yet’ was the chilling threat from the UDA/UFF at the turn of the year.
And the grim statistics show it was no hollow warning.
In the past nine months the terror group — which boasts a bigger membership than the IRA — has murdered 14 people, two more than for the same period last year.
The UDA/UFF is now operating under a reorganised leadership which was dealt a heavy blow by the Stevens Inquiry into security force collusion with loyalist paramilitaries.
It has restructured its terror cells and its ranks have swollen since the government proscribed the UDA in August last year.
The UDA/UFF is now well-armed, say security sources, with weapons coming from the shadowy Ulster Resistance set up after the signing of the Anglo-Irish Agreement in November 1985.
Campaign
Since the start of August the UDA/UFF has stepped up its campaign, killing four people within four short weeks and since the start of the year the UVF have killed seven — two fewer than in the same period last year.
The recent heightened loyalist threat appears to coincide with the removal of static vehicle checkpoints throughout Belfast.
In June the UVF in Belfast told Sunday Life the organisation was prepared to wait until the checkpoints were removed before stepping up its campaign.
‘Our intelligence is very good and our units are very tight,’ said the UVF commander.
‘We are not prepared to send volunteers on missions only to be scooped at checkpoints.
‘We can bide our time.
It also helps to build up better intelligence on our targets.’
The RUC, the government and politicians are deeply concerned over the heightened level of violence — five loyalist murders and two massive IRA bombs in eight days.
Threat
So serious is the threat from both republicans and loyalists that RUC Chief Constable Sir Hugh Annesely called a rare press conference last Wednesday morning.
He had two messages for the public and the victims of the killer gangs stalking Ulster's streets.
Firstly, the situation was very serious but ‘not out of control’ and his officers hunted down terrorists of both persuasions.
And secondly, he wanted the public to be the RUC's eyes and ears as the police ‘could not provide 100 per cent security’ or post a policeman ‘on every street corner.’
‘Use those eyes and ears to save life,’ Sir Hugh told journalists.
It is no secret in security force circles that high-grade intelligence from informers within the ranks of the loyalist terrorist groups is thin on the ground.
Source
The Stevens Inquiry and the conviction of UDA/UFF intelligence officer and Army spy Brian Nelson dealt a huge blow to the intelligence world.
Sir Hugh said the Nelson affair had thrown up some difficulties in source intelligence work.
Since then RUC Special Branch and Army intelligence have been earnestly trying to recruit new informers.
‘It is a long and slow process,’ said a senior RUC officer.
‘An agent is not worth his salt if he is not in the trust of those above him.
‘It can take two to three years before an agent is in a position to provide accurate intelligence on ops and the movements of his colleagues, bombs and weapons.’
Last week Sunday Life revealed that the RUC had better intelligence on the UVF than on the UDA/UFF, intercepting up to six UVF teams compared to only one UFF unit this year.
Senior
Special Branch also lost a senior UDA/UFF member in 1992 after police sprung a trap on a loyalist murder team at Finaghy Road north.
The informer believed he had come under suspicion by his commanders but in fact the UDA/UFF leadership suspected another member of setting up the team.
Detectives believe most of the UDA/UFF killings have been carried out by a unit from the Shankill district.
Prison bosses launch investigation into major security lapse
BENT WARDER FEAR
By ALAN MURRAY
EXCLUSIVE
How Sunday Life broke the story last week
SENIOR prison officials fear a warder serving at Belfast's Crumlin Road jail has been compromised by loyalist paramilitaries.
A major investigation has now been launched into the smuggling of keys from the jail to UDA elements outside.
The governor at Crumlin Road called in the RUC after Sunday Life last week exclusively revealed the major security lapse.
And police sources say the major concern is that a prison warder has been ‘bought’ financially or compromised by threats or other means.
They say the most likely way the keys were smuggled out was by a prison warder rather than an inmate to a visitor.
Around 700 warders are stationed at the Belfast jail which houses loyalist and republican remand prisoners and only a few sentenced prisoners.
The major fear now for the prison's governor is that a warder could be forced to smuggle a small gun into the prison to carry out an attack against republican remand prisoners in revenge for the deaths of two loyalist prisoners.
In November, 1991 a UDA man and a UVF member died when a small IRA semtex bomb exploded behind a radiator in a dining room.
Prison sources say that while many warders work at Crumlin Road, only a few would have access to the keys for the second B wing landing which were smuggled out.
Holiday drivers under attack
LATE summer sightseers flocking to the famous Antrim Coast Road are warned to be on the alert for stone-throwers.
Indiscriminate attacks on motorists have occurred in recent weeks at the historic ‘Red Arch’, a busy tourist passage between Cushendall and Waterfoot.
Locals, as well as tourists, are under threat.
One Waterfoot fisherman had a lucky escape when his car window was shattered.
Aine Murray explained: ‘My father was driving along minding his own business when the window suddenly came in.
At first, because of the noise, he thought it was an explosion.
The stone didn't hit him and luckily it didn't come through the front window or something more serious could have happened.’
The attacks are believed to have been launched from high ground above the ‘Red Arch’.
MURDER SPARKS HOSPITALS ROW
HEALTH chiefs are denying that taking critically injured patients from East Belfast to the Royal Victoria Hospital is a bridge too far.
And they say a decision to route an ambulance carrying a fatally wounded Catholic man through heavy morning traffic on the Queen's Bridge was the correct one in the circumstances.
The ambulance was delayed as police motorcyclists tried to clear a path through peak morning traffic as UVF murder victim Jim Bell was rushed across the City two weeks ago.
The 49-year-old ice cream delivery man was shot in East Belfast but paramedics decided not to convey the critically injured patient to the Ulster Hospital at Dundonald.
Decision
Ambulance Chief Alan Murray defended his men's actions pointing out that they reached the Royal in seven minutes.
And he said he agreed with the decision to select the Royal because of the medical facilities there.
‘Only at the Royal is there the availability of thoracic and neuro surgeons whose medical skills are vital in some cases.
‘And a special medical pump is also only available at the Royal so I back my men's decision,’ he said.
Concern
But East Belfast MP Peter Robinson says the incident causes further concern that too many primary medical facilities are located on the Northern and Western side of the River Lagan.
‘This is further evidence that the major hospital on one side of the river is being denuded of major medical facilities.
‘That Mr Bell was not taken to the Ulster is concerning to the huge and growing population in East and South Belfast and the North Down peninsula.
‘To decide to negotiate the Queen's or Albert Bridges at busy times on busy days —not to mention days of traffic chaos caused by bomb scares — is ludicrous.
‘The Eastern Health Board also has to realise that for many people, the Royal is situated in a no go area,’ the MP said.
Emergency
A spokesman for the Eastern Board said 24-hour Accident and Emergency facilities were available throughout the city and were available at the City, Mater, Royal and Ulster hospital sites.
But the spokesman confirmed that specialist neuro and thoracic care was only available at the Royal site.
‘While certain highly specialist services are only available at specific locations, this does not lessen their accessibility to those patients in need of them,’ he said.
Man accused of double murder
A MAN was remanded in custody yesterday accused of the double murders of his mother-in-law and sister-in-law, who were found strangled in their home at Eden, near Carrickfergus in Co Antrim three days ago.
William Caldwell,(49), an unemployed man of Edenvale Avenue, also in the village of Eden, was further charged in Belfast with attempting to kill his estranged wife, also by strangulation last Thursday.
The murder victims were Mrs Kathleen Curran and her daughter Angela, who lived at Edenvale Avenue, a few doors from the accused.
The attempted murder relates to Patricia Agnes Caldwell of Coronation Road in Eden.
Caldwell was remanded in custody to appear in a Belfast court again on October 1.
An RUC detective told the Magistrates Court that when arrested, Caldwell replied ‘no’ to all the charges and the police officer said that they regarded the case as a domestic matter.
Horror ordeal of sex slave
A WOMAN held as a sex slave for six hours yesterday began to whisper to detectives the full story of her horrific ordeal.
Notebooks in hand, they listened beside her hospital bed as she told of how her attacker stripped her, tied her hands behind her back, and turned her into a human rag doll by dumping her in a city rubbish skip.
Disco
It was the first time the 25-year-old has been able to speak about her ordeal since she was found early on Friday morning after being abducted from near a disco in south Dublin.
The attack on the woman, left to die after being savagely beaten and sexually attacked has outraged detectives used to dealing with the most horrific crimes.
‘We are determined to get this beast,’ said a top police source yesterday.
Maniac
‘We are at the bedside of the girl and are now starting to piece together what happened to her in the six hours she was in the hands of this maniac.
‘She is naturally very unwell, and we are still attempting to discover if she was raped.’
The woman was found naked from the waist down in the skip, in Glovers Alley behind the Royal College of Surgeons near the city centre, by a porter who heard moans.
Man held over beach murder
DETECTIVES investigating the murder of a man whose body was discovered on Blackpool beach have arrested a man.
The body of 25-year-old Mark White, a waiter from the Manchester area, was found on the shore near the resort's Golden Mile in the early hours of Tuesday.
Although he had suffered severe head injuries and eight broken ribs, he was found to have died from drowning.
Bomb found at publishers
A FIREBOMB was defused by Army bomb disposal officers near Windsor Castle yesterday at the publishers of blood sports magazines.
Animal rights activists are thought to be behind the incendiary device, found by police on the doorstep of Burlington Publishing, in Sheet Street, Windsor, Berkshire, shortly before 11am.
Burlington Publishing Co produces titles including Shooting Times and Country Magazine, Airgun World and Baily's Hunting Directory.
Fury over fatal car accident in republic
FURY erupted in a border town in the Republic yesterday over a sentence imposed on a hit-and-run driver from Ulster who left a young Gaelic footballer dying on a country road.
Peter Lynch, chairman of Castleblayney District Council, called for a revision in the law revised to ensure ‘adequate penalties for killers on Ireland's roads.’
His call was made in the wake of a six month sentence imposed by a judge at Castleblayney on Gerard Smyth, 22, of Darkley, Co Armagh.
Smyth, who pleaded guilty, was jailed for driving a car without insurance and failing to report a collision in which a 22-year-old footballer, Declan Byrne of Castleblayney was killed.
He was also banned from driving for 20 years.
Byrne was walking towards his home along the Londonderry/Dublin road in the early hours when he was struck by a car.
Police eventually found the car involved in Co Armagh.
Despite forensic tests linking the vehicle with the fatal crash and an admission by Smyth that he was behind the wheel, the Republic's Director of Public Prosecutions ruled there was not enough evidence for a dangerous driving charge.