

WE PROMISE FULL CONSULTATION AT ALL TIMES
IT HAS been reported that the Flaybrick Chapels in Boundary Road, Bidston, were to be renovated and turned into a ‘Crisis Centre’ for Birkenhead.
As vicar of Bidston and deeply involved in the plans, may I correct a few misleading rumours.
Firstly, any plans for the chapel complex are only in embryonic form.
We have no money whatsoever in the ‘kitty’ and things are at a very early stage of development.
It has always been my intention to call a public meeting for all interested parties once we have something definite to report.
We would never dream of beginning anything of this kind without gaining the views of local residents.
Secondly, I am well aware that the idea of a ‘Crisis Centre’ conjures up all kinds of pictures.
Perhaps that is not the best way of describing what our ideas are.
What we envisage is somewhere open and staffed 24 hours a day, seven days a week, where anybody can come for help and advice.
Our aim would be to link in with all the caring agencies in the area and provide care and assistance as and when it was needed.
Any activity taking place around the refurbished buildings would be carefully controlled and would not be troublesome.
The idea would be very much an extension of our activities at St Oswald's Church Centre in Bidston Village.
Since this centre has been open vandalism has ceased.
Thirdly, our plan is to screen the buildings from the rest of the cemetery and to have the entrance on Boundary Road.
Please rest assured that nothing will get beyond the earliest stages of preparation without full consultation taking place.
If anyone has any further questions, do not hesitate to contact me at St Oswald's Church Centre (tel:).
Ice cream charges have certainly changed since the days of this 1920s
‘Stop me and buy one’ trike Ice cream racket
AS SUMMER comes in and the demand for ice cream increases so the opportunities arise for the vendors to overcharge, especially when parents are treating their children.
Prices for ices vary considerably and this also applies to quality.
Recently, I was charged £1.45 for a ‘cornetto-type’ and a choc ice.
As there were a number of Wall's stickers on the van, I thought I was getting ices of their make.
The charge at my local sweetshop for genuine Wall's Cornetto and a choc ice is £1.10.
Name and address supplied.
Strong campaigns
I READ the letter headed ‘White elephants’ which concerned the Playhouse, Everyman and William Roberts Centre.
I find it amazing that reader Mrs J.  took the time and effort to castigate another community Norris Green for fighting to keep an asset in an area that is one of the most socially and economically deprived in this city.
Mrs  states that the people who want these facilities should pay for them.
We do.
Does she think that we get access to these facilities free of charge?
We not only pay an entrance fee to access these facilities, we also pay a community charge for local amenities.
The quote ‘These outfits lose money because no one wants them’ does not make sense.
If no one wants them, why are there such strong campaigns to keep them?
Murder victim Fiona Jones
THIS JUSTICE IS A FRENCH FARCE
THE ABSURDLY lenient sentence given to Frederic Blancke, the French hospital worker who brutally murdered British school teacher Fiona Jones, is a travesty of justice.
After attacking Fiona and leaving her for dead, he later returned and repeatedly slashed her throat, ignoring her pleas for mercy.
This monster could be free, to possibly kill again, in less than seven years.
Therefore the French judicial system must at least review this erroneous judgement.
Fiona's mother says she will never set foot in France again in view of the treatment by the French towards our British fishermen, farmers and truckers.
That may not be too bad a criterion for many of us.
Please support Fiona Jones's parents by asking your local MP to take up their cause.
Echo's June 1st headline
WHAT ON earth are the bosses of Wirral Social Services being paid for?
I ask this question after reading in the Echo about their latest crazy scheme sending out instructions to all child-minders that they must feed their young charges ‘culture food’.
By this they apparently mean curry, etc.
Curry is an acquired taste and heavily spiced food is surely not suitable for the stomachs of very young children.
These Social Services bosses should leave English people to feed their children in the way they see fit, just as ethnic groups feed their children.
If they think forcing strange food down children's throats will enhance good race relations, then they are barking up the wrong tree.
It is only by teaching respect for one another that different races can live peacefully together.
CAN ANYBODY be expected to take the Deputy Director of Wirral Social Services seriously when he suggests that feeding curry to toddlers will help them counteract the evils of racism?
On reading the Echo report I had to look at the top of the page to make certain that the date was June 1st and not April 1st.
Princess Diana under fire from reader D.P.  of Bootle
Di can't know
PRINCESS Diana knows nothing about the lives of ordinary, everyday people and of inner city deprivation and squalor.
She cannot even begin to comprehend how a mother feels about bringing up children on state benefits or the frustration and despair of young people who can see no likelihood of ever finding meaningful employment.
Nor can she be expected to.
Yet here she is on television telling us all how to manage our lives and formulating phrases about how best to overcome adversity.
If only those grey establishment figures would stop putting palliatives into her mouth in order to mitigate her credibility under the Crown.
I MUST PAY £22.50 MORE A WEEK
WHY WAS so much noise and trouble caused over the poll tax?
Now that the council tax is implemented, not a dicky bird from Labour, Liberal or the people of any of the big cities.
Now tax on electric, gas, and every other fuel and still no shouting.
The council tax, increase in rents, and tax on electric and gas now means I must find approximately another £22.50 a week.
I wonder if my pension will be increased to meet some of these demands?
The council tax is a disgrace.
These valuations are way over the top and it is time a lot of these councillors where brought down to earth.
No to 40hr week
THE CONTROVERSY concerning the EEC directive for a working week of not more than 48 hours is beyond belief.
Anyone who knows anything about the building workers and continued process working will understand that there are numerous reasons why it is impossible to have a 40 hour working week.
Sickness of workers requires skilled process workers from other shifts to fill the gap.
Selected holiday dates also cause an effect.
This means a slight rise in the wages account which is no different than working overtime for cleaning and maintenance of machinery.
Politicians should think and inquire before they speak trash.
Live in harmony
WHY CAN'T everybody be in harmony with each other?
I am sick of people arguing over their colour because it affects so many children and they have to suffer the consequences.