

Language initiative
AN initiative designed to promote the Welsh language and culture in the Vale of Clwyd is to be discussed at a public meeting in Denbigh on June 16.
The main speaker will be Cefin Campbell, director of Menter Cwm Gwendraeth, set up in Dyfed in 1989.
The aim of the meeting will be to find out whether there is enough interest to set up the venture in Clwyd.
Raiders steal equipment
THIEVES who broke into the garage of a house in East Avenue, Rhosddu, Wrexham, stole tents, camping equipment and tools worth a total of £1,000.
Sport talk
DOCTOR Nick Whitehead, the Sports Council for Wales's director of development services, will give a talk on ‘The Future of Sport’ and answer questions at an open meeting of Wrexham Maelor District Sports Council at the Guildhall at 7pm tomorrow.
Mine success
WREXHAM Maelor Council says its newly-opened Minera Lead Mines tourist attraction has gone down well with visitors during its first week of opening.
Quality award
WELSH Under-Secretary of State Gwilym Jones is to present the British Standard quality certificate BS5750 to the Pendine Nursing Home in Summerhill Road, Wrexham, on Friday.
Parking plan
PARKING restrictions are being considered by Powys County highways department in the Vine Square area of Llanfyllin, following regular complaints of obstruction caused by parked vehicles, especially in the area adjacent to the ambulance station.
On the leash
RADNORSHIRE District Council's dog warden service may be extended to deal with stray dogs, and members of the public exercising their dogs on the playing fields at Llandrindod High School.
Bridge cost
STRENGTHENING work at Pont Sychcoed bridge, near Llanfair Caereinion is estimated to cost £200,000.
COUPLE'S LITHUANIA MERCY DASH
School helps with aid project for hospital children
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
A CLWYD school has come to the aid of project to bring help to children at a Lithuanian hospital.
Ron and Pat Woolley, of Rhyl, recently took a huge lorry-load of medical supplies, equipment and clothes to the Klaipicla Children's Hospital in Lithuania after being shocked by the conditions they found there during a previous visit.
The hospital's situation was so desperate that there was only one small bag of drugs to share between 300 sick children.
The couple launched an appeal which evoked a generous response from organisations, companies and individuals.
Although the couple's mercy dash has meant conditions have improved and lives have been saved, the hospital's problems are not yet over.
During their visit they took a video camera with the intention of making a short film to show what conditions are really like.
However, they needed help to make the film clearer.
In stepped pupils from Ysgol ap Iwan, Abergele, who used special facilities available at the school to do the job.
They are also helping the couple in making a collage of the many photographs they took.
‘The students have done a marvellous job for us.
Having a film to show is vital to help us get the message across,’ said Mrs Woolley.
The couple have already launched a second appeal and are willing to talk to clubs and organisations about their experiences.
They can be contacted on Rhyl 35 .
Pat Woolley with Abergele High School pupils who helped with the video.
They are, from left: Andrea Davies, Iwan Bedford and Melanie Robson Picture: PHIL MICHEU
Trespass report
MEMBERS of Montgomeryshire District Council's environmental health committee will meet in private tomorrow to consider an officer's report on alleged trespass on council land adjacent to River Cain, Llanfyllin.
Limit returns
THE Welsh Office has agreed to reinstate the 30mph speed limit on the A44 at Llangurig, to be effective from late summer.
New crossing
REGIONAL Railways proposes to commission the new automatic half barrier crossing at Abermule on Thursday of next week.
The crossing will be manned for two weeks after commissioning to monitor the safe use by drivers.
Safety bill
REMOVAL of asbestos fibre found under the library floorboards of Welshpool High School has cost Powys Education Authority £6,200.
Food visits
MONTGOMERYSHIRE environmental health officers carried out 339 food hygiene visits under the Food Safety Act 1990 in March and April, resulting in 33 improvement notices being served for a total of 390 contraventions.
MP to rescue over benefit hearings
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
PEOPLE on benefits in the Rhyl and Kinmel Bay area unhappy at having to travel to Wrexham to sort out grievances have been helped by their MP.
Clwyd North West MP, Rod Richards, became concerned over complaints from constituents that they had to travel all the way to Wrexham for benefit agency tribunal hearings.
‘Many of those who made the journey suffered from physical disabilities and the distances involved caused them great hardship and discomfort,’ he said.
Mr Richards said he approached the Independent Tribunal Appeals Services in Nottingham, and as a result residents of Kinmel Bay and Rhyl would now have their cases heard in Colwyn Bay, reducing travelling time from around 50 minutes to 15 minutes.
Trident revolt fear by Tories
MINISTERS were warned yesterday of ‘horrendous implications’ if the lucrative contract to refit Trident nuclear submarines was awarded to Devonport dockyard instead of Rosyth in Fife.
The Government could be heading for a damaging backbench revolt of Scottish Tories if it rejects Rosyth.
Even though the Ministry of Defence insists no decision has been reached, MPs North of the border suspect that Devonport in Plymouth is now favoured.
Already Scottish Tory Mps are lining up to threaten the Government that they will withhold support or even vote against if Rosyth is forsaken.
Sir Nicholas Fairbairn, MP for Perth and Kinross, warned: ‘I would certainly vote against the Government.
Such a move would ruin the economy of the whole central belt of Scotland.
‘Rosyth is hands-down better than Devonport for safety, development and everything else.
It would be madness to pick Devonport.’
Implications
Bill Walker, MP for Tayside North, said the political implications of rejecting Rosyth were ‘far more horrendous than they are in the South West.’
He stressed that a 5pc voting swing against the Tories in the South West would reduce their MP numbers there from 16 to 10.
‘In Scotland, a 5pc swing against the Conservatives would reduce our numbers from 11 to two and that would make it virtually impossible for a Conservative Government to govern in Scotland.’
Many MPs suspect no announcement on the decision will be made until the last day before the summer recess to avoid a Parliamentary row.
Devonport's chances are thought to have increased following the Tories' disastrous performance in last month's local elections in the South West.
But Menzies Campbell, Liberal Democrat MP for North-East Fife, warned: ‘If the submarine refit goes to Devonport and not Rosyth, the Tory Party in Scotland might as well go into receivership.’
Talks agreed on 2m-strong ‘super union’ merger
A POSSIBLE merger between two of Britain's biggest unions moved a step closer yesterday, with a ‘historic decision’ to open talks.
Delegates in Portsmouth for the annual conference of the GMB union overwhelmingly agreed to start preliminary discussions with the Transport and General Workers' Union.
A possible amalgamation, which would form a two million-strong ‘super’ union, will now be discussed at the T&GWU's annual conference next month.
GMB general secretary John Edmonds said: ‘This is a matter of enormous significance in the union movement.’
An amalgamation between two unions with huge resources could be a way of attracting more union members, he believed.
Bill Morris, general secretary of the TGWU, said: ‘The outcome is very encouraging for both unions.’
Call for action on cover at hospital
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
HEALTH watchdogs in Aberconwy are stepping up their pressure on Gwynedd Health Authority to ensure there is adequate weekend and night-time anaesthetic cover at Llandudno Hospital.
Earlier this year Aberconwy Community Health Council called for urgent action to tackle the situation.
They say that cover is presently provided from Ysbyty Gwynedd at Bangor, but are concerned that delays in getting to Llandudno could prove potentially serious.
The health authority say a consultant anaesthetist living in Colwyn Bay is available.
But the health watchdogs have countered that one person cannot be expected to be on call all the time, and that person might also not be available.
Instead, they want three anaesthetists who live nearer Llandudno Hospital to be put on a local cover rota.
They also pointed to an incident during which a patient had to wait for four hours for an anaesthetist.
They had been pleased that the health authority's chairman, Grahame Hulse, had taken a sympathetic view.
But the community health council's chief officer, Mrs Chris Stead, said the council had still not been given any assurances that the situation was being addressed.
US directors visit Welsh paper mills
MEMBERS of Kimberly-Clark's American board flew into Hawarden yesterday for a whistle stop tour around its Clwyd factories.
The paper and soft tissue products company has invested £75m in three mills in Flint and a new European headquarters in the £3m business and technology centre on Northop Country Park.
They met Clwyd MPs during a House of Commons visit before coming to Clwyd.
Brian Howes, President of Kimberly-Clark's European service and industrial sector said: ‘The board was impressed by our partnership with the local community which has had a great deal to do with the success of our North Wales operations in establishing an award winning site of manufacturing excellence.’
Jewellery raid sparks warning
POLICE yesterday warned householders to secure their homes before leaving for summer outings.
The warning follows a burglary at a house in Hendre Road, Conwy.
Jewellery worth £450 was taken after a thief got in through an open window.
Office gear is stolen AN OFFICE at the building site for the salmon ladders project at Conwy Falls, near Betws-y-Coed, has been burgled and equipment worth £2,600 stolen.
A photocopier, fax machine, theodolite level and calculator were taken.
MONTGOMERYSHIRE environmental health officers carried out 339 food hygiene visits under the Food Safety Act 1990 in March and April.
They resulted in 33 improvement notices being served.
Rodent calls
PEST control officers from Montgomeryshire District Council dealt with 41 complaints of rats and 24 of mice at properties within the district during March and April.
Jury at site of crash tragedy
By Daily Post Correspondent
A JURY visited the scene of a horror car crash yesterday, in which an 81-year-old woman died.
The 12 jurors boarded a coach outside Chester Crown Court which took them on a half-hour drive to the scene of the accident.
Mrs Elsie Hayward was travelling with relatives in a Vauxhall Chevette along the A525 Wrexham to Ruthin road on March 29 last year when the accident happened, Chester Crown Court was told.
Her car was ploughed into by 19-year-old Howard Sloane, whose Seat Ibiza skidded on a corner, said prosecutor Derek Halbert.
Emergency Services staff battled for four hours to free Mrs Hayward, Mr Sloane and two others.
An off-duty policeman was forced to slam on his brakes as Sloane sped past, and watched in horror as the Seat veered onto the wrong side of the road 325 yards before the smash, the court heard.
Sloane, of The Mount, Meol Maelor, Coed Poeth, Wrexham, denies one charge of causing death by reckless driving.
Mr Halbert told the court: ‘The car crossed from one side of the road to the other.
‘The policeman saw the car coming straight towards him, and thought he was going to be hit, and had to pull in to the side of the road.
‘The Seat car hit the Chevette, and a Cavalier car that was travelling behind it could not avoid crashing into it.’
The case continues.
EVERYTHING in the garden is rosy with a strong hint of green at a nursery.
The Clwyd Social Services' Bryn Tirion nursery, Henllan, is thought to be the first in North Wales to use only environmentally-friendly products in all its work.
Team leader Alan Smith said the nursery was committed to preserving the environment so it did not use peat materials or chemicals.
Pictured at work are gardeners Kathy Poynton and John Beck Picture: PHIL MICHEU
Public school head in attack on tests policy
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
THE Government's education policy has come under attack from the headmaster of a leading North Wales public school who appealed to the public to put more trust in teachers.
Speaking at the annual speech day, Nigel Thorne, headmaster of Rydal school in Colwyn, said he was increasingly concerned at what was happening to the education system which was faced with a ‘testing monolith’.
Although he welcomed many of the central themes in the Government White Paper, Choice and Diversity, he had reservations about the way the status of teachers was being undermined.
The Government said parents knew best but that failed to recognise the professionalism of teachers and the close links between teachers, parents and schools.
‘A Government White Paper which proclaims that teachers know less about education than parents can scarcely hope to win the support of the teaching profession.’
But one of his biggest concerns was that the changes being ‘inflicted’ upon schools would significantly reduce the amount of enjoyment and fun in teaching.
Her added: ‘The strong commitment to the whole idea of teaching is being undermined by more and more paper, and more and more stress.
I want my colleagues to continue to enthuse about the job and teach effectively.
I do not want them buried under mounds of paper.’
The amount of power ministers had seized for themselves over the development of young people was also worrying.
The school's decision not to become involved in testing had been proved right.
‘The tests were poor discriminators and, in terms of checking on their progress and diagnosing their weaknesses, we could do a far better job ourselves in a fraction of the time,’ he declared
He was worried that the teaching process could become dominated by tests and exams.
Barrage shelved as cash runs out
By Malcolm Handley Regional Affairs Correspondent
PLANS for one of the most ambitious civil engineering projects envisaged for the North West are to be left gathering dust.
Studies for the £1bn Mersey Barrage scheme have been shelved with no immediate plans for further work.
Ironically, the project has reached the end of the road as its counterpart in Cardiff Bay begins its final stages through the House of Commons.
Mersey Barrage Company general manager, James McCormack said: ‘The timing is not quite right.
‘Rather than plough on regardless damaging the scheme and the partnerships we have created, we have decided to suspend the project.’
Mr McCormack said this did not mean the barrage project was dead.
‘I am still absolutely convinced the barrage will be built,’ he said.
John Major's government has refused to provide cash for phase four of the project, despite being told it would now cost substantially less than first thought.
The writing was on the wall last year when the Government said it could not continue funding.
Mossley Hill MP, David Alton, who chairs the all-party Mersey Barrage Group said: ‘Things are unlikely to happen until there is a political will and a more interventionist approach.’
The scheme, with its first three survey phases now complete, has cost £6.3m over the past six years.
Canoe tragedy adventure centre closes
THE adventure centre at the heart of the canoeing tragedy in which four teenagers died earlier this year has been sold and is to close with the loss of 20 jobs, it was announced yesterday.
Simon Dunne, Claire Langley and Rachel Walker, all 16, and Dean Sayer, 17, died while on a course at the St Albans Centre in Lyme Regis, Dorset, in March.
The four were members of a party of nine pupils and a teacher on an outdoor activity holiday arranged through their school, Southways Comprehensive School, Plymouth, Devon.
Peter Kite managing director of the centre's owners, Active Learning and Leisure, announced yesterday's sale, which was for an undisclosed sum.
He said directors at his firm, based in Kingston, Surrey, had decided that ‘it is in the best interests of both their clients and company to sell the business to the PGL adventure group’.
The adventure centre would be closed until next year, Mr Kite said.
£1m bid to cut op waiting lists
By Carl Butler Daily Post Staff
MORE than £1m is being pumped into initiatives to reduce hospital waiting lists in Clwyd this year.
The money will be used to help patients waiting for operations in orthopaedic, urology, general and oral surgery areas.
The Welsh Office is providing £2.7m of extra cash for the whole of Wales this year to help reduce waiting lists, and although yet to be finalised, Clwyd's share could be around £400,000, says health authority treasurer, Nigel Morris.
He told a joint meeting of the authority with Clwyd Family Health Services Association (FHSA) in Mold, that the authority will be bidding for its share within the next two weeks.
Academic
Added to this, Clwyd has put up its own £300,000 towards waiting list initiatives, plus £400,000 for academic and consultant appointments which will also allow more operations.
Clwyd particularly wants to tackle the problem of people waiting over three months for outpatient appointments, and the few who are still waiting over 18 months for in-patient treatment.
‘Those are areas we hope to address this year,’ said health authority chief executive, Brian Jones.
Last year's Welsh Office waiting list initiative offering particular operations at certain centres was not a great success in Clwyd when patients showed little enthusiasm to travel to South Wales or Bangor for hip, knee and eye operations.
Meanwhile, news that the Welsh Office is to set up a forensic psychiatry unit in North Wales a medium secure unit was given a cautious welcome.
Authority chief executive Brian Jones, and FHSA chief executive Christopher Last both warned it could prove costly.
The unit is likely to be based at the Bryn-y-Neuadd hospital in Llanfairfeshan, near Bangor.
Clwyd already pays about £500,000 a year to keep people in medium secure units in England.
Cot deaths toll halved
COT deaths were more than halved last year following a national campaign to sleep babies on their back, it was revealed yesterday.
A £2m TV campaign backed by presenter Anne Diamond, whose son Sebastian was a cot death victim two years ago, has resulted in a fall from 912 deaths in 1991 to 456 last year.
Man dies after night fishing trip disaster
ONE of four fishermen rescued early after a 15ft boat sank in the Bristol Channel died in hospital last night.
Wayne Cummings, 32, was plucked unconscious from the water by the crew of an RAF helicopter more than three hours after the craft capsized off Llantwit Major, South Glamorgan.
He was among three friends to be rescued.
A fourth managed to swim several hundred yards to shore to raise the alarm.
Mr Cummings, of Ffordd Elin, Barry, South Glamorgan, had been in a ‘critical’ condition at Cardiff's Royal Infirmary suffering from severe hypothermia.
His companions, Philip Turner, 40, Nigel Dee and Vaughan Thomas, all from the Barry area, were treated for exposure but were less seriously ill.
Swansea coastguards, who organised the rescue, said it was unlikely anybody would have survived without life-jackets.
The all-night fishing trip ended in tragedy for the four men after their boat ran out of fuel and ran aground on a sandbank off Nash Point.
It was swamped by the incoming tide and sank at about 5am yesterday.
A Sea King helicopter from RAF Brawdy, Dyfed, joined lifeboats from Barry and Porthcawl in the rescue more than three hours later after a cliff-top walker spotted men in the water.
A coastguard spokesman said the other two ‘undoubtedly survived because they were wearing lifejackets, which also made them easier to spot in the water.’
Newspaper law change
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
NEWSAGENTS will today be urged to back calls for a change in the law to protect them from becoming innocent victims of the law which prevents tobacco being sold to under-age youngsters.
A resolution, to be put to the national conference of the National Federation of Retail Newsagents in Llandudno, suggests it is wrong for ‘agent provocateurs’ children sent for cigarettes by adults to be used to trap shopkeepers.
Newsagents claim it is the buyer who should face legal action for allowing tobacco to get into under-age hands.
They argue that it is easy for someone to appear to be above the age of 17 and say laws should be introduced that place less onus on the newsagent, who may be an innocent victim.
Hundreds of delegates are attending the conference.
The federation represents almost 29,000 independent newsagents from around the UK and Republic of Ireland.
Another strong theme in the conference is what is seen as a threat posed to the traditional newsagent.
Community police move
MAJOR renovation and refurbishment to the police station at Rhuddlan has meant transferring the Community Police base to St Asaph, say North Wales police.
The work is expected to take eight to 12 weeks.
Anyone wishing to contact the community team can do so by telephoning Rhyl police and asking for St Asaph police station.
Samantha Ward Tadman, 10, of Rhyl, has just taken up the cello, and after only a few months, the prize-winning pianist has passed her first cello exam Picture: PHIL MICHEU
Mountain air rescue
TWO police cadets from Essex suffering from heat exhaustion were winched off 3,000ft high Tryfan in Snowdonia by an RAF rescue helicopter yesterday.
One of them had been unconscious for a while.
They were flown by the helicopter, from Valley in Anglesey, to Ysbyty Gwynedd at Bangor for treatment.
Fans' deaths bring TT death toll to nine
TWO MORE people have died in the Isle of Man TT Races.
A man and his woman pillion passenger died instantly when they lost control of the machine and hit a wall.
The fans' deaths brought the death toll to nine in this year's race week.
They were negotiating a part of the 38-mile long course known as Guthrie's Memorial on the Snaefell Mountain Road.
A spokesman for the island's police said last night: ‘The accident happened at 12.23pm on the TT course.
Some riders get away with serious injuries if you can say that, but others are not so fortunate.
‘To be honest, we have not been any busier this year but the accident toll has been higher than in previous times.’
He declined to give any personal details about the pair apart from saying they were from the United Kingdom.
All the victims killed during this year's competition were fans and not professional riders.
Community officer chosen
IN a new move to boost community relations in the region, North Wales Police are to appoint a Community officer to serve the Rhydwen Drive district of Rhyl.
Discovery of devout OAP's body stuns town
By Gareth Hughes Daily Post Staff
A TOWN was in shock yesterday after a well-known local character was found dead at her home.
The body of 87-year-old Mattie Edwards had been found in her terraced house in Mwrog Street, Ruthin, on Monday night.
Last night, a 55-year-old local man was charged with murder and he is expected to appear before Dyffryn Clwyd magistrates at Denbigh later today.
Detective Supt Gareth Jones, deputy head of North Wales CID, has been called in to head the inquiry and a post-mortem examination was carried out by Home Office pathologist Dr Donald Waite.
Mrs Edwards, a widow, lived alone in the neat terraced house opposite the Farmers' Arms where she was born.
She owned several properties in the area.
Throughout her life she was a regular worshipper at Llanfwrog Parish Church, even though in recent years she was largely confined to her home.
She was in church last Sunday morning, having been taken in a wheelchair by a friend.
‘She thought a lot of the church and attended very regularly.
Church members were also very good to her,’ said secretary Rona Edwards.
Travelled
Two years ago, Mrs Edwards, who preferred her first name Grace to Mattie, travelled to Israel with fellow church members.
‘It had always been her ambition to go to the Holy Land and so when I arranged the trip I told her ‘Right, now you're going’.
She was a committed churchgoer,’ said the Rev Godfrey Caine Jones, former rector of Llanfwrog, who is now vicar of Ruabon.
For some time, Mrs Edwards worked in the Denbigh office of solicitors Kerfoot Owen and Company but for many years had to care for her elderly mother with whom she lived.
She had no children and her only brother, John, died some years ago.
‘She didn't mix an awful lot but friends were always popping in and out because the door was open.
It's a terrible shock for something like this to happen,’ said one neighbour.
‘She was a delightful person,’ said Betty Turley, also of Mwrog Street.
Mrs Edwards's former next-door neighbour, Ruth Duncan, called to see her every day and spent some time with her on Monday evening, leaving about 9pm.
Mrs Duncan, who now lives in Bryn Rhydd, Ruthin, was too upset to talk yesterday.
Mattie Edwards: ‘a delightful person’
Derek tells world and 100 tourists of his love…
A COMPUTER expert gave his girlfriend an olde worlde surprise when he enlisted the help of a town crier to ask her to marry him.
Two weeks ago Sharon Edwards began teasing Darren Johnson over his ‘lack of romance’.
But yesterday, after 25-year-old Derek from Huntington, Chester, popped the question, Sharon, 22, admitted she was stunned.
Mr Johnson secretly arranged with deputy crier David Mitchell to propose during one of his ear-splitting announcements.
So, while out on a shopping trip, Darren stepped forward as a volunteer to help the crier with a proclamation of his own.
In town crier fashion he bellowed: ‘I call upon these persons here present to witness that I, Darren John Johnson, being of sound mind, do ask my beloved Sharon Samantha Edwards, if she will plight her troth unto me.’
And in front of more than 100 cheering tourists, Sharon accepted.
Mr Mitchell then took up his cry of ‘The lady hath accepted.’
Sharon, who works at a miniature models factory in Wrexham, said: ‘I have been teasing him for about two weeks for not being romantic but he has shown me I was wrong.
‘I was not suspicious at all and did not know anything about it.
It was a big shock and when I said yes there were about 100 Australian tourists cheering and photographing us.’
Darren said: ‘We are both history lovers so enlisting the town crier's help seemed the ideal way to propose.
‘I was glad she accepted because otherwise I would have looked a right banana in front of all those tourists.’
Mr Mitchell said Darren's announcement was ‘quite authentic’.
Easy rider's stolen bike
A MOTORCYCLIST on a stolen bike was stopped by police for not wearing a crash helmet, Colwyn Bay magistrates heard yesterday.
Graham Mayers, 25, of Pensarn, was fined £72 and £20 costs.
He admitted receiving stolen property and breach of a conditional discharge.
Builders battle in the sand for beach bonanza
WIRRAL Housing Department scooped a major public relations windfall last night all for the cost of a few sticks of rock.
Hundreds of people descended on Wallasey beach in the bright evening sunshine to see a dozen teams vie for honours in a novelty sand-building competition.
Teams representing a cross-section of housing interests were set the task of building a sandy estate incorporating a housing mix of family and old folks' homes.
The venture — to spotlight National Housing Week — was such a success that hopes are high it will develop into an annual competition.
The event realised £600 to provide smoke alarms for the homes of elderly people.
Top prize, and a special trophy, went to Beechwood Community Association, with minor prizes going to Forum Housing Association and Hanks Builders.
All 48 people who took an active part in last night's exercise were given a New Brighton stick of rock.
Wirral housing director John Agass commented: ‘The residents’ groups in particular concentrated mainly on traditional housing designs, which probably reflects what they are looking for in housing.
Their views should be taken into account.’
Beechwood add finishing touches to their winning sand houses, aided by radio personality Billy Butler Picture: FRAZER BIRD
New future dawns for historic school
A HISTORIC Wirral landmark, rescued from dereliction by a local company, is to be officially opened by Baroness Chalker.
The former Laird School of Art in Birkenhead the first purpose-built art school in Britain has been transformed into prestigious offices by Stanton Marine, with the help of grants from the City Lands scheme.
Stanton Marine are international marine surveyors and consultants.
Director Bill MacDonald said: ‘I am delighted that this beautiful Victorian building has been rescued and restored to its former glory.
‘The directors of the company decided that the building would not only serve as its headquarters, but also be renamed the John Laird Centre to acknowledge the contribution of the Laird family to the area.’
The interior of the building will be furnished with Laird artefacts with the help of Wirral Council historian David Hillhouse.
The opening ceremony is scheduled for Friday.
Baroness Chalker
Thieving trio use baby to con elderly woman
By Richard Elias Daily Post Staff
A WOMAN clutching a baby stole an elderly woman's purse after conning her way into the pensioner's home.
The thief called at the house on east Merseyside with another woman and a man, and asked if she could use the toilet.
But, minutes later, when the trio had left, the 89-year-old discovered that her purse had been taken from a bedroom of her terraced home in Albany Road, Prescot.
Last night, a detective investigating the theft said that although this type of crime was becoming increasingly prevalent, it was the first time he had heard of a baby being used as a decoy.
Det Con Steve Roberts added: ‘It is unusual to say the least, the fact that one of these women was holding a baby at the time.’
The three called on the victim who lives alone shortly before 9pm on Monday night.
The woman who was holding the baby is described as being white, in her 30s and had brown, tidy, collar-length hair.
Her female accomplice was in her 20s, with long, fair hair.
The man was around 5ft 4ins and had fair hair.
The gang left in a blue car.
Anyone who has any information about the incident is asked to contact Prescot CID on  ext 4285.
Ex-trade unionist jailed for theft
By Lynda Roughley Daily Post Correspondent
FORMER Liverpool City Council trade unionist Tony Gavin, who stole welfare funds including death benefits, was yesterday jailed for three months.
Gavin, 35, who was a fulltime Nalgo official, admitted stealing cash belonging to the City Council Life Insurance Welfare Scheme over 22 months.
Liverpool Crown Court judge David Lynch, sentencing Gavin, said that he had used the fund's bank account as his own and had stolen between £3,500 to £4,200.
He had taken the money to pay off debts and had continued to do so even when bereaved relatives were desperate for cash to pay undertakers' bills.
‘That is unforgivable,’ said the judge.
Gavin, of Briar Drive, Huyton, pleaded guilty to eight offences of theft between January 1990 and October 1991.
He denied a further 10 theft and deception offences and not guilty verdicts were recorded.
Prosecuting counsel Antonis Georges said Gavin had been treasurer of the Welfare Scheme since 1985.
Each week 800 council employees voluntarily contributed 50p from their wages of which 31p was paid to an insurance company which paid out £2,750 upon death.
The balance of the contribution was paid into the Welfare Fund, which had a bank account, and was used to provide interest-free hardship loans.
‘Gavin used the Welfare account as if it was his own money,’ Mr Georges said.
He wrote out cheques from the account to pay his credit card debts, rent arrears and he also used it to clear phone bills and part of £500 taxi bill.
The taxi bill arose after he opened an account for Nalgo with Mersey Cabs without authorisation and used it for his own personal use as well as official business.
Mr Georges said that mobile phone calls Gavin made included many to race lines.
Matters came to a head after relatives of the deceased employees did not receive the expected death benefits even though the insurance company had paid out the cheques to the fund.
Gavin repeatedly tried to fob them off and one family had still not been paid.
£231 fine for car tax fraud
A WOMAN was fined £231 with £30 costs yesterday after she admitted fraudulent use of a car tax disc.
Suzanne Gratton, 22, of Warwick Close, Birkenhead, was accused after it was noticed that the licence on her car had been taken out for another vehicle.
Appearing with her before Wirral magistrates was Craig Blackwell, 23, of the same address, who admitted allowing fraudulent use of the licence.
He told the magistrates the licence was for a car which had not been on the road for nine months.
He took the blame for Miss Gratton's appearance.
He was fined £84 with £30 costs.
Youthful TV judges
A YOUNG panel of judges will tour the Merseyside Maritime Museum this morning.
The six will give their views as part of the first ever children's museum of the year competition.
Organised by BBC TV's Blue Peter programme, the Albert Dock attraction is one of three shortlisted museums nominated by viewers.
Maria Hogan, 12, of Rock Ferry, the pupil of Plessington School who nominated the museum, will meet the show's presenters.
Public urged to come to rescue of swimming pool
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
LABOUR councillors have called for a massive public demonstration to save Woodchurch swimming pool, amid fears it could be lost ‘by stealth.’
The pool has been closed after being condemned as a health hazard because of structural faults.
Councillors have been told repairs will cost about £1m.
Wirral Council has earmarked £150,000 in its capital programme for refurbishment work.
But there are fears a further cash squeeze by Whitehall could jeopardise its completion.
Labour councillor Hugh Lloyd, who represents Upton, said: ‘It all depends on what the Government say and what we get from land sales.
‘If Whitehall clamps down on capital expenditure there will be real problems for whole areas of capital spending not just Woodchurch pool.
‘With money so tight and nothing is heard from local communities the facility could be lost by stealth.
‘I am desperately anxious to avoid this happening.
‘It is important for the saving of the pool to be at the forefront of everyone's minds it should be treated as a number one priority.’
Labour Coun George Davies, a qualified swimming instructor, said Woodchurch's closure deprived a huge area of swimming facilities.
He pointed out that since 1974, Wirral had lost five pools New Brighton, Derby Pool, Wallasey, New Ferry open air pool, Livingstone Street, Birkenhead, and Hoylake.
He said: ‘The Labour group is committed to retaining Woodchurch pool.
‘It is a service we can't afford to do without.’
Labour councillors are planning to rally action at a public meeting at Woodchurch leisure centre on June 22.
They also plan to launch a petition.
Quiz of couple goes on over murder of OAP
A COUPLE were still being questioned by detectives last night in connection with the murder of pensioner John Goult.
The man and woman from Liverpool were arrested on Monday afternoon after a public appeal for witnesses to the killing of 80-year-old Mr Goult last Friday night.
Mr Goult was found dead in an armchair at his ground floor flat in Woolfall Heath Avenue, Huyton, on Saturday afternoon.
A post mortem revealed he had been stabbed repeatedly in the chest and died about 7pm on Friday night.
Mr Goult's pet terrier Champ was found lying by his side and is now being cared for at Huyton police station until a suitable home is found for him.
Anyone with any information is asked to ring the incident hotline on  in confidence.
£270,000 ‘slap in face’ for pit town
By Peter McBride Daily Post Correspondent
A MINING town devastated by the closure of a nearby colliery just days ago was yesterday given a Government cash boost.
However, news of the £270,000 package sparked anger from workers and the St Helens town council leader who described it as ‘a slap in the face.’
The gates of Parkside Colliery, at Newton le Willows, closed last Friday.
Around 700 pit workers were made redundant, just two years after the colliery was praised by the Government for breaking production records.
Amid angry calls from union leaders for the Government to change its mind, Inner Cities Minister Sir George Young yesterday confirmed the Department of Environment's stand.
‘British Coal has now indicated that, following the recent High Court judgment, they will be proceeding with the closure of Parkside Colliery.
‘I feel that now is an appropriate time to complete the announcement of May 13 of the full extent of support from the Government to those areas where the affected pits are situated.
‘The cash will provide significant benefits to the areas and communities affected by possible pit closures.’
But last night St Helens council leader Dave Watts attacked the Government's announcement.
‘The timing is beautiful.
On Friday they close us down.
Today they give us a meagre amount of the cash which they had previously taken off us in the form of grant cutbacks,’ he said.
‘It is a pittance and it will not help us deal with the huge problems caused by the closure of Parkside.
‘It is a slap in the face, a sweetener, a paltry gesture which indicates the help they intend to give us.’
Anglers net 2,000 fish to save club
ANGLERS are celebrating after landing a huge catch of fish which has ensured their club's survival.
Fishing tackle manufacturers Daiwa Sports Ltd has donated around £10,000 worth of freshwater fish to the Broughton Hall Angling Club, West Derby just 12 months after all their fish were wiped out in a oil spill.
The private club faced closure before the Japanese firm stepped in with the 2,000-fish donation.
‘Fish in lakes and rivers are at the mercy of environmental factors as Broughton Hall anglers know only too well,’ said Daiwa managing director Sam Aoki yesterday.
‘Fish are in short supply in many fisheries.
We plan to plant the seeds to improve a number of fisheries every year.’
A combination of oil being dumped in the lake and excessive algae killed the fish last year.
Delighted club secretary Paul McCoy said yesterday: ‘Talk about our luck changing!
We are absolutely thrilled that Daiwa will be helping us in such an effective way.
Concern for missing patient
POLICE are becoming increasingly concerned about the welfare of a 30-year-old woman who has not been seen since she walked out of Broadgreen Hospital, Liverpool, two weeks ago.
Diane Wright, of The Greenway, Dovecote, Liverpool, was being treated at the hospital for anorexia.
A police spokesman said last night: ‘Miss Wright simply walked out of the hospital at 2pm on May 23 and has not been seen since.’
Twitchers' eagle error
BLUNDERING birdwatchers may be to blame for the failure of England's only breeding pair of Golden Eagles to produce chicks for the first time in four years.
The pair produced two eggs in their eyrie in Haweswater, Cumbria, but experts fear twitchers may have breached an exclusion zone set up by the RSPB.
EX-UNION BOSS SENT TO PRISON
Three-month sentence for official who stole £3,000
By Harry Dean
FORMER Liverpool City Council union official Tony Gavin was jailed for three months at Liverpool Crown Court for theft this afternoon.
Gavin, 35, stole more than £3,000 from a fund set up to help grieving families, the court had been told.
And in passing sentence Judge David Lynch told him: ‘You caused a great deal of distress and anger.’
The court was told that Gavin, full-time city council union official at the time of the offences, handed over some of the cash as hardship payments to striking bin men.
Gavin, of Briar Drive, Huyton, admitted eight charges of stealing cash from the council's Life Insurance Welfare Scheme.
Gavin, since been dismissed by local government union Nalgo, was a full-time union official representing thousands of council employees.
Antonis Georges, prosecuting, told an earlier hearing that Gavin admitted to the police he wrote out cheques for amounts ranging from £59 to £711 which he claimed he intended to repay.
But in some cases two years had elapsed without the money being refunded by him.
One of the offences to which Gavin pleaded guilty was a specimen charge of £100, an amount he admitted taking from the account once or twice a month between March and October 1991.
Gavin denied 10 charges of theft and three of deception, and he was found not guilty on these 13 charges.
Judge Lynch told Gavin: ‘Over two years you used the fund as an extra bank account of your own.
Trust
’ You did not lead a particularly high life style and the money went to pay of credit cards, rent arrears, phone bills and taxi fares.
‘It was a very serious breach of trust.
You were taking money out of this fund when relatives of the dead were hoping to be paid funeral expenses, and this caused a great deal of distress and anger.’
Anthony Carus, defending, said Gavin was the treasurer of the fund.
The administration was always poor and in 1991 it became chaotic.
He said that the Treasurers department at Liverpool City Council was responsible for deducting contributions to the fund from employees, but errors regularly cropped up.
All the work eventually fell on Gavin shoulders.
He did not receive any payment for his work with the fund.
Mr Carus said there was strike action and Gavin was hounded by refuse collectors to make on-the-spot hardship payments in pubs and clubs.
Gavin was called on to act as press liaison officer.
He was under tremendous pressure and on the go for more than 12 hours a day.
He said Gavin had used the money to pay off debts.
Council boost for registry offices
By Carl Butler Daily Post Staff
COUNCILLORS asked to save money by closing seven offices used for registering births, deaths and marriages have decided to spend money promoting them.
Some outstations were so far out of the way, the public did not know they were there, said Prestatyn Coun Richard Edwards.
He told Clwyd's environment and protection committee he was angry about proposals to the end the grass-roots service.
Officials wanted consultation on the future of Caergwrle, Buckley, Connah's Quay, Denbigh, Prestatyn, Chirk and Ruabon.
Caergwrle and Buckley have had only six callers between them in six months.
Problems
But Coun Edwards said: ‘It's like British Rail, you reduce the service bit by bit then you shut it.
We have, in Prestatyn, a facility which is very central and well used, despite the fact that the signs advertising it have been changed three times in five years.’
Prestatyn Coun Rhiannon Hughes said the alternative of going to Bodelwyddan would pose huge problems for those without transport.
Coun David Messham said the money which was going to be used on the consultation process would be better spent advertising and promoting the outstations.
Councillors agreed to try to promote the outstations for 12 months to see if the public make more use of them.
Hospice hopes receive vital cash boost
FUNDS of a home care unit to be opened in September at the Hospice of the Good Shepherd, Backford, will be boosted with a grant of £5,000 from a medical insurance agency.
Building of the new unit, at a cost of £120,000, is almost complete.
A fund-raising fun run is being held on Sunday.
Friends talk about gardens ORGANIC gardening will be explained this evening at a meeting of Halton Friends of the Earth.
Guest speaker at the meeting, in Waterloo Community Centre, Runcorn Old Town, is Jim Hay (7.45pm).
Memorial
EXTENSIONS to the Pavilion in Barrow in memory of the late Coun Walter Mapes will be opened today by his widow Annie (6.30pm).
Curry attack too hot for knife men
By Daily Post Correspondent
STAFF at an Indian restaurant forced two angry knife-wielding customers to flee by bombarding them with curry powder, a court was told.
Paul Sharp, 27, and David Sweeney, 28, argued with the manager of the Step In Indian restaurant in Foregate Street, Chester, and then followed him into the kitchen, Chester Crown Court heard yesterday.
Sharp allegedly picked up a 12-inch knife and threatened to kill manager Jason Ali, but was overpowered by staff and covered in chilli and curry powder by the chef, said Philip Hughes, prosecuting.
Sharp, of Rhuddlan Road, Blacon and Sweeney, of Hatton Road, Blacon, both deny two charges of assault causing actual bodily harm and affray.
Mr Hughes told the jury: ‘The defendants complained that their table cloth was dirty and were generally noisy and offensive.
‘When Mr Ali asked them to leave, Sharp became aggressive and Mr Ali went into the kitchen.
‘Sharp followed him in and picked up a 12-inch knife and threatened to kill him and other staff.
‘Staff disarmed him but then he head-butted Mr Ali quite deliberately with such force he fell backwards.’
Mr Hughes said Sweeney picked up a knife from a table and stabbed the restaurant's owner with it in the back of the hand.
He added: ‘Sharp then started to chase Mr Ali around.
The staff tried to subdue the defendants by throwing curry and chilli powder at them.’
The court was told that when arrested, the pair complained to police they were injured by having curry powder thrown at them.
The trial continues.
Girl, 8 ‘no angel’ says sex case judge
A SEX offender escaped jail yesterday after a judge said the eight-year-old girl he abused was ‘not entirely an angel’.
Judge Ian Starforth Hill, QC, gave Karl Gambrill two years probation at Winchester Crown Court for attempted unlawful intercourse.
He told Gambrill he would have faced a prison sentence but for mitigating circumstances.
‘The law in this country protects little girls because they do not know what is right and what is wrong.
‘They would take part in sexual activities because they would think that was right.
‘However, I have been provided with information which leads me to think she was not entirely an angel herself, which is no excuse for you.
‘And you were only 18 at the time as opposed to being a grown man.’
Gambrill, now 21, of Southampton, Hants, pleaded guilty.
He was ordered to attend a programme of treatment for his sexual problems and pay £100 costs.
Crash victim named
A WOMAN killed in a road accident at Little Neston on Monday has been named as Audrey Wells, 66, of West Kirby.
Mrs Wells was killed when a Nissan Sunny, in which she was a passenger, was in collision with a Ford Transit van on Marshlands Road.
Her husband, Edwin, who was driving, has serious injuries.
The driver of the Transit was not badly hurt in the accident.
League's £2m ground plan
A MOVE that would generate around £2million to help pay for improvements at Football League grounds is set to go ahead this week.
The cash will be raised by a five per cent levy on all transfer fees received by the clubs and a 10 per cent cut of their end-of-season prize-money from the League.
The proposal goes before chairmen at the League's annual meeting on Friday and seems certain to be endorsed.
League spokesman Ian Cotton said: ‘It will show that League football is doing something to help itself fulfil the requirements of the Lord Justice Taylor report.
‘If we apply the levies to the last full financial year, they would have raised almost £2million£1.6m generated by transfers and £360,000 from prize money.’
The cash generated will not be held in a central pool but in individual accounts for each club.
The money each club generates is held for that club to use for improvements, alterations and safety measures.
Friday's meeting, to be held at Walsall's Bescot stadium, will also discuss a number of changes to League rules.
The League is anxious to protect its lucrative link-up with the pools' companies and the growing number of teams moving from the normal Saturday date has seen the day's fixture list shrunk.
The League proposes that games can only be switched from Saturday on police instructions or because of television commitments.
Proposals include both teams taking to the field together before kick-off and permitting three substitutes instead of the current two, with the third being a ‘recognised goalkeeper’, as in the Premier League.
Clubs also look set to be given the option of having players' names on the back of their shirts.
Princess meets charity ‘heroine’
By Sherai Raif Daily Post Correspondent
THE PRINCESS of Wales met one of her heroines when Mother Teresa of Calcutta visited her at Kensington Palace.
Mother Teresa was driven there from one of her missions in Kensal Rise, west London.
After returning to the three-storey house in Bravington Road, she said: ‘It was a brief visit.
There was no discussion.’
Asked if the Princess had changed since their last meeting at the mission in September 1991, Mother Teresa said: ‘She was as I know her.’
The elderly founder of the charity helping children in the back streets of Calcutta is making a brief visit to Britain after a visit to Ireland.
The Princess and Mother Teresa first met in Rome.
Mother Teresa's invitation to Kensington Palace confirms the admiration and respect the Princess of Wales has for the 82-year-old aid worker.
Mother Teresa, who last week spoke out about the evil of divorce, made an anguished comment in the wake of the announcement of the Royal marriage split.
She told The Universe, the Catholic weekly: ‘I am praying for the family and I feel very sorry for them.
‘Love begins at home and the family that prays together stays together.’
Yesterday's meeting is likely to fuel further speculation about the Princess's interest in Catholicism.
Yesterday, the Princess also turned down an invitation to try out a hospital treadmill saying she was much too fit already.
She was visiting Glasgow's Western Infirmary to learn about pioneering work to find new ways to treat asthma.
Earlier the Princess, who is the patron of the International Spinal Research Trust, visited Scotland's national spinal-injury unit in the city.
Afterwards, she visited the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons and was told surgeons there will soon be able to practise their skills using virtual-reality equipment.
Police warning on gun suspect
A MAN on the run from the French Foreign Legion and branded ‘Psycho’ by his former comrades is still being hunted by murder squad detectives.
Justin Martin-Clarke is wanted in connection with the drugs-related shooting of a businessman in April.
Last night a nationwide alert was issued for the former foreign embassy bodyguard, who has Merseyside connections, and the public was warned not to approach him under any circumstances.
Hertfordshire Police are leading the hunt for Clarke following the murder of Paul Milburn on April 26 in St Albans.
The 43-year-old victim was discovered in his Saab car with a single gunshot wound to the chest.
Clarke, 38, has not been seen since.
Detectives believe he was killed after a drugs deal went wrong.
Det Sgt Greg Cooper, who is heading the murder inquiry, said: ‘Clarke is extremely dangerous and is considered armed.
On no account should he be approached.’
He added: ‘Clarke has long-standing links with north london and Merseyside and has a slight Liverpool accent.
He is not known to have a wide circle of friends, in fact people tend to steer clear of him.
‘However, he is extremely plausible and a good talker.
People should be on their guard.’
Clarke is a former nightclub bouncer who joined the Foreign Legion in 1980 but went absent without leave just nine months later.
He is described as being white, around 6ft tall with broad shoulders and dark, curly hair.
Anyone who can help Hertfordshire Police is asked to contact  or Merseyside Police on .
‘War at sea’ launched
By David Greenwood Daily Post Staff
IRISH Sea ferry operators B&I and Stena Sealink are ready to battle it out for passengers this summer.
The opening shots have been fired by Dublin-based B&I with the introduction of the first’ super ferry’out of the Anglesey port of Holyhead.
And next month the port's owners, Sealink, will hit back by launching its fast Sealynx service.
But yesterday, as B&I showed off its 20,000 tonne vessel, the Isle of Innisfree, to travel agents, local civic leaders and the media, company officials said they were not worried by the opposition's planned move.
B&I's UK passenger manager Victor Williams said it was just the start of the company getting into the ‘super phase mould.’
‘Competition is fierce but we believe we have, in this ferry, a product of the highest quality,’ he said.
Mr Williams said the Isle of Innisfree, capable of carrying 1,800 passengers and 411 cars, was the first of its class to come into Holyhead.
‘And we are delighted that we are the ones to bring it here,’ he added.
Mr Williams predicted that everyone would be happy with the service provided on the ship which has been upgraded as part of a £6m investment throughout the line's car ferry fleet.
‘Car passengers from all over the country arriving at Holyhead want a relaxed journey to Dublin.
This ferry is the way to do it it just oozes luxury.’
He explained that an innovation on the ship, bought a year ago from a Danish company, was the introduction of a ‘club class’ ideal for the businessman who wanted to get away from the crowd.
Facilities include phones and fax machines.
There are also new lounges for motorists, service restaurants, a play area, casino and cinemas.
The Isle of Innisfree berthed at Holyhead yesterday
Council bid to save energy
HOUSING chiefs in Warrington have approved a programme of pilot initiatives to improve energy efficiency in council houses.
The work will include cavity wall insulation, roof insulation, double glazing and installation of energy efficient heating systems.
Housing director Tom Roberts said energy efficiency would benefit the tenants by reducing fuel bills, and the council by reducing maintenance costs due to condensation problems and increasing the value of the dwellings.
It would also increase rent revenue as tenants would be better off and more satisfied, and could also increase the authority's chances of winning more money from the Government.
Crime figures rise again
LATEST figures show Cheshire's police force is still fighting a losing battle against a rising tide of crime.
The force has come in for criticism in the past two months after figures released on the constabulary's ‘crime-free day’ in April showed Cheshire had suffered the highest rise in crime in the country.
Figures released yesterday for the first four months of the year show total crime in the county is up 12pc on this time last year, with the detection rate down by 3pc.
Chief Constable David Graham expressed concern about robberies which are up by 23pc with 130 offences in the first four months of the year.
He said: ‘I am concerned but these figures may have something to do with the fact that as a direct result of the Warrington bombing and shooting the serious crime squad has been completely centred at Warrington, which has left the rest of the county without adequate cover.
‘But I am hoping with normality returning, we might see a falling of these figures.’
Sexual offences are down on the same period last year by 31pc.
Fear for future o f special hospital
FAMILIES who fear that a special hospital is to close have accused health service managers of snubbing their request for consultation.
More than 30 patients at the Manor Bungalows, in Little Sutton, Ellesmere Port, could be moved elsewhere under an option being considered by Chester Health Authority.
The authority wants to revamp the site to meet new social services guidelines limiting the number of people in each bungalow from eight to six.
They have confirmed that one option under consideration is to close down the site.
But Chief Executive Ralph Murray has promised that no hasty decision will be taken and that full consultation will be held with the carers before any action is taken.
But the families say they have still not been told anything by the health authority.
Coun Peter Sheppard, who is representing the families, said: ‘They are very angry that after the initial assurance of consultation they have still not heard anything.
‘They are very worried about the place and the effect of the uncertainty.
‘They want to hear what is going on and what the future holds for the Manor bungalows.’
The Manor bungalows are run for the authority by private firm McIntyre.
They families say that people with severe learning difficulties do not adapt well to sudden changes of environment.
Mr Murray was not available for comment last night.
LABRADOR bitch, 9 years old, OAP owner gone into care; free to good home.
Jilted man's suicide
A MAN hanged himself in his bedroom after he became depressed about a break-up with his girlfriend.
An inquest in Liverpool heard that unemployed printer Philip Banks, 31, moved back in with his aunt, Hilda Barrett, after his girlfriend left him and returned to her husband.
Mrs Barrett said she found her nephew hanging in the bedroom of his home in Oakhill Road, Oak Vale Park, Liverpool, on the evening of February 11.
She released him from the leather strap then ran next door to call the police.
Merseyside Coroner Roy Barter heard that Mr Banks returned to England in 1985 after his family emigrated to Zambia then moved to South Africa.
After living with his aunt for four years, Mr Banks moved in with his girlfriend, but he moved back home last September after the couple split up a few weeks later and became very depressed.
He was diagnosed anti-depressants by his doctor but failed to take them and did not return for a check up two weeks later.
Mr Barter recorded a suicide verdict and expressed his sympathy to Mr Banks' family.
Man's nose bitten off
A MAN of 28 who bit of the tip of another man's nose during a fight has been jailed for 18 months.
Michael Connolly, of Wellington Road, Toxteth, had pleaded guilty at Liverpool Crown Court to wounding Brian Daly, 24, with intent.
David Owen, prosecuting, said the men were fighting outside the Volunteer pub in Park Road, Toxteth.
Daly was taken to hospital where surgeons sewed the nose back on.
Defence counsel Brendan Carville said Connolly was not a violent man.
Blackmail of firm denied
A MAN set up a protection racket and demanded thousands of pounds from a building firm, it was alleged yesterday.
Gary Grugel, 40, of East Millwood Road, Speke, Liverpool, has pleaded not guilty to 10 offences involving blackmail, attempting to pervert the course of justice, wounding with intent and assault.
Prosecuting counsel Mark Brown claimed at Liverpool Crown Court: ‘Grugel, by the use of intimidation and threats of serious physical violence, sought to operate a protection racket.’
He told the jury that Joseph Marland owned a building company.
He bought a site in Ramsfield Road and development work began in the winter of 1990.
The following September, while Mr Marland was on holiday, Grugel spoke to Marland's son-in-law, who had been left in charge.
He claimed Mr Marland had agreed he should look after the site and demanded money.
Mr Johns said he knew nothing of this but the next day Grugel again asked for money and became aggressive.
Mr Brown alleged that Grugel twice asked plasterer Peter McCabe for some plaster boards and when he threatened to tell the police Grugel assaulted him, causing a laceration above his eyebrow which needed hospital treatment.
Grugel threatened he would break Mr McCabe's legs.
That evening, Grugel spoke to Mr Johns saying that if the police were informed ‘his brother-in-law would come looking for Mr Johns’.
Mr Johns spoke to McCabe and stopped him reporting it,
It was claimed that there were further threats and assaults and Grugel was given money.
The case continues.
Rockers digit
PETE Townshend played air guitar on his shovel and Chuck Berry flashed his famous footwork as they helped break ground for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum in Cleveland, Ohio, yesterday.
The £55m project is scheduled for completion in June 1995.
Fire bird gone
A BUDGERIGAR is missing this morning after fire destroyed his cage.
The blaze broke out in the house in Ashurst, Skemersdale, Lancashire, shortly after 3pm yesterday.
The rest of the property was slightly damaged.
A fire brigade spokesman said: ‘We could find no trace of the bird.’
Foster-son tells of island farmhouse ‘whipping ordeal’
By Daily Post Correspondent
A TEENAGER yesterday claimed he was beaten with a horsewhip sometimes while dangling upside down from a rope by his foster father.
Paul Llewelyn Jones told a jury at Mold Crown Court he was beaten with a cane or a whip three or four times a week and was forced to scour bins for food.
When he was hungry, he went to eat the left-overs thrown to the dogs outside the Anglesey farmhouse where he was staying with foster parents.
And when he was caught he was given a bowl of Winalot dog food, he alleged.
‘I ate it.
I had no choice because I was starving.
I felt sick after that,’ he said.
‘They used to make me look a fool and leave a bowl outside for me.’
Norman Roberts, 59, of Ysgubor Escob at Gwalchmai, Anglesey, denies cruelty by wilful ill treatment and assault.
His wife, Evelyn, 59, of the same address, denies wilful neglect and their son, Ian Roberts, 34, denies common assault.
All the alleged incidents are said to have taken place between 1980 when he was fostered at the age of six by the family and 1985.
The court was also told that Gwynedd Social Services department left the boy with the family, despite his allegations of mistreatment.
David Hale, prosecuting, said photographs of the boy's injuries were taken by a doctor in Ysbyty Gwynedd in 1985 and he was placed on an at risk register.
But social services decided they did not have sufficient information to justify removing him from the Roberts' care.
The matter only came to light when police, conducting an inquiry into the running of children's homes in North Wales, interviewed the boy last year.
Jones, now 19, and living in Holyhead, said Roberts and son, Ian, would hold him upside down, tie his feet with rope or string, and tie it to an overhead pole.
It was then he was whipped, he said, which happened three or four times.
Roberts would whip him, and his son would watch.
But he alleged Ian hit him once or twice.
But there were other times that he was whipped while standing up.
‘I used to be in agony all the time,’ he said.
‘I have still got pains in my back now, and my legs and hands.’
Defending barrister Thomas Teague accused Paul Jones of making up ‘wicked inventions.’
He said at no time was Paul Jones ever hit with a cane or whip, at no time was he tied upside down and hit, he was never forced to get up early to feed the animals, or ill-treated in any way whatsoever.
He would sometimes be slapped with a hand on the bottom, and very occasionally would be given a clip around the ear by Mr Roberts.
The case continues.
Boy in roof plunge
A SCHOOLBOY escaped severe injury last night when he plunged through a skylight and crashed on to a bed.
Although the child suffered serious gashes to his hands and arms, emergency services say his injuries could have been a lot worse.
The accident occurred last night in the Toxteth district of Liverpool as he and his friends played football.
When their ball ended up on the roof of the Bentley Road Health Centre, the 12 year-old clambered up to try to get it.
But as the boy scrambled about, he stood on a skylight and fell about 12ft into the room below.
The alarm was raised by the boy's friends who called the fire brigade.
Station Officer Alan Bridle, from Canning Place's Green Watch, said: ‘When we arrived I got up on to the roof and then lowered myself down into the centre.
‘The boy was a little shocked and had quite deep gashes but landing on the bed as he did certainly saved him.
‘I calmed him down and checked him over and then the ambulance took over.’
Peru fears revenge of Blackburn vampire
A TOWN in Peru is in an uproar over a legend that a Blackburn woman buried there is a vampire who has vowed to return to life tomorrow to seek revenge.
Windows, doors and chimneys in the town of Pisco, 125 miles south of Lima, have been festooned with garlic.
Radio stations have promised live transmission from the tiny graveyard at midnight, and local police have been mobilised to keep order among sightseers.
The focus of the uproar is the tomb of Sarah Helen Roberts from Blackburn, Lancs, who was buried in the local cemetery.
Legend has it that Sarah Helen, who died on June 9, 1913, was shut alive inside a lead coffin by British authorities for practising witchcraft, but swore to rise in 80 years to take revenge.
For the next four years her relatives reportedly tried to find a country that would receive her body for burial, but were turned away until they reached Peru.
Carlos Castro, head of Pisco's main hospital, said pregnant women fear the vampire will reincarnate in their babies.
Looking on the bright side, Mayor Edgar Nunez said tourism had jumped by 60pc.
Protest over job fears
DAVID Hunt was lobbied by trade unionists yesterday when he visited offices where they claim 1,000 jobs are under threat.
Union representatives at Castle View House in Runcorn handed a letter to Mr Hunt when he officially opened the new £15m building.
The letter from CPSA secretary Dave Jones called on Mr Hunt to review the ‘market testing’ programme, a form of competitive tendering, which the unions claim is threatening 1,000 of the 1,500 workforce.
Mr Jones said: ‘He did make reference to the letter in the speech that he made and he did make positive noises but whether they will translate into positive actions we'll have to wait and see.’
The unions are concerned because they fear that even if the in-house bids for the Civil Service work are successful, jobs could still be lost.
The unions involved, the Civil and Public Servants Association and the National Union of Civil and Public Servants, claim that the in-house bids involve jobs losses of up to 50pc as well.
The Department of Employment has said that the market testing programme aims to provide the best value for money for the taxpayer.
Groom-to-be tells the world
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
A COMPUTER expert gave his girlfriend an olde worlde surprise yesterday when he enlisted the help of a town crier to ask her to marry him.
Two weeks ago, Sharon Edwards began teasing Darren Johnson over his lack of romance.
But after her 25-year-old boyfriend from Huntington, Chester, popped the question Sharon, 22, admitted she was stunned.
Mr Johnson secretly arranged with David Mitchell to ask the crucial question during one of his announcements.
So, while out on a shopping trip, Darren stepped forward as a volunteer to help the crier with a proclamation of his own.
He bellowed: ‘I call upon these persons here present to witness that I, Darren John Johnson, being of sound mind, do ask my beloved Sharon Samantha Edwards, if she will plight her troth unto me?’
And in front of a crowd of more than 100 cheering tourists, Sharon agreed to his proposal.
Deputy town crier Mr Mitchell then announced: ‘The lady hath accepted.’
Sharon, who works at a miniature models factory in Wrexham, said: ‘I have been teasing him for about two weeks for not being romantic but he has shown me I was wrong.
‘It was a big shock and when I said yes there were about 100 Australian tourists cheering and photographing us.’
Darren said: ‘We are both history lovers so enlisting the town crier's help seemed the ideal way to propose.
‘I was glad she accepted because otherwise I would have looked like a right banana in front of all those tourists.’
Heroin man jailed
A KIRKBY man caught with £300 worth of heroin has been jailed for two years.
Ian Potter, 21, unemployed, of Ascot Drive, pleaded guilty at Liverpool Crown Court yesterday to possessing the drug with intent to supply.
David Owen, prosecuting, told how police officers called at Potter's home on March 16.
They were allowed in by his father but then had to break down the locked bedroom door.
As well as a bag containing the drug, officers found plastic bags and a knife blade.
Potter admitted to police that he had intended selling the drug.
John Maxwell, defending, said that Potter, who has no previous drugs convictions, accepted that he would have to go to jail.
Probe into OAP death ordered
A CORONER yesterday ordered a police investigation after a pensioner died following a car crash near a junction with faulty traffic lights.
Alec Lewis, 84, died from a stroke two days after his car was in collision with a bus on Muirhead Avenue, Norris Green, Liverpool.
He was rushed to hospital on the day of the crash with his wife Ethel and young granddaughter, both passengers in the car, was released later the same day after receiving three stitches to a head wound.
Mrs Lewis told the opening of an inquest at Liverpool Coroners Court that she found her husband hanging half out of bed, frothing at the mouth, two days after the crash.
He was rushed from his home in Whinfell Avenue, West Derby, to Broadgreen Hospital where he later died.
Merseyside Coroner Roy Barter said he would be holding an inquest after a post mortem revealed head injuries played a part in Mr Lewis's death.
And he said he had ordered a police investigation after reports that a set of traffic lights near the scene of the accident were not working.
Pigeon rifleman triggers scare
By Richard Elias Daily Post Staff
ARMED police officers surrounded an office block and sealed off surrounding streets after a man was seen pointing an air rifle from the roof.
Evening rush-hour traffic in Liverpool city centre was halted during the alert, in which the gunman was spotted looking through the sights at potential targets.
But after noticing all the activity in the streets below, he telephoned Merseyside Police headquarters and sheepishly announced: ‘Sorry, I am security guard here and I was just shooting pigeons.’
The man rang off but was soon contacted by officers from the force's Firearms Unit who ordered him out of the building on Crosshall Street.
Last night, a police spokesman said: ‘We received reports of a man on the roof aiming a rifle and looking through its sights.
‘The Armed Response Vehicles were sent, the place surrounded and the area sealed off.’
The spokesman added: ‘The weapon was being discharged, but he must have noticed what was going on because he rang up saying who he was and apologised.
‘He was told to leave his weapon behind and to walk out his hands clearly visible in the air.’
An air rifle was later recovered from the scene and a man has been reported for summons at a later date.
Police probe mill blaze
POLICE are investigating the cause of a fire which badly damaged a large mill last night.
The blaze, at the Old Bainbridge Mill in Bolton Old Road, Atherton, near Leigh, was fought by 30 firefighters from the Greater Manchester Brigade.
Unrestrained folly
MANY parents are flouting the rear seat belt law and leaving their children unrestrained in cars, according to the RAC.
It is the driver's legal responsibility to ensure that children under 14 are strapped in but spot checks by the RAC showed nearly seven in ten did not comply.
Richard Waterhouse, who runs the RAC's Child Safety Campaign, said: ‘It only takes a minute to ensure a child is safely strapped in.
That minute could literally save a child's life.’
‘Where belts are fitted they must be used yet I have seen parents taking four or five children on a school run with none restrained.’
Gunman admits Nazi killing
A LONE gunman killed a French Nazi collaborator yesterday, and then went on television to claim responsibility.
Christian Didier said he killed Vichy police chief Rene Bousquet with four bullets fired at pointblank range at his Paris home.
Hours later Didier summoned television crews to a hotel before being arrested.
He said he pretended to be carrying court documents.
A court was due to decide whether to send Bousquet for trial.
Jewish leaders said the assassination deprived France of a chance to establish the truth about Bousquet's past.
UN flies bodies home THE BODIES of 23 peacekeepers shot in weekend battles with Somali gunmen were flown home to Pakistan yesterday as the UN honed plans to hit back at the killers ‘within days’.
Sources said the UN planned to build up its forces and mount an overwhelming show of force.
Meanwhile a sombre ceremony for the dead Pakistanis was held at Mogadishu airport.
Some 400 Pakistani soldiers turned out to bid their comrades farewell.
Chateau porn fury
THE French count who is to marry the Princess of Wales' stepmother, Raine, Countess of Spencer, said yesterday he felt ‘totally abused’ by people who rented his chateau then used it for a porn film.
Comte Jean-Francois de Chambrun issued a Press statement after learning of the story when he and his fiancee returned to the Countess's London home.
A Sunday newspaper reported that the film team moved into the Chateau Garibondi at Cannes as the Comte and his bride-to-be ended a weekend there, and carried photographs of models cavorting in various parts of the property.
Banned driver in car chase with police
A BANNED drink-driver led police on a chase around housing estates at speeds of up to 50mph, Warrington magistrates heard yesterday.
Christopher Millman then stopped his car and tried to run away, but was soon caught.
He was later found to be more than twice the legal drink-drive limit.
Millman, 41, of Poplars Avenue, Orford, Warrington pleaded guilty to driving dangerously; with excess alcohol; while disqualified; and without insurance.
He was remanded on bail until July 6 for reports.
Dennis Tighe, prosecuting said police spotted Millman driving a BMW at about 11.30pm and tried to stop him.
Millman accelerated and led police through 30mph housing estates at speeds of up to 50mph.
He eventually stopped the car and tried to escape, but was caught by police after a short chase.
Frank Howard, defending, said Millman had been drinking to celebrate his birthday and expected his girlfriend to drive him home at the end of the night.
He said: ‘Mr Millman waited for some time but she failed to arrive and he stupidly decided to drive home himself.’
Baby freed by firemen after cot ordeal
FIREMEN had to release a baby yesterday after her leg became trapped in the bars of her cot.
Alexandria Gaunt, aged seven months, was trapped in the cot for more than half an hour as her worried family tried to release her.
Firemen eventually managed to untangle the frightened child from the bars by prising them apart.
Frantic mother Ashleigh Gaunt had dialled 999 after trying in vain to free her baby herself.
But last night Alexandria was safe and sound asleep at home in Holes Lane, Woolston, Warrington.
Her mother said: ‘My son, who is two and a half, has slept in the cot before with no problems and she has always been alright in it.
‘We can't understand how she got stuck.
But she was not injured and I'm really grateful to the firemen.
‘She is asleep now and has forgotten all about it.’
Sub officer Jim Clark said: ‘It was quite a simple job for us.
We were just happy to be able to help.’
Marquess behind bars after four days on run
By Keith Manning and Gavin Cordon
THE Marquess of Blandford was behind bars last night after four days on the run from police.
As he started a 112-day sentence in London's Pentonville prison for failing to pay more than £10,000 in maintenance to his estranged wife Becky, the 37-year-old aristocrat also faced new charges of attacking police sent to arrest him.
His arrest came just hours after he taunted police, ringing up a national newspaper to say he was the ‘new Lord Lucan’ and would never be caught.
The Marquess is heir to the Duke of Marlborough's £100m Blenheim estate and the family motto is ‘Faithful though Unfortunate’.
He was tracked down early yesterday to a flat in Cathcart Road, Kensington, west London.
This is just next door to his old address at No 76, where he managed to evade a High Court Deputy Tipstaff last week after a tip-off from the landlord, apparently by climbing through a back window and shinning down a drainpipe.
In the struggle to arrest him yesterday, two policemen were hurt and extra officers had to be called.
Neighbour Brian Dean, a 55-year-old chauffeur, said: ‘I was woken up by the police cars lining up in the middle of the street.
‘I could hear all the banging and screaming and then about seven or eight minutes later they dragged him out.
‘He was screaming and shouting abuse.’
The two officers who went in to arrest the Marquess, Sgt Michael Tate and PC Patrick Murphy, were involved in ‘quite a violent struggle’ with him, said a Metropolitan Police spokesman.
The peer, whose ancestors include Sir Winston Churchill and the first Duke of Marlborough, victor of the Battle of Blenheim in 1704, was taken to Kensington police station.
After being charged with assaulting the officers, he emerged bruised and dishevelled to be transferred to Pentonville.
A police spokesman said Blandford had also been charged with four offences of making off without payment to taxi drivers for amounts ranging between £11 and £70.
He will appear before Horseferry Road magistrates on June 30.
A police spokesman said: ‘As I understand it, he will serve 112 days unless he pays the £10,000 maintenance.’
The Marquess, known to friends as Jamie Blandford, married 28-year-old kindergarten teacher and friend of the Duchess of York, Becky Few Brown, in February 1990.
The couple produced a son, George, Earl of Sutherland, before they separated.
Raiders prey on blind man, 80
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
A PARTIALLY blind elderly man was tricked by two youths who stole his wallet.
Detectives in Northwich yesterday appealed for public help in catching the pair.
They said one of the youths kept the frail 80 year old man talking while another sneaked into his house in Forest Street, Weaverham.
He searched through the premises with the victim completely unaware that he had slipped inside.
The blind man called the police when he realised they had stolen his brown leather wallet.
Det Insp Graham Lee, of Northwich CID, said: ‘He was a confused old man who was partially sighted.
‘It was a cruel crime to carry out and they escaped with £20.
‘This is a timely reminder to people that they should be careful with strangers and if they are leaving their doors open.
It is an invitation to thieves.’
The man has only been able to provide police with sketchy details of the youths but they spoke with Liverpool accents.
Det Insp Lee said: ‘Despite that they could still be local or from Winsford.’
He appealed for anyone with information to contact him on .
Fears on bedsit fire standards
FEARS that city bedsits could become death-traps have been raised, amid reports that the Government is to scrap laws governing them.
Chester city councillor, Christine Russell, has slammed the Government after reports that it was planning to abandon laws governing safety in bedsits.
After a campaign by councillors, a registration scheme was set up in the Cheyney Road, Garden Lane and Ermine Road areas of the city.
Coun Russell said: ‘I am horrified that the Government may be planning to scrap the legislation that empowers authorities to inspect register bedsits.
‘This scheme has proved extremely useful in putting pressure on private landlords to improve the safety and fitness of their properties.’
Coun Russell said there had been at least two deaths in bedsit fires in Chester in recent years.
‘For the Government to consider scrapping this form of protection for tenants against landlords is a backward step.’
A spokeswoman for the Department of the Environment, said: ‘We have been having discussions with the local authority associations.’
Under the Chester scheme, landlords pay £50 to register, but if they fail to do so and their houses contain more than the permitted number of occupants, they face fines of up to £1,000.
Holly Park targeted for park-and-ride
By Malcolm Handley Regional Affairs Correspondent
A FORMER Merseyside football ground, which has been vandalised, could become a railway park and ride site.
Holly Park, once the home of South Liverpool FC, has been empty since the club gave up the battle against vandals in 1990.
Now the derelict ground is being viewed by Merseytravel as a potential park and ride site.
A spokesman for Merseytravel last night confirmed its interest in Holly Park, which is immediately adjacent to Allerton Station.
But he stressed that no formal approach had been made for the former football ground.
‘It is just one of a number of sites which we are looking at to formulate an extended park and ride system,’ he said.
Liverpool City Council owns the freehold of Holly Park.
South Liverpool, formerly in the HFS Loans League, abandoned the ground after 50 years there.
Since then the future of Holly Park has been surrounded in controversy.
Last year, German-owned Aldi supermarkets withdrew from purchase negotiations after failing to get assurances on its plans for a food store.
Care group to discuss problems
NESTON Care Group has organised a public meeting on June 15 to look at community problems in the area and to see what positive steps can be taken to help eliminate them.
Chairman of the voluntary group, Linda Davies, says she hopes the meeting will not only highlight particular difficulties but also encourage more people to offer help and ideas.
The meeting, at Neston Town Hall, will be attended by Police Chief Inspector Vivienne Mills.
Training sessions VOLUNTEERS are needed to act as advocates for people with mental health problems.
Two training days are planned for June 23 and 30.
Anyone interested should contact Kevin McNerney, recently appointed full time advocate with Advocacy in Wirral, on .
Site move
REDEVELOPMENT plans for the site of the former Orbro store at Bidston Moss will be studied by Wirral plan sub committee tomorrow night.
The scheme involves demolition of existing warehouses and replacement with one unit, car parking, a garden centre and service yard.
Trust plans
WIRRAL Hospital Trust plans alterations and an extension at Clatterbridge Hospital to create a new outpatients department.
Man bailed
WIRRAL Magistrates bailed Andrew Ashman 24, of Waterpark Close in Prenton for 4 weeks for reports after he admitted entering the locker room at Prenton golf club and stealing a sports bag and contents in May.
Car ban
JOHN SHACKMAN 44, of Shrewsbury Road, Birkenhead was fined £100 and banned from driving for 20 months by Wirral Magistrates when he admitted a drink driving offence.
Man guilty after police find stolen bicycles
STOLEN cycles were found at the rear of a house when police executed a search warrant, Wirral magistrates heard.
Martin Butler, 25, of Woodward Road, Rock Ferry, denied attempting to dishonestly receive the two bikes, which he claims he bought for £20 from a caller at his door.
He was convicted and fined £40 plus £65 costs, with 28 days imprisonment if the money was not produced forthwith.
Butler also faced the court for non-payment of fines totalling over £500.
He was told he had been given every opportunity to pay, and was jailed for 32 days.
Pipeline hinders work on show
By David Banks and David Lloyd
A GAS pipeline which cuts across the Cheshire Show field has hindered preparations for the event.
Organisers have been forced to cut down on competitors and rent extra land after the British Gas pipeline interfered with their plans.
The laying of the pipeline has meant some land at the showground in Tabley, near Knutsford, cannot be used this year.
Seven acres of land has been rented to make up for the lost space.
There will be no donkeys or coloured and part-bred Welsh ponies at this year's show, which takes place on June 22 and 23.
‘The pipeline running from Carrington to Audlem carved a swathe through the northern end of our showground,’ show vice-chairman Geoff Morris said.
‘It was re-seeded but the seed was drowned out last autumn and difficult weather conditions in the spring means that it has to remain fenced off and unusable for this year's show.’
Joint show secretary Margaret Hollinshead said work on the pipeline had forced them to drop two judging rings for the donkeys and ponies.
British Gas would not comment on the matter yesterday.
The cost of this year's show has been put at £350,000, but admission prices have been kept at £6 for adults, £5 for senior citizens and £3 for children.
Almost 60,000 people attended last year's event.
Medical centre to open
A NEW medical centre which will cater for south Liverpool will be officially opened later this month.
The centre in Belle Vale Road, Gateacre, is part of an on-going improvement programme organised by Liverpool Family Health Service Association.
The centre will be opened on Saturday, June 26 by Rosemary Hawley, who is chairman of the FHSA.
Jewellery theft sparks warning to householders
POLICE are urging householders not to leave their front doors open in hot weather after a thief walked into a family home and stole £1,000 worth of jewellery.
The sneak thief walked into the house through an open front door in Rawson Road, Seaforth, Sefton, stealing nine rings.
The incident occurred at about noon on Monday.
A Merseyside Police spokesman said: ‘People should be careful about leaving their doors open in warm weather while they are busy elsewhere in their homes.
‘The rings stolen were of great sentimental value to the female owner, included in the haul were wedding and engagement rings.’
Assault at scene of crash
TWO police officers were punched and kicked when they went to investigate a minor road accident, a court heard yesterday.
A police car was also damaged during the incident, Warrington Crown Court was told.
Darren Grannell, 28, of Lord Street, Latchford, Warrington and Lee Day, 22, formerly of Warrington but now living in Weston-super-Mare, denied assaulting PC Roy Aspinall but changed their pleas to guilty after a trial had started.
Grannell also changed his pleas in respect of charges of assaulting PC Eric Moss and damaging a police car.
Both were remanded on bail for reports.
Sarah Leigh, prosecuting, said the two men were in a car which drove into the rear of a parked car in Reaper Close, Great Sankey.
A neighbour saw what happened and notified the car's owner who called the police.
PC Aspinall arrived on the scene and saw the two men pushing a car.
He started to question them but Grannell ‘flew off the handle’ and attacked him, punching and kicking the officer who fell to the ground.
Day also attacked him.
PC Moss arrived on the scene and was also punched by Grannell.
Grannell was placed in a police car but kicked out the rear window causing £150 damage.
Both men were taken to the police station where Grannell said he had been drinking and had no recollection of what had happened.
Disabled angry at county's plan for means test
By Daily Post Correspondent
DISABLED people who fail a means test will have to start paying for facilities they have enjoyed free of charge.
Users of the Dallam Centre, Warrington, are outraged by proposals to charge up to £5 a day for use of the facility.
Questionnaires issued by Cheshire County Council's social services department asking for financial details of those suffering with physical disabilities, mental illness and learning difficulties will also take away a person's privacy, it is claimed.
Wheelchair-bound Ethlyn Whittaker, aged 56, from Great Sankey, Warrington, has started a campaign against the means test forms, and has hit out at the charges set to be introduced in October.
‘I don't mind paying for use of the centre, but £5 for each visit is a bit steep.
‘The means testing forms that have been sent out will also take away my privacy.
The only thing they don't ask is what time I get up in the morning and what time I go to bed at night.
‘I have been told the forms are private and confidential, but by the time you finish filling them in, your whole life is there for someone to see.’
Mrs Whittaker said she would have to pay up to £20 a week to continue visiting the centre, as well as £5 an hour for her own carers.
‘I cannot afford these charges,’ she said.
A spokesman for Cheshire County Council's social services department said: ‘At present there are many people who do not pay, so they need to be asked to make a contribution to cater for those care needs.
‘The means testing forms have to be in such detail so we can work out how much people can afford.
‘The system is unfair at the moment, because only a handful are charged.’
A spokesman for the Warrington Disabled Information Group, based at the Dallam Centre, said: ‘People only need to give details they feel comfortable about.’
People with any queries about means testing can contact the information group on  between 10am-3pm.
Father tells of murder girl's last goodbye kiss
By Richard Elias Daily Post Staff
THE father of murder victim Jean Larkin told of how he kissed her goodnight during their last moments together.
And yesterday, Kevin Larkin revealed how he and his family are attempting to cope with their loss.
Speaking at a news conference at Merseyside Police headquarters in Liverpool, he said: ‘Unfortunately at this time all I can feel is angry.
My stomach has been turning over ever since this began.
It is like a nightmare that will never end.
‘I am desperate to find out exactly what happened to her and Garry.
We thought Jean might have been with Garry in the fire but there is no evidence to suggest that she is there now.’
Mr Larkin, 54, added: ‘Really now, I am wondering whether she has been buried somewhere.
But I really just do not know.’
He told how she and Garry used to call round to his house ever Sunday for lunch.
Mr Larkin said: ‘When she was leaving she always used to come and kiss both me and her mother goodbye although she was 24 years old.
That was the type of girl she was.’
The last time Mr Larkin saw his daughter was as she talked to her mother, Kay, about knitting and crochet at Mr Larkin's home in Alderfield Road, Speke.
He said: ‘I asked her to drop me off at the nearby Woodcutters Club.
Although it was late she did this, kissed me goodnight and that was the last I saw of ever her.’
One of the detectives in charge of the inquiry, Det Insp Ray Wareham said the hunt had now moved to a new location.
He said: ‘We are looking at Yarrow Country Park between Chorley and Coppull where underwater search unit officers have been brought in to help.
‘We are also searching the adjoining land and the car park in the area for any trace of Jean.’
The remains of Jean's boyfriend, Garry Pettitt have been discovered near Coppull, Chorley.
The results of DNA tests have not been received yet.
Detectives believe the pair were murdered when a drugs deal which Mr Pettitt was involved in went tragically wrong.
The couple from south Liverpool disappeared on April 27.
Gary Pettitt and Jean Larkin
Kevin Larkin a nightmare that will never end
‘Air route will ruin peaceful park’
NOISE from aircraft using a proposed new flightpath over Tatton Park may drive up to 80pc of visitors away and leave it financially crippled, it was claimed yesterday.
At a meeting on Friday, park managers will meet Cheshire councillors to discuss the implications of the proposed new route into Manchester Airport.
They want compensation from Manchester Airport for money they predict will be lost from visitor revenue.
They want the flightpath moved one mile to the west.
Tatton Park director Mike Beaufoy said: ‘Income comes to the estate from visitor admissions, open air events, concerts and filming in the open air these are all affected by aircraft flying over the estate.
‘Great numbers of visitors come to Tatton from urban areas.
They see Tatton as their nearest open space for recreation.
‘Reduction in the perceived peace and tranquillity will reduce the attractiveness at Tatton to 80pc of its visitors, thus having a major effect on visitor income and support for the estate.’
Tranquil Tatton but will a new airport flightpath shatter this idyllic rural scene and drive tourists away?
Light at end of the tunnel
By Malcolm Handley Regional Affairs Correspondent
MERSEY Tunnel officials were last night welcoming increased business and faster traffic flows.
Following a year when toll increases from 60p to £1 and the recession slashed use of both tunnels by a million vehicles, business has begun to boom.
Traffic through the Mersey tunnels was down 4.9pc in the year ending in April but a spokesman said indications were that it had regained 3pc of that business in the first few months of this year.
Officials are particularly pleased at the success of the new Fast-tag electronic payment system.
‘We are expecting to record our millionth Fast-tag customer within the next few weeks,’ said Jeremy Herbert for Merseytravel.
Figures out yesterday show that the tunnels were now breaking even.
It had been feared that if the impact of the recession and resistance to the toll increase had exceeded 10pc motorists faced another price rise.
Merseytravel finance director John Wilkinson said he did not now expect another toll increase to be even considered for another 12 months.
The company needs to raise £24m £8m to cover running costs and £16m to finance the £110m debt.
Mr Wilkinsion said he was pleasantly surprised that the loss of traffic had not been as bad as feared.
‘It does appear traffic is still returning to the tunnels,’ he added.
Merseytravel is convinced that increased use of the Fast-tag system will mean more efficient traffic flows.
Arsonists escape school inferno
FIRE-FIGHTERS risked their lives yesterday searching for two suspected young arsonists believed to be trapped inside a blazing school building.
The blaze caused extensive damage at the disused English Martyrs High School at Orford, Warrington scene of numerous fires and acts of vandalism in recent months.
Firemen wearing breathing apparatus searched the buildings for more than hour But two youths, believed to have started the fire, had disappeared.
A Fire Service spokesman said: ‘We were told from a reliable source the youths were still likely to be in the building so we conducted a thorough search.
But they must have got out somehow.
‘They were very lucky not to have been hurt.’
Local residents are campaigning for urgent action to stop the repeated fires at the semi-derelict school which closed only about two years ago.
Treaty enemies firm in debate
THE Maastricht Treaty Bill was set to gain its second reading in the Lords early today after a marathon two day debate which saw Margaret Thatcher lead a head on clash with Mr Major over her call for a referendum.
Baroness Thatcher's demand was to be reinforced by her former Cabinet lieutenant, Lord Tebbit, as the debate drew to a close.
The bitterness of Maastricht opponents who also included Tory ex-minister Lord Parkinson and former Commons Speaker Viscount Tonypandy signalled that the European Communities (Amendment) Bill is set for a gruelling passage, despite it being given an unopposed second reading.
Lady Thatcher told peers yesterday that it would be ‘disgraceful’ if British voters were denied a say on Maastricht.
The former Prime Minister added: ‘I personally could never have signed this treaty.’
Not to allow voters a referendum in Britain would be to ‘betray the trust…they have placed in us’.
Lords Leader Lord Wakeham said: ‘Those who find the arguments attractive in this case might…contribute to undermining the very system of parliamentary democracy it is their professed aim to protect.’
Labour ex-Cabinet minister Lord Healey warned: ‘Lady Thatcher's type of nationalism is the greatest single danger to peace in the modern world, and Mr Major's failure to confront it head-on as such a danger has made a civil war in the government party a danger to Britain and to Europe as whole.’
Lord Tebbit
Cash plea to fight lung cancer
Surgeon tries to stop mass killer
By Jane Gallagher
LEADING lung cancer specialist Ray Donnelly has called for more cash to wipe out the disease which kills 1,600 Merseysiders every year.
Mr Donnelly, consultant surgeon at Liverpool's Cardiothoracic Centre, has told of his hopes for a three-year study to find out why Merseyside has become the lung cancer capital of the world.
Speaking at the launch of the Southport and Formby Lung Cancer Support Group last night, Mr Donelly said: ‘In Liverpool, lung cancer in women is 125% above the national average.
‘I don't believe people here smoke 125% more cigarettes and in fact two in 10 people who contract lung cancer do not smoke.
‘Maybe the influencing factors are genetic, occupational, stress, environmental, we need to examine these more closely.’
The study, to be carried out by Liverpool University, will cost more than £300,000.
Mr Donnelly added: ‘We need cash to fund this research and develop screening and better treatments.
‘The treatments for lung cancer today are no better that they were when King George VI died of the disease 40 years ago.
‘Lung cancer does not respect person or class.
‘We need money to eradicate this scourge from our society so that our children and our grandchildren are not presented with the awful statistics we are presented with today.’
Colin and Pam Lawrence, parents of air hostess Nicola Lawrence who died of the disease in February, aged 25, endorsed Mr Donnelly's appeal.
Mr Lawrence, of Aughton, near Ormskirk, said: ‘Our daughter never smoked a cigarette in her life yet she contracted the disease.
‘We would like to lend our support to the appeal because we would like to help prevent this happening to other families in the future.’
Lung cancer survivor Bernard Maxwell, from Blundellsands, stressed the importance of support groups.
Bernard, 51, said: ‘When you are told you have lung cancer, it is shattering.
‘I survived but I have joined the group because I want to put something back raising money and proving to others that you can survive.’
Ray Donnelly
…cash plea
P. 1 lead
EXCLUSIVE by Caroline Storah, crime reporter THE heartbroken father of Liverpool girl Jean Larkin killed in a gruesome double murder said today: ‘How could they do this to our beautiful daughter?’
Speaking for the first time since the tragedy Kevin Larkin told the Echo: ‘Jean was young and innocent.
Even members of the underworld who have been in contact with me are outraged at her murder.’
Jean, 24, was killed with her boyfriend Gary Pettitt, 25, after they disappeared from their home in Aigburth.
Their bodies were burned in a desolate Lancashire beauty spot near Chorley.
Police believe Gary may have been caught up in the world of drugs and met his death as a result.
But Jean, say detectives, was simply in the wrong place at the wrong time.
Mr Larkin said: ‘We have learned that even among criminals there are rules and in this case, by killing Jean, they have broken them.
‘Even hardened criminals do not harm wives and girlfriends, so we have been told.
‘That is why they have blown the gaffe and been tipping off the police.
‘They say if Jean had stayed in that night and washed her hair then she would be alive today.’
Mr Larkin was opening his heart after making a trip to the woodlands in Coppull, near Chorley, where the couple met their deaths.
Mr Larkin said: ‘Jean's was a young, innocent life taken away in a horrible way.
She led a good life.
‘She would never have been caught up in anything to do with drugs.
Dream
‘She and Gary had everything to live for and were working to get married for a life together.
‘Now that dream has gone and our lives are in tatters.
‘I doubt we shall ever be the same again.’
Mr Larkin says his suffering is worse for knowing that Gary had only agreed to go to Chorley at the last minute after two people, a man and a woman, had spoken separately to him on the phone.
Persuaded
He said: ‘The police have told us he was very reluctant to go at first.
‘But they say a woman finally persuaded him and he took Jean with him.
‘We keep thinking ‘If only they hadn't’.
‘It would have been just like Jean to have gone along for the journey.’
Mr Larkin is haunted by memories of a visit he made to the secluded woods at along with Marie Pettitt, Gary's mother.
Mr Larkin's wife Kay was unable to make the journey on medical grounds.
She has hardly slept since the couple vanished six weeks ago.
Secret
Mr Larkin said: ‘I wanted to the see the place for myself.
I thought it might help, but it hasn't.
‘It is a terrible place with a terrible secret.’
Forensic tests have revealed teeth found in the debris of a massive fire were Gary's and murder squad detectives are still waiting for scientists to formally identify Jean's remains.
Detectives have seized 7,000 ecstasy tablets from a flat in the North-East and are linking that to the couple' disappearance.
They say they have only tenuous evidence Gary might have been involved in drugs.
Gary and Jean left their flat in Jericho Farm Walk, Aigburth, on April 27.
Their van was found at Manchester Airport the following day and the couple were never seen again.
Support
Both families are staying close, supporting each other through their ordeal.
Mr Larkin added: ‘Jean would never have got mixed up in anything criminal and I can't believe Gary was involved either.
‘I believe if he was into drugs it was the first time.
‘They never had any money.
They were always borrowing money, even for cigarettes.
‘Everything they did was for their business.
‘He worked all hours trying to build it up.
He started early and finished late.
‘We thought the world of him and just can't believe he was involved.
Gary was a hard-working lad just trying to make ends meet.’
Mr Larkin says he has learned from the criminal underworld about the events on the night of April 27.
Beautiful
‘I just don't know how anyone can do this to anyone else.
People sometimes say they bear no malice but I do not know how they can say that.
‘Jean was beautiful.
Whoever killed her will be sent to prison.
But at the end of the day they have a life.
‘My daughter's has gone forever.’
From Page One.
Turn to Page 44.
Kevin Larkin…grieving dad Jean Larkin…perfect daughter Gary and Jean…victims of callous killers
Cot deaths are halved
COT deaths were more than halved last year after a national campaign to sleep babies on their back, new figures show today.
The Back to Sleep campaign backed by presenter Anne Diamond, whose son Sebastian was a victim of cot death has resulted in a dramatic fall in deaths from 912 in 1991 to 456 last year.
Coal gloom: British Coal chairman Neil Clarke has painted a gloomy picture of the prospects for ‘substantial additional sales’ in his talks with the power generating companies, saying the generators already had large stocks they wanted to run down.
Murder hunt: A man in his 50s has been arrested for the murder of a wealthy woman in her late 80s found dead at her home in Mwrog Street, Ruthin, North Wales.
Boat rescue: RAF helicopter rescued two survivors after a boat capsized in Bristol Channel off Llantwit Major, South Glamorgan.
New escape: A 22 year old prisoner was on the run today after escaping from Group 4 guards in Derby while being taken from court to jail.
Devonport tip: The battle for the lucrative contract to refit Trident nuclear submarines appears to be swinging in favour of the Devonport dockyard in Plymouth.
Gun attack: A Sinn Fein election agent and his family escaped injury last night after gunmen opened fire on their home at Castlewellan, Co Down.
Carpet mogul is back in business
SIR Phil Harris, one of the stock market stars of the 1980s, makes a dramatic comeback this month, having increased the value of his stake in his new venture Carpetright from £3m to about £30m.
It is the second fortune he has made from the carpet-retailing business, after being forced out of his Harris Queensway chain nearly five years ago.
Carpetright is to float with a price tag of £113.6m at 148p a share in a move which will enable another major investor, the MFI furniture group, to raise a total of £21.7m which will be used to cut debt.
Some 35% of Carpetright is for sale, of which 10% is being reserved for employees and directors.
Sir Phil, who walked away with about £70m from the takeover of Harris Queensway, has built Carpetright into one of Britain's leading carpet retailers.
He has nearly 29% of the company, but that will be reduced to just under 21% on flotation.
Loser…shrug of defeat as Woody Allen faces the press
Mia Farrow…savouring victory
Foster care boy ‘beaten and starved’
FOSTER father Norman Roberts took a horse whip and bamboo stick to a boy placed in his care by a council's social services department, it was alleged today.
The boy was tied with a rope by his feet, hauled over a beam in a barn at the North Wales farm where they lived, then beaten, it was claimed at Mold Crown Court.
Roberts’ son Ian would also join in the beatings, it was alleged.
The boy, Paul Llewelyn Jones, was also starved of food by Roberts' wife Evelyn and given dog biscuits as a punishment, the jury heard.
He would beg food from other children in school, eat their apple cores and even scoured bins for food, prosecuting barrister David Hale told the jury.
Police were not aware of the allegations for six years.
But photographs found by police in the files of Gwynedd County Council's social services department last year showed the child had been beaten, it was alleged.
Internal investigations were made by social services and Paul Llewelyn Jones was put on the ‘at risk’ register.
A special case conference was held in 1986 because he was not thriving as he should have done.
But he was left with the Roberts family, the social services department considering there was insufficient justification to remove him.
Norman Roberts, 59, of Ysgubor Esgob, Gwalchmai on Anglesey, denies cruelty.
His wife Evelyn, 59, of the same address, denies wilful neglect by allegedly failing to provide the boy with sufficient nourishment.
Norman Roberts is also charged with assaulting the child.
All allegations are between 1980 and 1985.
Their son Ian Roberts, 34, is charged with common assault on the boy in September 1985.
Their alleged victim, now 19, of Holyhead, was fostered by the Roberts from six to 12.
(Proceeding).
Mersey Ferries probe urged
By Vic Gibson
A TOP-LEVEL inquiry was demanded today into claims that the world-famous Mersey Ferries are heading for closure.
The call came from trade union leaders representing the ferries' 103-strong workforce.
The renewed concern follows a £6 million investment by Merseytravel to revamp the loss-making ferries in 1990.
Mersey Ferries general manager Ian Thompson said: ‘I would welcome an inquiry in the interests of both Mersey Ferries and Merseytravel.
‘My deepest concern is that the future of the ferry service itself may be in jeopardy, particularly as a result of the way in which £6 million was invested in the operation in 1990.’
Half the sum was spent improving the Mountwood and Woodchurch vessels.
The other £3 million was spent on the three ferry terminals.
Merseytravel, which operates the boats, strongly denies that it is steering them towards closure.
But Wallasey MP Angela Eagle said today that she is to raise the matter in Parliament.
Merseytravel has already announced plans to close the Seacombe terminal.
Campaigners, backed by Ms Eagle, say the landing stage could be repaired for as little as £1.5 million instead of the £10 million being quoted by Merseytravel.
They also complain that bus services to the closure-threatened terminal have deliberately been diminished.
The ferries' board of directors meets tomorrow.
A Merseytravel spokesman said: ‘We are determined to retain the ferries as part of Merseytravel's future.
We have nothing more to add before Wednesday's meeting.’
Patten attack on teachers
By Maria McGeoghan
EDUCATION Secretary John Patten launched another attack on teachers today, hours after the start of massive boycott of tests for 14-year-olds.
Mr Patten was speaking at a Newspapers In Education conference in Bristol, which is looking at ways of getting children involved with their local paper at an early age.
He told the ECHO that he thought the teachers' action which has left thousands of exam papers unopened, was a ‘great tragedy’.
He said: ‘It is very sad indeed that there is any industrial action in any of our schools.
‘I don't think it is a professional approach.
It is a tragedy that many children have been denied the chance to take these tests.
‘Professionals don't take such action.
It is a great pity that they feel this is the right course of action to take.’
It was revealed today that the tests included a passage by Liverpool writer Helen Forrester on a Mersey ferry trip aimed at spending a day away from the city's ‘heavily polluted air’.
The exam was sent out to thousands of schools as part of the government's testing scheme for youngsters.
But the test was sat by only a handful of pupils because of a boycott by teaching unions.
The piece, from her book ‘Liverpool Miss’, was used for a test of reading and writing.
The passage includes a section with the words: ‘The floating pier was always packed with people, anxious to spend a day away from Liverpool's heavily polluted air.’
A Merseytravel spokesman said: ‘This sounds like a work of fiction and should be treated as such.’
‘Ecstasy worth £1m in city flat’
DETECTIVES found more than £1m worth of ecstasy in a Liverpool flat, a court was told.
Ian Ainsworth, 24, of Acrefield Road, Woolton, denies possessing the drug with intent to supply.
Christopher Cornwall, prosecuting, told Liverpool Crown Court that police went to Ainsworth's ground floor flat last October.
In the cellar, which could be reached only from his flat, they found five holdalls containing plastic bags with 118,000 ecstasy tablets, it was alleged.
They also found a piece of paper with the radio frequencies used by police locally and nationally, said Mr Cornwall.
Water costs level out
ANGLIAN Water says market research has shown its customers would be willing to pay more in return for improved standards.
The water industry, privatised in 1989, faces a price review by watchdog Ofwat which will set charges from 1995 until the year 2000.
Pretax profits to March 31 rose to £185.4m from £171.3m.
Man dies, 14 injured, in attack on tourist bus
BRITONS IN BOMB RAID AT PYRAMIDS
By Echo reporter
AT LEAST one man was killed and five British tourists were among 14 people injured when a man threw a bomb at a tour bus on the road to the Pyramids in Cairo today.
The attack was blamed on Muslim militants who have waged a campaign of violence for more than a year to overthrow the government and turn Egypt into a purist Islamic state.
Windows
Witnesses said the bus, carrying 49 Britons on a day trip from Cyprus, was driving through an underpass on the main road leading to the Pyramids of Giza when a man dropped the bomb from a bridge above.
It wrecked a Mercedes-Benz car driving in front of the bus and blew out the windows of the bus, which then crashed into the back of the Mercedes.
Four other cars and a motorcycle were caught in the mayhem.
Cairo's interior ministry said an Egyptian man had been killed and nine Egyptians and five British tourists had been injured.
Two Egyptians, including the tour bus guide, were in a serious condition.
Doctors at a nearby hospital said four of the five Britons had only slight wounds but one man had an operation to remove a nail embedded in his chest.
Another report said one of the holidaymakers suffered a serious eye injury caused by flying glass.
More than 130 people, mostly Egyptian militants and police, have died in political violence in Egypt over the last 14 months.
A British nurse, Sharon Hill from Gloucester, a Swede and a Turk were killed in previous terror attacks on tourists.
But a massive security campaign pushed militants deeper underground and until today appeared to have stopped attacks on foreigners.
John Cook, 45, said after being treated for a cut on the head: ‘We heard an explosion.
The bus moved quickly.
‘We don't know what happened afterwards.
We came to the hospital and got medical treatment and you can see that we are all right.’
A taxi driver driving behind the bus said: ‘I heard a big explosion just as the tourist bus was passing.
‘I saw grey smoke and then the tourist bus moved away fast.’
Tourist attraction…the Sphinx and pyramids at Giza
P.2 Ferries
Probe is demanded over ferries ‘closure’
By Vic Gibson
A TOP-LEVEL inquiry was demanded today into claims that the world-famous Mersey Ferries are heading for closure.
The call came from trade union leaders representing the ferries’ 103-strong workforce.
The renewed concern follows a £6m investment by Merseytravel to revamp the loss-making ferries in 1990.
Mersey Ferries general manager Ian Thompson said: ‘I would welcome an inquiry in the interests of both Mersey Ferries and Merseytravel.
‘My deepest concern is that the future of the ferry service itself may be in jeopardy, particularly as a result of the way in which £6 million was invested in the operation in 1990.’
Half was spent improving the Mountwood and Woodchurch vessels.
The other £3m was used on the three ferry terminals.
Merseytravel, which operates the boats, strongly denies that it is steering them towards closure.
But Wallasey MP Angela Eagle said today that she is to raise the matter in Parliament.
Merseytravel has already announced plans to close the Seacombe terminal.
Campaigners, backed by Ms Eagle, say the landing stage could be repaired for £1.5m instead of the £10m quoted by Merseytravel.
A Merseytravel spokesman insisted: ‘We are determined to retain the ferries as part of Merseytravel's future.’
A former Liverpool union official was jailed today for stealing £3,000 from a fund to help grieving families.
Page 3 Pyramids bomb
Five British tourists have been injured in a bomb attack on the road to the Egyptian pyramids.
Page 9 Lynne on mend
Coronation Street star Lynne Perrie is recovering in hospital after collapsing from an asthma attack.
Page 7 School fire
Six fire crews were fighting a blaze this afternoon at the disused English Martyrs School, Orford, Warrington.
Down 0.7 at 2223.7 SE-100 up 0.5 at 2845.3 Down to 1.5150 dollars Down to 2.4607 marks
Clinton fears affecting drug companies' shares
WHY are shares lagging behind in Britain?
The Footsie 100 Index of the Top 100 shares has more or less stood still this year.
Yet on Wall Street shares are up by 7pc, Japanese shares have gone up 19pc and in Europe the share index has risen by 9pc.
The truth is that the Footsie is proving to be a misleading guide to what is really happening in the market.
Beneath the surface of the index there is much turmoil, with some shares zooming ahead.
For example British Aerospace has more than doubled to 375p this year.
There has also been a huge recovery of confidence in construction material shares as RMC and Redland, although my favourite remains Blue Circle at 250p because of its involvement in the home improvement business through Armitage Shanks.
Fears
On the other hand what is holding the Index back is the drug companies.
These now comprise 10pc of the total index but are under a cloud because of fears about US President's wife Hillary Clinton, who is expected to stamp on their profits hard when her review of the US health scene comes out later this year.
So Glaxo shares are down from £8 to under £6 and Wellcome down from £10 to £7.50.
Other drug shares have also fallen, so the Footsie Index is giving a misleading impression as to the underlying strength of the market.
One share that comes out of this situation well is ‘born-again' ICI at 690p.
Not only has it hived-off its drug side into Zeneca but also, unlike most chemical companies, it is coming out of the recession with no cash worries as the rights issue for the Zeneca shares will pay off most of its debt.
Old and new join forces in print
By David Hope Business Staff
ONE of Merseyside's oldest printing firms has joined forces with one of the region's newest.
Four-year-old Final Film of Birkenhead and the long established north west market leader Rockcliffe Printing Group at Aintree, bring together the former's high tech colour production service and the latter's high volume capability to service large corporate bodies.
Final Film's managing director, Peter Stevens predicts that by bringing together their allied skills, technology, advice and consultancy they will offer a service, ‘second to none’.
‘I am tremendously excited about the whole project, I can see a rewarding and profitable future.
It has a multimillion pound potential, it will rattle the industry,’ said Mr Stevens.
Managing Director of Rockcliffe, Graham Campbell said,’ We are not just going with the trend, we are about to overtake it.’
Both firms have invested heavily in hi-tech applications and are running a double shift.
Mr Stevens forecasts success will lead to a treble shift round the clock working and the creation of six or seven new jobs for both companies.
Final Film are to the fore in the conversion of Apple Mac graphics to colour film for brochure work and run a fully integrated Crosfield colour reproduction installation, which now complements Rockcliffe' high volume Hiedelberg presses.
In addition Final Film are introducing BT's International System Digital Network, a hi-speed data transfer system which allows design work to be sent from the computer screen down a landline.
Both already boast a prestige client list,’ a whole raft of serious clients’, said Mr Stevens.
Rockcliffe does work for Pilkingtons, National Giro, the Alliance and Leicester, Paramount and produces Liverpool Football Club programmes.
Final Film have contracts with the Cheshire, Yorkshire and Lancashire Life magazine group and produce catalogues for many top firms, including Gault Toys, Matthews Office Furniture, international Arabian oil giants Aramco and the International Marine Business law magazine.
At the beginning of June the companies began marketing themselves as a ‘total service’ to corporate clients, a one-stop-shop for print buyers from desk top to finished brochure.
Murder protest to envoy
By Daily Post Correspondent
THE parents of murdered schoolteacher Fiona Jones want to meet the French Ambassador to tell him about their dissatisfaction with the result of the recent trial.
Rod Richards, Tory MP for Clwyd North West, yesterday wrote to the Ambassador requesting the meeting, at which he also wishes to be present.
Bruce and Pat Cottrill, of Colwyn Bay, are furious that killer Frederic Blancke has been jailed for only 15 years, which means he could be free before the end of the century.
They want to tell the Ambassador they are unhappy about the trial, the fact that the jury found there was no premeditation, and their fear that the court could have been influenced because their daughter was not of French nationality.
They also want to know whether the French Government will take any action.
Mr Richards has also met Foreign Office minister Mark Lennox-Boyd to discuss the case.
The MP said yesterday: ‘I agree with the family entirely that the punishment does not fit the crime.
Had it happened in Britain there would have been uproar if the judge hadn't recommended a minimum of 20 years in jail for such a case.’
Mrs Cottrill, 56, said:’ We wonder whether the verdict would have been the same had Fiona been French.’
‘Human fireball’ man died in Bosnia protest
By Daily Post Correspondent
A MAN turned himself into a human fireball as a protest against Western inaction in Bosnia, an inquest heard yesterday.
Graham Bamford, 48, from Macclesfield, Cheshire, emptied a can of petrol over himself, flicked a lighter and exploded in flames in London's Parliament Square as MPs in the nearby House of Commons debated the Bosnia crisis on April 29.
Horrified witnesses watched helplessly as the blazing man staggered around the square before collapsing.
He was taken by air ambulance to the Queen Mary's Hospital burns unit in Roehampton, London, but died later from burns to 80pc of his body.
Police found a book beside the empty petrol can containing the word ‘Sarajevo’ and a message from Mr Bamford expressing frustration with events in Bosnia and lack of action by politicians.
Coroner Dr Paul Knapman said at Westminster Coroner's Court: ‘He was concerned about the events in Bosnia and the lack of action by politicians in the West.
‘He has taken his own life in a dramatic gesture which some have described as futile.’
The coroner's verdict was that Mr Bamford killed himself and died from shock due to burns.
The inquest heard that Mr Bamford taught English in Japan where he met his wife, Tumiko.
The couple married when they returned to England and Mr Bamford started a new business as a haulage contractor.
But his business folded, and his wife went back to Japan.
His father, George Bamford, a retired architect, told the inquest: ‘He felt strongly about the events in Bosnia.’
Despite unemployment and money worries, he made two donations of £250 and £100 to Christian Aid and sympathised with victims of Serbian cruelty in Bosnia.
PM defends national curriculum tests
NATIONAL curriculum tests were ‘very much in the interests’ of schoolchildren, the Prime Minister told MPs yesterday.
John Major was speaking in the Commons in the wake of Monday's boycott, which left the Government's English reading and writing test for 14-year-olds in tatters.
And teachers were poised to resume their attack with a boycott of today's English literature and essay papers.
Almost all schools are expected to abandon the tests in the face of the boycott by members of the National Association of Schoolmasters-Union of Women Teachers, National Union of Teachers and Association of Teachers and Lecturers.
Mr Major spoke out during Prime Minister's question time when MP John Carlisle (C Luton N) raised the case of a headteacher who, after being awarded a salary increase, had written to Education Secretary John Patten ‘telling him he could stuff his pay rise’.
The Prime Minister replied: ‘It is an unusual position to take about pay rises.
I do regret very much that there is difficulty in carrying these tests forward.
‘They are very much in the interests of the children.’
Peer faces 15 hours a day ‘banged up’ in cell
By Gavin Cordon Daily Post Correspondent
THE Marquess of Blandford can expect little in the way of special treatment at Pentonville Prison.
His sentence is for a civil matter, so he is entitled to certain privileges denied to inmates convicted of criminal offences.
But he will still probably spend 15 hours a day or more ‘banged up’ in his cell in the 150-year-old Victorian jail.
His first taste of his new regime came yesterday morning at ‘reception’ when his warrant was checked and his clothes and possessions logged and stored.
After a short shower, he was given a fresh set of prison clothes and marched off to his cell.
His first two days are likely to be spent on the induction wing while he is assessed by prison staff, before being allocated a permanent cell.
The prison population at Pentonville has been cut sharply in recent years, from more than 1,000 to about 600, and most inmates now have their own cells.
Because the 37-year-old peer is a civil prisoner, there is also a good chance he will be allocated to the jail's C wing, where the cells have their own lavatories and wash basins, saving him the indignity of ‘slopping out’.
His civil status also means he can choose whether or not he wants to work during his sentence.
The jobs on offer cleaning, gardening, helping in the kitchen or the tailoring workshop seem unlikely to appeal to his aristocratic tastes.
The alternative, however, is to spend most of his time in his cell.
The Marquess's treatment at the hands of his fellow inmates will depend very much on his own attitude.
‘He is coming in here as a well-known figure.
There's no way they're not going to have heard of him so it all depends on how he reacts to the other prisoners,’ one prison source said.
Pentonville Prison no special treatment for the Marquess
by KEN MATTHEWS in Llandudno
CHRIS LILLYWHITE of the British professional Banana team recovered from a crash to regain the yellow jersey of race leader as the Milk Race ended its longest stage of 125 miles from Birmingham to Llandudno yesterday.
Lillywhite's team-mate Brian Smith moved up to second place overall, 38 seconds behind, and Irishman Conor Henry, who was a shock winner last year, is in third spot overall at 41 seconds.
Escaped
The winner of stage eight was the Australian, Patrick Jonker, who escaped from the leading break of 13 riders with a mile to go and came in 12 seconds ahead in a time of 4 hours 40 minutes 45 seconds for the 125 miles.
The leading bunch was led in for second place by Jacek Mickiewicz of Poland with another Australian, Grant Rice, third.
Lillywhite was fourth and Smith ninth but in the same time as the second placed man, ensuring them the top two places overall.
Lillywhite recovered after crashing just after the Horseshoe Pass climb at Llangollen at 73 miles though it had not been all plain sailing for the Banana team.
Ben Luckwell, previously third overall behind Belgian amateur Nico Mattan and Lillywhite, finished among the last group of riders along with team-mate Shane Sutton, the 1990 Milk Race winner who suffered badly bruised ribs in a crash at Milton Keynes last week.
Break
Mattan, who had taken over the yellow jersey from Lillywhite in Leicester on Saturday, started yesterday 33 seconds ahead of Lillywhite but had dropped to fourth place overall by the end of the day.
The main field was led in by Miles Erzen of Slovenia one minute and 30 seconds behind the leading pack, with another 42 riders in the same time.
Early in the day there was a break of eleven riders who were joined by another five and the group gained an advantage of nearly four minutes.
In that early break was Rob Holden of the Neilson-Tivoli professional team (GB).
When they got to the Horseshoe Pass, where most of the Merseyside fans chose to watch, the break fell apart but Holden went on to win the special prime (SIC) 30 seconds ahead of the rest.
By that point the leading group contained 22 riders with an advantage of 2 mins 20 sec over the main field.
Holden was caught at Ruthin.
A total of 94 riders remain in the race with four stages to go.Two dropped out yesterday, Australian Rob McLachlan submitting to flu and South African Steven Wolhuter being admitted to Shrewsbury Hospital for a check-up though he was released later.
Today's stage nine is 120 miles from Wrexham to Rotherham and the Milk Race comes to Liverpool city centre tomorrow, the first riders set to arrive at around 2.30pm. finishing line for the stage is situated at the top of the cobbled William Brown Street.
HOT PURSUIT: The Milk Race speeds into Llandudno with Patrick Jonker the jubilant stage winner
Lib-Dems split on abortion is healed
LIBERAL Democrat leaders have healed a party rift over abortion which threatened the desertion of hundreds of members and the walk out of one MP.
To the relief of leader Paddy Ashdown, Liverpool Mossley Hill MP, David Alton, said yesterday there was now no obstacle to his standing again at the next General Election.
Last autumn, Mr Alton threatened to quit or even stand as an independent after the party's Harrogate conference endorsed a strong pro-abortion line.
But two weeks ago the Liberal Democrats reversed their policy at their spring conference in Nottingham, making clear that abortion was a matter for the individual conscience.
Hundreds of members of the 100,000-strong party backed Mr Alton and threatened to sever their links with the party.
Mr Alton, a Catholic and a leading campaigner for reforming the abortion law, told the Daily Post: ‘The way is open for me to stand.
My constituency association supported me 100pc.’
Mr Ashdown said: ‘I am delighted with the sensible decision taken by our spring conference and David's statement.’
Fears for missing woman
POLICE are becoming increasingly concerned about the welfare of a 30-year-old woman who walked out of a hospital two weeks ago and has not been seen since.
And they believe Diane Wright may be in the Aberystwyth area.
Dyfed Powys police have been alerted.
Miss Wright, of The Greenway, Dovecote, Liverpool, was being treated for anorexia at Broadgreen Hospital, and a Merseyside police spokesman said last night the family were concerned about her safety.
Walked out
’ Miss Wright simply walked out of the hospital at 2pm on Sunday, May 23, and has not been seen since.
But we believe she could be in the Aberystwyth area,’ said the spokesman.
Miss Wright is described as 5ft 1ins tall, of very slight build with short dark-brown hair and blue eyes.
She was wearing grey jogging bottoms, a lilac floral sweatshirt, white trainers and a long navy-blue overcoat when last seen in hospital.
‘She spent a lot of time in her younger days in Aberystwyth.
She has said more than once it was her favourite haunt,’ said the spokesman.
Diane Wright
Fit Princess rejects run-of-mill offer
By Joe Quinn and John Clarke
THE Princess of Wales yesterday turned down an invitation to try out a hospital treadmill saying she was much too fit already.
She was visiting Glasgow's Western Infirmary to learn about pioneering work to find new ways to treat asthma.
During a tour, the Princess watched patients exercising on treadmills to measure their lung functions.
But she declined an offer to go on the treadmill herself, telling patients: ‘No thank you.
I would embarrass you I do it regularly at home.’
Earlier the Princess, who is the patron of the International Spinal Research Trust, visited Scotland's national spinal-injury unit in the city, where exercise also has key role in treating patients.
Alan Murphy, 25, from Alexandria, Strathclyde, told the Princess he was exercising to put on weight as he had lost six stones after breaking his back in a car crash.
She watched him working out on an exercise bike and said: ‘There's nothing wrong with slim people.’
The Princess was at the unit to launch a new leaflet aimed at raising cash to pay for research into cures for paralysis.
Afterwards she visited the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons and was told surgeons there will soon be able to practise their skills using virtual-reality equipment.
She opened a conference centre named after her and was given a glimpse into the future with a demonstration of the latest keyhole surgery.
Later she received a good luck token when she went on a walkabout in Glasgow's George Square.
A Mary Queen of Scots coin was given to her by well-wisher Jessie Brown, 40, of South Carntyne, Glasgow.
‘I gave the coin to the princess as a memento,’ said Ms Brown.
‘It brought me a lot of luck and I hope it brings her just as much.’
Princess Diana tells patient Alan Murphy; ‘There's nothing wrong with slim people’
Threatened grant aid creates jobs
Clwyd factory beats off foreign rivals to expansion package
By David Jones Daily Post Staff
A CLWYD company is to expand with the creation of 38 new jobs.
But the project could have been lost to overseas had it not been for grant aid from the Welsh Office.
The £2.8m expansion at Wrexham Wire Company will involve the construction of a 45,000 sq ft factory close to the firm's existing plant which employs 92 people on the town's industrial estate.
Six new wire-drawing machines and a new cleaning line will be added to the present six machines.
The company, a subsidiary of the Caparo Group, produces high-quality steel wire for fasteners and for the furniture industry.
Work on the project will start shortly and the company expects to start production at the new facility early next year.
Most of the new product will be exported.
A Wrexham Maelor Council spokeswoman said the importance of grant aid in securing the project underlined how crucial it was that the borough retain its assisted-area status, now under review by the Government.
Harry Lister, group managing director, paid tribute to the support received from both the Welsh Office and the Welsh Development Agency.
He said: ‘It has been the critical factor in deciding to make our investment here in Wrexham rather than elsewhere.’
Swraj Paul, Caparo Group chairman, said: ‘I have great faith in British manufacturing capability.
The group is keen to expand its manufacturing base in the UK with a view to exporting products to Europe and the rest of the world.’
Foster son tells court of ‘whippings ordeal’ at home
Norman and Evelyn Roberts all charges denied
Paul Llewelyn Jones ‘forced to eat left-overs’
By Daily Post Correspondent
A TEENAGER yesterday claimed he was beaten with a horsewhip sometimes while dangling upside down from a rope by his foster father.
Paul Llewelyn Jones told a jury at Mold Crown Court he was beaten with a cane or a whip three or four times a week and was forced to scour bins for food.
When he was hungry, he went to eat the left-overs thrown to the dogs outside the Anglesey farmhouse where he was staying with foster parents.
And when he was caught he was given a bowl of Winalot dog food, he alleged.
‘I ate it.
I had no choice because I was starving.
I felt sick after that.
‘They used to make me look a fool and leave a bowl outside for me.’
Mistreatment
Norman Roberts, 59, of Ysgubor Escob at Gwalchmai, Anglesey, denies cruelty by wilful ill treatment and assault.
His wife, Evelyn, 59, of the same address, denies wilful neglect and their son, Ian Roberts, 34, denies common assault.
All the alleged incidents are said to have taken place between 1980 when he was fostered at the age of six by the family and 1985.
The court was also told that Gwynedd Social Services department left the boy with the family, despite his allegations of mistreatment.
David Hale, prosecuting, said photographs of the boy's injuries were taken by a doctor in Ysbyty Gwynedd in 1985 and he was placed on an at risk register.
But social services decided they did not have sufficient information to justify removing him from the Roberts' care.
The matter only came to light when police, conducting an inquiry into the running of children's homes in North Continued on Page 5 Continued from Page 1 Wales, interviewed the boy last year.
He made no allegations concerning his time in homes at the age of four, but complained about his time at the smallholding in Anglesey.
Jones, now 19, and living in Holyhead, also told the court he ate apple cores from the toilet in school, and took cake and other items from a bucket outside the school canteen.
He spoke to a cook and used to be given second helpings.
Jones said Roberts and son Ian would hold him upside down, tie his feet with rope or string, and tie it to an overhead pole.
It was then he was whipped, he said, which happened three or four times.
Mr Roberts would whip him, and his son would watch.
But he alleged Ian hit him once or twice.
But there were other times that he was whipped while standing up.
He would be told to take down his trousers and underpants and would be whipped by his foster father, he alleged.
‘I used to be in agony all the time,’ he said.
‘I have still got pains in my back now, and my legs and hands.’
He said he was scared of showing the marks to anyone, in case he got another good hiding.
But a boy at Bodedern Secondary School had seen them and told a teacher, and Paul Jones said he showed the marks to three teachers at Gwalchmai school in 1985 and they telephoned the social services.
Defending barrister Mr Thomas Teague accused Paul Jones of making up ‘wicked inventions.’
Mr Teague said that at no time was Paul Jones ever hit with a cane or whip, at no time was he tied upside down and hit, he was never forced to get up early to feed the animals, or ill-treated in any way whatsoever.
He would sometimes be slapped with a hand on the bottom, and very occasionally would be given a clip around the ear by Mr Roberts.
The case continues.
Ian Roberts
NAIL BOMB TRAGEDY
BAe worker hurt in tour blast terror
A NORTH Wales man was recovering last night after being pierced in the chest by a nail in a bomb blast which killed an Egyptian car driver.
His wife also received medical attention after the nail bomb was dropped from a bridge on to their tour bus and other nearby vehicles in Cairo.
British Aerospace worker Leonard Phillips, 61, had an operation to remove a nail embedded in his chest.
His wife, Agnes, was last night at his bedside as four other slightly-injured Britons were flying to Cyprus.
The couple, from Penyffordd, near Mostyn, were on a sightseeing tour to the Pyramids at Giza.
It was the latest in a spate of attacks by Muslim extremists and blew out windows on the bus, packed with 49 British holidaymakers, and gutted a Mercedes.
Father-of-two Mr Phillips is a quality manager at BAe's Broughton plant in Clwyd, and often travelled abroad as part of his work.
Full story Page 22
Chaos in a crowded Cairo street after yesterday's nail bomb blast tragedy Picture: NORBERT SCHILLER
Toft race with Park in a spin Cricket round-up
ANOTHER excellent performance saw Toft progress to the fourth round of the Cheshire Cup with an emphatic win over Liverpool Competition side Birkenhead Park.
Opener Chris Sheldon (48) dropped anchor and allowed the middle and later order batsmen to attack the bowling, Toft reaching 181 for seven in their 40 overs.
Birkenhead Park were in trouble from the start against the spinners Paul Burtonshaw and Ronnie Locke.
Their line and length was immaculate and after 16 overs Park were still in first gear on 28 for one.
Forced into a run chase, Park lost wickets quickly, Brian Coutts finishing them off in the 39th over with three for 19.
Bredbury took 12 points from the drawn game to take the lead at the top to 29 points.
Beating Ashley in a low scoring game at home gave second-placed Mobberley 16 valuable points.
Held out
The visitors were bowled out for 107, John Cooper taking four 33.
Mobberley lost only four wickets and needed only 31 overs to score the runs on a low-scoring weekend.
Prestbury hit most runs in the First Division with 201 for four at home to Cholmondeley, David Jenkins hitting 76.
Visitors Cholmondeley held out for a draw on 130 for seven.
Bowdon Vale were unable to reach Barnton's modest 155 at Broomsedge, being held back on 105 for eight by Barnton's Geoff Langham with six for 43.
In a tight match at Christleton visitors Oakmere batted first and set a total of 165 for five, Paul Matthews 66.
Christleton finished two runs short of the total for the loss of six wickets despite 84 from Doc Davies.
Hale Barns were bowled at home for 111 by Knutsford, Willie Hannan doing the damage with five for 37 but Knutsford's reply was shattered by aggressive fast bowling from Dave Molloy, seven for 47.
Only Craig Stubbs with 33 not out looked comfortable as Hale Barns bowled Knutsford out for 101.
Putting on the pounds
HOSPITAL staff in Chester have raised almost £5,000 towards new equipment.
In the last six months, £4,662 was raised through a lottery at the Countess of Chester Hospital.
The Priority Care Unit benefitted to the tune of £2,300 with the purchase of outward bound equipment for the young people's unit, mirrors for the occupational therapy unit at Ellesmere Port and equipment for the physiotherapy gym, plus televisions, videos and pictures for wards.
The accident and emergency department received £2,157 and other money has been given to the ambulance service.
John Ross, chairman of Chester Health Authority, said: ‘I'm always amazed at the generosity of the staff on this site.’
John Ross: Amazed
Sneak thief stole bag from toilet
A SNEAK thief snatched a handbag while the owner was in a public toilet cubicle, magistrates were told at Warrington yesterday.
On another occasion Pauline Jordan cashed a Giro cheque for £330 after stealing it from her mother's house, the court heard.
Jordan, 24, of Heather Close, Birchwood, Warrington, pleaded guilty to stealing a Giro cheque belonging to Brian Bennett, attempting to obtain £330 by deception and stealing a handbag and contents belonging to Jean Baker.
Jordan also asked for two offences of attempting to obtain money by deception to be taken into consideration.
Mr Dennis Tighe, prosecuting, said Jordan acted as a ‘sneak thief’ when she stole the bag after reaching under a partition separating two cubicles in a public toilet.
Jordan was remanded on bail until July 6 for presentence reports.
Women's minister hits at ‘bigotry’
By Amanda Williamson Daily Post Staff
MINISTER for Women's Affairs, David Hunt, claims he is a victim of prejudice.
He defended his role on his visit to Merseyside yesterday.
Responding to criticism that the job should automatically be given to a woman, Mr Hunt said: ‘I think that's an appalling statement.
‘It reflects the very bigotry which women have had to fight against.
Nobody would dream of suggesting that only a man can understand male issues.’
The announcement that Mr Hunt, as current Employment Secretary, would take over responsibility for women's affairs was made at last week's Tory Women's Conference and sparked outrage from Labour MPs and women's lobby groups.
Mayor who can stand the heat
MAYOR Brian Lloyd aims to put some fire into his new job and yesterday joined Frodsham firefighters to show he means business.
The town's new Mayor, only the second since it gained the town title, spent the day at the fire station to learn about their work.
He said: ‘I feel that when you live in a town, you take the services for granted.
‘If you just ring them up you cannot understand the problems they face so I thought this would be a good way that I could use myself as a focus on their work.’
Before yesterday's behind-the-scenes look, Coun Lloyd experienced another, less glamorous, side of the fireman's work.
For the past week the Mayor has suffered with the men as they respond to early morning calls.
He had a bleeper in his house which wakes him up for every call though for insurance reasons he cannot join the men.
Yesterday, Coun Lloyd, who retired from ICI last August, took part in a training operation with special cutting equipment.
He also joined the men in a gym session and with a physiotherapist.
He now plans a series of other hands-on visits including a day with the town's police officers and bin men.
Mayor Brian Lloyd prepares to spend a day with Frodsham's firefighters
NAIL BOMB TRAGEDY
BAe worker hurt in tour blast terror
A BROUGHTON British Aerospace executive was recovering last night after being pierced in the chest by a nail in a bomb blast which killed an Egyptian car driver.
His wife also received medical attention after the nail bomb was dropped from a bridge on to their tour bus and other nearby vehicles in Cairo.
BAe worker Leonard Phillips, 61, had an operation to remove a nail embedded in his chest.
His wife, Agnes, was last night at his bedside as four other slightly-injured Britons were flying to Cyprus.
The couple, from Penyffordd, near Mostyn, were on a sightseeing tour to the Pyramids at Giza.
It was the latest in a spate of attacks by Muslim extremists and blew out windows on the bus, packed with 49 British holidaymakers, and gutted a Mercedes.
Father-of-two Mr Phillips is a quality manager at BAe's Broughton plant, near Chester, and often travelled abroad as part of his work.
Full story Page 22
Chaos in a crowded Cairo street after yesterday's nail bomb blast tragedy Picture: NORBERT SCHILLER
Judge Ian Starforth Hill remarks ‘unacceptable’
Judges ‘too lenient’ sentence under fire
By Daily Post Correspondent
A JUDGE with several controversial statements behind him was under fresh attack last night after saying an eight year-old sex offence victim was ‘not entirely an angel.’
Sex offender Karl Gambrill escaped a prison term for attempted intercourse on the little girl when Judge Ian Starforth Hill, QC, sentenced him to two years' probation at Winchester Crown Court for attempted unlawful intercourse.
The sentence came under immediate attack, with the girl's mother saying she wanted the case reviewed, and child care experts saying the judge's remarks were ‘totally unacceptable.’
The judge told Gambrill he would have faced a prison sentence, but for mitigating circumstances.
Information
‘The law in this country protects little girls because they do not know what is right and what is wrong.
‘They would take part in sexual activities because they would think that was right.
‘However, I have been provided with information which leads me to think she was not entirely an angel herself, which is no excuse for you.
‘And you were only 18 at the time as opposed to being a grown man.’
Gambrill, now 21, of Southampton, Hants, pleaded guilty.
He was ordered to attend a programme of treatment for his sexual problems and pay £100 costs.
The court was told that Gambrill had climbed into the girl's bunk bed while babysitting and tried to have sex with her.
The girl was said to have already ‘fallen prey’ to a sex gang, while Gambrill was sexually inexperienced.
But the girl's parents, and police officers, said after the case that the so-called ‘sex gang’ was no more than Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 playing doctors and nurses with other children in a garden shed.
Valerie Howarth, executive director of ChildLine, said: ‘It is totally unacceptable that a judge should suggest that a child is responsible for sexual abuse perpetrated upon her.’
The girl's mother said she wanted the case to be brought back before court, as she said that motoring offenders were given sterner sentences than people who abused children.
In 1976, as a county court judge, Judge Hill refused to give a wife suing for divorce a court order that her husband's mistress should be evicted from the marital home.
His refusal on condition that the husband and mistress put themselves in sexual ‘quarantine’ was overturned in the Appeal Court, where one judge described the decision as ‘indefensible.’
In 1978, he told five youths who tied up a 14-year-old boy as a target for their catapults: ‘What is the best sentence for you really would be to have you tied to a tree and everybody throw stones at you.
‘But unfortunately, or perhaps fortunately I ought to say because the Press is here, that sort of sentence is not open to me.’
In 1988, he told an Iranian living on social security, found guilty of using a forged rent book and inflicting grievous bodily harm, that in his own country he would have had an arm chopped off ‘or something similarly spectacular.’
Unigate celebrates double profits
SHAKE-UP SUCCESS
A PROGRAMME of sell-offs and acquisitions enabled food and distribution group Unigate to boost profits by more than 50%.
The group, known for the St Ivel brand, spent £152m in the 18 months to May and raised £73m from disposals, figures show today.
That enabled it to boost pre-tax profits to March 31 to £101.4m from £65.7m in the previous 12 months.
The sell-offs had a dramatic effect because some of the businesses were loss-makers which dragged down profits last time.
Excluding the losses and other one-off charges, profits rose to £97.9m from £92m.
The latest result was boosted by a £4m pension fund surplus.
Businesses sold included US Cheese and Giltspur International.
Unigate's car hire business is also being run down.
On the group's shopping list was Sussex Dairies, bought from the Co-op, Clifford Foods and Glass Glover.
The final dividend is raised to 10.4p from 9.6p, taking the total to 16.1p from 15.3p.
Earnings per share rose to 31.3p from 23.4p.
Tebbit warns of ‘tears’ on EC treaty
THE Maastricht Treaty will end in tears, Lord Tebbit warned early today towards the end of a marathon two day Lords debate on the ratification Bill.
The Tory former Cabinet minister, summing up the case of those opposed to European union, demanded a referendum.
Shortly before the European Communities (Amendment) Bill was due to gain its second reading, he told the House that the referendum question could be perfectly simple unless the job of formulating it was given to the Department of Education officials who framed the current controversial tests for 14-year-olds.
It should state: ‘Do you want this treaty to be brought into effect or not?’
Lord Tebbit claimed that if Britain said ‘no’, the Community would go on just the same as it did yesterday.
He asked why it was said that if Denmark and Britain rejected the treaty they would have to leave the EC, when this had not been said of France or Germany.
He forecast: ‘This Treaty will end in tears it is better that it ends in tears now than it ends in very bitter tears in five, ten or 15 years.’
Earlier in the day's debate, Viscount Whitelaw, former Tory Deputy Prime Minister under Margaret Thatcher, accused treaty opponents of ‘taking a narrow-minded view.’
Labour ex-Prime Minister Lord Callaghan said: ‘The imperative that impels this treaty is the overriding necessity of preserving the peace and security of the European mainland and hence the British Isles themselves.’
Thieving trio use baby decoy to con woman, 89
By Richard Elias Daily Post Staff
A WOMAN clutching a baby stole an elderly lady's purse after conning her way into the pensioner's home.
The thief called at the house on east Merseyside with another woman and a man, and asked if she could use the toilet.
But minutes later, when the trio had left, the 89 year old lady discovered that her purse had been taken from a bedroom of her terraced home in Albany Road, Prescot.
Last night a detective investigating the theft said that, although this type of crime was becoming increasingly prevalent, it was the first time he had heard of a baby being used as a decoy.
Det Con Steve Roberts added: ‘It is unusual to say the least, the fact that one of these women was holding a baby at the time.’
The three called on the victim who lives alone shortly before 9pm on Monday night.
They claimed their car, which they parked outside the house, had broken down.
Whilst the man and one of the women stayed talking to the householder, the other woman, holding the child, was directed to the toilet.
Added Det Con Roberts: ‘It was only later that the lady realised that her purse, containing around £220 in cash, had been taken.’
The woman who was holding the baby is white, in her 30s, with brown, tidy collar length hair.
Her female accomplice was younger, possibly in her 20s, with long, very fair hair.
The man was around 5ft 4ins tall and had fair coloured hair.
The gang told the woman they were heading towards Widnes, and they then set off in a blue car.
Anyone who has any information about the incident is asked to contact Prescot CID on , ex 4285.
Union official is jailed for theft of welfare cash
By Lynda Roughley Daily Post Correspondent
FORMER Liverpool City Council trade unionist Tony Gavin, who stole welfare funds, has been jailed for three months.
Gavin, 35, who was a full-time Nalgo official, admitted stealing money belonging to the City Council Life Insurance Welfare Scheme.
Jailing Gavin yesterday, Liverpool Crown Court judge David Lynch said he had used the fund's bank account as his own and had stolen between £3,500 and £4,200.
He had taken the money to pay off debts and had continued to do so even when bereaved relatives were desperate for cash to pay undertakers' bills.
‘That is unforgivable,’ said the judge.
Gavin, of Briar Drive, Huyton, admitted eight thefts between January 1990 and October 1991.
He denied a further 10 theft and deception offences and not guilty verdicts were recorded.
Prosecuting counsel Antonis Georges said Gavin had been treasurer of the Welfare Scheme since 1985.
Each week 800 council employees voluntarily contributed 50p from their wages of which 31p was paid to an insurance company which paid out £2,750 upon death.
The balance of the contribution was paid into the welfare fund, which was used to provide interest free hardship loans.
As well as writing cheques from the account to pay his credit card debts and rent arrears, he also paid phone bills and part of £500 taxi bill.
Matters came to light after relatives of the deceased employees did not receive the expected death benefits even though the insurance company had paid out the cheques to the fund.
Gavin repeatedly tried to fob them off and one family has still not been paid.
Defence counsel Roderick Carus, QC, said proper records had never been kept by the Welfare Scheme.
During the 1991 bin men's strike, the situation became chaotic as Gavin was hounded for hardship payments.
The fund's other trustees had left and he was under an intolerable strain, working more than 12 hours a day.
He received no pay for being the treasurer and his own debt continued to escalate, so he used the fund account to ease his financial situation.
He has since been sacked by Nalgo and has debts of £10,000.
Mr Carus said father-of-three Gavin had housebound parents.
His wife was in poor health and would suffer if he was jailed.
Alton's acceptance of party's abortion stance welcomed by Ashdown
By David Rose Daily Post Political Editor
LIBERAL Democrat leaders have healed a party rift which threatened the desertion of hundreds of rank-and-file members, and the walk-out of one MP.
To the relief of Paddy Ashdown, Liverpool Mossley Hill MP David Alton said yesterday there was now no obstacle to his standing again at the next general election.
Last autumn Mr Alton threatened to stand down after the party's Harrogate conference endorsed a strong pro-abortion line.
But two weeks ago the Liberal Democrats quietly reversed their policy at their Spring conference in Nottingham, making clear that abortion was a matter for the conscience of individuals.
Hundreds of rank-and-file members in the 100,000 strong Liberal Democrats backed Mr Alton in protesting over the Harrogate decision, and threatened to sever their links with the party.
Mr Alton, a Catholic and a leading campaigner for reforming the abortion law, told the Daily Post: ‘The way is open for me to stand.
My constituency association supported me 100 per cent.’
Mr Ashdown welcomed the decision by Mr Alton, an MP since winning a by-election in 1979.
The Liberal Democrat leader told the Daily Post: ‘I am delighted with the sensible decision taken by our Spring conference, and David's statement.
‘David is a valued MP, a superb campaigner for Liberal Democracy, and will always be a welcome member of our team at Westminster.’
David Alton
Paddy Ashdown
Masseuse murder riddle detectives chase new leads
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
DETECTIVES were last night following up two new leads in their hunt for the killer of masseuse Lynne Trenholme.
They say it is too soon to say if either will produce any results, but Chief Inspector Steve Cross of Cheshire's Serious Crime Squad confirmed: ‘We have been given some new names which we are following up at the moment.
‘We are still investigating them at present and have not ruled them out.’
Today marks the second anniversary of Miss Trenholme's death.
Her bloodstained body was found at Pinky's massage parlour, Boughton, where she worked.
Miss Trenholme, 29, and originally from Failsworth, Manchester, had been working at Pinky's unbeknown to her family, who thought she was employed as a secretary.
She used the name Blondie to hide her identity.
It is believed the motive for the killing was robbery as the £170 that Miss Trenholme earned that day has never been traced.
Police believe the man responsible for the murder is a client known only as John who signed his name in the book at the massage parlour on the day Miss Trenholme was murdered.
They believe he may be the same man who made a number of violent attacks on prostitutes in Warrington and Crewe.
They are still trying to trace the owner of a metallic blue Vauxhall Carlton which was parked near Pinky's on the day of Lynne's death.
The driver is described as in his early 40s, 5ft 10ins to 6ft tall.
Police are expecting to pick up more new leads later this year as forces throughout the country join a national fingerprint computer system, which will enable them to check unidentified prints from Pinky's.
‘We are also in contact with other forces every time a prostitute-related offence comes up,’ said Chief Insp Cross.
‘This case has certainly not been forgotten and we still want to hear from anyone with information.
‘We still believe that there is someone who knows who this man is.’
Lynne Trenholme
Short, sharp shock for raiders at cricket club
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
A CRICKET club is biting back at persistent raiders and vandals by covering the roof of its pavilion with razor-sharp security wire.
Norman Costain, secretary of Parkfield Cricket Club in Wallasey Central Park, said: ‘We were under siege.
‘But since we installed the razor wire we have had no problems.’
The action, however, has met with the disapproval of Wirral planning authority, which views the wire as visually intrusive in the park environment.
The clubhouse is prominently placed close to the park boundary and nearby homes.
Planners have condemned the wire as ‘unsympathetic and alien’ to the design of the building.
Mr Costain explained: ‘We have told the council this is only a temporary measure until we get an extension built at the club and strengthen the roofing.
‘We are asking for a temporary reprieve.’
The club's original wooden pavilion was burned down in 1977.
Said Mr Costain: ‘We would have liked to build a replacement with a wooden verandah and steps, but it can't be done in this day and age, so we had to build a concrete one like Fort Knox.’
Three break-ins in five months forced club officials to adopt the razor-wire option to deter raiders.
Club members gave up their sleep to spend the night guarding the pavilion.
The club's application to retain the wire will be considered tomorrow night.
Planners have recommended enforcement action compelling the club to remove the wire with 12 months lee-way.
Police cash crisis over bombs probe is ‘solved’
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
A POLICE cash crisis caused by the £650,000 cost of investigating the Warrington bombings seems to have been resolved.
Cheshire's Chief Constable, David Graham, had warned that manpower would be reduced and cuts made in police station opening hours if the money was not found.
The results could have been disastrous for the force which has already had to freeze recruitment of officers during 1993 to keep within a tight budget.
But at a meeting of Cheshire's Police Committee yesterday, councillors made a unanimous decision to find half of the money out of the county council's reserves.
The decision still has to be ratified by the Finance and Management Services Committee.
It is expected that the Home Office will come up with the rest of the money.
The investigations into the two IRA attacks on February 26 and March 20 involved the setting up of two major incident rooms within Warrington Police Station as well as the setting up of a special HQ for CID costing £35,000.
Councillors may visit the Home Secretary later in the year to ask him to consider funding a greater proportion of the cost of the investigations, but chairman of the Police Committee, John Collins, warned they were unlikely to receive more than half of the sum.
‘The £665,000 is not a sum that I believe would gain a positive response from the Government in respect of national assistance.
But we would not want to miss an opportunity or to court a refusal,’ he said.
The decision whether to ask for more money from the Home Office will be made by a special panel who meet on June 25 to discuss the issue, as well as deciding how to fund new security cameras for Warrington and police pay rises.
David Graham: Warning
Ambitious barrage plans ‘suspended but not dead’
By Malcolm Handley Regional Affairs Correspondent
PLANS for one of the most ambitious civil engineering projects envisaged for the North West are to be left gathering dust.
Studies for the £1bn Mersey Barrage scheme have Ironically, the project has reached the end of the road as its counterpart in Cardiff Bay begins its final stages through the House of Commons.
When first launched, the Mersey Barrage scheme was projected to create 5,000 construction jobs and numerous leisure spin-offs.
Mersey Barrage Company bosses say the scheme has proved too bold for the funding it needed.
General Manager James McCormack said: ‘Rather than plough on regardless, we have decided to suspend the project.’
Mr McCormack said this did not mean the barrage project was dead and buried.
He added: ‘I am still absolutely convinced the barrage will be built.
‘We are convinced by the former Chancellor's Autumn Statement proposing support for joint ventures between public and private cash.
This would be an excellent opportunity to prove such plans could work.’
John Major's government has refused to provide cash for phase four of the project, despite being told it would now cost substantially less than first thought.
Mossley Hill MP David Alton, who chairs the all-party Mersey Barrage Group, said: ‘Things are unlikely to happen until there is a political will and a more interventionist approach.’
The scheme, with its first three survey phases now complete, has cost £6.3m over the past six years.
MBC shareholders include Barclays Bank and Littlewoods.
An artist's impression of the proposed Mersey Barrage, which has been shelved
Major raps Mates over gift to Nadir
By David Rose Political Editor
NORTHERN Ireland Minister Michael Mates was placed on probation last night after John Major publicly slapped him down in front of MPs.
The Prime Minister said Mr Mates had been ‘unwise’ to present runaway tycoon Asil Nadir, under investigation by the Serious Fraud Squad, with a watch inscribed ‘Don't let the buggers get you down.’
But he made clear it was not a sacking offence and he regarded the matter as closed.
‘It was a misjudgment, but it is not a hanging offence,’ Mr Major said.
Before signalling that he could keep his job, Mr Mates, however, was quizzed by Downing Street about any links he had with Mr Nadir.
Mr Major instructed his Principal Private Secretary, Alex Allen, to demand answers from the minister before facing MPs in the Commons.
‘I am assured by Mr Mates that he has had no financial involvement with Mr Nadir, nor with any of his companies or with his advisers, either before he became a minister or since,’ said Mr Major.
Mr Mates had approached the Attorney General, Sir Nicholas Lyell, over the handling of the case by the Serious Fraud Squad at the request of one of Mr Nadir's advisers, who was a constituent of his.
Comment Page 18
PM Unity plea to party rebels
Embattled Major acts to head off Tory mutiny
By David Hope Political Editor
JOHN Major will move today to head off a threatened mutiny by the Tory Right to sink his premiership.
He will use the platform provided by the Tory Women's Conference to try to reassure the Tory Right that the Left has not taken over the Government.
And other Cabinet ministers are lined up to pledge their full loyalty to Mr Major, and plead with the Tories to pull together.
Top Tories will act to counter the threat of guerrilla warfare from the Tory Right, issued yesterday by Edward Leigh, sacked as junior Industry Minister in last week's reshuffle.
He voiced the fear of other Right-wingers that the sacking of Norman Lamont had left Left-wingers in key jobs.
And he added to the problems confronting new Welsh Secretary John Redwood by referring to Wales as one of the ‘isolated fortresses’ held by the Tory Right in the Government.
Since taking over from Left-winger David Hunt, former Thatcherite Mr Redwood has been trying to reassure the Welsh that there will be no dramatic change in Welsh Office policy.
Mr Leigh said: ‘The Left of the Tory party has now achieved its ambition to control economic, foreign and industrial policy.
‘The Right sits beleaguered in isolated fortresses in the Home Office, Social Security and Wales.
‘But we on the Right must fight back.’
Mr Leigh also highlighted the tensions in Government by revealing that as a minister he had organised other meetings of junior ministers in opposition to the Maastricht Bill paving the way for closer European ties.
After one meeting, attended by 14 ministers, he went to see Mr Major as their spokesman.
‘I was sacked for speaking my mind too loudly,’ he said.
And he turned on Mr Major to accuse him of running ‘a regime unwilling to tolerate dissent and afraid of views different from its own’.
He later said there was a need to build up an alternative force on the backbenches to put forward ‘tough, positive, coherent’ policies.
More worrying for Mr Major, however, are growing signs that Mr Lamont is also planning his revenge.
He has already allowed friends to put it around that he only stayed as Chancellor after Black Wednesday because Mr Major begged him to.
Right-wing rumblings of rebellion over the reshuffle have raised the prospect of them mounting a challenger to Mr Major's leadership.
Yesterday, one Right-winger who did well in the reshuffle, Home Secretary Michael Howard, followed Scottish Secretary Ian Lang in defending Mr Major.
He said there would always be some voices of dissent.
But the overwhelming majority of the party was fully prepared to give Mr Major full credit for winning the general election and driving the Maastricht Bill through ‘and back him 100 per cent’.
Mr Major, meanwhile, cancelled a scheduled visit to Manchester to watch the Test match and worked on his speech instead.
John Major
John Redwood
Five Britons injured as bomb wrecks Egypt bus
By Shenai Raif and Roger Williams
FIVE British tourists to Egypt, including one from Mold, were injured when a bomb was dropped from a bridge in Cairo as their tour bus headed out to see the pyramids at Giza.
An Egyptian man in a car was killed and nine other people injured in the latest of a spate of attacks by Muslim militants.
Forty-nine Britons on an excursion from Cyprus were on the bus going through an underpass when a man dropped a nail bomb from above.
It blew out the windows of the bus, which crashed into the back of the Mercedes.
At least four other cars and a motorcyle were caught in the mayhem.
One of the injured Britons, Leonard Philips, from Mold, had to undergo an operation to remove a nail which embedded in his chest.
The other four British tourists affected had only slight wounds and were on their way back to Cyprus tonight.
Mr Philips remained in hospital near Cairo, and his wife Agnes stayed behind to comfort him.
Hospital manager Ibrahim Fouad said his condition was very good.
‘Fortunately, the nail had only gone into his chest wall and did not enter his lungs, we shall keep him here for a day or two under observation.’
Cecil and Margaret Sharp, from Grampian, and John and Carol Cook, from Essex, rejoined the 43 other Britons from the coach on the Romantica cruise ship last night.
The attack is being blamed on Muslim militants who have waged a campaign of violence for more than a year trying to undermine the country's lucrative tourist industry.
Their aim is overthrow the government and turn Egypt into a purist Islamic state.
The Foreign Office in London is considering a report from British Consul Anita Sheldon, who visited the scene and the injured.
A spokesman said: ‘We are considering whether to change advice to Britons.
It could take some time.’
Advice to visitors issued in March was to be vigilant at all times, avoid Dairut and Assiut where the most serious attacks have occurred unless carrying out essential business, and dress and behave discreetly.
While the highest priority was given to protecting visitors, further incidents ‘must be expected’.
Shattered the Cairo tour bus after the bomb attack
Blue-print for streets of need
Cheshire Show is hit by gas pipeline work
By David Banks and David Lloyd
A GAS pipeline which cuts across the Cheshire Show field has hindered preparations for the event.
Organisers have been forced cut down on competitors and rent extra land after the British Gas pipeline interfered with their plans.
The laying of the pipeline has meant some land at the showground in Tabley, near Knutsford, cannot be used this year.
Seven acres of land has been rented to make up for the lost space.
There will be no donkeys or coloured and part-bred Welsh ponies at this year's show, which takes place on June 22 and 23.
‘The pipeline running from Carrington to Audlem carved a swathe through the northern end of our showground,’ show vice-chairman Geoff Morris said.
‘It was re-seeded but the seed was drowned out last autumn and difficult weather conditions in the spring means that it has to remain fenced off and unusable for this year's show.’
Joint show secretary Margaret Hollinshead said work on the pipeline had forced them to drop two judging rings for the donkeys and ponies.
British Gas would not comment on the matter yesterday.
The cost of this year's show has been put at £350,000, but admission prices have been kept at £6 for adults, £5 for senior citizens and £3 for children.
Almost 60,000 people attended last year's event.
Despite the cancellation of some of the sections the overall entry for light horses at this year's show is close to 3,000.
The ever-popular shire horse entry has an increased turnout of 140, making the show the second most important shop window for the one-time farm workhorse.
A prize of nearly £2,000 for top dairy cattle has encouraged a huge entry of 777 animals, bucking downward national trends.
The showground will play host to more than 10,000 animals this year.
Last year's show enjoyed perfect weather and organisers are hoping for a repeat to attract even bigger crowds.
The shire horses, whose entry has increased to 140 this year Picture: STEPHEN SHAKESHAFT
Margaret Hollinshead:
British troops witness ‘cold-blooded’ massacre
By Daily Post Correspondent
BRITISH peacekeepers saw Muslim soldiers gun down Croat civilians yesterday, UN military sources said.
‘They saw people killed in cold blood,’ one said.
‘When they saw atrocities the British soldiers moved in to stop them.’
The sources said the incidents were in Croat villages seized by mainly Muslim Bosnian forces in an offensive near Travnik in central Bosnia.
British troops managed to prevent about 30 Muslim fighters from gunning down some 170 civilians around Guca Gora, they said.
‘The British told the soldiers to lay down their arms and gathered the civilians into a church and contacted the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to evacuate them,’ a source said.
Elsewhere troops saw civilians shot as Muslim soldiers fought their way from house to house.
At least five Croat villages had been ‘cleansed’ of Croats by the advancing Muslims.
The fierce battle for Travnik was now over, the sources said.
Fighting between the former allies yesterday sent more terrified Croat refugees fleeing from the city as desperate Croat defenders pounded positions occupied by Muslim troops.
The battle for Travnik has turned into a rout for the Croats who at the start of the Bosnian war were allied with the Muslims against the Serbs.
Now the allies are tearing at each other in a savage grab for territory.
The Bosnian Serb news agency said the number of beaten Croat soldiers and civilians seeking shelter with the Serbs in the nearby Mount Vlasic area had doubled overnight to 8,000.
A spokesman for the Croatian Defence Force, the HVO, admitted that around 1,000 of its soldiers had disobeyed orders and surrendered to nearby Serb forces on Monday.
THE DEATH OF TWO NORTH WEST INSTITUTIONS HAS CAUSED SADNESS WITH A PIT SHUTTING AND A FAMOUS STORE'S TILLS RINGING FOR THE LAST TIME
FOR about 70 years, the giant department store of Owen Owen was as well-known a part of the Liverpool scene as the Pier Head.
But today it closes its doors for the last time.
ANDREW FORGRAVE was there yesterday for some sad farewells
City shoppers say farewell to an old friend
AN ERA ends today when the shutters come down for the last time at the Owen Owen store in Liverpool.
Shoppers throughout the North West will be left to mourn a once great department store which dominated Liverpool's city centre shopping for almost seven decades.
Its only legacy will be the widespread attraction the store held for millions of day-trippers who based a visit to Liverpool around a trip to Owen Owen's.
In the past few days shoppers have been paying one last visit to the store, many angered by a trend which has seen Liverpool stripped of many of its landmark shops.
Alongside Owen Owen is a list which also includes such well-known names as Blacklers, Binns, Coopers and Woolworths.
Inside the store in Clayton Square yesterday, bargain hunters picked over sale items while others wandered around saying silent farewells to an old friend.
Shelves were bare, displays empty, areas sectioned off and cheap jewellery was 50pc sale price or less.
Everywhere there was a deep sense of sadness.
Margaret and Jack Carolan, from Huyton, had sneaked a camera inside and were snapping off shots as keepsakes.
Mrs Carolan said: ‘It's very sad another chunk of the old Liverpool gone.
Shopping will never be the same again.’
Nostalgia combined with a sense of loss prompted Patricia Gosling to visit the store yesterday.
‘I think it's such a shame.
I have shopped here for as long as I can remember.
They're taking the real feeling of Liverpool away,’ she said.
For Margaret Williams, of Everton, Owen Owen was a family tradition: ‘I used to come here with my mum and now I bring my children.’
Catherine Kirkham, of Netherton, said it was the end of an era: ‘I can never remember Liverpool without Owen Owen.
‘What's going to happen now?
Are they to close Liverpool altogether?
I came here today to have a look but I didn't think it would affect me the way it has.
It's all very sad.’
Joan Andrews, of Pensby, Wirral, added: ‘I don't go shopping in Liverpool all that often, but I do try and visit Owen Owen.
It's a very sad day for the city.’
Three-quarters of the store's 164 staff, half of them full time, will lose their jobs.
Many have gone already.
The rest will be transferred to the Owen Owen group's other Liverpool store, Lewis's, where much of the Clayton Square activity will now be concentrated.
Food chain Tescos is thought to be interested in taking over the imposing building.
But, for now, shoppers will be left to reflect on a bygone era when the Owen Owen store was the heart of Liverpool retailing.
Joan Andrews
Catherine Kirkham
Patricia Gosling
Owen Owen's store today is its last day of business
Aid delay to disabled in trouble
WIRRAL social services, smarting from an Ombudsman's rap, claimed last night it had been the victim of its own generous policies.
Ombudsman Pat Thomas investigated eight complaints in connection with the provision of equipment and adaptations to the homes of disabled people.
Maladministration was proved in all but one of the cases.
But a social services spokesman said last night: ‘The council is unhappy at the situation and feels it is being penalised because of its generous policies.’
He claimed that the delays were caused by the volume of demand and the shortage of staff and money.
And he warned that any compensation paid to satisfy the Ombudman's requirements, would squeeze funds set aside to help people with disabilities.
He said: ‘Wirral Council spent over £3m last year in assisting people with physical disability.
‘It has above national average figures for the employment of occupational therapists.
‘Each month approximately 300 new requests are made for an occupational therapist assessment and this level of demand far outstrips the borough's available resources.’
Tom Curran, deputy director of Wirral social services department, said: ‘If, in the first place, we had said to people they did not meet the criteria and did not put their names on the waiting list, we would be in less trouble.’
In future, he said, there would be strict adherence to criteria, which would mean less people going onto the waiting list.
He added: ‘It seems a bit of a nonsense to struggle to provide a good service and then for compensation awarded by the Ombudsman to come out of the money provided for the work in the first place.’
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
Such a relief!
Windfall from landsale boosts schools budget
By Carl Butler Daily Post Staff
MAJOR school building work can go ahead this year thanks to a financial windfall from Clwyd's oil and gas finds.
Services in Clwyd are reaping the benefits of the county council's sale of land at Point of Ayr to Hamilton Oil for its oil and gas terminal.
Without it, the county education authority would only have had £650,000 to spend on building work this year.
Instead, the authority has an extra £2.78m taking its 1993–94 total to £3.43m.
If councillors approve the spending list at the meeting on Wednesday, a number of schools will benefit.
Castell Alun High, at Hope, near Wrexham, will get £500,000 to start on new buildings to replace portable classrooms, part of a £1.75m scheme.
Wrexham Acton junior school is in line for £600,000 to begin a £900,000 improvement.
Llay Junior gets £500,000 to start its £700,000 improvement, while Ruabon High will get £60,000 towards its £700,000 scheme.
Meanwhile, Hawarden High is getting £70,000 towards its £1.55m scheme and Flint Cornist primary also gets £70,000 towards a £1.17m scheme.
Up to £1.3m is being allocated for minor work at Prestatyn, Ruthin Brynhyfryd and Saltney high schools and primaries at Cefn Mawr, Denbigh Twm or Nant, Denbigh Ysgol y Parc, Ewloe Green, Flint Cornist, Garth, Gwernaffield, Hawarden Penarlag, Johnstown Infants, Leeswood, Llansannan, Llantysilio, Old Colwyn T Gwynn Jones, Prestatyn Penmorfa, Rhyl Brynhedydd, Rhyl Emmanuel, Rhyl Dewi Sant, Shotton Edward Morgan, Trelawnyd, Llangernyw, Wrexham Wats Dyke.
Children face tests in TB alert
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
PARENTS are facing an agonizing six-week wait after it was revealed that a hospital paediatrician is suffering from tuberculosis.
Tests will be carried out on up to 500 children across the North West who have been treated by the doctor.
Health officials at the Countess of Chester Hospital, where the man works, have set up an emergency clinic to carry out skin tests on the youngsters and 500 staff who are known to have come into contact with the man.
Counsellors have also been drafted in to provide reassurance and advice for the hundreds of worried parents who are expected to contact the hospital.
Sixty per cent of the children come from Chester and Ellesmere Port with the others coming from Clwyd or Wirral.
The tests are due to be carried out over the next fortnight but parents will face a six-week wait for the results.
Doctors were first alerted on May 21, when the man, a junior paediatrician, began to cough up blood.
Dr Ian Keeping, who diagnosed TB and has since been treating the doctor, said: ‘The man stopped work immediately and we set about investigations to establish a diagnosis.
‘This was finalised on May 27.
We don't believe he was infectious before May 21 and we expect him to make a complete recovery.
‘We don't know where he contracted the disease but the likelihood is it was from a patient.’
Personal details about the doctor are not Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 being released but he is undergoing treatment and is expected to be back at work soon.
Paul Barrow, chief executive of the hospital trust said the chances of someone catching the disease from him were ‘a million to one.’
‘The chance of any child having been infected is extremely remote,’ he said.
‘Tuberculosis is contracted through prolonged contact with someone with symptoms of the disease.
‘In this case the doctor stopped work immediately he displayed any symptoms and has remained off work.’
Even if someone does catch the disease, experts say it is extremely treatable and nearly all patients make a full recovery.
‘These days TB is easily cured by antibiotics.
Patients cease to be infectious within two weeks of starting treatment,’ said Dr Philip Mannion from the Public Health Laboratory Service.
All the children called in have been treated by the man in the past two months.
A small number of children who attended community clinics held by the man will also be seen.
The symptoms of TB are a persistent cough, a feeling of general ill-health, listlessness and weight loss.
A helpline has been set up for anxious parents.
The telephone numbers are  and .
Angry bikers left stranded at pier
By Andrew Forgrave Daily Post Staff
BIKERS, who had travelled from all over the world for the Isle of Man TT motorcycle races, were left stranded at Liverpool's Pier Head yesterday.
Hundreds of motorcycle racing enthusiasts remained stuck on the mainland after the Lady of Man ferry was damaged in a crash at Douglas Harbour.
And many of them were angered at what they said was a lack of information from the ferry company on replacement sailings.
Ted Pratt, 48, from Boston, and Wolfgang Heinrich, from Berlin, were among those who complained of long delays and lack of information.
But TT race organisers are confident the world's most famous motorbike event will get under way on schedule despite transport hitches.
The Isle of Man Steam Packet Company, which owns the ferry, said the vessel struck a quayside just above the waterline, crushing the hull inwards, in the accident on Wednesday.
No-one was hurt and engineers immediately set to work making temporary repairs to the hull.
The boat is expected to be operational by this afternoon.
A BAe 146 plane was chartered by the company to fly 80 motorcycle enthusiasts from Speke Airport.
But that too ran into difficulties when thick fog on the runway at Ronaldsway Airport, Douglas, delayed the flight for more than an hour.
Last night 400 bikers were drifting away from Pier Head to other ports after being told extra boats would be chartered from alternative ports today.
Steam Packet managers have organised relief sailings from Stranraer, Gourock, and Heysham.
A spokesman said: ‘The company wishes to thank all those affected by the delays for their tolerance in these trying circumstances.’
TT race organisers said the ferry crash was only a minor setback because the first race does not start until tomorrow afternoon.
Most competitors had already arrived.
Isle of Man TT motorcycle race fans stranded at Pier Head, Liverpool, yesterday
Parents to face ballot re-run on opting out
A SECOND ballot on the future of one of Merseyside's largest Catholic schools is to be held, following an invalid vote by parents.
Parents of pupils at St Mary's College, Wallasey, voted to reject proposals to opt out of local authority control by 552 to 211.
But the vote has been declared invalid because fewer than half the parents took part in the ballot.
Another ballot will now be held to determine whether the 1,000-pupil comprehensive will obtain grant-maintained status or stay within Wirral local authority.
A spokesman for Wirral's education department said: ‘We are pleased that so many parents voted against opting out, but regret that the ballot has to be re-run.
‘St Mary's is a good school providing quality education.
We want to see our partnership continue.’
Only 48pc of the ballot papers sent out were returned to the Electoral Reform Society and, despite a 72pc vote against independence, the law requires at least half of all parents to take part before the result can stand.
Had forty more parents voted, the vote would have been valid.
The second ballot will take place over the next fortnight, and the result will stand no matter how many parents vote.
Calday Grange Grammar School also faced a second ballot over opting out after it applied for grant-maintained status last year.
There were just two more votes for opting out than against, and Education Secretary John Patten decided the vote was unsafe because of‘errors in the distribution of ballot papers.’
The only Wirral opt-out votes preceding St Mary's College have been at grammar schools.
Calday Grange School voted to leave local authority control in June last year, and Wirral School for Boys went along the same path one week later.
In both cases, opting out was perceived as a means of ensuring the survival of grammar school status.
By Chris Parker Daily Post Staff
Man kills girlfriend then shoots himself
Jilted boyfriend in avenging bloodbath
By Daily Post Correspondent
JILTED boyfriend Alan Graham killed his lover with a sawn-off shotgun yesterday before turning the weapon on himself.
Graham, 29, went to confront 19-year-old Samantha Gibson after she walked out on him.
He took his gun and marched to the house of his best friend, Phil Lowe, where Miss Gibson was staying, and demanded to see her.
Then he forced his way inside and confronted her as Mr Lowe's grandfather George Norris, 73, tried to halt the violence, telling the gunman: ‘Don't shoot the girl.’
But he shot Mr Morris in the leg in front of his five-year-old granddaughter, Amy, then bundled Amy and Mr Lowe's wife Jeanette, 26, into a bedroom.
As the wounded grandfather pleaded with him to leave Miss Gibson alone, Graham shot her in the chest at point blank range, killing her instantly.
He then walked into a bedroom and shot himself in the chest.
Graham and Miss Gibson had been living at his house on the Riddings Estate in Scunthorpe but split up after a row on Monday night.
After the shootings in Somerby Road, just 200 yards from Graham's home, neighbours rushed into the house to find Mr Norris lying in agony on the landing.
Pamela Meikle, 50, said: ‘I heard a loud bang and then some more.
Then all hell broke loose.
Phil came running in to the street saying: ‘He shot my granddad’.
‘I ran into Phil's house and saw the granddad lying on the floor with a hole in his leg.
There was blood everywhere and he was screaming for help.
‘Right behind him, about two foot away, was Samantha.
She was lying on her back with blood on her chest.
‘I knew Alan was in the house somewhere but I didn't know where.
I opened the bedroom door and there he was lying on the floor dead.
The gun was lying next to him.’
Mrs Meikle said just two days ago Graham had been seen in a local pub.
She said: ‘He was telling everyone that if his girlfriend ever left him he would kill her.
Nobody took him seriously.’
Mrs Meikle's daughter, Jane Waudby, 29, who also lives next door, put towels on Mr Norris's leg to try to stop the blood.
She said: ‘It was carnage.’
Mr Norris was taken to Scunthorpe General Hospital but later transferred to Hull Royal Infirmary where he underwent surgery on his right thigh.
He is in a stable condition.
Lifetime of service earns head reward
A LIFETIME'S work for the Urdd brought a North Wales head teacher the most prestigious ‘thankyou’ the Urdd can give.
The John and Ceridwen Hughes Uwchaled award is given annually to individuals in recognition of outstanding service through the Welsh language, to young people over the age of 11 outside formal education.
The winner, Llew Williams, of Llangernyw, retires from his post as head of Ysgol Bod Alaw, Colwyn Bay, in September.
His record for the Urdd and the community generally spans four decades, from being the secretary of Llangwm Aelwyd, where he grew up, to founding and leading two senior branches at Capel Garmon and Bro Cernyw.
He is still the leader of the latter, but with three assistants, now after 18 years.
He was the warden of the village's education centre for nine years, has served as a member of the Urdd Council and was the movement's vice-president for three years.
Bro Cernyw Aelwyd has over the years won in almost all sections of the Urdd's activities, from Eisteddfod competitions to darts, pool, five-a-side football and twice runners up in the national quiz competition.
Llew Williams…four decades of Urdd devotion
TURNING THE KNIFE
BA yesterday revealed it is one of the financial institutions backing former British Aerospace executive Richard Hooke in his bid for BAe's Corporate Jet business.
There was another piece of good news yesterday with the announcement that BAe plans to take on apprentices again.
The Corporate Jet business is being sold to American conglomerate Raytheon for £250m.
But Mr Hooke says until the deal is closed he will continue to try to put his bid before BAe's board.
Unity Trust, the trades union and co-operative financial institution, has discussed with Mr Hooke the possibility of an employee stake in the new company through an employee share ownership plan.
Gordon Beesley, managing director, said: ‘The initiative has our support.
The impact on jobs of a sale to a foreign bidder would be highly unfavourable.
‘We believe the buy-out team should be allowed to formulate proposals which would keep the control of this company in the UK.’
It is understood Mr Hooke has major institutions to act as equity and debt providers.
BAe has argued Raytheon was the better deal for employees and shareholders.
Mr Beesley said: ‘We shall be asking the Government to ensure that BAe supplies the necessary information to the buy-out team to enable a formal offer to be made.’
Amid all the gloom of redundancies and take-over deals, BAe has announced it wants to recruit apprentices at its Broughton factory for the first time in three years.
The company is looking to hire between 20–30 to work on Airbus wing production.
George Marshall, head of human resources, said: ‘In spite of our current employment difficulties, but looking to the future of our business, I am announcing we will have an intake of 20–30 first year apprentices in September.
‘We still have nearly 200 young people undergoing training on this site and although it continues to be less than in earlier years, because the business scene has changed, our overall commitment to training and development certainly has not.’
BAe made apprentices completing their training redundant a couple of years ago, but made every effort to find them alternative jobs within the group or with other companies.
The move was welcomed by Airbus unions convenor at Broughton Mike Nesbitt.
‘We want to keep open the training school and this also helps local colleges.
‘Whether there will be any jobs for them at the end of the day is too early to say but at least they will be getting quality training which can be a kick-start in life.’
Jubilation as schools are saved from axe
By Emyr Williams Daily Post Correspondent
THERE was jubilation last night after Gwynedd councillors threw out controversial plans to close three village schools.
Such was the opposition to the plan for closure of a school in the Bro Dysynni area of South Meirionydd, put forward by an education authority panel, that one senior councillor, Dr William George, described the vote in the county council chamber as the ‘most sweeping’ he had ever come across.
More than 100 parents and children from Abergynolwyn, Llanegryn and Llwyngwril made the 100-mile round trip to Caernarfon to show their opposition to the plan to close their schools and establish a new area school at Bryncrug.
The county's schools reorganisation panel chairman, Coun Dafydd Orwig, urged members of the county's education committee to accept the recommendation, which, he argued, would be for the benefit of the children's education.
But the recommendation was thrown out by an overwhelming majority, with only Coun Orwig and education committee chairman, Coun Handel Morgan, voting to close the three schools.
Coun Jim Knowles said: ‘We all knew that this proposal would not go through, and it is now clear that we should not be pursuing a policy of closing schools.’
Handing over a petition opposing the closures, signed by more than 1,200 local people, Coun John Tudor said: ‘The fact that people from these three villages have travelled here today in two buses and seven cars to voice their opposition is a clear message to us all how the people of Bro Dysynni feel on this issue.’
The committee also agreed, by 39 votes to 17, to defer for 12 months consideration of a proposal to close the village school at Abersoch.
Pupils protest against the closure plans outside Gwynedd education offices
‘Cancer best thing that ever happened to me’
By Andrew Forgrave Daily Post Staff
NEW Zealander Mary-Jane Hilton means every word when she says cancer was the best thing that ever happened to her.
When many women would have been devastated, the 50-year-old took the news that she had a malignant breast tumour in her stride.
She saw it as an opportunity to take control of her life and set about tackling the crisis with positive thinking.
That was three years ago and Mrs Hilton is now relishing her new role as fundraiser for the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Society.
Sitting in her office at the historic Philharmonic Hall, she contemplates her newfound lease of life.
‘I know it sounds terrible but I'm awfully glad I had cancer it was the best thing that ever happened to me,’ she said.
‘I now have a completely different lifestyle, with different sets of values.
I am more content and I feel a lot happier.
‘As a fund-raiser, you can never take no for an answer and no one was going to put me six feet under.’
Mrs Hilton was a successful public relations and fundraising consultant in New Zealand when she learned she had cancer.
After having her breast removed, she was then told the malignancy had spread to the lymph nodes under her arm.
Chemotherapy was prescribed but three months later she decided to fight the disease with her mind rather than chemicals.
‘I took control,’ she said.
‘I believe cancer is a state of mind and can be defeated by positive thinking.’
The treatment was stopped and Mrs Hilton prescribed her own course of healthy eating and holistic medicine.
After controlling her needle phobia through hypnotherapy, she travelled to America to study clinical suggestion techniques.
Now she uses the same techniques to teach other women cancer can be beaten.
But it is the Liverpool Philharmonic Hall which is benefitting most from her zest and drive.
Yesterday, the European Commission announced a £2.5m grant giving the green light to the restoration of the grade II-listed building.
And next year she has set herself the personal goal of raising £500,000.
Mary-Jane Hilton
‘Backdoor bid ‘claims to close down fire stations
By Carl Butler Daily Post Staff
FIRE chiefs have been accused of ‘back-door’ tactics in an attempt to close two fire stations in a review of station boundaries.
The review would take away large areas covered by Buckley and Prestatyn retained fire stations.
Councillors have now called for a full investigation before any action is taken.
Buckley Coun David Messham said the reorganisation was being proposed without local councillors being aware.
Prestatyn Coun Richard Edwards said some of the proposed changes were ‘ludicrous’.
Both stations, manned by part-timers, were under threat of closure some years ago but massive campaigns secured their future.
Chief Fire Officer Ken Hayton told Clwyd's environment and protection committee yesterday that after a review of fire cover last year he reassured councillors there was ‘no question of closing fire stations’.
But the service had looked at 18 areas and applied a Home Office computer to determine which fire station turns out first to a fire.
Variable travel times were calculated, including the time it could take for part-timers to get to their station.
Mr Hayton last year voiced concern that some part-time stations occasionally failed to get any response, particularly in the day time and the nearest full-time station had to cover.
Because it is calculated that a retained crew might take four minutes to get to the station the computer calculated other stations could respond quicker.
‘Buckley fire station has a proud record of getting to all fires.
Computer models are wonderful things but they do not put people on the ground,’ said an angry Coun Messham.
The proposal would take away from Buckley, Penymynydd, Penyffordd, Mynydd Isa, Hope, Higher Kinnerton, and Drury, yet leave it Bryny-Baal.
‘You have to travel through Mynydd Isa to get to Bryn-y-Baal,’ Coun Messham said.
It looked like another ‘back-door method’ of closing the stations.
‘Ludicrous’
‘We now have this ludicrous situation where if a fire broke out in one end of a particular street in Prestatyn, Rhyl fire engines will go to it and if it breaks out in the other end of the street Prestatyn will go to it,’ added Coun Edwards.
In one case changes were being proposed because the computer calculated a difference in response time of about five or six seconds, he claimed.
Mr Hayton said he would be willing to make a presentation of the computer findings to councillors and if the results could be challenged, they would be re-examined.
The committee called for a special report on the matter.
Golf guidelines aim to conserve county farmland for future
Policy to control rural development
By Emyr Williams Daily Post Correspondent
NEW GUIDELINES for the development of golf courses in Dyfed are set to be approved by county councillors this week, following a period of public consultation.
The new guidelines aim to give added protection to the countryside while at the same time promoting In drawing up the guidelines, planners accept that golf can have a major impact on countryside amenities, which, they claim, must be weighed against considerable economic and recreational benefit.
Drawn up by Dyfed County Council, with help from the district councils, the guidelines recognise the rapid growth of golf.
County planning officer Dave Bown, said: ‘At the present time, Dyfed is witnessing a considerable increase in the number of golf development proposals.’
The guidelines make it clear it is council policy not to permit golf development if it involves new buildings or associated development in the open countryside, and is unrelated to existing settlements.
Golf developments likely to adversely affect the landscape will be resisted.
There will also be opposition to the use of high quality agricultural land for golf courses.
Subject to certain conditions, particular encouragement will be given to proposals where development utilises degraded land, and where the development would result in demonstrable improvements to amenity, landscape, nature conservation or public access.
Golf development will not normally be permitted if it causes unacceptable disruption to the public enjoyment of rights of way.
‘For many of us the natural beauty of much of Dyfed's countryside remains undisputed, though few people nowadays accept that this will always be so, regardless of economic or other pressures,’ said Mr Bown.
£4m ‘windfall’ to be spent on town, village revamp
By Carl Butler Daily Post Staff
DELYN has nearly £4m to spend on improving its towns and villages in ambitious plans for 1993–94.
But councillors are urging officials to get on with spending because the authority could go out of business in two years' time if local government is reorganised.
Most of the money will find its way into Flint which is looking forward to a major town centre redevelopment supermarket, DIY store, smaller shops, fast food restaurant and new car park.
Delyn was going to spend £1.25m in 1993–94, but finds it has more than £2.5m unspent capital which it can carry over from last year's budget.
Chairman of Delyn's development environment committee, Coun Gwilym Roberts, said: ‘It is a very exciting and ambitious scheme.’
The bulk of the £3.8m will be split between three towns: £2.3m to Flint, £312,000 to Holywell and £315,000 for Mold.
Greenfield Valley will get £212,000 and village enhancement schemes will get £54,000.
But not everyone has welcomed the news.
Coun Tony Chilton told the Borough's development and environment committee yesterday: ‘The benefits which are going to the towns seem very unfair, very biased.
‘More than £3m is being spent on the towns and just £54,000 on the villages.
‘People in rural areas pay council tax just like everyone else.’
Labour leader Coun Chris Bithell said: ‘We underspent last year by about 38pc.
‘We are probably in the last days of this authority and we want to make sure our schemes and aspirations come to fruition.’
Spending on Flint includes massive environmental improvements, clearance of the former Courtaulds' Deeside Mill, re-siting the town's football club and car parking.
In Holywell it will be spent on car parks, bus station toilets and other environmental schemes.
In Mold there will be major environmental improvements, pedestrianisation, improvements to the trader's hall and car parks.
Gwilym Roberts
Widow's nightmare as her baby fights for life
By Carmel Brown Daily Post Staff
A MOTHER is living in a nightmare from which her only possible escape is that her tiny daughter may win her fight for life.
For Angela Allen had to abandon her vigil at the bedside of 10-month-old Laura in a Birmingham hospital to return to her St Helens home where her husband had been found dead in bed.
Rob Allen, 41, is thought to have suffered a heart attack which his wife believes was brought on by the strain of their daughter's condition.
But just two weeks before his death, the couple had been celebrating after a last-ditch nationwide appeal found a donor liver to save the life of their baby.
Mr and Mrs Allen had been trying for a child for 19 years and were overjoyed when Laura was born.
Sadly, their world was shattered when, within days of her birth, doctors told them their child had acute liver failure.
Laura was admitted to Birmingham Children's Hospital for specialist treatment where Mrs Allen maintained a 24-hour vigil during the 12 weeks they waited for a liver to become available.
And Mr Allen, dividing his time between his job and the hospital, constantly made the return journey from their home in Provident Street, Parr.
‘Rob was always so fit.
I can't believe what I am going through.
I just don't know how to think,’ said a devastated Mrs Allen last night as she prepared to return to Birmingham following her husband's funeral.
‘It must have been the tremendous strain he had been under worrying about Laura and trying to keep his job up.
‘It was non-stop and a terrible, terrible strain for him.
The emotional pressure was just tremendous.
‘We were both so delighted when Laura had the liver transplant.
It was the answer to all our prayers.
‘We thought all our problems were behind us and were looking forward to a new life.
‘But Laura developed complications.
Her new liver took straight away but she had to go on a ventilator because she was having problems with her lungs.’
Mrs Allen was with Laura when his mother discovered her husband dead in their bed last week.
‘She is all I have to live for now.
Doctors have given her more than a fighting chance and I just have that to cling to.’
Rob and Angela Allen with baby Laura soon after she was born
Bridgewater Four ‘proved innocent’
By Heather Tyrrell Daily Post Correspondent
THE families and lawyer of three men convicted of killing newsboy Carl Bridgewater yesterday handed in ‘new evidence’ to Home Secretary Michael Howard which they said proved their innocence.
They presented him with a thick dossier containing new information about the alleged confession that led to the convictions.
Michael Hickey, his cousin Vincent Hickey and James Robinson were jailed in 1979 for the murder of 13-year-old Carl as he disturbed their burglary at a remote farmhouse in Stourbridge, West Midlands in September, 1978.
Patrick Molloy was convicted of manslaughter and died in prison in 1981.
Michael Hickey's mother, Ann Whelan, who was among a large crowd of protesters outside the Home Office, said: ‘Our message is simple that we are not going anywhere.
We are not going away.
‘They may as well give us justice now and exonerate these men from this horrific crime.’
Solicitor Jim Nichol said the main new evidence, never considered before, was that the confession by Molloy at the centre of the case was not a word-for-word record of what he said but the recollections of police officers present.
He added that a prime suspect in the investigation, who had told police that he had no gun at the time of the murder, is now known to have possessed a double-barrelled shotgun at the time.
And he said there was now further evidence to discredit a principal witness in the case as a liar and a cheat.
Relatives of the men were confident the new evidence would eventually secure their release.
Carl Bridgewater
Solicitor Jim Nichol with relatives of the jailed men, from left, Ann Whelan, Anne Skett and Theresa Robinson at the Home Office yesterday
Married couples pension rights will have to be faced in future
WE have just about got used to the framework for personal and company pensions introduced in 1986, with its incentives for ‘contracting out’ of the State Earnings Related Pension Scheme (SERPS) and the freedom to transfer pension rights from company schemes to personal pensions.
But now even bigger and more drastic changes are on the horizon.
One stems directly from Europe: thanks to a European Court Judgement.
Britain is required to equalise pension rights between men and women.
the other concerns division of pension rights between husband and wife.
The Government has delayed responding to the need to equalise pension rights because it means equalising State retirement ages.
At present these are 65 for men and 60 for women.
Equalising at 60 is far too expensive for the Government to contemplate.
But equalising at 65 would be very unpopular with women 
Compromise
Sooner or later and if not sooner, further references to the European Court are likely a definite decision will have to be made.
Retirement at 63 is the obvious compromise solution.
But since the private sector will then bring its normal retirement ages into line, this will involve complex adjustment of pension rights for everyone in work.
Potentially an even bigger bombshell is about to burst on the vexed question of pension rights.
It has long been recognised that women who devote years of their lives to bringing up children lose out in the pension stakes.
Their husbands earn pension rights while they do not.
If divorce follows, the husband keeps the pension rights and the wife has none.
At present, English law does not recognise pension rights as an asset in the context of divorce settlements.
And even Scottish law, where pension rights are taken into account on divorce, has no mechanism for transferring them from one person to another.
All the judges can do is award a greater proportion of non pension assets to the wife to make up for her lack of long term security and if these other assets are small, the husband is still the winner.
Now a report from the Pensions Management Institute has suggested ways of changing the law to bring pension rights into play.
The aim would be to give the courts the right to divide pension rights, even if earned by one of the divorcing parties, between them.
This would be done on the basis of the facts, in particular the period of time the marriage had lasted and the extent to which the wife had foregone the opportunity to earn pension rights while bringing up the children.
The legislation would not affect the flat-rate State pension.
Nor, at present, does it look as though it will be practicable to bring SERPS within the scope of the Courts.
But all other pension rights, whether through occupational or personal pension schemes, would in principle be divisible.
Protecting the position of women who work hard at being mothers is obviously a worthy social objective, and with no political dispute likely, the report's changes could be legislated within a year or two.
Implications
The implications for the future (any changes will almost certainly not apply to pension rights earned before the date off legislation) are enormous.
Married people will have to treat the pension rights they earn as partly conditional on their remaining married.
And the possibility, particularly for husbands, of losing a significant part of their pension rights on divorce will focus their minds on the value of those rights.
Anglican-Catholic plan for new primary school
Estate's joint venture ‘exciting’
By Malcolm Handley Regional Affairs Correspondent
A UNIQUE project could mark Liverpool as the country's leader in school building trends.
The city's education officials and leaders of Liverpool's Catholic and Anglican churches are considering a new ‘joint Christian’ primary school for the Croxteth Park district.
Although a small number of inter-denominational schools have been built in the UK, they are normally the result of neighbouring schools coming together from weakness and threat of closure.
The project under discussion for Liverpool comes from the confidence of two religions prepared to work together to build a new primary school.
Liverpool's education officials are viewing the project as an exciting and dynamic venture which could set the scene for future plans.
But Clive Lawton, head of educational services, said there was still a long way to go, and he warned against being carried away with a good idea if it were to impoverish the rest of the scheme.
‘The proposals have been fully thought through by the local education authority, the Anglican Diocese of Liverpool and Roman Catholic Archdiocese.
‘Proposals for establishing a joint trust and practical provisions for pupil places have already been prepared,’ he added.
The proposal for a joint Christian voluntary-aided primary school goes before this afternoon's education planning committee.
If the plan gets the go-ahead it will be submitted to the Department for Education and if approval is given the school could begin soon after that decision.
Mr Lawton said: ‘It is an exciting initiative which could provide a dynamic role model for future co-operation in other parts of the city.
‘This is not a barrier smashing initiative.
The two religions already work close together.
It is a very positive proposal.
‘It is an exciting idea to serve Croxteth Park, one of the largest housing estates in the country.
The idea suits the age and the city of Liverpool,’ he added.
There are still a number of potential stumbling blocks beginning with today's meeting before the project could get the go-ahead.
The developer of the site, Ideal Homes Holdings, has undertaken to reserve the site and provide it free of charge to the school trustees in addition to a one-off payment of up to £150,000.
£650,000 bill sparks crisis
Bombs probe costs may force police to cut back
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
CHESHIRE Police Force may have to reduce its manpower and police station opening hours because of the cost of the Warrington bombings.
The force estimates that £650,000 has been spent on the investigations so far.
And Chief Constable David Graham has warned that if the Government does not provide extra money, drastic steps will have to be taken.
Cost cutting measures would include:
Reduction in police overtime the force is already running at below the minimum levels it considers necessary.
Reduction in training.
Cuts to police station opening hours.
Reduction in the operations of special departments, including community liaison, and crime prevention.
Cuts in the use of vehicles.
Reduction of civilian staff.
In his report to tomorrow's police committee, Mr Graham warns the cost of the investigations, without additional funding, could have ‘enormous implications.’
He says: ‘Already, in order to achieve a balanced budget, it has been necessary to freeze recruitment during 1993 of all police officer posts as and when they come vacant.
‘As it is impossible to reduce police strength any further to offset the estimated cost of the two major investigations, the force will have to implement some or all of the measures mentioned.’
The IRA bombings, which took place on February 26 and March 20, necessitated the setting up of two major incident rooms within Warrington Police Station, financed by the Cheshire Constabulary.
Three arrests have been made in relation to the first incident when a policeman was shot and injured shortly before an explosion at the gasworks.
Their trial is likely to cost £90,000.
A further £60,000 is needed for continuing investigations into the second incident.
The force has already spent £428,000 on extra officers to deal with the second incident in which two children died and 53 people were injured.
The Police Committee is expected to request a grant from the Government to cover the extra expense.
Mountain search is suspended
Concern grows for lone climber ‘lost’ in Alaska
By David Greenwood Daily Post Staff
HOPES were fading last night for an Anglesey man who has been missing in an Alaskan wilderness for five days.
Keen mountaineer Thomas Hargreaves, 39, left to go on a day's hiking in an area frequented by grizzly bears last Thursday, but friends only reported him missing at the weekend.
As his parents, Alan and Sybil, of Llangoed, Anglesey, waited anxiously by their phone for news from Alaska, the man heading the search confirmed last night that it had been suspended.
State Trooper Chuck Lamica in Juneau said: ‘We have now suspended the operation and it will not start again until we get a new lead.’
He said Mr Hargreaves's bicycle had been found chained to a sign at the start of a trail, which winds its way through thick forest to the vast Mendenall glacier, just north of Juneau in south east Alaska.
State Trooper Lamica added: ‘He has gone into a very dangerous area.
Every year we have several people going missing there.
Unfortunately, some are never seen again.’
He said searchers have had to fight their way through areas of dense undergrowth which can edge on to sheer cliff faces.
They have even ‘spooked’ a couple of grizzly bears.
Mr Hargreaves was believed to have been carrying ice-climbing equipment.
State Trooper Lamica concluded: ‘We just hope he hasn't gone onto the glacier.It is filled with 400 ft deep crevasses, and is extremely dangerous.’
Mr Hargreaves, single, a graduate of Bangor University and a fisheries expert, has been a regular visitor to Alaska for the last four years.
Michelle Ridgeway, one of Mr Hargreaves's friends, said: ‘He is very composed and calm.
If anyone can make it he can.’
Lisa Sutcliffe, Christopher Filtock, Iain Cropper and Hayley Waller with a certificate awarded for the school garden
Hard times…the police crackdown on kerb-crawlers has meant a huge slump in business for vice girls in Liverpool.
(Pictures posed by models)
‘The number of girls is now at an all-time low’
Row over fun figures to boost seafront
Campaigners hit out over ‘appalling decline’
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
LIFE-SIZE three-dimensional characters inspired by the popular saucy postcards of Donald McGill could soon become a feature in a seaside resort.
Sefton Council officers are considering proposals to introduce the fun figures in Southport in a bid to help rejuvenate the town's shabby seafront area.
However the plans have been branded ‘ludicrous’ by Southport 2000, a group set up to help preserve the town's heritage and restore it to its Victorian splendour.
The argument is one of many currently raging between Sefton Council and people living in the town once known as the Garden City of the North.
‘Southport's seafront area is in an appalling state, it is disgraceful, but a few plastic dummies won't put the problem right,’ said Southport 2000's Tony Quirke.
‘We held a Victorian Fair at the weekend and many people who previously lived in the town and were back visiting couldn't believe how much it has deteriorated.’
The group, which boasts 2000 members, expressed fears that Southport's popularity as a holiday resort is in decline.
And they claim that a council scheme to construct a concrete sea defence wall along the coastline will worsen the appearance of the area.
‘People are unhappy at the way the town is looking,’ said Mr Quirke.
‘The seafront area is run-down with too much concrete, the sea defence wall will act as a Berlin Wall cutting people off from the beach and the sea.
‘It will be a monstrosity and we will witness the end of Southport as a resort.
‘We believe that the seafront area should feature continental-type cafes, with an emphasis on families.
The road could be closed off and the beach opened up and made more accessible.
‘We fear that the construction of a sea defence wall will pave the way for road and business developments and will signal the end of Southport as a resort.’
Imaginative
However, Sefton's Chief Planning Officer Tim Cox refuted the criticisms and said that the fun characters were just one aspect of environmental art being considered for the area.
‘There are one or two places including Manchester which feature some very imaginative art.
‘We hope to embrace that artistic approach to make Southport more interesting and special.
‘The Council is working on re-generated Southport's seafront area.
We are very conscious of the problems on the seafront but these have been recognised.
‘Coast defence work is necessary because the area is flooded 50 days of the year, and we have more chance of attracting business investment by removing the threat of flooding.
‘In order to keep the sea out we have to build a wall, but a promenade will be constructed above road level and people will be able to look over the wave wall.’
Sefton's Chief Tourism Officer Phil King is attending a conference in Scarborough and was unavailable for comment.
Rubbish on Southport's seafront and, inset, fun figures which could brighten the area