

Corsa is recalled after blazes
SOME of Vauxhall's new Corsa cars, featured in an extravagant £3m TV commercial with top model girls, have burst into flames, the company said yesterday.
Vauxhall announced on May 28 that all 5,128 of its UK Corsas were being recalled because of an electrical fault.
But yesterday the company confirmed that faulty wiring had, in some cases, led to cars burning.
‘It's a question of some of the wiring not being routed in the correct way and in some cases this has caused a chafing or a short circuit,’ said a Vauxhall spokesman yesterday.
‘In most cases that we heard there was no real problem, but in some cases there was fire so we decided to have the recall as a purely precautionary move.’
The work on the Spanish built cars is being done free of charge.
Models such as Linda Evangelista, Naomi Campbell and Kate Moss, appeared in TV adverts for the Corsa.
The car received more publicity when a feminist group complained that shots of Naomi appearing in a leather outfit complete with whip in a fantasy bondage scene was ‘sexist and disgusting’.
However, the Independent Television Commission ruled that the adverts were more tongue-in-cheek rather than sinister or sexist and that, in any, case the Naomi Campbell one had been moved to a post-9pm slot.
A replacement for the Nova, the Corsa was ninth in the May 1993 UK top ten sellers list.
By Daily Post Correspondent
THE new hi-tech scanner used when surgeons battled to try and save the life of IRA bomb victim Tim Parry is to be dedicated to his memory.
Twelve-year-old Tim was the first patient on the £500,000 scanner as he clung to life after suffering horrific head injuries in the Warrington bombing outrage.
The surgeons' battle was in vain and Tim died but now the Computed Tomograph (CT) Scanner is to be named after him.
It will be officially opened by his parents, Colin and Wendy Parry, at a special ceremony at the Walton Centre for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Liverpool, on June 28.
Representatives of Everton Football Club are expected to be present.
Tim, from Great Sankey, was a dedicated fan of the club and had been shopping for an Everton strip on the day of the Bridge Street bombing.
Players who visited him during his final days in the Walton Centre gave him an Everton shirt which was later buried with him.
The Philips Tomascan LX CT Scanner had only just been installed at Walton when the bombings took place.
Tim was transferred there from Warrington General Hospital so it could be used.
A Regional Health Authority spokesman said: ‘It is superior in design to older models.
Imaging quality has been vastly improved and now includes a 3D facility.’
In the meantime, the tendering process for the purchase of Warrington's own CT scanner has started following a major boost for fund-raisers since the bombings.
Scanner appeal co-ordinator Jack Froggatt said: ‘The town centre bombings raised awareness of the need for a scanner in Warrington and money has been coming in much quicker since then.’
It is now hoped to reach the £1m target by the autumn.
The trustees administering the appeal fund set up for victims of the bombings have now approved the design of a memorial to be placed in Bridge Street at the scene of the atrocity.
Remembered: Tim Parry