

Misery for miners
THE SHOW is over according to British Coal.
BUT the audience is still hanging around, waiting for an encore.
PARKSIDE COLLIERY, the last mine on the Lancashire coalfield, officially closed last Friday, with the loss of over 700 jobs.
BUT a week later, two women have chained themselves inside the pit, and protestors are still outside the locked gates.
JACKIE NEWTON spent a night at the camp to find out why Women Against Pit Closures Billy was among six miners who refused to sign on Friday, and all were made redundant on Monday.
Chubb's bumper accounts
CHUBB Security, which was floated off from Racal Electronics last October, today published a sparkling first set of accounts as a separate company.
Pre-tax-profits in the year to March 31 jumped 64% to £64.2m from £39.1m in the previous 12 months.
Wimpey's cash call
BRITAIN'S second biggest housebuilder George Wimpey today threw its weight behind hopes that the UK housing market is set for recovery.
It has joined the queue of property and building companies asking shareholders for more money with a £104m rights issue of new shares.
Fleet renamed
SHELL'S coastal tanker fleet is to be renamed after the Latin words for seashells.
The deep sea tankers have been named after shells since the launching of the Murex in 1892.
‘Worst is over’ at Pilks as dividend is slashed again
By David Hope Business Staff
PILKINGTON, the world's biggest glass manufacturer has seen a dramatic slide in profits for the third year running.
And for the second successive year, the St Helens based group is forced to cut its dividend.
The continuing slide is blamed on the effects of the recession on glass markets and prices, particularly in construction and car manufacturing industries.
But last night, group chairman Sir Antony Pilkington hinted the company was over the worst.
While it was too early to be optimistic about 1993/94, the year had started on a better note, he said.
‘There are glimpses of recovery in our markets in the UK and North America, while performances in Argentina, Brazil and Australasia are looking up,’ he said.
In addition, last year's investment in glass manufacturing in Poland and Italy were sound and would produce profits when on stream in two years time.
Pilkington has taken a 40pc stake in the Polish float glass plant and, with the country boasting the largest East European population, was expecting to do well.
But with Germany one third of the firm's European profit base still in recession, there was room for continuing concern.
Costs
Pre-tax profits in the year ending March 31 collapsed to £40.7m from £95.7m previously.
The dividend is reduced to 4p per share.
Costs have been cut by £70m this year and by about £170m a year since the start of the recession in 1990.
More than 9,000 staff have been axed and about another 11,000 have departed in businesses sold off.
Sir Antony commented: ‘The fact that these actions have not prevented the substantial fall in profitability over the same period is a reflection of the length and severity of the recession.’
But the weakness of the UK pound helped Pilkington boost market share against foreign imports.
Borrowings increased during the last year to £932m from £760m but the company is in the process of disposing of businesses, including Sola glass, in an effort to cut debt.
Sir Antony revealed a number of bids from interested parties were under consideration and a Sola announcement was pending.
Shell goes Latin for tankers
SHELL'S coastal tanker fleet are to be re-named after the Latin names of seashells.
Shell's large deep-sea tankers have been named after shells in an unbroken line since the launching of the Murex in 1892.
The first of Shell UK's smaller coastal tankers, the Shell Seafarer, was renamed Asprella in a ceremony at Ellesmere Port Boat Museum.
Ineka Boot, wife of Dominic Boot, General Manager of Shell's Stanlow site, presented an asprella shell to the crew.
Control Techniques drives profits higher
By Ian Herbert Business Editor
A HIGH-TECH electronics firm has more than doubled interim pre-tax profits as it expands its world-wide operation, it was revealed yesterday.
Control Techniques, one of Wales' home-grown success stories, turned in pre-tax profits of £3.7m to March, a leap of £2.1m on the same period in 1992.
The Newtown-based electronic motor drive specialist opened a dealership in Istanbul, Turkey, two days ago, and is now in negotiations to expand the network to India, Pakistan, China, Barcelona in Spain, Austria and Brno in the Czech Republic.
Profits before tax were up 137pc and turnover topped £54m against £43m for the corresponding period last year, an increase of 25pc.
An interim dividend of 2.35p was declared, an increase of 9pc on last year's 2.15p.
Earnings per share were 5.9p against 2.3p last year.
The company, which has been acquisitive in the last two years, purchasing controlling stakes in US competitor ICD Drives among others, attributes this year's success to organic growth alone.
Chairman Trevor Wheatley said yesterday: ‘The recovery we are seeing in the UK and US is fragile, though our order books are 20pc up on this time last year.
‘But other markets in which we operate, apart from Asia-Pacific, which is experiencing double digit growth, remain depressed and this adds a measure of uncertainty to our forecasting process.
‘Customers who might have refurbished steel or paper mills have been seriously affected by recession.
‘We do replacements of old equipment, which people turn to in difficult times.
‘We are only spending 3.5pc of turnover on research and developments and would like to put that up to 5pc.
We are very profitable and can afford that.’
The company pins great hopes on its new small AC drive Dinverter.
The digital AC motor speed controller is no bigger than a filofax.
‘Our policy of focusing solely on drives for electric motors is continuing to bear fruit,’ said Mr Wheatley.
Control Techniques was founded 20 years ago and floated on the Stock Market in 1985, when the annual turnover was £6.8m.
Nearly a quarter of the workforce is based in and around Newtown which, as well as housing the main production facilities, is home to the company's research and development division.
A new £4m R and D plant will be completed by the end of 1994 on the Mochdre Enterprise Park in Newtown.
Poundstretcher expands
BROWN & Jackson, which operates the Poundstretcher chain of stores, today became the latest in a long line of companies to ask shareholders for cash.
Half the £21m it intends to raise is earmarked for 15 new stores this year and a further 45 in 1994.
Irish link on cards
THE rebirth of a ferry link between Liverpool and Ireland moved a step closer last night after the Mersey Docks and Harbour Company splashed out £15m in its first shipowning venture.
It has bought a 50pc interest in Merchant Ferries, which operates daily roll-on, roll-off services between Heysham, Fleetwood and Warrenpoint, Northern Ireland.
The deal adds fresh momentum to plans for a rare Irish service to a river berth off Twelve Quays, Wirral.
The plan, already a subject of discussion between MDHC and Irish ferry operators, will be debated at a Merseyside Development Corporation board meeting later this month.
MDHC would not be drawn on the Irish service plans last night though Cenargo, Merchant Ferries' parent company, declared: ‘Two existing routes will be maintained but new routes are under investigation.’
Trevor Furlong, MDHC chief executive, said: ‘This is in keeping with our strong commitment to Irish Sea trade.’
Compact seeks new partners
A CRUCIAL partnership, which motivates inner city youngsters to succeed in the world of work, was strengthened yesterday.
Liverpool Compact, set up four years ago, forms a link between schools and businesses, to help increase the motivation and skills of young people.
Its programmes include work experience, careers lessons and mock interviews.
Yesterday, a clutch of companies which have committed themselves to the project, including the Liverpool Daily Post and Echo, were awarded Liverpool Compact Partnership Bonds.
At a lunch and presentation event at Speke Community Comprehensive School, Compact director Mike McCann told businesses that the partnership paid dividends for both them and the young people involved.
The project, based at Aigburth Road, Liverpool, has now launched a new drive to increase the number of companies involved and develop 100 existing links.
After initial support from the Department of Employment, Compact has raised funds for four years' work from Merseyside Training and Enterprise Council, Liverpool City Council and the private sector.
Mr McCann presents the first Bond to Chris Smith of Royal Insurance, watched by Bill Tubey, Manweb; Richard Smith, Barclays; Erica Duff, Brookside Productions and Frank Cogley, Liverpool's Director of Education Picture: TONY KENWRIGHT
Park Foods chairman is hungry for growth
By Stephen Suckley Business Staff
HAMPER firm Park Foods is not ruling out acquisitions and spending some of its cash pile, chairman Peter Johnson told the Daily Post yesterday.
Speaking from London at the announcement of record profits for the Birkenhead-based firm, he said: ‘We are not rushing at anything but the question must be asked what do we do with our cash balances.
I think the answer is, after due diligence, we will be looking at expansion.
Audience
‘We are a sophisticated savings club and monies received will peak at £60m this year.’
With 1m customers already in the fold, Park Foods is chasing a potential audience of 13.5m households, so there is plenty of room to increase market share.
‘At present there are around 3m households supplied with hampers and we are steadily increasing our share.
‘I believe our concentration on providing quality value and service to a value-conscious customer,’ said Johnson.
‘This will enable us to maintain our position as market leader.’
Park Foods is in fine fettle after selling off all none-core business identified in a refocusing exercise a move which has clearly had a beneficial effect on profits which soared by a third from £7.7m to £10.3m before tax at the end of March this year.
The company has astounded share-watchers by recording half-time losses due to the seasonal nature of the business and then coming up with continued record earnings at full-time.
‘By the very nature of the business we know where we will be at at the end of each year,’ said the hamper chief.
‘Orders processed for next Christmas are comfortably ahead of last year with both agent numbers and customer spend showing healthy increases.’
Sweet
Without giving away numbers, Mr Johnson said: ‘I am confident the group will achieve a satisfactory improvement in trading performance in the current year.’
Other figures yesterday showed turnover slightly lower at £116.1m from £119.5m, reflecting discontinued businesses, but when compared with continuing business the figure increased to that level from £108.6m.
Shareholders were kept sweet with a 4p final payout, taking total distribution 2.8p higher to 6p a share.
British soaring business
THE number of people using Britain's major airports increased again last month.
Airport operator BAA reported it handled 6.8m passengers at its seven airports in May, 1993 2.9pc increase on the May, 1992 figure.
Passenger numbers at both Heathrow and Stansted were 4.7pc up while Gatwick was 3.6pc down.
Direct comparisons are difficult for Gatwick and Stansted as 50,000 football fans, mainly from Spain, used the two airports to attend the May, 1992, European Cup Final at Wembley.
Glasgow and Edinburgh airports had 9pc passenger number increases last month while Aberdeen was more than 5pc up.
European scheduled traffic increased by 6.3pc and domestic routes continued their recovery with a 4.7pc rise.
Long haul traffic was up 5pc but the lucrative, and for airlines crucial, north Atlantic routes showed only a 0.6pc rise.
£104m cash call a sign of confidence
BRITAIN'S second biggest housebuilder George Wimpey yesterday threw its weight behind hopes that the UK housing market is on its way back from the slump.
It has joined the queue of property and building companies asking shareholders for more money with a £104m rights issue of new shares.
The cash will be used to fund a major investment programme, including buying new housing land and expanding its quarrying business.
Wimpey is launching the cash-raising exercise just three months after reporting the worst loss in its 100-year history, a £112.4m deficit in 1992.
It follows on from a £95m cash call this week by property company Great Portland Estates and news that legendary investor George Soros has launched a £500m property-buying joint venture.
Wimpey chief executive Joe Dwyer said: ‘The strong advance in homes sales we have experienced this year gives us confidence that the UK housing cycle is turning towards recovery.
‘Our strengthened balance sheet will enable us to benefit fully from the opportunities which the recovery will offer across our range of activities.’
Wimpey made a loss in 1991 of £16.1m but has restructured by selling off businesses and said earlier this year that it believed the worst was over in the construction industry.
Dividends
The housebuilding side of the business has seen a 55pc rise in sales in the first five months of the year over the start of 1992.
The board also expects the quarrying side to pick up.
However, the contracting division is not expected to recover until 1995.
Shareholders have been promised unchanged total dividends of not less than 5.25p this year.
The rights issue is priced at 148p and is on the basis of one new share for every four already held.
BT rush
MORE than a million potential investors have already registered an interest in the latest BT sell-off.
Around 730,000 of the new registrations have been through the Share Information Office and the rest with the many Share Shops set up by banks, building societies and other financial firms.
Rights issue BROWN & Jackson, which operates the Poundstretcher chain of stores, is asking shareholders for cash.
Half the £21m it intends to raise is earmarked for opening 15 new Poundstretcher stores this year and a further 45 in 1994.
The rest will reduce bank borrowings.
The rights issue is being offered to investors on the basis of two new shares at 12p each for every five held.
Loss warning
TROUBLED Lloyd's of London is heading for its worst ever losses, chairman David Rowland indicated yesterday.
Forecasts have put losses for 1990 at between £2.5bn and £2.8bn.
BRITAIN'S second biggest housebuilder George Wimpey today threw its weight behind hopes that the UK housing market is on its way back from the slump.
It has joined the queue of property and building companies asking shareholders for more money with a £104m rights issue of new shares.
The cash will be used to fund a major investment programme, including buying new housing land and expanding its quarrying business.
Wimpey is launching the cash-raising exercise just three months after reporting the worst loss in its 100-year history, a £112.4m deficit in 1992.
It follows on from a £95m cash call this week by property company Great Portland Estates and news that legendary investor George Soros has launched a £500m property-buying joint venture.
Jets order secures jobs
BRITISH Aerospace today announced a £500m deal to sell Hawk jet trainers to Indonesia.
It will secure jobs not only at the company's plants at Warton and Samlesbury, Lancs, and Brough, Humberside, but at many sub-contractors notably Rolls-Royce at Filton, Bristol.
Rich people: According to Fortune magazine's list of the world's wealthiest people, the Sultan of Brunei comes top with £24bn and the Queen ranks ninth (£5.13bn).