

A week we'll all remember
I AM a member of the Russian Convoy Club (sometimes known as The Snowdrops, I believe, because of our white berets) who was in Liverpool for the commemoration events.
My thanks for the hospitality and friendliness accorded to myself and my comrades by all concerned.
I was overcome by the warmth of feeling displayed by the many thousands of people who lined the route of our march-past.
There was hardly a dry eye among us.
Peter Broughton, Ex-HMS Sheffield and HMS Potentilla, Seaford, East Sussex.
MY WIFE and I would like to express our sincere gratitude for the heart-warming friendliness shown to us by the Liverpool citizens we met at the celebrations.
This warmth, coupled with all the spectacular events, has made it a part of our lives we will never forget.
Alan and Margaret Johnson, Redditch, Worcs.
THANKS to all in Liverpool on behalf of the members of my Association who were on parade.
From the moment the parade began we were applauded, and we were cheered every step of the way right up to dispersal at St George's Hall.
I have never seen such a large number of people and we were all overwhelmed by such a reception.
It made us feel very proud.
It was a happy, friendly and very satisfying day one which will remain in the memory forever.
We wouldn't have missed it for anything.
Robert Kay, chairman, Bolton branch, Royal Naval Patrol Service Association.
A GREAT big thank you to the people of Liverpool, especially for the magnificent reception they gave us on the march-past on Saturday morning.
How thrilled and grateful we all were that so many people turned out on our behalf.
We felt that it was a great tribute to us and all our many comrades who made the supreme sacrifice.
Les Owen, ex-Merchant Navy, Prestwich, Manchester.
MY gratitude to the people of Liverpool for the wonderful reception and kindness shown to myself and my old comrades.
I was there for the full week, being lucky enough to have a brother living in Crosby, so was able to take in most of the events and sights of interest, as well as having the pleasure of meeting old comrades at the Cunard Building
I also attended the service in the Anglican Cathedral, which was a most moving experience and one which I shall always treasure.
F. Rees (Corvettes), Scarborough.
MY husband and I arrived home in Dumfriesshire, after a memorable and highly emotional weekend in dear old Liverpool.
It is hard to describe it all to people who weren't there.
The camaraderie, the nostalgia and of course, the famous Liverpool humour.
We can assure the world that the spirit of wartime Liverpool still lives on in the young taxi drivers, news vendors, waiters, waitresses and the police.
We salute you, Liverpool, and may all your citizens prosper in the years to come, as you certainly deserve to do so.
Irene Grant, Annan, Dumfriesshire.
I THANK all concerned with the celebrations.
It was a credit to everybody and the people of Merseyside who put the finishing touches to everything with their overwhelming support.
A big hand must go to the Canadians who took part so wholeheartedly and the many other international representatives.
A great big hand must go to all the officers, men, Marines and to the wonderful Wrens of the HMS Eaglet, especially the Wren who broke ranks and helped me to fix my medals which had come adrift from the bar.
Hoping to meet you all again sometime.
John Bennett, A Happy Veteran, Ex-M.N. and Royal Navy, Walton.
ON behalf of many ex-M.N.
War Vets who were with me on the march-past on Saturday, our thanks to all those who made it possible the R.N., the R.N.A., the police, the Sea Cadets, the catering staff in St George's Hall and the youth band who played such lovely tunes all afternoon.
Special thanks to all the people who poured into the city in their thousands to clap, cheer, and wave.
Thanks to all those who bought the Red Ensign (Red Duster).
You all gave us a day to remember and a memory we'll never forget.
Ex-M.N. 1939–1945, Huyton.
Furore over plans to cut benefit for disabled
By Paul Bromley Daily Post Correspondent
CONTROVERSIAL Government plans to reduce and, in some cases, stop invalidity benefit payments for thousands of people provoked a political storm last night.
Ministers have agreed to make the invalidity benefit taxable and to introduce tough new assessments that would exclude up to 60,000 people who currently qualify for benefit.
The money-saving plans were agreed at a meeting on Wednesday between Social Security Secretary Peter Lilley and Treasury Chief Secretary Michael Portillo.
Details emerged in confidential documents faxed to the Press Association yesterday including a draft letter from Mr Lilley to the Prime Minister.
In the letter, Mr Lilley says: ‘I propose a three-pronged course of action which would focus the benefit more closely on the long-term sick, make it less generous and make it taxable.’
He acknowledges the changes are ‘bound to be controversial’ and will cause ‘some outrage’.
Mr Lilley says his changes would save about £180m in 1995–96 but he tells the Prime Minister that Mr Portillo wants him to go further in reducing spending.
He says he wants the alterations to apply to new claims only.
GPs currently assess whether people are incapable of carrying out their job and therefore able to claim benefit.
But ministers want to tighten the rules to ensure only people unable to perform any sort of work would qualify for payment.
The internal fax was addressed to a dozen civil servants within the Department of Social Security.
Labour demanded an immediate Commons statement from Mr Lilley and said it was outrageous that the long-term sick were being asked to pay for the Government's economic mess.
Groups representing disabled people were horrified at the proposals.
Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown called on Mr Lilley to come to the Commons to give more details.
He said: ‘I am going to force the Government to tell us the truth about the real threats behind the public spending review to thousands of sick and disabled people.’
Shadow social security secretary Donald Dewar said the changes would generate ‘enormous anger’.
He said: ‘This Government is asking the long-term sick to bear an unfair burden to bale Mr Major out of the mess that he himself has created.’
Marilyn Howard, of the Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation, said: ‘This will add to the climate of fear and insecurity among people who claim invalidity benefit.’
Richard Gutch, chief executive of the charity Arthritis Care, said: ‘What I've heard astonishes me.
If a person has become disabled through no fault of their own and they're not going to be provided with a benefit which would compensate them for being out of work, they will suffer enormously.’
A Department of Social Security spokeswoman said: ‘We don't comment on unauthorised disclosures.’
Peter Lilley
Prom pennies
THE British Red Cross and St John Ambulance, Wallasey Divisions, will hold their ‘Mile of Pennies’ collection on New Brighton promenade on Sunday, June 20.
Stop rail con man in his tracks
YOU recently mentioned con tricks well, I was waiting at Lime Street Station for my mother when a well-dressed man with a briefcase asked me for £1.
He showed me £15 and said his train ticket was £16 and he needed the £1 to get home to his wife and child.
I gave him £1…then watched him ask everyone in the station.
When my mother got off the train we walked across the road to the bus stop, only to find the same man jumping on the Kirkby bus.
The bus stopped at the traffic lights and I could see him counting his £1 coins.
E. Smith, St Helens.
WE SAY…
Just when you are alerted to one con trick, it seems someone else is waiting around the corner with another devious way of getting you to part with your money.
Hopefully our readers will pass on the message to as many people as possible, with the hope that this particular con man, and others like him, are stopped in their tracks.
If other readers have been victims of con tricks why not pass on a warning to others through our Letters Page?
Highest male death rate from disease survey
CANCER CAPITAL OF THE COUNTRY
By Will Rolston
MERSEYSIDE is the cancer capital of Britain, with the region having the highest male death rate from the disease in the country, a survey has revealed.
However, NHS patients in the region receive a more efficient service than anywhere else.
Fewer than one in 100 patients wait over a year for treatment 25 times better than Northern Ireland, where the figure is one in five.
Over-40s
Meanwhile, forty-something women are turning their backs on careers and embracing family life.
The number of babies born to single women over 40 has more than doubled over the last 10 years, with the North West top of the older mums' baby league table.
Almost one in four births in 1991 among the over-40s are among unmarried women.
This compares with just 11% a decade ago.
Overall, three in ten babies are born outside marriage in the UK to mothers of all age groups.
In 1991 there were 553,000 deaths, compared with 547,000 births.
However, these were more than offset by the migration of 348,000 people to the area.
The survey also shows East Anglia and the South West continue to be the fastest growing regions.
Mourners claim grass is so high it is now hiding relatives' gravestones
CITY CEMETERY ‘LIKE A JUNGLE’
By Jules Stenson, local government reporter
ANGRY mourners are staying away from a Liverpool cemetery, because they say it has become like a jungle.
The grass is so high in parts of West Derby cemetery that it completely hides some of the gravestones.
The city council says it is the wrong type of grass and is too lush.
It has shot up in the recent hot sun, while the grass at the city's other cemeteries has been burned off.
That's because the water table is higher at West Derby.
Liberal Democrat Councillor Flo Clucas said the grass was up to 4ft high in places.
‘This is absolutely disgraceful,’ she said.
‘You would think the council would know what type of grass was there by now.
‘This is the type of excuse we normally expect from British Rail.
‘People are going to see relatives’ graves and are finding the cemetery looking like a jungle.
‘I understand similar problems are also brewing at Anfield Cemetery.’
A council spokeswoman said extra machinery and manpower was needed.
But she added that the problems would be sorted out by next week.