

FIFTY years ago the Allies were starting to win World War II.
The Battle of the Atlantic, commemorated so spectacularly last month, was a major campaign reflected in the Daily Post.
Now we follow the many other decisive events every Monday.
The Rev Malcolm Kelly, Rector of Grappenhall, presents £250 cheques from proceeds of the Live at St Wilfred's concert series to Hazel Gregory of Relate and Muriel Monks of the Save the Children Fund (Grappenhall branch).
St Saviour's Oxton Panto Group, Birkenhead, is pictured presenting a cheque for £450, profits from their last year's pantomime Cinderella, to
Mrs S Roberts, chairman of the Claire House Appeal
Within a whisker of the Germans ‘secret weapon’
WE were on a northerly course, well into the Arctic Circle, east of Jan Mayen Island.
The old battleship Rodney was rolling along nicely.
We knew that we were about to join a convoy coming from America.
It was only after four hours of sailing from Scapa Flow that we were told of our destination.
My stomach turned when I heard our ‘Number One,’ Cmdr Boord, announce over the broadcast system: ‘We are to escort a convoy to Murmansk.
The reason for sending a capital ship is because there is a strong possibility the Tirpitz might be tempted out.
‘Intelligence tell us Jerry has some 200 Stuka dive bombers stationed on Spitzbergen.
We will soon be within their range.
Good luck.’
I was 19-years-old and, although I had been in action bombarding the Normandy coast and seen ships lost, the thought of this new venture alarmed me.
My job was to sweep the seas with powerful binoculars from the bows on the left side to 45 degrees.
I sighted a shiny black object floating fine on the port bow.
‘Mine red 5,’ I yelled.
There was a rush of gold-braid in my direction, including that of Capt FitzRoy.
Someone called: ‘I daren't alter course sir, but the bow-wave might fend it off.’
It vanished.
I held my breath, waiting for an explosion.
Suddenly, it popped up not 80 yards away.
I was astonished to see the sinister black dome suddenly turn and stare up at us.
Two large tusks and whiskers were clearly visible.
A huge walrus!
There was an audible sigh of relief.
The officer of the watch turned to me.
I could feel my face reddening.
Excepting for German reconnaissance aircraft which shadowed the convoy and a number of abortive U-boat attacks, we all arrived safely and I had my first run ashore in a foreign country.
I still chuckle when I think of that deadly, German secret weapon with its trunks, whiskers and puzzled expression and the panic it caused all those years ago.
By R BURTON
Activists set for break-in protest
MEMBERS of Cymdeithas yr Iaith Gymraeg, the Welsh Language Society, say are set to break into Government and Conservative Party offices as part of their campaign for an independent education system in Wales.
But before taking the action some members will begin a vigil in Cardiff this afternoon to give the Welsh Language Education Committee (PDAG) one last chance not to co-operate with what they claim are the Government's education ‘quangos.’
‘Monday afternoon's vigil marks the self-destruction of PDAG, as well as preparing for a new period in our campaign for an independent and democratic education system,’ said the society's education spokesman, Ffred Ffransis, last night.
Cymdeithas yr Iaith would be calling on PDAG not to co-operate with the Government's education ‘quangos.’