

A county merges major departments
THE economic development and planning departments of Gwynedd County Council have been merged into one, to be headed by Dr Eurwyn Lloyd Evans who was previously the county's economic development officer.
The new directorate's responsibilities include development planning and research, public transport co-ordination, environmental services, urban renewal and conservation, derelict land, minerals, European affairs, business support and economic promotion and tourism.
Explaining the new arrangement a spokesman said: ‘It's the council's experience that economic development and planning go hand-in-hand.
Over the years, the departments have moved closer together and combining them will also lead to efficiency savings for the authority.
It will enable the council to harness the strengths of both departments.’
Pen of peace goes on show IMPORTANT and significant additions, including a fountain pen which David Lloyd George used to sign the Treaty of Versailles after World War I, are to go on show at the Lloyd George Museum in Llanystumdwy.
Other exhibits to be added to the collection include books from the library of Lloyd George's father William and an illuminated scroll presented to Lloyd George by his Caernarfon Borough constituents in 1913 in which they expressed their total confidence and trust in him.
Body in wood
THE body of a 67-year-old man missing for nine months has been found in woodland at Maesnewydd Farm, Talybont, near Aberystwyth.
Ernest Latimor Evans was last seen on October 3 last year after disappearing from the Plas Penpom Peren residential home in Talybont.
Police are not treating the death as suspicious.
March-past cheers stirred emotions
I FEEL I must write and thank my fellow citizens for the magnificent turnout at the main Battle of the Atlantic march-past.
I had the honour and privilege of being one of the veteran marchers, and the cheering and applause was unbelievable and very emotional.
You certainly made my day.
God bless you all.
CHARGED:
Merseyside Police said two men charged with murder of Liverpool couple Gary Pettitt and Jean Larkin.
Will appear at City Magistrates Court Monday morning.
Massage parlour at scene of killing
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
POLICE have closed down a massage business operating in the room where prostitute Lynne Trenholm was brutally murdered.
Two years to the day after the killing, three women were working in the former Pinky's massage parlour.
Police shut down the new business, called Kim's, last week after a covert operation.
Last Wednesday marked the second anniversary of the 29-year-old's death.
Family and friends left flowers and wreaths at the door to the building in Boughton, Chester, which now houses a women's fashion shop on the ground floor.
Unknown to the shop's owners, the new business was being run in the upstairs room where Miss Trenholm's blood-stained body was found.
It is believed she was knifed to death.
Adverts were placed in local papers last week but not the Daily Post offering a ‘massage in pleasant surroundings.’
Callers were told to enter the building up a back staircase, avoiding the downstairs shop, which had no connection with the parlour.
Following a tip-off, Chester police launched an investigation and closed the business.
No arrests have been made.
Sgt Geoff Williams, head of Chester's Special Initiative Squad, said: ‘It is obviously a sensitive place and we acted as soon as we could to close it.
‘We are constantly keeping an eye out, and are aware of the public's concern.’
The owner of the building was unaware of the nature of the new business.
Police, who are still hunting the killer, marked last week's anniversary by renewing their appeal for help from the public.
Boy's plunge
A BOY aged 13 fell through a skylight on a school roof, but escaped serious injury.
The boy, who was not named, was retrieving a ball from the roof of Our Lady of Good Hope School in South Drive, Wavertree, when he slipped and fell through a plastic skylight into the toilet area of the school.
Redwood tells Tories: be nice to the English
By David Rose Political Editor
WELSH Secretary John Redwood has warned the Welsh people that they must put up with strangers buying new houses and speaking in foreign accents in pubs if they want jobs.
Mr Redwood used his debut at the Welsh Tory Conference in Llangollen at the weekend to ram home this message, which will have special meaning for Welsh-speaking communities in North Wales.
While he promised to show a ‘sympathetic understanding’ towards the Welsh culture, language and landscape, Mr Redwood vowed to put the need for new jobs at the top of his agenda.
He warned that the Welsh would have to pay the price this would entail by accepting incomers.
Mr Redwood said: ‘The M4 and the Great Western Railway that carries Welsh goods to the English market and beyond also bring English voices and influences the other way.
The improved A55 not only speeds the lorries eastwards to the Mersey, but brings holidaymakers, settlers and business ideas west.
‘To a man without a job a few more houses on a field or a few foreign accents in the local pub seem a price worth paying for prosperity.
‘The Welsh Office under my leadership will be committed to prosperity, to putting the search for work and investment at the top of the agenda.
‘Contact and trade with England, other parts of Europe and the wider world will be central to this task.’
Mr Redwood gave his warning while announcing that he had instructed the Land Authority for Wales to make more land available for housing.
He also said he had asked Housing for Wales to step up its new building to provide more affordable homes for sale and shared ownership.
Although he promised to listen to the Welsh, he also rebuked those who had criticised his appointment, as a Tory Right-winger and MP for Wokingham.
Mr Redwood said: ‘I will not listen if all the Opposition can do is bellow out megaphone caricature.
‘There has always been a welcome in the hillsides for Englishmen in love with the Welsh rhythms and landscape, just as many people from Wales found jobs and homes in the flourishing towns and cities of industrial and commercial England.
‘To those who compare Wokingham and Tredegar as if condemning Wokingham for daring to succeed, I say I want Tredegar and the valleys to understand and share more of Wokingham's success.’
In fact I'm thinking of inviting Dr Ruth Westerheimer to a mass therapy session at rush hour at the exits to the Mersey tunnels.
Fear of nuclear plant ‘legacy’
BRITAIN'S nuclear weapons factory at Aldermaston is creating a dangerous legacy of radioactive waste, a former director claims.
Peter Jones, who ran the Atomic Weapons Establishment from 1982 to 1987, is also concerned that production of the next generation of Trident warheads is going ahead in buildings which are more than 30 years old which might not be able to contain a bad leak.
He will reveal in tonight's BBC1 Panorama programme that he is worried about facilities at the Berkshire plant run by private contractors since April which date back to the early days of the nuclear age.
‘There is an accumulation of buildings and equipment, radioactive materials, which you're unable to get rid of,’ he says.
‘It is a highly undesirable legacy for the nuclear industry to leave.’
Panorama says a Commons defence committee report on the progress of Trident, leaked to the programme, warns that if the new Aldermaston complex is not finished soon the warhead project will be affected.
Its claims come less than five months after a Greenpeace report said that Aldermaston had an ‘appalling safety record’ of unreported deaths and fires, radioactive leaks and contamination of workers.
It listed 58 accidents and safety-related incidents since 1955.
A Ministry of Defence spokeswoman said Aldermaston was regularly inspected under health and safety regulation.
‘The facilities continue to be maintained to rigorous standards,’ she said.
‘There are double and triple checks going on all the time.’
Comic patrol Dave Danzig and Mandy Medlicott perform ‘police duties’ on stilts along New Brighton's promenade yesterday, as part of the Festival of Comedy.
Tom Disley, of Wallasey, is ‘cautioned’ Picture: FRASER BIRD
Flying ace dies at 84
BATTLE of Britain hero Group Captain Tom Gleave, who survived what was one of the Second World War's most decisive conflicts, has died aged 84.
Group Capt Gleave, who died on Saturday night in a Berkshire hospital, was one of hundreds of RAF pilots to become members of the Guinea Pig Club after pioneering surgeon Sir Archibald McIndoe rebuilt their badly burned faces.
He was bitten by the flying bug at the age of four when in 1912 he saw a flimsy Bleriot aircraft flying near his Liverpool home.
By the outbreak of war in 1939, he was 32 and compared with other pilots was an old man to be flying against German fighters.
Initially he was appointed to the air staff at Bomber Command.
But by August 30, ranked a Squadron Leader, he was at the controls of a Hurricane fighter facing 100 enemy aircraft along with just two other planes.
On that one day he notched up five kills although Fighter Command downrated them to four ‘probables’.
The next day he was shot down and badly injured.
Husband took overdose of pills
RIDDLE OF CHEMIST IN SUICIDE ON THE BEACH
By Jane Gallagher
MYSTERY surrounds the death of a happily married pharmacist who took his own life by swallowing more than 500 tablets.
The body of Huyton-born William Ryder, 57, was discovered on Formby beach by a coastal ranger on February 27.
An inquest held at Southport Coroner's Court yesterday heard how on the night before his death Mr Ryder had played cards at his home in Green Lane, Formby, as he had done every Saturday night for the past 30 years.
After walking the dog late that night, Mrs Betty Ryder was concerned to find her husband had left.
After looking for him, she decided to called the police at around 4am.
Detective Constable David Hemes told the inquest that Mr Ryder had left his home and gone to his chemist's shop in Old Town Lane, Formby, and taken a bottle of barbiturates.
Consultant pathologist Dr Stephen Dundas who carried out a post mortem said Mr Ryder had died as a result of overdosing on both tablets and alcohol.
DC Hemes told the inquest how he had been baffled by the case.
He said: ‘Mr Ryder's business was doing well and he appeared happy at home.’
Coroner Gordon Glasgow recorded a suicide verdict.
Rain misery to continue
TORRENTIAL rain continued to drench much of Britain early today with thunderstorms bringing floods to several areas.
West and North Wales was worst hit, hours after the ‘storm of the century’ forced 500 residents in Llandudno to flee their homes.
More than an inch of rain fell in the early hours at Aberporth in Cardigan Bay, six miles from the River Teifi estuary where a helicopter rescue was mounted yesterday after caravans were deluged by a flash flood.
Many areas have received around five inches of rain in the past 24 hours, double the normal average for June.
Thunderstorms also hit the south of England.
The heavy rain was likely to continue in western parts of the country today.
Crowds attending the Trooping the Colour ceremony in London stood a 70% chance of getting wet and more rain is expected early next week.
Forecasts for 6am to midnight on Monday June 14 General situation: Rain at first, some bright spells.
Most of England, Wales and Northern Ireland will start cloudy with outbreaks of rain.
These will be heavy in some western areas at first, then spread to other central and southern areas for a time.
The rain will gradually die down from the west, to leave only a few showers in the south-east by the end of the day.
Brightness will develop in sheltered western regions but the east will remain cloudy.
Scotland mainly dry with sunny intervals.
Outlook for Tuesday and Wednesday: Further periods of heavy rain, becoming showers, sunny periods and cooler on Wednesday.
District forecasts: 1,2,3,4,5,7: Outbreaks of rain, heavy in places for a while, dying out later.
Wind south-east becoming north-east light later.
Max 16c (61f).
a 6,12,15: Outbreaks of rain gradually dying out.
Wind east becoming north-east light.
Max 16c (61f).
8a,9,10,11: Cloudy, some heavy rain, becoming patchy and lighter.
Coast and hill fog patches.
Wind south-east becoming south-west to west moderate.
Max 19c (66af).
13,14,16,29: Outbreaks of mainly light rain gradually dying out.
Wind easterly light.
Max 16c (61f).
17,18,19,20,21,22,25: Sunny intervals.
Dry.
Wind south-east light, becoming light variable.
Cold in places at first.
Max 16c (61f).
23,24,26,27,28: Rather cloudy patchy light showers in places.
Wind mainly north-westerly light.
Max 13c (55f).
mf ws 131755 JUN 93 Sea passages: 1,2: Wind light variable becoming north-east moderate.
Rain at times.
Visibility moderate or good.
Sea slight.
3: Wind south-west moderate becoming northerly moderate later.
Heavy rain at times.
Visibility moderate.
Sea moderate.
4: Wind westerly moderate becoming northerly light.
Rain then showers.
Visibility moderate with coastal fog patches at first.
Sea moderate.
5: Wind variable mainly south-east light.
Rain at times.
Visibility moderate.
Sea slight.
end ws 131800 JUN 93
MP triumphs over claims
MERSEYSIDE MP Eddie O'Hara has won a Commons' victory to change the wording of benefit claim forms for the terminally ill.
Mr O'Hara Labour MP for Knowsley South was unhappy over the ‘insensitive’ wording which made it clear the payments were for people not expected to live longer than six months.
Scruffy thief: Police are hunting a scruffy thief who snatched £60 from a newsagent's till in Bebington Road, Tranmere.
They say he was aged 28 to 32-years-old with dark hair.
Class call: A reunion is being planned for ex-pupils and staff of St Hugh's, Earle Road, Wavertree, Liverpool, during the 60s.
Anyone interested should contact Dave Easton on  or Jane Jenny on .
Tough task: Students from Bracknell College, Kirkby, and nursery nurses from Minders, in Derby Lane, Old Swan, will tackle the assault course from Granada TV's Krypton Factor show tomorrow.
Shock attack: An 80year-old woman is recovering from shock after coming face to face with a burglar who stole jewellery from her Wirral home in Spencer Avenue, Rock Ferry.
Extra hours: City councillors are to consider extending the opening hours of Liverpool's central libraries until 9pm.
Bard blues: As You Like It, due to be staged at the Liverpool Empire on Monday, has been cancelled because of‘a lack of support.’
Annual service: An annual memorial service is to be held at Anfield Crematorium tomorrow at 3pm.
Bizarre stunts for Africa trip
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
AN ADVENTUROUS woman has been selected for an expedition to study the rare black rhinoceros in Africa.
And Lucy Edwards, 21, of Fairways, Frodsham, has come up with two bizarre stunts to raise the £2,950 she needs to go on the trip
Lucy intends to stage a sponsored ‘backwards’ walk up the Eiffel Tower, in Paris, to raise the money.
And she also hopes to spend time with Chester Zoo's own black rhino baby Emma, mucking out and washing her to raise money.
Lucy, who graduated from Newcastle University last year, flies out on the Operation Raleigh mission to Zimbabwe next March.
She said: ‘There are only 3,000 black rhinos left so we have to learn to conserve them.
‘I will be part of a team sent out there to study them as part of an environmental project.
‘I have to find the money myself and they told me that the wackier the ideas, the better the response so I am hoping that my ideas come off.’
She hopes to hold the French sponsored walk in November and is now looking for companies and individuals to back her.
She added: ‘A lot of people have walked up the Eiffel Tower so I thought it would be something different to go backwards.
And I will be hitchhiking there.
‘We are still trying to organise something with the zoo but I have seen Emma and she is lovely.
‘It is suitable that I do something involving a black rhino to raise the money.’
She has already passed a rigorous selection weekend to qualify for the trip.
She said: ‘It is a trip of a lifetime and something I want to do before I settle down with a career.
It's something worthwhile.’
Anyone wishing to sponsor Lucy can contact her on .
Lucy Edwards walking backwards up the Eiffel Tower to get to Africa Picture: EMMA WILLIAMS
Supporters rally to boost baby clinic staff
THE Brook Advisory Service in Birkenhead was back in the spotlight today thanks to a demonstration of a different kind.
The Whetstone Lane advice centre whose aims include trying to reduce unplanned teenage pregnancies, has come under attack from anti-abortionists since it opened in January.
Protestors who have picketed outside the centre, claim the advice on offer encourages promiscuity.
But Brook supporters have decided to hit back by staging their own demonstration to support the centre's work.
Wirral Labour Councillor Phil Williams said: ‘There is a groundswell of support for the centre and we want to show its counsellors that.’
Wrecks please
FIREMEN are looking for bangers to burn!
Malpas brigade are appealing for MoT failures which would be uneconomical to repair so they can practise their firefighting skills.
Parade drama for hurt PC
A POLICE constable making a ‘routine search’ of scaffolding at Horse Guards Parade before today's Trooping of the Colour ceremony, marking the Queen's official birthday, fell on to railings impaling his leg.
He was expected to be taken to hospital by air ambulance.
Wildlife survey: Bird lovers are being asked to help in a survey on threatened farmland birds.
The British Trust for Ornithology wants to monitor numbers of corn and reed buntings and yellowhammers contact The Nunnery, Thetford, Norfolk, IP24 2PU.
Murder charge: A 30year-old man from Thorne, south Yorkshire, is to appear in court charged with the murder of a patient in hospital.
Peter Savage, 53, a married man, died from a single stab wound at Doncaster Royal Infirmary.
Beaten to death: A 45-year-old married man was beaten to death in Cardiff by a gang of teenage vandals after he tried to stop them damaging traffic bollards.
Jailhouse rock: Grim Dartmoor Prison will open its steel doors to invited guests during the next fortnight for a festival of sport, music, drama and entertainment.
Welsh success: Wales continues to lead the UK out of recession, enjoying the largest regional increase in orders over the last four months, says the Bank of Wales.
Get set: Marathon runners will take on four-legged competition in a long distance run at Llanwyrtyd Wells, Powys.
There is a prize of £14,000 for the first human to out-run a horse.
Last round: TV's Cheers says farewell to Britain after 11 years.
The final 90-minute episode will be screened on Channel 4 on Sunday night.
Travelling vicar goes full circle
A MUCH-TRAVELLED vicar is returning to the city where he began his ministry 30 years ago.
The Rev Peris Williams and his wife Sheila are leaving St Hildeburgh's at Hoylake in Wirral to take up the parish of Holy Trinity in Blacon, Chester, in October.
The church serves a population of 18,000, mainly living on a council estate.
‘It will certainly be a big change from Hoylake but we know the area well and we have friends there,’ said Mr Williams, 53, who has been in Hoylake since 1986.
‘I'm genuinely looking forward to moving but we will be sorry to leave here.
The people have been most warm and welcoming and it has been one of the most enjoyable times in my ministry.’
Mr Williams, originally from Bangor, was curate of Upton by Chester in the 1960s and was diocesan youth officer in the city for several years.
Prior to Hoylake he was at the church of St Helen Witton at Northwich.
The new post will see Mr Williams move closer to his beloved football team Chester City.
‘Some of my parishioners think that is the reason I'm going there!’ he joked.
Pick-pocket preyed on elderly victims
A PROFESSIONAL pick-pocket who targeted pensioners has been jailed for 27 months by Liverpool Crown Court.
Dennis Clark yesterday told John Turner, 30, that society would be outraged if he did not send him to prison.
‘There is enough trouble for pensioners in this day and age without them having to go out and meet people such as you waiting to prey on them like jackals.’
Turner, of Maria Road, Walton, had pleaded guilty to the thefts.
The offences involved stealing a purse from an 82-year-old holiday maker on a bus in Southport and a wallet from an man aged 84 on a bus in Moreton, Wirral.
Turner was arrested after the first offence but released on bail and then carried out the second offence.
FORECAST AND OUTLOOK FORECAST FOR 24 HOURS FROM 6PM TODAY: Outbreaks of rain, heavy in places, over England and Wales at first will largely die away overnight.
By dawn, some patchy drizzle seems likely over eastern England and a few showers over both the south east and south west.
The day should gradually become dry with sunny intervals.
Scotland and Northern Ireland should have a dry night, with local ground frost in northern Scotland, followed by a day of broken cloud.
OUTLOOK FOR THE FOLLOWING 48 HOURS: Fairly sunny on Monday after a chilly night, then rain spreading from the west during Tuesday.
DISTRICT FORECASTS 1,2,3,5: Showers overnight.
Dry with sunny spells tomorrow.
Winds moderate.
Max temp 17C 63F. 4,7,10,11,12,13,15: Any early rain dying out overnight.
Sunny spells tomorrow.
Winds moderate.
Max 18C 64F. 6,16: Rain easing overnight, patchy drizzle tomorrow, then brighter.
Winds fresh.
Max 13C to 15C 55F to 59F. 8,9: Showers becoming lighter overnight.
Becoming mainly dry.
Winds moderate.
Max 17C 63F. 14,17,18,20,21,25,29: Dry night, with variable cloud and colder than of late.
Winds mainly moderate.
Max 16C 61F. 19,22,23,24,26,27,28: Fine but chilly night with local ground frost.
Sunny spells on Sunday.
Winds moderate.
Max 12C 54F.
Temperature data supplied by
Bidston Observatory HOME AND ABROAD Anglesey 13C 55F Athens 34C 93F Barcelona 21C 70F Dublin 14C 57F Edinburgh 15C 59F Faro 23C 73F London 19C 66F Majorca 28C 82F Malaga 27C 81F Malta 31C 88F New York 31C 88F Nicosia 35C 95F Paris 20C 68F Rome 29C 84F Tenerife 22C 72F Torquay 17C 63F TIDES HIGH WATER: 17.42, 7.4 metres.
Tomorrow: 06.06, 7.6 metres.
18.44, 7.2 metres.
LIGHTING UP: 21.40 to 04.43 ECHO WEATHERCALL NORTH WEST
DORSET, HANTS, IoW
DEVON & CORNWALL
NORTH WALES
KENT, SURREY, SUSSEX
NORTH EAST
ECHO MARINECALL
WELSH COAST
NORTH WEST COAST
All calls charged at 48p per min-peak and standard-and 36p per min offpeak
Police cars pelted
POLICE had bottles and other objects hurled at them during a high-speed car chase across Cheshire.
Police cars chased two men after a raid at a chemist shop in Tarporley on Saturday.
The pair crashed the Ford Escort van, which was earlier reported stolen from Wallasey, and were arrested.
Vicar makes a return
A MUCH-TRAVELLED vicar is returning to the city where he began his ministry 30 years ago.
The Rev Peris Williams and his wife Sheila are leaving St Hildeburgh's at Hoylake to work in the parish of Holy Trinity in Blacon, Chester, in October.
The parish serves a population of 18,000, mainly living on a council estate.
‘It will certainly be a big change from Hoylake but we know the area well and we have friends there,’ said Rev Williams, 53, who has been in Hoylake since 1986.
‘I'm genuinely looking forward to moving but we will be sorry to leave here.
The people have been most warm and welcoming and it has been one of the most enjoyable times in my ministry.’
Rev Williams, originally from Bangor, was curate of Upton by Chester in the 1960s and was diocesan youth officer in the city.
He was at the church of St Helen Witton at Northwich before moving to Hoylake.
The new post will see Rev Williams move closer to his beloved football team Chester City.
‘Some of my parishioners think that is the reason I'm going there!’
Crash car driver left man trapped
POLICE are searching for the driver of a crashed car who ran off leaving his passenger trapped in the wreckage.
The vehicle smashed into a tree and wall in Pensby Road, Heswall, during the early hours of today.
By the time emergency services arrived the driver had disappeared.
It took firefighters almost an hour to free the passenger who was treated at the scene by paramedics.
The man, who has not been named but comes from the Wallasey area, is in Arrowe Park Hospital suffering serious leg injuries.
Police said this morning that the Nissan vehicle had not been reported stolen at the time of the accident.
A spokesman said: ‘We are anxious to trace the driver, or the owner.
At this stage we don't know if they are one and the same person.
We are also appealing for witnesses.’
Fire scare
RESIDENTS of a sheltered housing unit in Wallasey were evacuated last night after a fire broke out in a communal kitchen.
The fire at Reay Court, Borough Road, was caused by a cooker grill and the flames spread to the dining room.
But firemen quickly got the situation under control.
A MERSEYSIDE nurse was today accused of trying to endanger the life of a young patient.
Dominic Rymer, 25, a nurse at Arrowe Park Hospital, Wirral, appeared before Birkenhead magistrates where he was accused of an offence involving four drugs.
Rymer, of Willowcroft, Wallasey, was formally accused of attempting to cause to be administered noxious substances Atenolol, Temazepam, Bendrofluazide and Coproxamol thereby to endanger life or inflict grievous bodily harm to a boy on Wednesday June 9.
There was no application for bail and Rymer was remanded in custody until June 18.
Woman of 85 is beaten up for £3
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
AN 85-year-old woman was beaten up in her home by a man who tricked his way in and demanded money.
The pensioner was later treated in hospital and was taken to a nursing home because she was too distressed to return home.
Police in Ormskirk are appalled by the incident saying it was ‘particularly traumatic and nasty.’
Witnesses are being sought and a reward is being offered.
The incident happened on Thursday afternoon in Holborn Hill, Ormskirk, when a man knocked at the pensioner's door offering to cut the hedge.
He was admitted to the house and began assaulting the woman and demanding cash.
He followed the woman upstairs demanding to know where her money was kept, all the time assaulting her.
He escaped with a purse containing about £3.
Alarm
The terrified woman raised the alarm and was taken to Ormskirk and District General Hospital suffering from cuts and bruises.
Sgt Mike Bennett said at Ormskirk Police Station: ‘This was extremely traumatic for this lady and as yet we have been unable to speak to her about it.
‘The victim was transferred from hospital to a nursing home in Ormskirk to be cared for.
‘Once again we have a case of the more vulnerable members of out society being preyed on.
‘The consequences of this man's actions could have been a lot more serious because of the lady's age and we are anxious to arrest him as soon as possible.
‘We would now like to appeal to anyone who was in the area of Holborn Hill at its junction with Cottage Lane on Thursday afternoon.
‘There will also be a reward offered for information through Crimestoppers.’
Anyone who can help should telephone Ormskirk Police on 
PC in car fire chase slashed by knifeman
By Lynda Roughley
A POLICEMAN was slashed with a knife when he tried to arrest a man who had just set fire to a £9,000 Volvo car, Liverpool Crown Court heard yesterday.
John Dunsheath, a 20-year-old food packer, had been seen trying the door handles of cars parked outside a Renault dealers in Weld Road, Southport.
When officers arrived he had climbed into the back yard and the Volvo was seen to be on fire.
The window of a van had also been smashed, said John Lever, prosecuting.
The two officers gave chase but Dunsheath suddenly turned round and brandished an open lock knife at one of them.
Violent
He lashed out and cut the officer's hand in three places.
He became abusive and violent and there was a struggle and the injured officer's colleague managed to arrest him.
Dunsheath, of Elmridge, Tanhouse, Skelmersdale, pleaded guilty to wounding with intent to resist arrest, destroying the Volvo which was written off, and attempted theft.
He was sentenced to 12 months' detention.
The court heard that he had not meant to set the car on fire but had lit a cigarette and thrown the match on to the vehicle.
Dunsheath said he had the knife in his hand before the officers arrived and did not remember slashing the constable.
Dawn swoop in bomb strike on Somali warlord
GUNSHIPS LEAD REVENGE RAID
By Echo reporter
THE United Nations, led by US special units and their giant Spectre aircraft gunships, launched a punitive strike in the Somali capital Mogadishu early today over the killing of 23 Pakistani peacekeepers.
The gunships swooped over the city shortly after 4am and bombed ammunition stores and a radio station belonging to the main Mogadishu warlord Mohamed Farah Aideed.
It was later announced Aideed's radio station had been destroyed by the Spectres which reduced it to rubble in a sustained attack of pinpoint accuracy.
‘Aideed will never be able to use this station again,’ said a Pakistani soldier kicking over the rubble.
‘The blows were devastating.’
Later Pakistani UN troops killed a Somali when they fired into a crowd demonstrating against the military strike.
Two other Somalis were wounded.
News reports from Washington said troops took part in a house to house search in an attempt to capture Aideed, blamed by Pakistan for the killing last Saturday of its ‘blue helmet’ peacekeepers.
But after 40 minutes the first wave of the military action ended and as dawn broke over the capital there was no sign of a ground operation.
Aideed's whereabouts remain unknown.
In Washington, a US defence official said: ‘The plan was for a raid of high intensity and fairly short duration.’
‘Carry-On’ star Bernard dies at 59
COMIC actor Bernard Bresslaw, famous for his appearances in the Carry On films and numerous television and radio roles, died last night after collapsing in his dressing room.
Staff at the Open Air Theatre, Regents Park, central London, administered first aid to the 59-year-old celebrity but he died later at London's University College Hospital.
Mr Bresslaw, married with three sons, was due to play Grumio in the New Shakespeare Company's production of Taming of the Shrew.
Mr Bresslaw, known for his 6ft 7in frame, first made his name in television's Army Game.
Collapsed…
Bernard
Bresslaw
Raft race rescue
LIFEBOATMEN went into action this afternoon when a raft overturned and broke up during the annual Merseyside Police charity race on the Mersey.
The New Brighton-based rescue team plucked five people from the water when the incident happened near Seacombe.
Eighty rafts took part in the Speke to New Brighton event and crews had to cope with high tides.
Cheshires' Bosnia heroes rewarded
THE bravery of Cheshire's Bosnia heroes was rewarded today, with medals and citations for their heroism under fire.
The Cheshires received medals from commanding officer down to sergeant for the courage and leadership they displayed during their harrowing tour of duty in Bosnia.
Lieutenant Colonel Bob Stewart, the Cheshires' colourful commanding officer, whose marital rift hit the headlines last month, was awarded the Distinguished Service Order.
Captain Martyn Forgrave, Lieutenant Alex Watts and Colour Sergeant John Oram were all awarded the Queen's Gallantry Medal.
Lt Col Stewart's DSO was awarded for his inspired command of the Cheshires during their hazardous tour a position which often placed his own life in danger.
The citation read: ‘Throughout the tour he has led right from the front, exercising all the energy, enthusiasm, charm and courage in his possession.
‘On a number of occasions he has personally been the target of attack from either snipers, antitank fire or from mortar bombardment.
Lt Watts, of Mold, was the man in charge of the mission when L/Cpl Wayne Edwards was killed by sniper fire.
The QGM was awarded for the ‘outstanding bravery’ he displayed in the most difficult and hazardous situations.
John Manley, L/Cpl Edwards's stepfather, when told of Lt Watts' medal said: ‘That's absolutely brilliant.’
Capt Martyn Forgrave was also awarded the Queen's Gallantry Medal.
His citation read: ‘As a pioneering element of the UN operation, working in an immensely difficult area, he was hugely successful.’
His citation concluded: ‘Captain Forgrave has directly contributed to the success of the tour by his careful and thorough preparation prior to operational tasks.’
Colour Sgt Oram's Queen's Gallantry Medal, was awarded after he placed himself in the firing line time and time again saving the lives of others.
His citation detailed his action rescuing the crew of a UN observer vehicle near Sarajevo.
Colour Sgt Oram was on convoy protection duty in January when 30 or 40 local soldiers surrounded them.
He remained calm despite severe provocation and only left when ordered to do so by a senior UN official.
Sadly, as soon as Col Sgt Oram left the area the local soldiers shot and killed the Bosnian deputy prime minister, who was under the protection of other UN troops.
Mentioned in despatches in yesterday's awards were Capt John Donnelly, Capt Matthew Dundas-Whatley, Second Lt Tudor Ellis, Lt Robert Ryan, Warrant Officer Charles Stevens.
Lt Col Stewart…led from the front
Whoopi sued:
FILM star Whoopi Goldberg is being sued for £130m by another actress who claims she stole the idea for her hit film Sister Act.
Beverley Hillbillies' star Donna Douglas says the movie is a ‘rip-off’ of her own screenplay and book.
Pilot killed in jet crash
A PROBE was under way today into how a vintage jet crashed into moorland, killing its pilot.
The privately owned Hawker Hunter was on its way to Liverpool Airport from East Anglia when it crashed yesterday afternoon.
The jet, with one person on board, came down right on the Derbyshire/South Yorkshire border.
Treasure trove blow for finder
A 16th Century gold pendant found by a Merseyside metal detecting enthusiast is not Treasure Trove, an inquest jury has decided.
The pendant, worth up to £3,500 at auction, will be held by coroner's officers until ownership can be agreed or determined.
The inquest at Shrewsbury was told that the enamelled pendant, which experts say is South German origin, was found by Irwin Haberla of Charlcombe Street, High Tranmere, Wirral, in a field at Haughmond Abbey owned by Mr Charles Teece, who farms close to the abbey ruins.
Report by PHIL MINSHULL
Death probe halted
A CHILEAN judge has halted a probe into the death of British defence journalist Jonathan Moyle because of a lack of clues.
Moyle, an expert in defence issues, was found dead, hanging in a Santiago hotel room closet, in March 1990.
Test flight: The Eurofighter combat jet, made by a consortium of German, British, Italian and Spanish aviation firms, is to have flight tests this summer.
Drink up: Euro Disney has begun to serve alcohol for the first time at four of its restaurants as it seeks to stem heavy losses from weak attendance.
Patten rap: China today unleashed a fresh attack on Hong Kong governor Chris Patten, saying his proposals for more democracy in the colony that returns to Peking's rule in 1997 can never be accepted.
Gun law: Soldiers in two Cambodian provinces have forced UN police to leave their bases at gunpoint and blocked a landing strip to stop a peacekeeping helicopter landing.
In lead: President Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani has taken a big lead in Iran's presidential election, winning nearly 70% of the votes counted, according to the first partial results issued by the interior ministry today.
Biker birthday: About 20,000 motorcyclists were converging on Milwaukee, USA, today, to celebrate the 90th birthday of the Harley Davidson bike company.
Racist abuse revamp project
By Val Woan
A PROPERTY developer investing thousands of pounds on schemes to refurbish derelict buildings on Merseyside, claimed today racists are trying to put him out of business.
Liverpool-based Graham Pratt today found his new-look Marine Park Hotel in New Brighton daubed with National Front slogans, swastikas and racist abuse.
The project is just one of a number he has in the resort, and he claims the attack of vandalism also just the latest of a growing number.
Mr Pratt, 35, said: ‘I am black and so is my partner in the schemes we are currently undertaking in New Brighton.
‘We are being harassed by racists, who clearly want to destroy our business.’
He said that he and his partner, Frank Anderson, bought the empty property in Marine Park Mansions, Wellington Road, for £750,000 and spent a further £200,000 converting it from flats into a hotel.
Hotel deal
Mr Pratt said they have already bought and renovated another derelict building in the same area.
And they have just completed a deal to buy the disused Grand Hotel on the Marine Promenade to give that a facelift.
Mr Pratt, whose father Glyn was a former Merseyside County Councillor, added: ‘We are constantly hearing about the desire to breathe new life back into New Brighton.
‘My partner and I have a firm belief in that.
‘But we are being beaten back at every turn, simply because of racial prejudice.’
A Merseyside Police spokesman said: ‘Obviously any allegations will be looked into.’
Skipper pays tribute in the face of defeat
BRITISH LIONS captain Gavin Hastings paid tribute to his players after the narrow first Test defeat by New Zealand's All Blacks in Christchurch.
But Lions manager Geoff Cooke said he was disappointed that two crucial decisions went against his side the disputed second minute try and the penalty which gave Grant Fox the chance to kick his last-minute winner.
Hastings said: ‘I am very proud of my boys and I thought we played very well, especially the forwards.
‘But it's still a great disappointment to lose a Test match and we are very sad about that.
‘There are still two more games to go and we can still win this series.’
Cooke said: ‘You hate to lose a game like that, especially when it is so tight and when two decisions go against you in that manner.’
All Blacks hero Grant Fox said: ‘It's not often I have been in a situation where I have had to kick a penalty to win the game.
‘It was a typical first Test.
We are naturally slow starters.
For the second Test both sides will be much better prepared and a better Test match will be the result.’
Airport chief is a knight
A NUMBER of North West names have been honoured for their services to the community or their profession.
They include Moira Potier, a clinical psychologist, of Aughton, Lancashire, who is awarded the MBE for services to the National Health Service.
Louise Botting a non-executive director on the board of Trinity International Holdings, owners of the Liverpool Echo is awarded the CBE for her services to the Top Salaries Review Body and to Personal Finance Broadcasting.
She joined the Trinity board in 1991 and until recently was a regular financial columnist in the Echo's sister paper the Daily Post.
She has also been presenter of BBC Radio 4's Money Box.
Former Liverpool City Councillor Tony McVeigh has been awarded the MBE for his services to the North West War Pensions Committee.
A knighthood goes to Gil Thompson, chief executive of Manchester International Airport, who has been a tireless supporter of North West economic regeneration.
Other North West OBEs include Harry Marshall Fairhurst of Cheshire for his services to architecture; Henry Gilbert, of Formby for public service and Stanley Hagan, chief clerk at Liverpool Combined Court Centre.
North West MBEs include, Arthur Addis for services to the community of Culcheth, Warrington; Alan Deakin, of Warrington, for services to fire safety; Muriel Downs, managing director of Daryl Industries for services to manufacturing industry and Harold Edwards of Warrington for services to the Citizens Advice Bureau.
Edward Fry, Bebington Sea Cadet Corps; Major Arthur Ritson, of Formby, for services to the Royal Artillery Officers Association and Constable George Howard, of Merseyside Police.
Mersey hospital nurse accused
A MERSEYSIDE nurse was appearing before magistrates today charged with attempting to administer noxious substances to a young patient with intent to endanger life.
Dominic Rymer, 25, a nurse at Arrowe Park Hospital, Wirral, was appearing before Birkenhead magistrates.
Rymer, of Willowcroft, Wallasey was formally accused of attempting to administer noxious substances Atenolol, Temazepam, Bendrofluazude and Bopromoxol thereby to endanger life or inflict grievous bodily harm.
By David Jones
Report by Val Woan
THE nationwide search for the ex-boyfriend of murdered pub landlady Denise Johnston ended today.
David Ashworth was being brought back to Merseyside for interview after inquiries led murder squad detectives to Newcastle-on-Tyne.
The man in charge of the investigation, Supt Stan Fletcher, said: ‘Local police in Newcastle arrested him at a hotel last night.
‘He should be back on Merseyside this evening and will be interviewed.’
Police have been wanting to speak to Mr Ashworth since 35-year-old Denise's body was found in her flat above the Lion Tavern, Moorfields, on Thursday.
Toddler
Her toddler Gareth Mr Ashworth's son was missing and the hunt was extended to Scotland after the youngster was abandoned at a citizens' advice bureau near Glasgow.
The 20-month-old boy has now been reunited with Denise's parents, May and Rolf Blything from Bebington, who are caring for him.
FIRWOOD Bootle completed a memorable weekend with a hat-trick of victories.
They launched their winning spree against Leyland, who included former England all-rounder Geoff Miller and Ian Botham's son, Liam.
Bootle made just 112, with Botham taking three wickets and Mike Mannion scoring 37.
It did not look enough but tight spells from John Carpenter, Phil Gill and Gary Pike put the pressure on and Leyland folded to 60 all out.
Ian Cockbain provided a finishing flourish with 4–3 in three overs.
On Saturday Mannion wrecked Liverpool's hopes of overhauling a tantalising declaration at 150–6.
Andy McDowell (43) and Stephen Newell (27) gave the home side a sound start and at 83–1 they looked well placed to pick up their sixth win.
But their innings subsided to Mannion's excellent return of 6–25.
Only Cockbain really mastered the wicket with the bat scoring 79, including eight 4s.
Joe Parker, 16, finished with 3–37.
Yesterday they easily overcame Read in the Lancashire Knockout.
The visitors were 82–2 but two run outs followed by a four wicket burst from Mannion reduced them to 94 all out.
Cockbain (30no) and
Jamie Keggin (20) sealed an eight wicket win.
Ecstasy charge man cleared
By Lynda Roughley
A 24-year-old man has been cleared by a Liverpool Crown Court jury of possessing about £1.5m worth of ecstasy tablets.
Friends and relatives in the public gallery clapped and cheered when Ian Ainsworth was found not guilty.
It had been alleged that he had kept ecstasy tablets worth between £1.1m and £1.7m in the cellar below his ground floor flat in Acrefield Road, Woolton.
Police raided the premises on October 23 when the flat was unoccupied.
Three days later Ainsworth went to the landlord, Liverpool Housing Trust and said he had been illegally sub-letting the flat.
Ainsworth denied possessing the drug with intent to supply.
He said he had been living with his parents in Fazakerley, and had been sub-letting the flat to another man.
This man was not always around and had disappeared without paying several weeks rent.
POLICE ALERT: Women warned not to pick up hitch-hikers after a ‘dangerous’ male mental patient absconded from a Hull hospital.
Watchdog blitz on car sales cowboys
DODGY car dealers who take customers for a ride are facing a mileage ‘clocking’ clampdown.
Investigations in Lancashire last year uncovered 43 cars for sale with doctored mileage readings.
At least 1,376,000 miles had disappeared off the clocks the equivalent of 55 trips around the world.
Advice
Now the county's trading standards department is planning to ensure that traders have no excuse for breaking the law.
Information leaflets will be circulated providing advice to make sure that mileages are correctly described.
Offenders will then face the threat of prosecution.
Chief Trading Standards Officer Jim Potts said: ‘The clocking of second hand cars is a serious offence.
‘It not only affects the consumer but also those honest motor traders who do not engage in such malpractices.’
Training in the nude
A DRUNKEN rowing eight from an Oxford college ended up in hot water after holding a late-night training session…in the nude.
The eight men, from St John's College, came in for a severe dressing down from the police after they bared all on a two-mile row down the River Isis.
Heroes home at last FOUR US marines were laid to rest in Virginia nearly 26 years after they were killed in Vietnam.
The four died in July 1967 when their helicopter crashed during an approach to a landing zone in South Vietnam but their bodies were not returned until last July.
Mortar attack
NO-one was hurt when terrorists launched a mortar bomb attack on a police and Army station at Crossmaglen, in South Armagh.
News deal
THE New York Times announced it is buying the Boston Globe for a record one billion dollars, making the Times the biggest newspaper company in the US north east.
Vandals wreck bridge
AN attractive timber bridge carrying a public footpath over the route of the Trans Pennine Trail at Lymm has been wrecked by vandals.
As a result, Warrington Borough Council has agreed to spend £3,100 on safety work and has asked the police to keep a close watch on the area.
The bridge at Yeald Brow was refurbished only last year.
Council spokesman Mike Bailey said the bridge had an attractive timber finish.
‘Over the last two months the bridge has been repeatedly vandalised to the extent that it has become necessary to replace all the remaining timbers with expanded metal panels,’ he said.
Detective works puts Alf on trail to Fiji Road
BOMB PALS UNITED AGAIN 34 YEARS ON
By Philippa Bellis
A NUCLEAR test veteran has been reunited with two Fijian pals he had not seen since the notorious Christmas Island atomic bomb tests 34 years ago.
Alfred Anderson lost touch with the two men when he left the island in 1959.
But thanks to some detective work by a helpful contact in Fiji, Alf traced his friends and has just flown out to see them.
Alf, 55, a member of the Merseyside branch of the British Nuclear Test Veterans Association, said: ‘I lost touch with them.
‘Then we had an inquiry from Fiji and our vice-chairman told me to reply and ask about my friends.
Saddened
‘When I found out they were still alive I was over the moon.’
But Alf was saddened by the conditions his two pals are now living in.
Cousins Benny Silatoli and Josefa Ramacake, both 56, are barely surviving in poverty-stricken Fijian villages hit by a recent hurricane.
They live hand to mouth and get no pension or help off the state.
Alf, works manager of an engineering firm in Runcorn, said: ‘I was in the Royal Engineers and very friendly with Benny, who was in the navy, and Josefa, in the army.
‘We were from different cultures, but they kept me going through the bad times.
We were on poor money, but they were on 15p a day.
‘They have no jobs and conditions there are terrible.
They are very bitter because they cannot get anything from anyone.’
But the two men gave Alf a warm welcome and exchanged gifts as well as fond memories.
Alf added: ‘Benny has cataracts, but if you have no money you cannot get them treated.
Fighting
‘I found out 80% of Fijians who served on Christmas Island are dead.
No-one will take responsibility.’
The Nuclear Test Veterans Association has been fighting for 10 years to get compensation for British servicemen who were on the Pacific islands when the tests took place in the 1950s.
Alf is determined never to lose touch with his friends again.
He said: ‘It was great to see them again.’
Veteran Alf with his Fijian pal Benny
Carer hanged himself from doorknob
TRAGEDY OF LOVE-SPLIT BOYFRIEND
By Jane Gallagher
A CARE assistant took his own life after his girlfriend ended their relationship.
A Southport inquest yesterday heard how Kirk Weatherstone, 24, was found hanging from the door knob of his bedroom at his flat in Tulketh Street, Southport, on February 17.
Way out
His mother, Marjorie Llewellyn told the hearing how her son's first and only girlfriend, Helen Jones, had ended their relationship earlier that month.
Mrs Llewellyn of Vernon Road, Southport, said: ‘He thought it was all his fault.
‘He took the only way out he thought was best.’
Helen Jones of Paul's Lane, Southport, said she had met Kirk three years earlier when they both worked as care assistants at the Godfrey Ermine Home for the Blind.
She said: ‘We talked about marriage and Kirk said he didn't want to get married, maybe in a few years time.
‘I thought our relationship wasn't going anywhere.
‘We started having a row.
He asked if I was seeing someone else.
Knife
‘His last words to me were ‘Is that all we are going to be good friends?’.
‘I replied ‘yes’.’
Detective Constable David Hemes told the hearing that Mr Weatherstone had been found hanging with a belt round his neck.
He added that attempts to slash his wrist with a craft knife had been made.
Coroner Gordon Glasgow recorded a verdict of suicide.
Whisky theft from store
DOMINIC Marley, 21, of Boundary Lane, Heswall, pleaded guilty to stealing whisky worth £31.38 from Sainsburys, and burglary and theft of cash and jewellery worth £1,000 at a house in Telegraph Road, Heswall.
Wirral magistrates made a 12-month probation order and also ordered him to serve 100 hours' community work.
Detention for ‘nasty bully’ who took watch
A YOUTH who frightened a teenager into handing over his watch has been sentenced to 12 months detention.
Liverpool Crown Court heard that Mark McVey and two friends spotted the boy aged 15 in Chapel Lane, Formby.
When he was in Rosemary Lane the three approached him and McVey, 19, demanded his watch.
Hidden
The youths walked off but were spotted afterwards by police at Formby Railway Station.
McVey was arrested and the watch was found hidden in his left boot.
McVey, formerly of Mosscroft, Kirkby, but now homeless, pleaded guilty to robbery.
Judge Inge Berstein described him as a’ nasty bully’.
He already had another robbery conviction against him, the court was told.
Another Briton jailed by Iraq
By Echo reporter A BRITON has been jailed in Iraq after being arrested at gunpoint on the Kuwait-Iraq border.
The man, who is not being named at the request of his family, was detained with a German man at Umm Qasr on May 28 and sentenced to eight years in jail in Baghdad on June 6, a spokeswoman said.
The Foreign Office described the sentence as ‘outrageous and totally disproportionate to the alleged offence’.
The pair were charged with illegal entry the charge used against Britons Paul Ride, who was arrested in the same area last June, and Martin Wainwright, who cycled into Iraq from Turkey a few weeks earlier.
Outrageous
The Foreign Office has lodged official protests about this latest incident through several channels.
Russian diplomats, who are representing British interests in Baghdad, have been the main source of information about the Briton and German.
The spokeswoman said: ‘The Russian embassy in Baghdad has confirmed that both men were sentenced on June 6 to eight years imprisonment for illegal entry.
‘The sentences are outrageous and totally disproportionate to the alleged offence.
‘We are taking this matter most seriously and as soon as we heard of the involvement of a British national we protested to the head of the Iraqi interests section of the Jordanian embassy in London demanding their release.’
Education unveiled
PLANS have been drawn up for an education resource centre at the Greenfield Valley Heritage Park near Holywell.
It is suggested that Holywell's Spring Gardens schoolroom, which dates back to 1877, should be re-erected in the park for the purpose.
About half of the estimated £75,000 cost of the scheme has been raised.
The valley, which opened in 1984, is of national importance because of the role it played as a supplier of copper products in the 18th century.
The Greenfield Valley Trust says that the demolition of the Spring Gardens Schoolroom as part of the redevelopment of Holywell means that it can be reerected as an education resource centre.
It will also enable the schoolroom to be retained as a building of cultural and architectural heritage.
Rain dance
NEWTOWN survived Saturday's storm to collect more Furrows League points in a seven wickets home win over Acton Reynold.
The visitors made 91–9 and Newtown spin bowler Keith Harding took 7 wickets for 41.
Newtown then raced to 92–3 with Gwilym Lewis reaching an undefeated half century and Brian Jones adding 22.
Welshpool completed their innings at home to Much Wenlock.
They were all out for 93 but the game had to be abandoned with Much Wenlock on 33 for no wicket as rain continued to interrupt play.
MP's mountain fund tribute
THE proceeds of a fund set up in memory of a former MP will be used to maintain mountain footpaths in the Snowdonia National Park.
Donations of £215 have been received by the National Park Authority from friends and colleagues of the late Dr Mark Hughes, of Llanfihangel-y-Pennant, in recognition of his lifelong love for the Cader Idris area near Dolgellau.
Dr Hughes lectured in Economic History at Balliol College, Oxford, for 12 years before becoming Labour MP for the City of Durham in 1970.
In 1979 he became Labour's spokesman on agriculture.
He retired from Parliament in 1987.
National park officer, Alan Jones, said the memorial fund will be used to maintain Cader Idris, the mountain which Dr Hughes first climbed at the age of four.
Dr Hughes' widow, Jennie, said the money was in recognition of the love her late husband felt for Cader Idris.
Tribute Dr Mark Hughes
Artist's class switch pays off
A FORMER schoolteacher who decided to turn his back on his profession to follow his first love of painting is the latest winner of the Menter y Mis (Venture of the Month) award.
Artist Rob Piercy, of Porthmadog, considers himself lucky to be able to realise his childhood dreams.
Rob has been interested in art since he was a boy in his native Porthmadog.
But in those days few dreamed of being a professional artist.
He took his articles with a local architect before proceeding to teach art at his old school, Ysgol Eifionydd, Porthmadog.
But the urge to develop his own talent as an artist soon took over, and he began to exhibit his paintings in local galleries, such as Glyn y Weddw on the Lln peninsula, before finally deciding to leave teaching in 1989, and becoming a professional artist.
‘I had already established my own gallery in an old ironmongers in Porthmadog, after realising that there was a market for prints of original paintings.
The business grew rapidly in the early 90s,’ said Rob.
Rob Piercy at work in his studio realising childhood dreams
A quest for unity
THE Union of Welsh Independents, which meets at Wrexham today, will debate a motion that has the long-term aim of ending ethnic conflict in the world.
Because it has little executive power itself, the union faces a long hard road to have the motion adopted.
It will first go to Cytn (Churches Together in Wales) and through that body to the Council of Churches in Britain and Ireland, the European Council of Churches and the World Council of Churches.
It urges them to adopt a policy to maintain the right of every nation throughout the world to live its own life to the full without threat from any other state or nation.
To safeguard that fundamental right, the motion says each nation should have a mother country recognised by the international community and the United Nation where national life, language and culture can develop free from threat.
‘We believe the efforts of states to force their will upon nations (whether within or without the state's frontiers) are the essential causes of almost every conflict and war in the world,’ it declares.
‘We support the struggles of each nation to live its own life, so long as in pursuit of its aims it uses methods which do not violate the conscience and the dignity of any of its citizens.’
Adopting such a policy demands a fundamental change on a global scale, but its proposers, the Rev Guto Prys ap Gwynfor and the Rev Sin Alun, say belief in democratic rights is incompatible with support for the continuation of existing national states.
They urge churches worldwide to stress the rights of every nation and begin to create a climate of opinion leading to the disentegration of existing states, establishing instead a different world order.
A project to be launched at the three-day conference aims to promote the involvement of Christians of all ages in caring for the environment.
Life Styles is the response of the union's Christian citizenship department to the World Council of Churches' disintegration on Justice, Peace and the Integrity of Creation.
Pamphlets of practical suggestions will be distributed to all Congregational Church families.
The union will also be asked to adopt a plan to enable ministers with 10 or more years' service to take three-month Sabbaticals.
The new Archdruid of Wales, the Rev John Gwilym Jones, of Bangor, will be installed as president by his predecessor, the Rev Dr Stanley John, on Wednesday evening at Ebenezer Chapel.
Thieves in double swoop for £2,000 jet skis
THIEVES who targeted two domestic garages in Mynydd Isa on the same night must have known exactly what they were after for in both cases they stole Kawasaki Jet skis worth of £2,000 each.
In Bron-yr-Eglwys they also took wetsuits, boots and gloves worth £350, while the haul from the Mold Road house amounted to another £2,000.
It included a GT Karakoram and Rayleigh Dina Tec mountain bikes valued at £430 and £400 respectively, each fitted with a bike computer, two sets of Wilson golf clubs and one Slazenger set, and two wetsuits.
A mountain bike, this time a Kona Fire model valued at £600, also went from a shed in Cae Gabriel, Penycae, Wrexham.
Like the others, it was fitted with a cycle computer.
On Anglesey, thieves got away with almost £4,000 worth of property from an isolated barn at Brynteg.
The main items were a £1,000 grandfather clock, a square occasional table worth £900, a Pembroke table, a tip-top table and £400 worth of wine.
Another break-in at an isolated spot occurred near the Conwy Falls, Betws-y-Coed.
The raiders stole over £2,500 worth of equipment from a site office.
It included a Canon photocopier, Samsung fax machine, Triumph Adler electric typewriter, a Wild level worth £795, a telephone and calculator.
Over 1,000 second-hand slates worth £1 each have been taken from Mia Hall, Dyserth, which is being renovated.
Among ‘tow-away’ thefts reported during the past week were a Cubuto digger and trailer worth £5,000 which went from a Welsh Water compound in Abergele Road, Rhuddlan, and an Ivor Williams trailer belonging to Clwyd County Council which was unhitched from a van in Maesmawr Road, Llangollen.
A duplicate key is thought to have been used to enter a bungalow in Daytona Drive, Northop Hall, where property worth almost £4,000 was stolen.
The missing items include a Pioneer twin cassette deck and amplifier, Technics disc player and graphic equaliser, Sega Megadrive video game console, 75 CDs and 48 cassettes.
Ex-nurse celebrates her 100th birthday
A WOMAN who has spent her life caring for others was herself the centre of attention at the weekend.
Mabel Pearman, formerly of Bryn Tegid warden-controlled flats but now of Priory House Residential Home, Prestatyn, celebrated her 100th birthday.
A native of Cambridgeshire, she was a nurse during both world wars and became the matron of the Cambridge Nursing Home before retiring to the Prestatyn area.
‘She is a delightful lady and always keeps us entertained with her stories,’ said Priory House owner Mrs Rhona Waltham.
Mrs Pearman, who was twice married but has no children, still retains most of her faculties and is an avid reader, particularly of Mills and Boon novels.
Sprightly centenarian Mabel Pearman surrounded by flowers on her birthday
Pensioner wins 1993 community honour
A PENSIONER who has worked for the community for many years has had his efforts officially recognised.
Richard Huxley Jones, 72, is this year's recipient of the Aelwyn Morgan memorial award given by Rhuddlan Town Council to those who contribute most to the community.
The silver salver was donated in memory of Mr Morgan, a former councillor and local headmaster.
Mr Huxley Jones, of Fairlands Crescent, Rhuddlan, who was a branch manager with a plumbing supplies firm, has been pastoral steward at the local English Methodist Church for more than 20 years and a driver for the local meals-on-wheels service for eight years.
He is also a governor of Ysgol y Castell and is involved with Toc H, the leagues of friends of HM Stanley Hospital and Ysbyty Glan Clwyd.
The town's mayor, Coun Gareth Rowlands, said Mr Huxley Jones was exactly the type of person whose efforts merited recognition.
Richard Huxley Jones
Veterans ready for a battle of words
FIVE war veterans have taken on a new challenge producing a regular news booklet for their fellow medal holders.
They will form the editorial panel of The Defender, which is distributed to members of the North West branch of the George Cross Island Association, covering North West England and North Wales.
The five, all holders of the Malta Medal, are Bob Hughes, of Rhyl, Neville Rogers, of Llay, Bill Wootten, of Aston, Queensferry, Gilbert Butler, of Connah's Quay, and Bert Mason, of Garden City, who also holds the DCM.
Malta medal veterans Bob Hughes, Neville Rogers, Bill Wootten, Gilbert Butler and Bert Mason Picture: JEFF PITT
700 jobs claims are challenged
By David Lloyd Farming Correspondent
A MID-WALES meat exporter has challenged claims that a fully integrated meat processing complex at Llandrinio, near Welshpool, would generate 700 jobs.
Edward Hamer, of Llanidloes, asked how New Zealand company Fortex, which is currently considering two shortlisted sites one near the Powys village, and another in Lockerbie, Scotland expected to create so many jobs when his company could do it with half the number.
Mr Hamer said existing slaughterhouses were struggling to get sufficient lambs to keep existing plant operating at full capacity and that the Fortex development would be a case of job re-allocation rather than job creation.
He suggested that the job creating potential might have been ‘inflated for grant purposes.’
But Fortex's Director of Corporate Management, Steve Mander, said a lot of UK meat operations were ‘slaughter only’ while 70pc of any potential workforce would be involved in adding value.
Increased manning of the slaughter line increased the labour cost but also resulted in a higher quality product with a longer shelf life.
The New Zealand company earmarked three jobs for each lamb carcass, compared with one in the UK.
The main concern voiced at a packed open meeting to discuss the proposals, was the increased volume of heavy lorries carrying livestock into the plant and finished products outwards through the village.
While 40 unit transport movements a day were projected Mr Mander also gave an assurance that the company would introduce a traffic management system.
Seized Briton named
A BRITON jailed for eight years in Iraq after being seized by border guards on the frontier with Kuwait has been named as Simon Dunn, 23.
Mr Dunn, a resident of Kuwait, and a German were detained at gun-point on May 28 for alleged illegal entry.
Mr Dunn's parents are also believed to live in the Gulf although his family is from north west England.
He is the third Briton to be seized by the Iraqis and jailed in just over a year.
Office let
CLWYD county councillors are being asked to approve the proposed short-term lease of former social services offices at Chevet Hey, Prices Lane, Wrexham, to Clwyd Health Authority.
Housing plan
LAND at Llangollen Youth Club is likely to be sold by Clwyd County Council to a private developer for houses.
Machete man cleared
AN Irishman armed with a machete has been cleared of injuring a Welshman who was holding a pool cue in an early-morning street confrontation.
Joseph Daly, 58, of Bro Silyn, Talysarn, near Caernarfon, was found not guilty, at Caernarfon Crown Court, of wounding with intent and unlawful wounding.
The jury had heard during the four-day trial that Daly and Welshman Artro Davies, of Maes Dulyn, Penygroes, had earlier been involved in two scuffles in a local pub.
After the street rumpus both Mr Davies and Daly needed medical treatment.
D-Day as BT callers go digital
TOMORROW is D for Digital Day for 365 of BT's customers served by the Forden telephone exchange, midway between Welshpool and Newtown.
BT engineers will perform an early morning switch-on operation to bring to life the new computerised digital exchange the most modern telephone exchange technology in the world.
All three-digit numbers in Forden will now be prefixed by 580.
Red Arrows' flying visit A NEW date has been announced for the visit of the Red Arrows aerobatic display team to Llanidloes
Friday, July 23.
Building block
A SITE inspection panel is recommending refusal of an application to build a further five dwellings on land at Aberceiro Farm, Llandre, near Aberystwyth.
Work grows
A TOTAL of 391 planning applications were received by Ceredigion District Council during the first quarter of 1993, a substantial rise on last year.
Tanker traffic
SHELL UK Ltd have told Powys County Council that tanker traffic from Wrexham to Aberystwyth, will be around 15 deliveries a week.
Irish twin
MEMBERS of Aberystwyth Town Council are to consider a letter suggesting a twinning link with Wexford in Ireland.
Air tragedy
A PILOT and three passengers, all Portuguese, were killed yesterday when a light aircraft crashed and burst into flames next to an airfield runway at Montargil, Portugal.
50 die in rocket raid on hospital
temporary hospital and killed more than 50 patients and medical staff in the blockaded east Bosnian Muslim enclave of Gorazde.
There were no survivors of a direct hit on the building.
Sarajevo radio reported: ‘Pieces of human bodies are mixed with cement, broken boards, bricks and mortar.’
The death toll, if confirmed, is one of the worst in a single incident in the 14-month war between Bosnia's Muslim, Croat and Serb communities.
Sarajevo radio, which monitors ham radio transmissions from inside Gorazde, said Serb besiegers used rocket launchers against the town in the latest phase of a 17-day onslaught that has cost more than 600 lives.
Fifteen people were reported killed before the hospital was hit.
About 60,000 inhabitants and refugees were trapped under increasing pressure in Gorazde, which Serbs were attacking in defiance of its designation as a UN safe area.
Officers of the Muslim-led Bosnian government said it had urged President Alija Izetbegovic to return home immediately from Geneva, where he met international mediators, to underline the gravity of the crisis in the enclave.
The town is the last Muslim stronghold to defy Serbs who now control almost all of eastern Bosnia.
Bosnian Serb forces have so far refused to allow even UN military observers to go to Gorazde.
The UN closed Sarajevo airport, a vital aid lifeline for the Bosnian capital's 380,000 population, after shells exploded at either end of the runway during fighting yesterday.
Murdered British tourist ‘was lost’
A BRITISH tourist shot and killed in an alley in Washington apparently had become lost in the underground, then blundered into a high crime area.
Noel Fitzpatrick, 72, of Melton Mowbray, Leics, was found to have a single bullet wound in his chest, the Washington Post reported.
Mr Fitzpatrick had been looking forward for months to the holiday with his son, who attended business meetings in the US capital.
‘He was a devoted husband and hadn't been on holiday for two years,’ said son Liam, of Oundle, Northants.
‘The whole family is devastated and horrified,’ Liam added.
There was no apparent motive for the shooting, the Washington Post said.
Mr Fitzpatrick and his son had checked into a hotel and had planned to stay for several days while Liam did some business.
The pensioner had been caring for his sick wife and had been able to make the US trip only because she had been taken into a nursing home to allow him to have the break.
Liam, who was not with his father when he was killed on Thursday, said he was not sure where he had been going.
The Shaw neighbourhood is known for drug-trafficking and prostitution.
But when Mr Fitzpatrick was found he still had 300 dollars in his wallet and a camera slung around his shoulder.
The police say their only lead is a vague description of a man seen running from the alley after the shooting.
A resident of the neighbourhood told the Washington Post that several people had arrived early on Saturday to place bouquets on the bloodstained spot in the alley in which the murder took place.
Mr Fitzpatrick's widow, who has Alzheimer's Disease, is now in Towers Hospital, Leicester, according to a neighbour.
Terror raid ordeal OAP recovering from beating
AN 80-year-old woman who was battered by robbers in her home was making steady recovery at a Countess of Chester Hospital yesterday.
Police believe she will need to stay at the hospital for at least another week.
The woman was kicked to the ground and suffered a broken arm and leg during the attack at her house in Lache Lane, Chester, on Thursday night.
Two men then ransacked her house while another stood guard over her for half an hour.
They are believed to have made off with silverware and they also took a necklace which the woman was wearing.
They left her screaming in pain on the floor of her house.
She eventually crawled to the road and called a passer-by for help.
A CID spokesman said yesterday: ‘She is still very fragile and shaky but she will be all right.
‘We saw her yesterday afternoon and though she is still getting treatment she is better.’
They are hoping to interview her today.
Chester CID are appealing for anyone with information to contact them on .
Missing man found trapped in slurry pit
A MENTAL patient who had been missing for 24 hours from a hospital had to be rescued from a cow slurry pit.
Firemen hauled the middle aged man out from the tank where he was trapped up to his neck.
It is believed the man had been reported missing from nearby Winwick Hospital, in Warrington, on Saturday.
Firemen were called to Delph Farm, on Delph Lane, after a neighbour, Richard Ashton, spotted the man in the tank.
They were able to rescue him from the slurry within 15 minutes.
A fire brigade spokesman said: ‘We don't know how long he had been there but he was shivering and shaking.
He was also quite distressed.
‘He was up to his neck in it and we used rescue lines to haul him out.
‘I don't think he was in danger of falling any further in but it was about five foot deep.’
The man was taken to Warrington Hospital but was not seriously injured.
Tragic father died for us vicar
A VICAR yesterday called for mass action to stamp out crime on an estate where good neighbour Les Reed was kicked and beaten to death as he tackled vandals.
The Rev Bob Morgan said prayers at morning service at the Church of the Resurrection in Ely, Cardiff, just 400 yards from the green where Mr Reed died.
‘He gave his life as a sacrifice for the people of the estate.
That sacrifice must not be wasted,’ Mr Morgan said.
‘He was a good man trying his best against a tide of lawlessness.
Now we must all stand together in his honour.’
Mr Reed, 45, died from massive injuries after an attack at about midnight on Friday just 70 yards from his front door on a green at Charteris Road in Ely.
Flowers yesterday marked the spot where Mr Reed died.
The redundant steelworker and a friend were returning home from a social club when they tried to stop a group of youngsters allegedly attacking traffic bollards.
Friend Philip Tull, also 45, was yesterday ‘satisfactory’ at Cardiff Royal Infirmary with multiple injuries.
Rev Morgan, a former county councillor, said the unemployment rate for men aged 19 to 29 was running at 47pc on the estate.
‘There is a tremendous amount of poverty, unemployment and deprivation here but that is no excuse for the extent of crime we are suffering.
‘This death is a tragedy but I hope it may be a turning point on the estate,’ he said.
‘All the good people here must think again about everything that can be done to improve the area.’
Four males, aged 16–19, all from Ely, Cardiff, will appear in Court at Cardiff this morning jointly charged with the murder of Mr Reed and the attempted murder of Philip Tull.
Les Reed
Aid vow as scores face deluge despair
By Gareth Hughes Daily Post Staff
A GOVERNMENT minister yesterday promised emergency cash aid to bail out areas of North Wales devastated by last week's ‘storm of the century.’
As hundreds of people continued the heartbreaking task of clearing up their flooded properties, Welsh Office Minister of State Sir Wyn Roberts said help would be available.
Though he could put no figure on possible aid, Sir Wyn said assistance would come from the Bellwin scheme which can be activated for emergency relief after exceptional storm or flood damage.
Sir Wyn also promised that the Government would provide whatever cash assistance was necessary for action at Llandudno General Hospital, which was badly hit by the floods.
‘I cannot praise too highly the emergency services, local authorities and volunteers who carried out their responsibilities in an exemplary fashion.
Without their combined efforts, the situation in North Wales would undoubtedly have been very much worse,’ said Sir Wyn.
Some of the 500 people forced to leave their homes after Thursday's freak storm in the Llandudno and Conwy areas believe it could be several months before they are able to return to their homes.
Looters foiled Page 5 
Anguish: Mrs Ellen Owens clears up the muck and water from her Conwy Morfa flat Picture: COLIN PAXTON
Breakthrough in the bid to end cot deaths misery
SCIENTISTS believe they are one step nearer to discovering the cause of Cot Death Syndrome, which kills hundreds of babies every year.
A research team in Edinburgh has discovered a substance previously undetected in young babies and is beginning a three-year study which may prevent future cot deaths.
The news has caused great excitement among scientists in Liverpool, who say their Edinburgh colleagues' work could provide the missing pieces of the puzzle.
Prof Dick Van Velzen, of Liverpool University's Department of Foetal and Infant Pathology, said: ‘We held a meeting about this on Thursday and Friday.
It's very interesting and is linked to the work we've been carrying out.’
Prof Donald Weir and Dr Caroline Blackwell, of Edinburgh University's Medical Microbiology Department, and Prof Anthony Busuttil, of the Forensic Medicine Unit, are leading the research team.
They have discovered that in the period during which most cot deaths occur between two and four months 80 to 90pc of babies produce saliva, which makes it easier for bacteria to stick to the nose and throat.
These bacteria can produce powerful toxins.
Bridge is vandalised
A TIMBER bridge carrying a public footpath over the route of the Trans-Pennine Trail at Lymm has been wrecked by vandals.
As a result, Warrington Borough Council has agreed to spend £3,100 on safety work and has asked police to keep a close watch on the area.
The bridge at Yeald Brow was only refurbished last year with money obtained through a derelict land grant.
Now, the few timbers remaining after a spate of attacks in the last two months have been replaced with metal panels.
Anger at hostel plan
‘We face losing our own homes to help homeless’
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
FAMILIES are claiming they are being turfed out of their homes to make room for a hostel for the homeless.
Residents of Stoke Gardens, in Ellesmere Port, are furious at the plan for the £400,000 hostel.
Council officers have told them they will be found alternative housing if the plan goes ahead.
The new hostel was planned to clear the homeless problem by converting 12 maisonettes into a 30room hostel, with a flat for a warden.
But many of the people living in the maisonettes do not want to leave.
And others are unhappy with the prospect of such a hostel opening on their doorsteps.
They have now called on councillors to meet them to discuss the future of the maisonettes and will present a petition to them today.
Resident Pauline Smith, who has organised a campaign against the plan, said: ‘We have worked very hard to make this area nice and we are happy here.
We do not want to move.
‘There are people who have lived here for more than 20 years and are proud to come from here.
‘We have a good community feeling but the way the council do it is all wrong.
They have just told us we have to go.
‘It is just not practical to have 80 homeless people living here with one warden looking after them and it seems to us that the council have just shot into this without thinking.’
Councillors have suspended plans for the hostel until a meeting can be held.
But Coun Stephen Earley, chair of the council's housing committee, said the site was the only option to help clear the town's homelessness problem.
He said: ‘We are facing a homelessness crisis in Ellesmere Port and we have to do something about it.
‘This hostel would go a long way towards that.
‘But the residents do feel strongly about it with some not wanting to leave and others worried.
‘But we are not going to rush into anything and are quite willing to discuss this with the residents of Stoke Gardens.’
In the last year 190 families contacted the council's housing office saying they were homeless.
The authority spent £18,500 on bed and breakfast accommodation because its existing hostel was full.
Looters raid flood homes
By Derek Bellis Daily Post Correspondent
NORTH Wales Police are stepping up patrols of flood areas in a bid to ward off looters.
There have been reports of looters trying to raid homes in the Llandudno Junction area abandoned in the ‘flood of the century.’
At Llandudno Junction would-be thieves in a boat were foiled by local people, and in another incident two men trying to steal a refrigerator were put to flight by furious residents.
Police, however, say that so far only one or two isolated incidents have been reported.
A senior officer said yesterday: ‘We won't know how many thefts there have been until people return to their homes.
But we are maintaining a high profile and special patrols of flooded areas.’
Vehicles entering Llandudno are being checked and some, including vans whose occupants appear suspicious, are being turned away.
Police have put on display a number of items found on a man arrested by a special patrol at Llandudno in the early hours of yesterday morning in the hope that the owners can be traced.
They include brandy glasses, a clock, a trinket box and other items.
Hundreds of flooded cellars are having to be pumped clear before many shops and business premises can reopen.
At some, in the centre of Llandudno, expensive computers and other equipment have been destroyed.
And angry residents at The Meadows, Llandudno Junction, flooded for the fourth time, have reformed an action group.
Some are demanding that their homes should be demolished and they should be compensated.
On a happier note, bridegroom Sean Davies, a 29year-old local estate agent, waded waist deep through floodwater at Llandudno to save the wedding cake.
Sean got special permission from the police to save the cake.
It was needed for his marriage to Sharon Richardson, 22.
Flood victims Robert and Lillian Harris with their ruined furniture and possessions outside their Llandudno home Picture: PHIL MICHEU
Mayor launches disaster appeal to help victims
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
THE desperate plight of flood victims has prompted the Mayor of Aberconwy to launch a disaster fund to help.
The Mayor of Aberconwy, Eurwen Jones, said the sights she had witnessed following the floods were ‘heartbreaking.’
Many people had to leave their homes in the clothes they were wearing and had lost everything.
Some were at their wit's end.
She paid tribute to the ‘magnificent’ efforts of the emergency services, Aberconwy Borough Council and utilities to tackle the crisis.
The fund will be called the Mayor of Aberconwy Flood Fund and donations can be made to any branch of the National Westminster Bank, sort code 53–70–33.
She also revealed that the National Federation of Retail Newsagents, which held its annual conference in Llandudno last week had already donated £4,300 from a collection at their banquet.
It has also pledged a further £15,000.
Yesterday, an appeal was also set up for adults and children's clothes and shoes, which should be taken to the council headquarters at Bodlondeb, Conwy.
Staff at the emergency centre at Aberconwy Borough Council's HQ in Conwy are continuing to work round the clock.
A helpline for flood victims is available on Aberconwy 593111.
Social services personnel are available on that number which has 19 separate lines.
Independent advice on insurance matters is also available.
The Llandudno Citizens' Advice Bureau is on Llandudno 878818.
Colwyn Care and Repair are available on 53 .
Three saved in sea rescue
THREE people were rescued from a yacht which got into difficulties in heavy seas off Bardsey Island over the weekend.
The Coastguard was alerted at 2.30am on Saturday after the 24-foot yacht Gaelic Knight got into trouble about 15 miles off the island.
The yacht was on passage from Co Wicklow to Porthmadog.
The Gaelic Knight was being followed by another yacht, Tuhula, when it was swamped by the heavy seas and torrential rain.
The crew of the Tuhula immediately radioed for help and the Porthdinllaen lifeboat, Hetty Rampton, was launched.
It reached the Gaelic Knight in just over an hour.
The yacht's three crew Kevin Cowley, Robert Goodbody and Susan Tallon, all from Co Wicklow were taken off by the lifeboatmen and landed uninjured at Porthdinllaen.
Their yacht was also towed in.
An RNLI spokesman said: ‘They were lucky that they were accompanied by another yacht because their radio had been put out of action.’
Bottles hurled at police in car chase
POLICE had bottles and other objects hurled at them during a high-speed car chase across Cheshire.
Two men threw bottles and other material at police cars which chased them after a raid at a chemist shop in Tarporley.
A postman spotted two men breaking into Laurie's Chemist, in High Street, early on Saturday morning.
He tipped off police.
The Ford Escort van raced towards Chester followed by four police cars.
The £500 white van, which was reported stolen from Wallasey, eventually crashed into a field by the Post House hotel, on Wrexham Road, in Chester.
The car was badly damaged and one man was lying in a ditch.
He was not seriously injured.
The other man ran off but police officers caught him.
Both men were arrested and were being questioned at Northwich police station last night.
Patients given the ‘choice to die’
A HOSPITAL is giving its terminally-ill patients the advance choice to refuse resuscitation if they prefer to die a natural death once their heart stops beating.
An internal memo, circulated to all staff at the 850-bed Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, lays down guidelines for action if a terminally-ill patient's heart stops.
Patients who have little chance of being well enough to leave hospital even if resuscitated by medical specialists could make it known beforehand that they prefer to be left alone.
The words ‘do not resuscitate’ would be added to their medical notes, and updated every 24 hours or whenever the patients' condition or circumstances changed.
‘It takes away the problems of having to leave it often to a junior member of staff to make that decision,’ a hospital spokeswoman said.
Consultant anaesthetist Dr Gilbert Park said: ‘The decision not to resuscitate will be made by doctors, patients and their relatives.
‘But it won't be imposed on anybody because the patient's view remains paramount.’
An identity card for diabetics who have to carry syringes and medical equipment is launched this week by the British Diabetics Association.
It is designed to help diabetics when dealing with queries at airports or by the police or when they are taken ill.
Threat to school milk system
SWINGEING cash cuts by Eurocrats in Brussels could spell the end of Wales' school milk system, claim trade unionists.
The Farmers Union of Wales said last night that the European Commission plans to halve financial support for the scheme.
The EC currently supports the scheme at an annual cost of £206m.
The FUW say schoolchildren will not be the only losers.
‘If our fears are confirmed, it will be a serious blow to the milk industry in this country,’ said milk committee chairman Brian Jones, of Caersws.
‘But it could also seriously affect the health of schoolchildren as numerous studies have shown that milk plays a vital part in their nutritional intake.
School milk schemes take on an added importance at a time of recession when family budgets are very tight.’
Gordon Donaldson, Clwyd county secretary for the National Union of Teachers, said: ‘The result of these cuts could be that more children will eat junk food, such as crisps and pop, rather than more nutritional hot meals.’
It is a double blow for parents in Clwyd who since last April have faced higher school meal prices imposed by a cash-strapped county council.
FUW leaders are now to lobby the UK Government and the EC in a bid to ensure they continue the level of current spending on the scheme.
River patrol is in deep trouble
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
THE future of the River Dee patrol is in the balance.
Councillors will decide this week whether to carry on running the service this summer.
The boat which regularly patrols the waterway was once crewed by police officers, but two years ago they were withdrawn.
Chester City Council then took over the job.
This mainly involves monitoring speed limits and ensuring that all craft are licensed to use the waterway.
But now the council is being asked to find £2,695 to operate the service from July 3 until September 5.
Clive Roberts, leisure services' head of sports and recreation, said: ‘There were fears that lack of control measures would allow dangerous activities to go unchecked, with possible river bank damage and diminished enjoyment for other river-users.
‘On commencement of the patrol, the involvement of the council was widely welcomed by regular river-users.’
The patrol boat, on loan to the council from the police, is now crewed by Vandaline workers who have been specially trained in boathandling and who also have passed swimming tests and been briefed on river byelaws and enforcement.
The crew also carries out routine river checks and removes obstacles which may be dangerous.
Hero of Bosnia conflict attends soldier's inquest
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
BOSNIA hero Lt Col Bob Stewart will attend the inquest into the death of one of his soldiers tomorrow.
It will be Lt Col Stewart's first public appearance since it was announced that he has been awarded the Distinguished Service Order for his courage and leadership during his tour of duty in Bosnia.
The inquest hearing into the death of L/Cpl Wayne Edwards will take place in Wrexham tomorrow.
Maj Tony Astle, at the Cheshire Regiment's headquarters at Chester Castle, revealed that the Cheshires' charismatic commanding officer would be attending the inquest.
‘We're not sure where he is at the moment because he's on leave,’ said Major Astle.
‘The one thing I do know is that he will be at the inquest.’
The inquest will be presided over by Clwyd south coroner, John Hughes, who opened and adjourned the hearing shortly after L/Cpl Edwards death in January.
L/Cpl Edwards, 26, from Cefn Mawr, Wrexham, lost his life while driving a Warrior armoured personnel carrier through the streets of Gornji Vakuf.
He was part of a detachment escorting a civilian ambulance carrying wounded people.
His commander on that mission, Lt Alex Watts, of Mold, was awarded the Queen's Gallantry Medal in the honours announced at the weekend.
Part of the evidence at the inquest will include video footage of the streets of Gornji Vakuf, where the young soldier lost his life.
L/Cpl Wayne Edwards
Lt Col Bob Stewart, DSO
NRA and council in dispute over £156,780 rates bill
By Daily Post Correspondent
THE National Rivers Authority and Warrington Borough Council are on a collision course over the authority's £156,780 rate bill.
NRA chiefs believe they should not have to pay rates on their regional headquarters' building and workshops in Warrington.
But the borough's finance director Jack Clark disagrees.
The NRA has applied for discretionary rate relief but Mr Clark is urging councillors to refuse.
He points out that if the council gave 100pc rate relief, 25pc of the cost would have to be borne by council tax payers in the town.
This year this would amount to £39,195.
The council is allowed to give discretionary rate relief to non-profit-making organisations whose main objects are ‘charitable or are otherwise philanthropic or religious or concerned with education, social welfare, science, literature or the fine arts.’
NRA estates officer John Atherton said: ‘While we accept that the functions of the NRA do not fall directly under any one of these categories, the ambiguity of terms such as‘science’ infers a certain degree of latitude in its interpretation.’
Mr Clark said the NRA already received part of its income by way of a levy on Cheshire County Council which was included in the precept required from all district councils.
Sailors' lucky escape
FOUR yachtsmen competing in an annual midnight race had a lucky escape yesterday when their vessel flooded and began to sink three miles from the Isle of Man.
The men on board the ‘Firefly,’ a 25-foot catamaran, had set off from the Isle of Man on the return leg of the race when part of the vessel flooded.
They radioed for help and were rescued by crewmen from the Isle of Man lifeboat and taken back to Douglas harbour.
The Firefly, owned by Jim Connell, of Gatley Drive, Maghull, near Liverpool, had almost sunk when rescuers managed to haul it on to a slipway and take it back to Douglas.
The men, who were uninjured, were competing in the Isle of Man Midnight Race, an annual event organised by Tranmere Sailing Club, Birkenhead, Wirral.
Noose handed to dead man's twin
By Daily Post Correspondent
HEARTBROKEN Christine Lynch was horrified when she went to collect her twin brother's belongings after he was found hanged.
The bag handed over by police also contained the rope found around his neck.
Now police have apologised for the mistake and promised to review their procedure for returning property to bereaved relatives.
Mrs Lynch of Eleanor Street, Wigan, went to the local station at Ashton-in-Makerfield after her brother Stephen Wilkinson, 38, was found hanged at a children's play area.
She said:’ I can't get over what happened.
I was told to sign three cards and then they just dumped this bag on the counter, and I could see the rope inside.
‘It was still tagged with notes saying it had been found round Stephen's neck.’
Mrs Lynch added: ‘What I cannot understand is why the bag was not checked at the mortuary or the police station?’
Police have accepted their officers were in the wrong and sent a written apology to the family.
A spokesman for the Greater Manchester force said: ‘We very much regret the mistake.’
An inquest into Mr Wilkinson's death has been provisionally set for September.
Tibet ‘abortion’ cash sparks Alton fury
BRITISH taxpayers' money is being used to fund Nazi-type population controls in Tibet, Liverpool MP David Alton has claimed.
Last year the UK Government gave £9m to two international organisations set up to limit the population in China and Tibet, he said.
Sterilisations and abortions are being forced upon women who are then fitted with intro-uterine devices to prevent them having children, he claimed.
Much of the work is being funded by British-backed groups such as International Planned Parenthood Federation and the United Nations Family Planning Association, he alleged.
Anti-abortionist Mr Alton will raise the issue during an adjournment debate in the House of Commons tonight.
‘It is appalling that we are aiding and abetting this kind of cruelty.
It defies belief.
‘It is exactly like the Nazi regimes of the 1930s.’
Since Tibet was annexed by China, Buddist monks have been slaughtered, monasteries destroyed and Chinese have been extensively resettled in Tibet, he said.
Last month Mr Alton met Tibet's exiled leader, the Dalai Lama, in London and has since lobbied overseas development minister Lynda Chalker over the issue.
Village campaign
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
LITTLETON villagers are planning a summer of action to highlight their campaign for road improvements.
Residents of Littleton, on the outskirts of Chester, are lobbying for a bypass to reduce the huge volume of traffic that passes through the village every day.
The villagers are hoping to raise the profile of their campaign to let people know about their case for relief from the traffic.
‘We're not trying to stir up a hornet's nest but we do want to let everyone know what we're trying to achieve,’ campaign spokesman Steve Melia said.
One suggestion was to put up notices next to the A51 through Littleton to inform drivers of the campaign.
However the parish council disapproved of the plan because of the possible distraction it would cause to drivers.
One possible event being planned involves children from the village lining up on the pavement next to the road to highlight how many of them are at risk from traffic that goes through the village every day.
‘We believe that a bypass is what's needed and all we are asking for is a feasibility study to be carried out,’ Mr Melia said.
‘We're just trying to convince the Department of Transport of our case, then they can come back with proposed routes.’
The villagers have taken their case to Department of Transport officials in Manchester.
They are also enlisting the support of Chester MP Gyles Brandreth and will be carrying out a traffic count.
The last count by Cheshire County Council showed that the road through the village carried 28,000 vehicles a day.
According to the DoT's own guidelines such a figure is too much for a dual carriageway.
The road through Littleton is only a single carriageway.
Nurse remanded on poison charge
A MALE nurse alleged to have illegally tried to administer drugs to a nine-year-old boy patient at Arrowe Park Hospital, appeared before Wirral magistrates on Saturday.
Dominic Rymer, 25, of Willowcroft Road, Wallasey, was remanded in custody until Friday of this week at the request of prosecution solicitor Roger McDonough for further enquiries.
The full charge alleged that Rymer, on June 9, unlawfully and maliciously attempted to cause to be administered to the boy, a poison or other destructive or noxious thing namely Atenolol, Temazepam, Bendrofluazide and Coproxamol so as to endanger the life of the boy or inflict grievous bodily harm on him.
Reporting restrictions were not lifted and an order was made banning identification of the boy.
Rymer was remanded in custody.
Kenneth Grant, defending, did not apply for bail, but said he would be making an application at the next hearing.
Rymer spoke only to confirm his identity in the short hearing.
Promise of state aid for flood victims
By Gareth Hughes Daily Post Staff
AN emergency aid programme was promised for flood-devastated North Wales yesterday as the sun shone on a massive mopping-up operation.
Details were released by Minister of State for Wales, Sir Wyn Roberts.
The assistance comes from the Bellwin scheme which can be activated for emergency relief after exceptional storm or flood damage.
In certain circumstances, local authorities can claim help for emergency repairs.
Sir Wyn also gave an undertaking that the government would provide whatever cash assistance was necessary for action at Llandudno General Hospital, which was badly hit by the floods.
The cash would come from the pool of money set aside for such incidents.
The Welsh Office was in close touch with Gwynedd Health Authority, added Sir Wyn.
Meanwhile, Llandundo put on a brave face yesterday and struggled to get back to normal after last week's devastating floods.
The full impact of last Thursday's freak storm in Llandudno, Conwy and the surrounding areas is only now coming to light and it could be several months before some of the 500 people forced to leave their homes will be able to return.
Many shops and businesses are likely to stay closed today because of lack of power.
Advice
But the saddest stories are on the housing estates, some of which were under five feet of water.
By lunchtime yesterday all the streets were clear of water and the majority of people were being allowed to return to their homes.
But Gwynedd's chief executive, Huw Thomas, said it was already clear that some people would be unable to return home for several months.
Holidaymakers have been advised to check with their hotels before travelling to Llandudno.
Fresh storms broke over Wales, the West Country and Ireland at the weekend.
Beryl East, an elderly woman from Sussex, died at a north Devon beauty spot when she fell into the flooded East Lyn River while walking with her husband.
She was swept down stream.
In a boating tragedy in the Camel estuary, north Cornwall, one person died and another was missing.
Also in Cornwall, coastguards said a windsurfer died after hitting problems off Hayle Towans.
At Bedeford, north Devon, people were evacuated from their homes as a dam holding back flood water overflowed.
Storms also lashed eastern Ireland.
A 14-year-old youth died after falling into a drain at Baldoyle, Co Dublin.
Two teenage boys were missing feared drowned after their car crashed into a swollen river at Duleek, County Louth.
Missing mental patient found in cow slurry tank
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
A MENTAL patient who had been missing for 24 hours from a hospital was up to his neck in cow slurry when found.
The middle aged man was pulled from the slurry tank by firemen.
It is believed he had been reported missing from Winwick Hospital, Warrington, on Saturday.
The firemen were called to Delph Farm, on Delph Lane, after a neighbour, Richard Ashton, spotted the man in the tank.
The firemen got the man out within 15 minutes of their arrival.
A brigade spokesman said: ‘We don't know how long he had been there, but he was shivering and shaking.
‘He was also quite distressed.
‘He was up to his neck in it and we used rescue lines to haul him out.
‘I don't think he was in danger of falling any further in, but it was about five feet deep.’
The man was taken to Warrington General Hospital for treatment.
He was not seriously injured.
Traffic change
MOTORISTS are advised to avoid Bayswater Road, Wallasey, where it passes over the access slip road to Leasowe Road, while road works are carried out from today.
The area will not be open to vehicles while the road's load-bearing capacity is assessed.
The work is expected to take six months.
Mayhew faces IRA double agent quiz
MPs are to table Commons questions about reports that Ulster security forces allowed a top IRA volunteer to carry on terrorist activities while acting as a police informer.
Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Patrick Mayhew will face demands in Parliament today to make an immediate statement about claims in the Daily Mirror concerning ‘these astonishing events’.
Today's edition alleges that for five years Declan ‘Beano’ Casey, 39, was the security services' most valued double agent.
He is said to have fled to England last year ‘to begin a new life’ after a series of RUC swoops wrecked the Provisional IRA operation in the border town of Strabane, Co Tyrone.
He has, the paper says, phoned the IRA to tell them of his return to Ulster, to which the reply was: ‘Expect to hear from us tomorrow.’
The Mirror reports that Casey fed Ulster police with information which saved scores of lives, while at the same time carrying out his ‘murderous trade in terror’.
Lamont in ‘bomb’ scare
FORMER chancellor Norman Lamont took a suspect package into his local police station yesterday, believing it could be a bomb, Scotland Yard said.
The package, which the Yard said was addressed to his wife, was examined by explosives officers at Notting Hill police station in west London and found to contain a compact disc.
The Yard said the area around the police station was sealed off for half an hour while the package was examined.
Fears for missing woman
FEARS are growing for the safety of a 33year-old woman missing from her home since Friday.
Police say they are concerned for Kathryn Mary Baxter who is believed to be depressed following the recent break-up of her relationship with a boyfriend.
Before she disappeared on Friday morning Miss Baxter wrote her father a note saying she had ‘had enough’ and that he would not see her again.
She also wrote that he should not bother looking for her because he would not be able to find her.
Police are worried that Miss Baxter may try to harm herself.
She has been depressed for some time.
‘She has been missing for several days now and we are concerned for her safety,’ said a Garston police spokesman.
‘But it is possible that she has just decided to leave the area.’
‘We would urge her to get in touch with her family or the police to let us know she is all right.’
Miss Baxter, of Bellmore Street, Garston, is described as 5ft 2in tall, average build, with shoulder length-brown hair in a centre parting.
She has a pale complexion and hazel eyes.
Anyone who sees her is asked to contact police at Garston on .
Kathryn Mary Baxter note to her father
Serbs close in on Muslim stronghold
SERB forces were last night closing in on the last Muslim-held stronghold in eastern Bosnia, battling at close range with defenders of Gorazde.
Fifty-two people were killed when shells slammed into a makeshift hospital in the enclave, one of the United Nations's six ‘safe areas’ for Bosnia's Slavic Muslims.
Sarajevo radio reported Serb forces had breached Gorazde's defence lines in hand-to-hand fighting at the villages of Borovac and Gornja Glavica and were advancing on the town's outskirts.
Bosnian Serb forces urged Gorazde citizens to leave via a road east to Ustipraca, about six miles away, Belgrade radio said.
The appeal promised safe conduct, but added: ‘There is not much time left.’
There was no way to confirm the reports.
Gorazde, home to up to 70,000 residents and refugees, has been cut off for months and under fierce attack for 17 days.
The Muslim-led Bosnian government said Serb forces had penetrated the town and were ‘carrying out horrific crimes against civilians.’
In appeals to the UN Security Council and US President Bill Clinton, the government demanded protection from ‘genocide.’
Serb rockets flattened the temporary hospital with a direct hit and killed more than 50 patients and medical staff.
‘Pieces of human bodies are mixed with cement, broken boards, bricks and mortar,’ said a report on Sarajevo radio.
Fifteen people were reported killed yesterday before the hospital was hit.
Bosnian Croat and Muslim forces clashed yesterday in central Bosnia.
Murder at pub: Man accused
A MAN will appear before Liverpool magistrates today charged with the murder of his former girlfriend, found strangled in a pub.
David Ashworth, 31, was last night charged with the murder of Denise Johnston, 35, landlady of the Lion Tavern, Moorfields, Liverpool.
Ashworth, originally from Manchester, was arrested at 3am on Saturday at a hotel in Jesmond, Tyne and Wear.
The couple's baby son, Gareth, is being looked after by Mrs Johnston's parents in Bebbington, Wirral.
MOGADISHU, Monday Giant US flying gunships were pounding the Somali capital for the third night running, witnesses said early today.
The AC-130 gunships blasted selected targets but it was not immediately clear what had been hit, the witnesses said.
Journalists watching from a hotel roof in central Mogadishu said the aircraft fire was once again concentrated near the residence of Somali warlord Mohamed Farah Aideed.
Aideed's fighters have been blamed for the June 5 killing of 23 Pakistani UN peacekeepers and the United Nations launched retaliatory air strikes on Saturday and Sunday.
Pakistani soldiers killed at least 20 people yesterday when they opened fire on demonstrators in Mogadishu, according to witnesses and hospital sources.
Reuter ww 140049 JUN 93
Woman leads Canada ballot
CANADA was on course for its first woman prime minister early today as voting continued in the ruling Conservative party's leadership election.
Kim Campbell, 46, was ahead after a first ballot, but she fell short of a majority needed to succeed Brian Mulroney as the country's next prime minister.
A second ballot of the 3,478 delegates was being held.
Campbell received 1,664 or 48pc of the vote.
Male rival Jean Charest, 34, scored 1,369 votes, or 39pc and was still hoping to upset the front-runner in the next ballot, though Campbell needs only 71 more votes to win.
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney resigned in February.
Under Canada's British-style parliamentary system the winner of the party leadership automatically becomes the country's 19th prime minister by the end of the month.
Supporters of Campbell, the defence minister from Vancouver, and Charest, the youthful environment minister from Quebec, were scrambling to woo uncommitted delegates in a closer-than-expected race.
Campbell shot to the head of the leadership pack in March but ran into trouble with controversial comments about the Catholic church and apathy in politics.
Charest outshone Campbell with his performance in five televised debates during the campaign.