

Alarm
Boot capacity at 390 litres is the largest in its class and convenience items include an electrically operated hood, front and rear windows, door mirrors and aerial.
Safety and security features range from a full-size driver's airbag and twin side-impact door beams to a perimetric alarm with engine immobiliser and deadlocks.
The new Astra Convertible goes on sale on July 7 in fuel-injected 2-litre guise costing £15,800 with the electric hood offered as a £750 option.
A smaller 1.4i, also built by Bertone near Turin, will be in dealer showrooms next spring.
The 8-valve 2.0i petrol engine produces 125lb/ft of torque at only 2,600rpm for plenty of mid-range flexibility.
Top speed is 121mph with 0–62mph time of 10.5 seconds.
More significantly, despite a wide-ratio five-speed gearbox with overdrive fifth, the 50–75mph time is only 18 seconds in top.
The high fifth gear, which pulls 26.6mph per 1000rpm, provides refined cruising and helps give good fuel economy with 25.9/47.1/37.2mpg in the urban/56 and 75mph cycles.
The 10pc more torsionally rigid body has sharpened handling compared with the previous model and allowed sportier suspension settings, including gas pressure shock absorbers, without compromising ride comfort.
The new convertible incorporates all the extensive chassis improvements introduced with the launch of the hatch, saloon and estate models.
Key suspension changes over the old Astra include a wider front and rear track with increased negative camber for better cornering grip; separate front subframe to improve refinement, ride comfort and handling; larger volume rear suspension bushes and maintenance-free rear wheel bearings.
Front suspension is by MacPherson struts and the rear by Vauxhall's own compound crank system.
Anti-roll bars are fitted front and rear.
Power steering is standard.
Ready for summer Vauxhall's new Astra Convertible
Wraps off new Volvo
THE wraps have been taken off two high-performance turbocharged versions of the Volvo 850 which are set to reach British shores in the autumn.
Clothed in secrecy until now, the project gives the front-wheel drive Volvo 850 a 225bhp punch from its five cylinder, 20-valve, 2.3-litre engine.
The cars will offer tremendous flexibility with 221lb/ft of torque constantly available between 2000 and 5300rpm.
Safety features include ABS, Volvo unique side impact protection system, three point seat belts for all occupants and an integral child seat.
Business park has hi-tech design on jobs for Bangor
A PLANNED business innovation centre at Bangor hopes to create 500 technology-related jobs by 2000.
Gwynedd County Council will today be urged to give £25,000 towards the £650,000 cost of developing the Parc Menai scheme over the next two and a half years.
Dr Eurwyn Lloyd Evans, the county's director of economic development and planning, says in a report that a steering group, chaired by Professor Eric Sunderland, the principal of University College, Bangor, recognises the need for North West Wales to improve its competitive edge by attracting hightech industries.
European aid to establish a business and innovation centre, on the lines of Clwyd's Newtech venture, has already been approved in principle.
‘This means that up to 50pc of the total running costs could be funded through the European Regional Development Fund,’ Dr Evans writes.
The aim is to set up a professional, cost-effective organisation by 1996 to stimulate, assist, promote and encourage firms to set up and expand in Gwynedd, the report says.
The idea stemmed from a EC-approved feasibility study last year, conducted by Arfon Borough Council, to develop the Glyn Rhonwy site at Llanberis into a bio-technology park.
The Commission offered £20,000 towards the cost of employing four international specialists.
The steering group included Arfon's chief executive, the managing director of Euro/DPC, the regional director of the Welsh Development Agency, and Arfon's economic development and tourism officer as project manager.
The site at Parc Menai and the Mentec facility at Bangor were then included in a ‘broader focus’ approach.
The steering group then expanded to include the chief executives of Gwynedd County Council and Targed and the regional director of Welsh Water.
Technopol Eryri Cyf/Snowdonia Technopole Ltd has been adopted as the name of a holding company to formalise the partnership.
The proposed centre is intended to be a subsidiary called Canolfan Newyddiannu a Busnes Cyf/Snowdonia Technopole Business and Innovation Centre Ltd.
MY BOYFRIEND had what he thought was a fungal infection on his feet.
Now he's been told it's not a fungus, it's eczema.
Can this just develop he's 31 and what can he do to keep it away?
DR MEERA SAYS…
Eczema or dermatitis is a term used to describe the appearance of the skin which is inflamed, red, itchy, swollen and with leakage of a clear discharge; in prolonged cases the skin may become thickened and scaly and crack and become sore.
When the skin is damaged other infections can take hold more easily.
Eczema can be caused by different factors; through allergies a genetic predisposal often in association with asthma or hayfever; or simply by coming into contact with a particular thing.
Some chemicals cause a direct irritation to the skin leading to dermatitis.
And sometimes no specific cause can be found at all.
Firstly, I would recommend trying to identify whether he has a contact dermatitis and avoid whatever is identified that could be soaps, detergents, perfumes, some materials such as wool or nylon or leather or the dyes used with them.
Treatments would include keeping the area clean and dry, moisturisers such as E45 cream can ease off drying and scaling.
Creams or ointments containing steroids often help reduce the inflammation and itching in the skin but shouldn't be used for long periods of time.
LIKE many other people last weekend I got dreadfully burnt.
I hadn't sunbathed, I just got caught out.
I was in agony and I'd like to know what I should do if it happens again.
DR MEERA SAYS…
The best advice for sunburn is to avoid being in the sun for long enough to burn.
Wear a sunblock cream if you think you may be going to spend any time outdoors and wear clothes that cover sensitive areas.
When your skin becomes damaged by sunburn it loses heat and moisture more easily and when it is extensive then sunstroke follows when someone is dehydrated and lacking salt.
The burnt skin needs to be kept clean and after-sun creams and lotions can be soothing.
I'M getting married in less than two months and I want to lose about a stone before then to get in shape for the big day.
What is the best diet to follow?
DR MEERA SAYS…
If you seriously wish to lose your weight then it is most sensible to do it by looking carefully at your diet and eating a good balance of carbohydrates and protein with a reduced fat content.
Most of the slimming clubs around have very good diets which are easy to follow and you would have the benefit of the group leader being able to give you more personal advice.
It always helps to attend a group where you get the support of other people in the same situation as yourself.
Quick fad diets with very low calorie contents are not a very healthy way to lose weight since they can leave you feeling tired and irritable.
Don't forget that while dieting it is important to maintain a good level of physical exercise.
No evidence
THE article on cot death by Val Woan (May 17) may mislead your readers into thinking that breathing monitors have been involved in the recent drop in cot deaths.
There is no evidence that even widespread use of breathing monitors has any impact on cot death rates.
Monitors have an important role to play in medically-circumscribed situations, but they are, unfortunately, not likely to be an answer to cot death.
Your readers can get a free fact-file on monitors by writing to the Foundation for the Study of Infant Deaths, 35 Belgrave Square, London SW1X 8QB.
Ask for Fact-file 3 and enclose a large s.a.e.
Joyce Epstein, Secretary General.
Only facility IN answer to the letter from F. Kid (May 26) regarding the closure of the William Roberts Centre, Norris Green, the people of this area are intent on fighting for the William Roberts because it is the only recreational facility that the area has.
Moreover, Miss Kid states that there will be a new pool built in close proximity to the William Roberts Centre, despite the fact that the council have told us the there is no money for a new pool.
The William Roberts Action group had a meeting with Norman Wilkinson (Director of Sports and Leisure) on May 19 and when he was asked if there was any money in the budget for a new pool he said that there was not.
The council told the people of Dovecot that the Harold Davis swimming pool would be replaced with a new pool and it was not.
Now they appear to be trying to take the people of Norris Green down the same road and we refuse to go.
Weed takeover
AM I wrong, or is Liverpool trying to grow it's own rain forest?
Is the weed the national flower of our city?
Everywhere you look they are growing out of pavements and walls.
I've even seen them in house gutters.
In the area I live, off Lodge Lane, they are even growing on peoples' doorsteps.
Maybe they think they are flowers!
Isn't it time the council got to grips with this problem?
Ignorance
The new Toxic Shock Syndrome Information Service aims to put that ignorance right.
Ann Cunnane, TSSIS information officer, said: ‘We aim to clear up the confusion and bring into perspective the risk, while ensuring the public and medical communities are made aware of the importance of early detection.’
About half reported cases are associated with women who use tampons.
But it is not the tampons that cause the disease but the bacteria which develops when a tampon has been in too long.
The contraceptive cap can also spark the syndrome, as can a wound infection.
Dr David Abramovich, a consultant gynaecologist working closely with the TSSIS, says: ‘It is caused by a bacteria which is commonly found on the skin, or in the nose, armpit, groin or vagina of about one third of the population without causing any harmful effect.
Bacteria
‘It is not clear why a few of the many people who carry this bacteria go on to develop TSS, while the majority don't.
But it is thought, however, that these few people don't have the antibodies that protect them from the toxin if it is produced.’
The symptoms of TSS include: Flu-like symptoms and high fever.
Vomiting.
Diarrhoea.
Rash and muscles aches.
Dizziness or feeling faint.
If you suspect TSS you should go to see your GP immediately and, if you are using a tampon, remove it.
A tampon should not be used again without a doctor's consent.
Fact sheet
The TSSIS has a free fact sheet on the disease.
It is available from: The TSS Information Service, 24–28 Bloomsbury Way, London, WC1A 2PX.
Merseyside Healthwise doctor Jenny Hopwood says women should not be frightened of Toxic Shock Syndrome just aware of it.
She says it is impossible to give guidelines on how to avoid TSS because it is so rare and everyone is different.
But there are guidelines for women using tampons: Don't leave a tampon in for too long (time differs depending on menstrual flow).
Remember hygiene.
Always wash your hands before inserting a tampon.
Dr Hopwood says: ‘As long as people follow these rules they should be alright.’
MERSEYSIDE teenager Angela McKerrell was convinced she had flu.
She felt aching and feverish, so she climbed into bed hoping to weather the storm.
But soon after she was writhing in agony, her muscles racked with pain.
Angela, 19, from Woolton and presently studying medicine at Nottingham University, says: ‘I had all the classic symptoms of flu so I put it down to that.
‘But I woke up in the middle of the night in agony.
My muscles ached, and I couldn't move.
‘An hour later I began vomiting and had diarrhoea.’
The next day she was rushed to Nottingham City Hospital where tests revealed TSS, and she was treated immediately with antibiotics.
Angela says: ‘I was really lucky because this can kill.
‘I would warn anyone to take sensible precautions.
I used to leave tampons in overnight but I wouldn't do now.
‘I wouldn't want anyone to suffer like I did.’
DR HOPWOOD: Be aware ANGELA McKERRELL: Scare story
No easy answer to cot deaths
By Amanda Brown Daily Post Correspondent
SCIENTISTS are still battling to discover the reasons for cot deaths and although numbers have been halved the message today is that it is not a simple problem with a single answer.
Following the Back to Sleep campaign supported by TV personality Anne Diamond, figures published last week showed a drop in the number of cot deaths in 1992 from 912 to 456.
But it is still the largest single cause of death in babies aged over one week, according to the Foundation for the Study of Infant Deaths.
The foundation said yesterday, the start of National Cot Death Appeal Week, there is a vital need to discover how and why babies are still dying.
Although recent advice to mothers warning them not to allow babies to sleep on their stomachs or get too warm has helped considerably, health experts said there is no single answer.
Scientists and health experts, led by Professor van Velzen in Liverpool, said yesterday the most recent results show cell changes in the brains of some cot death babies.
Similar abnormalities are found in ‘small for weight’ babies.
More work is needed to confirm these observations, but they are of interest because the changes take place in an area of the brain stem involved in the control of breathing, heart rate and temperature.
Dr Peter Fleming, who has done research in Bristol, said overheating due to environmental temperature, over-insulation or both contributed to cot death.
The latest results from Bristol show the pattern of respiration in a normal baby changes dramatically when the room is warm.
This may give some clues on how overheating contributes to cot death.
Dr Mike Wailoo and Dr Stewart Petersen, who have made a study of infant deaths in Leicester, said some babies show a delay in the development of nighttime temperature rhythms which may increase their vulnerability.
Health survey says 50pc of men overweight
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
ALMOST half the men in Cheshire and Wirral are overweight according to the findings of a health survey published yesterday.
A third drink more than the weekly recommended levels of alcohol and more than half of men and women never exercise.
The statistics are among the findings of a health and lifestyles survey carried out on a sample of 10,000 people from throughout Cheshire and Wirral.
The study has been commissioned by Liverpool University on behalf of the local health authorities.
Although 78pc of people described their health as good, 53pc never took exercise, 29pc smoked and 86pc drank alcohol.
While a quarter of women were overweight, 40pc of men were too heavy.
Roughly one in ten people surveyed were obese.
The conditions shared by most people are high blood pressure (13pc) and asthma (9pc).
A long-standing illness, disability or infirmity was reported by almost a quarter.
The survey also showed that many people are eating a very poor diet.
A large number of young men reported eating white bread, chips, meat pies and sweets regularly.
They were also the group who were least likely to eat fresh fruit.
A report on the survey's initial findings is due to be put before Chester Health Authority on Friday.
The data collected will then be used to target areas of public health which need most improvement.
The information will also be compared with national and regional data to identify priority areas in the area.
The health authorities say it is too soon to comment on the implications of the figures as yet as they still have to be assessed in the light of the type and ages of the people who responded.