

World In Action
(ITV, 8.30pm) THE tough, no-nonsense investigative team visit Jamaica for a special report on tourist safety.
Within hours of their arrival, says a WIA team member, holidaymakers were queueing up to tell them horrific tales about thefts, attacks and prostitution on the streets.
In one hotel they found a man who had been mugged twice, young people who had been threatened with a knife and a newly-wed husband who had had his wedding ring pulled off his fingers by local thieves.
This 30-minute insight squeezes out all the grisly facts and figures and reveals the growing number of attacks on British tourists around the world.
The most chilling account, called Dark Side of The Sun, comes from Bob Duddle from Ashton near Preston who was the victim of a violent mugging and still has a bullet lodged in his stomach.
Film 93
(BBC1, 10.20pm) AND it's goodbye from him.
Barry is ready for his hols so this is the last time we will see the talking sweater in action.
Tonight he looks at Spielberg's Jurassic Park and there's the latest news on America's summer releases.
Neighbours (BBC1, 1.30pm and 5.35pm): Beth makes a difficult decision…life's full of them.
And Gaby thinks her boyfriend problems are over the fool.
Home and Away (ITV, 1.45pm and 6.00pm): Nick is just a wee bit fed up with Bobby interfering in his love life.
And Fin makes a desperate decision.
Eldorado (BBC1, 7pm): Ingrid has to come to terms with a matter of life and death, while Marcus does the dirty on Alex.
Coronation Street (ITV, 7.30pm): Who is plotting behind Mike Baldwin's back?
Let's face it the real shocker would be who ISN'T plotting behind the smoothie's back.
Brookside (Channel 4, 8.00pm): Barry discovers Jo's guilty secret and he must be well pleased about that.
SPUD CAMPAIGN
Dear Beeb, don't drop Eldorado!
Elofanerror
Dear Spud
I'VE watched every episode of Eldorado love the story line.
It is very popular among my family and friends and we would be very disappointed if it finishes.
Our Mondays and Wednesdays just would not be the same!
I am writing in support of‘Eldorado’.
It wasn't too hot at first, but after getting rid of certain actors it really has improved.
Good storylines, real people, not all doom and gloom like Brookside.
Please Beeb, reconsider.
I am a big fan of ‘Eldorado’.
In my opinion it is far better than Coronation Street.
Yours, D. Dawson, Liverpool 17.
My husband and I are fans of Eldorado and never miss an episode.
We hope it can be saved.
I would like to give my support for Eldorado.
I will really miss it as it is very good.
Can I say also what a load of rubbish the story lines are in Coronation Street at the moment.
Take Reg Holdsworth for instance: grown men don't act so stupid.
I have already written to BBC to plead for more time for Eldorado.
Another plea may not go amiss.
This series suffered a painful start with some dreadful acting.
But now they have gone, the story line has gone from strength to strength.
With woeful stories in Coronation Street and Brookside, I would choose Eldorado and its half-hour in Sunny Spain every time.
Name and address supplied 
We support the campaign to keep Eldorado on the TV.
Our family and friends think it is very good and a lot better than the Aussie soaps.
Here's hoping the Beeb will have another think.
I always enjoy reading your page in the Echo, will you please forward this letter to the Beeb.
I am a keen fan of Eldorado, I am house bound, so TV is good company for me.
I admit we should get rid a number of the useless shows on TV.
But at least Eldorado show is good clean viewing.
I also enjoy Families and thought Body and Soul was great.
I'd like more wholesome films and the sooner the better.
We want to see Eldorado reprieved.
We enjoy this programme as no doubt do thousands of others.
The storyline at the moment is very good, gripping and makes you watch the next episode.
It has brought some sunshine into our winter nights, it is also true to life for that part of the Costa and many viewers can relate to Eldorado.
The viewers are warming to Marcus Tandy (Jesse Birdsall)—
Out of prime
ACTRESS Helen Mirren is facing a battle to star in a big-screen version of TV's award-winning thriller Prime Suspect.
Hollywood studio chiefs do not see her as prime material to star as tough-talking Det Chief Insp Jane Tennison.
Birmingham's
Cable TV firm may cut phone costs
A COMPANY planning to bring cable TV to homes across Cheshire is investigating the possibility of installing a cable phone system at the same time.
NYNEX CableComms, which bought the television franchise for Cheshire earlier this year, would install the telephone system throughout Chester, Ellesmere Port, Warrington, Widnes, Runcorn and Neston.
It says cable phone bills would be 10pc cheaper than British Telecom's.
In Brighton, where the system has been installed for a number of years, one in four homes is on the cablephone network.
Simon Bond of NYNEX explained: ‘When we won the cable television franchise, we were given the right to provide a telephone service, which we have decided to take up.
’ We will be building cables with ducts leading off to every house, which can easily be connected if they want the service.’
A special-project team is currently working in the area to iron out technical details.
‘If everything proves satisfactory we should begin construction of the cable network at the end of the year and we should be in a position to provide some services from the spring of next year,’ he said.
The building and operating of the new telecommunications infrastructure is expected to create hundreds of jobs for the area.
COUCH POTATO fans have launched an S.E.S…
SAVE ELDORADO SPUD!
Letters have been flooding in from viewers desperate to see the Spanish soap from the axe in just a few weeks.
Here is a selection of your letters which we'll send on to the BBC.
Who knows?
It might just work.
If you have any other complaints about the telly, we'd be glad to hear them.
Send your offering to: Couch Potato, Features Department, Liverpool Echo, PO Box 48, Old Hall Street, Liverpool L69 3EB.
Harry Connick Junior Liverpool Empire
By Maria McGeoghan
‘I LIKE to play the piano,’ said the 24-year-old musical genius who has managed to cross all age barriers with his blend of nineties-style big band swing.
Harry Connick Jr has been saying that since the tender age of eight when he stole the show in his native New Orleans, and he just gets better and better.
And last night he enthralled fans from six to sixty with a brilliant set of old and new numbers, cleverly arranged and expertly put together.
The voice that is always compared to the young Sinatra, and always comes out better in the comparison stayed mostly out of the limelight as Harry let his sixteen piece band do the talking.
And could they talk!
With a brass section that cheerfully joined in any chorus they could remember complete with formation instrument swaying and excellent drums, double bass and guitar, it was easy to see that this band have been all over the world together.
They know their stuff inside out, but most importantly they also look like they are having a whale of a time.
Many of the instrumental numbers were so relaxed, they looked like they were amusing themselves at a family party and when Harry told everyone to stand up as he bopped around the stage in his black silk suit, everyone did as they were told.
But fans who expected the maestro to run through all of his favourites were disappointed.
He opened with ‘Forever For Now’, the title of his latest album, and did later did ‘It Had To Be You’ from the soundtrack of ‘When Harry Met Sally’, but good old weepies like ‘Drifting’were kept for another time.
And there is just one more gripe.
After just an hour and a quarter the band said goodnight, and after a good deal of clapping and foot stamping Harry came back to one last song on his own.
At £17.50 a ticket, I expected the band to come on for a bit longer or were they all dashing off to see Lady Chatterley too?
Lady Chatterley (BBC1) THIS adaptation of the D.H.
Lawrence classic is receiving as much publicity as the latest Speilberg blockbuster and Super Mario movie.
Here, however, it's not dinosaurs or the world's pluckiest plumber who dominate the headlines but that old telly monster SEX.
While the BBC told us it would be ‘done’ in the best possible taste, there will still be many viewers who found the scenes last night disturbing those who cannot see the forest for the trees.
Just as the Singing Detective caused outrage when it featured similar amorous action shot in a shady area, director Ken Russell makes his current coupling couple keep their clothes hanging on.
Yet when IT did happen (and quite frequently, too) the moans, groans and wistful looks off-camera owed more to Sharon Stone's cavortings in Basic Instinct than those described in the novel.
Joely Richardson as Lady C is not as timid as Lawrence's confused heroine, while Mellors as played by Sean Bean is striking more for his designer courting britches than any animal passion.
He looked as though he had just returned from a Chas'n Dave concert or tied up Hercules the horse in the Steptoe and Son barn.
It is the sub-plot that succeeds: wheelchair-bound Sir Clifford at home with his chess board and pushy housekeeper Mrs Bolton.
James Wilby and Sally Anne Field both offer a more tangible and less clinical love story than the dangerous liaison between the game-keeper turned heart-poacher and the sex-starved adulteress.
Cheers (Channel 4) CHEERS and thank you for the many memories.
The Boston bar put the towels on as the last cold beer fell into the frosted glasses.
This series shone for 11 years because the scripts were consistently sharp and the regulars as welcome as a cool lager on a hot day.
The team served us with a final cocktail of emotions: happy, poignant and even philosophical.
But even now Cheers has left its audience wanting more.
Indeed, wouldn't it be magical to have just ‘one more for the road’?
PETER GRANT
Play could help Third World needy
A MUSICAL presentation called Paid On The Nail, created by two Merseyside church members, is being held in at Deyes High School, Maghull, on Thursday.
Derek Christoffer, from Maghull Chapel, dreamed up the idea and another member, Paulette Franklin, provided the words and music for the presentation about the Easter Story through the eyes of Mary, Jesus and St Peter.
Organisers hope the event will raise money towards a project to provide a centre in Mukoko, Uganda.
Members of Maghull Chapel have already helped pay for a well to be dug to give the village drinking water.
I'VE watched every episode of Eldorado and love all the storylines.
The viewers are warming to Marcus Tandy (Jesse Birdsall)
Goodbye Cheers
VIEWERS cried into their beer as Channel 4 screened the final episode of Cheers last night
Monster opening hit for the box offices
STEVEN Spielberg's dinosaur epic Jurassic Park shattered box-office records in its opening weekend.
The film pulled in more than £32m in ticket sales, Universal Pictures' studio executives said in Los Angeles.
With dinosaur-mania sweeping the United States and Universal mounting a huge marketing blitz, movie fans packed cinemas across the country, giving Spielberg's latest film the biggest four-day opening of all time.
Jurassic Park is located on an island off Costa Rica, where a rich Scottish entrepreneur, played by Lord Attenborough, has genetically raised several species of dinosaur, using the DNA from excavated bones of ancient reptiles.
The science-fiction thriller, expected to be one of the biggest blockbusters of 1993, topped the record set by Batman Returns, which took in £31.8m in first Thursday-to-Sunday showings last year.
Spielberg…film breaks records
Dot sends out for pet parrot
By Barry Turnbull MERSEYSIDER Dot Phillips has sent out a call for help to find a missing parrot that mimics telephones.
The Seaforth housewife watched helplessly as her prized pet flew off in Litherland on Saturday.
Three-year-old Timmy, an African Grey, specialises in impersonating ringing phones and wolf-whistles.
Mrs Phillips said today: ‘I was bringing him home from my daughter's house when he got out of his cage.
‘We have been out searching, but there has been no sign of him.
‘Because he is grey he may not be easy to spot and will probably look like a pigeon from a distance.
‘Nobody could mistake his calls, though, because he likes to take-off telephones and wolfwhistles a lot.’
Mrs Phillips can be contacted on 949- .
TV sex scenes ‘waste of cash’
CLEAN-UP campaigner Mary Whitehouse branded sex scenes in the BBC1 adaptation of Lady Chatterley's Lover as ‘absolutely ludicrous.’
Mrs Whitehouse, 80, head of the National Viewers and Listeners Association, said the second of Ken Russell's four-part £4m adaption of D H Lawrence's novel was ‘a shocking waste of money.’
In last night's sex scenes involving Lady Chatterley and the gamekeeper Mellors, played by Joely Richardson and Sean Bean, the actors kept most of their clothes on.
Ludicrous
Mrs Whitehouse said the programme was a ‘dreadful bore.’
‘The only good thing was the scenery and the fact that the four-letter words had been cut.
But the sex scenes were absolutely ludicrous.
‘I shall write to director general John Birt to suggest he keeps a closer watch on how public money is being spent.’
The BBC said there had been 12 calls about the programme some complimentary.
Musician Carl's on right track
TOP musician Carl Davis today became a train conductor to signal the start of Merseytravel's green transport week.
He used a piece of railway track to conduct the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic at Hooton Station on the Wirral.
The band (above) played Fanfare for the Common Man, conducted by Mr Davis, using a piece of environmentally-friendly aluminium conductor rail.
The aluminium is being used on a large scale for the first time in Britain in the electrification of the Hooton to Chester line.
Mr Davis collaborated with Paul McCartney on the Liverpool Oratorio.
MONEY FOR ARTS ‘VITAL’
PUBLIC funding of the arts is essential to the cultural future of the country, the government was told today.
Private backers from industry should not be expected to shoulder the full burden, said the Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts.
Poster power
I WAS travelling home from work and I saw some of the events posters referred to in a recent Echo article.
Besides being ‘colourful’ they advertise records which I presume are for sale in Liverpool shops and various events such as the wonderful ‘Festival of Comedy’.
All of which must surely bring business from surrounding areas into Liverpool thereby benefitting the city and everybody.
That's It She's Done It!
(BBC2, 6.00pm)
MARTINA Navratilova is courted tonight in A Celebration of 100 Women at Wimbledon.
An action-packed full history of the major sporting event, it looks at Navvy's achievements, including winning the Women's Singles Championship nine times…a title she competes for again this year.
There are Billie-Jean King's skills on display and that magical moment when Virginia Wade finally won the title for Britain.
Should get tennis fans in the mood for love of a different kind.
The Bill
(ITV, 8pm) PC Stamp isn't licked yet he's convinced that three brothers are looking for revenge when he sees them armed with baseball bats and no ball!
He is suspicious about their motives but with an over-time ban on at Sun Hill nick, are there enough officers on duty to prevent more violence?
A policeman's lot is not a happy one at all.
Neighbours (BBC1, 1.30pm/5.35pm): It's Cameron's housewarming and farewell party for Lucy and Brad which ends in disaster and tears.
Home and Away (ITV, 1.45pm/6.00pm): Fin has pangs of conscience over using the stolen exam papers.
When will that girl learn to be honest?
And Greg is in trouble.
Tug's dad is out to get him after he tipped off the police about his shady escapades.
Emmerdale (ITV, 7.00pm): Lyn lays down the law with Turner…and Pollard takes a risk to break it.
Zoe goes for it and plucks up some courage while Leonard asserts himself and makes a decision.
EastEnders (BBC1, 7.30pm): Arthur has an unexpected visitor.
Over in the Vic Phil discovers a new drinking buddy.
TIME'S UP: Peter Hall resigned as president of UK Timex Electronics Corporation which locked in five-month industrial dispute, company spokesman said.
‘It is NOT a play about women getting undressed…’
IF we say Geoffrey Bobblesbon-bon, you'll immediately know who we mean.
Actress Paula Wilcox starred opposite the late Richard Beckinsale as the ever-patient girlfriend in The Lovers.
But what's she doing now?
Well, she's in Liverpool, as Woman Extra found out.
Interview by
PADDY SHENNAN
HOT-BLOODED men beating a path to the Liverpool Playhouse for the return of the Raving Beauties are in for a shock if they expect Paula Wilcox to reveal all in the adults only show.
Paula plays the part of ageing beauty queen Diane, who is trying to convince herself that she is still young and nubile enough to vie for the title Miss Golden Gate.
In last summer's run, actress Linda Rooke who played Diane was the only member of the cast who bared all.
This was no mean achievement, bearing in mind that much of the action takes place in the contestants’ changing room.
But Paula, who shot to fame back in the '70s in the hit TV shows The Lovers and Man
About The House, is staging a cover-up.
Nibbling at her lunchtime sandwiches, she is perched on the edge of a chair by a window overlooking Williamson Square, high in the Playhouse heavens.
Crowds of shoppers below are sweltering in the summer heat.
But Paula, dressed in light grey leggings, sweatshirt and a blue denim jacket, looks as cool as a cucumber.
Unlike those hot-blooded men
…
Had there ever been a possibility that she may have been following in the footsteps of Linda Rooke and, ahem, disrobing?
‘No, absolutely not!’
‘In fact, I think a decision had been reached that it is a play about women entering a beauty contest not a play about women getting undressed.’
At least, that's all sorted out then!
‘I was attracted to it because the script made me laugh and it's a splendid play.
And I heard a lot about how well it worked last time.’
But Paula is aware that not all paying customers will have the purest of motives.
She cackles loudly as she admits: ‘I think you always need a bit of a hook to get people into the theatre.’
Paula made her first appearance at the Playhouse and in Liverpool 15 years ago in JB.
Priestley's Time and the Conways.
But her best-known theatre role in the city has to be as Shirley Valentine, the acclaimed Willy Russell play that she took all over the country four years ago.
‘It's extremely nice to come back to Liverpool,’ she says.
‘It's funny how much I keep coming back.
And I'll soon be doing a drama series for Radio 4 which is set here.’
And she is still recognised by people in the street thanks to her TV appearances all those years ago.
But is she haunted by her past?
‘There was a time when I slightly resented that, but I realise now that you may as well sit back and enjoy it.
‘I just hope one of these days I do something else that proves to be as phenomenally successful.’
Raving Beauties runs at the Liverpool Playhouse to July 3.
Paula Wilcox…set to take centre stage Paula with Richard Beckinsale in The Lovers
Duke can help immeasurably
ONE TV reviewer criticised the Duke of Westminster for hijacking BBC2's ‘Open Space’ slot to highlight the human tragedy festering beneath the surface of farming's seemingly serene exterior.
Why, he asked, should a man with an instant high profile platform in the House of Lords be allowed to use a TV channel while other less well placed people queue to voice their views.
But why not?
Those who know the Duke recognise his passionate interest in the countryside and the wellbeing of those who live by the land.
He is an effective communicator who knows the industry's problems and is concerned that too few know about the level of despair which can make a farmer twice as likely to commit suicide as the average man.
Financial pressure plus isolation can be a deadly cocktail for a sector of society which has by the nature of its calling ready access to the means of self-destruction.
Why, farmers should be asking, is it left to the Duke to crusade for farming's cause which others are paid to prosecute?
If his influence and ability to communicate helps urban dwellers, now many generations away from any direct links with farms, understand that farming is no bed of roses then that's helpful.
My only quarrel with the Duke was his choice of hard-luck stories although one had to admire the courage of the North Wales farmer who lives in a caravan having sold off the seven-bedroomed farm house to cut the farm's borrowings.
Farmers who watched ‘The Last Straw’ will echo the Duke's call for more stability, some leadership and a sense of direction for farming as an industry.
While the ducal lament graphically highlighted some of the problems of the past it failed to chart a new way ahead for the industry.
Having moved away from an era of commodity support to one offering reward for environmental investment agriculture has largely shed the old ‘featherbed’ image.
While farmers themselves recognise that no-one owes them a living, there's still an inherent desire to be on the receiving end of some support.
As an industry composed of independent businesses farmers have two options to receive payment from the taxpayer for their national service as an army of green guardians of the countryside, or be totally free operators in the open market.
Is the future one of being paid park keepers or producers of primary produce?
The Duke has initiated an important debate, but it is not yet concluded.
ORGANISERS of Hill Sheep ‘93 on a Powys upland holding, deserve a round of applause for staging a specialist event tailored for the professional flockmaster.
Some 70 trade exhibitors were persuaded to pitch their tents at three levels on steep slopes which proved a testing but rewarding exercise for visitors from as fair afield as Scotland and the West Country.
The event provided the opportunity to have a close-up look at part of the farming enterprise of John Gittins who has been a pioneer in land reclamation and has also spearheaded the development of commercial crossbred sheep that have put millions of pounds in the pockets of fellow farmers.
But John Gittins has never lost sight of the fact that man must work in harmony with nature.
That's why he sees rushes not as an eyesore but an asset nature's way of providing Welsh Mountain lambs with shelter from the wind's keen blade.
This was a worthwhile farmers’ event and there could be merit in considering such a location as a means of educating some of those who criticise upland farming into the ways of the hills.
THE European Commission faces the dilemma of having to decide whether the ban on the use of the milk yield boosting BST should be extended.
The scientific lobby insists that the laboratory-made version merely builds on the dairy cow's natural supply of the hormone and that regulatory authorities in Britain, Europe and the United States agree that its use presents no threat to human health.
It is also presented as a effective tool in ensuring a level supply of milk as the number of active dairy farmers in Europe continues to decline.
But farmers operating under a quota regime question the economic sense of introducing BST and are concerned that its use would send out the wrong signals to consumers.
Cheshire NFU chairman Barbara Smith put it well when she was interviewed on the BBC Radio 4's early morning ‘Farming Today.’
Declaring that she was ‘totally and utterly’ against the use of BST which the majority of farmers didn't want to use.
‘I certainly don't want to ask any more of my cows than I feel they are prepared to give,’ she declared.
‘As a mother I wouldn't want to buy milk with artificial BST in it for my children or grand children.’
She saw nothing good about BST except as a profit booster for the drug companies.
ONE TV reviewer criticised the Duke of Westminster for hijacking BBC2's ‘Open Space’ slot to highlight the human tragedy festering beneath the surface of farming's seemingly serene exterior.
Why, he asked, should a man with an instant high profile platform in the House of Lords be allowed to use a TV channel while other less well placed people queue to voice their views.
But why not?
Those who know the Duke recognise his passionate interest in the countryside and the wellbeing of those who live by the land.
He is an effective communicator who knows the industry's problems and is concerned that too few know about the level of despair which can make a farmer twice as likely to commit suicide as the average man.
Financial pressure plus isolation can be a deadly cocktail for a sector of society which has by the nature of its calling ready access to the means of self-destruction.
Why, farmers should be asking, is it left to the Duke to crusade for farming's cause which others are paid to prosecute?
If his influence and ability to communicate helps urban dwellers, now many generations away from any direct links with farms, understand that farming is no bed of roses then that's helpful.
My only quarrel with the Duke was his choice of hard-luck stories although one had to admire the courage of the North Wales farmer who lives in a caravan having sold off the seven-bedroomed farm house to cut the farm's borrowings.
Farmers who watched ‘The Last Straw’ will echo the Duke's call for more stability, some leadership and a sense of direction for farming as an industry.
While the ducal lament graphically highlighted some of the problems of the past it failed to chart a new way ahead for the industry.
Having moved away from an era of commodity support to one offering reward for environmental investment agriculture has largely shed the old ‘featherbed’ image.
While farmers themselves recognise that no-one owes them a living, there's still an inherent desire to be on the receiving end of some support.
As an industry composed of independent businesses farmers have two options to receive payment from the taxpayer for their national service as an army of green guardians of the countryside, or be totally free operators in the open market.
Is the future one of being paid park keepers or producers of primary produce?
The Duke has initiated an important debate, but it is not yet concluded.
ORGANISERS of Hill Sheep ‘93 on a Powys upland holding, deserve a round of applause for staging a specialist event tailored for the professional flockmaster.
Some 70 trade exhibitors were persuaded to pitch their tents at three levels on steep slopes which proved a testing but rewarding exercise for visitors from as fair afield as Scotland and the West Country.
The event provided the opportunity to have a close-up look at part of the farming enterprise of John Gittins who has been a pioneer in land reclamation and has also spearheaded the development of commercial crossbred sheep that have put millions of pounds in the pockets of fellow farmers.
This was a worthwhile farmers’ event and there could be merit in considering such a location as a means of educating critics of upland farming into the ways of the hills.
THE European Commission faces the dilemma of having to decide whether the ban on the use of the milk yield boosting BST should be extended.
The scientific lobby insists that the laboratory-made version merely builds on the dairy cow's natural supply of the hormone and that regulatory authorities in Britain, Europe and the United States agree that its use presents no threat to human health.
It is also presented as a effective tool in ensuring a level supply of milk as the number of active dairy farmers in Europe continues to decline.
But farmers operating under a quota regime question the economic sense of introducing BST and are concerned that its use would send out the wrong signals to consumers.
Cheshire NFU chairman Barbara Smith put it well when she was interviewed on the BBC Radio 4's early morning ‘Farming Today.’
Declaring that she was ‘totally and utterly’ against the use of BST which the majority of farmers didn't want to use.
‘I certainly don't want to ask any more of my cows than I feel they are prepared to give,’ she declared.
‘As a mother I wouldn't want to buy milk with artificial BST in it for my children or grand children.’
She saw nothing good about BST except as a profit booster for the drug companies.
Pub plays
TRAVELLING actors are performing in Cheshire pubs under the umbrella of Cheshire Celebration.
This evening Function Factory Theatre Company stops at the Big Lock Webbs Lane, Middlewich.
(8pm).
Tomorrow the Company hits Sandbach, where, at the Crown Hotel, patrons can see the interactive drama, which creates a pastiche of the Hollywood Wild West.
Bashir Makhou
BLUECOAT
Review by Adrian Henri
BASHIR Makhoul's paintings at the Bluecoat are superficially in the style known in the 1960s as Hard Edge strongly patterned abstracts in flat areas of contrasting colours.
Yet this isn't the whole story; the colours in the earlier works are there for powerfully symbolic reasons.
The designs of the later ones recall, say, the mosaics of the Alhambra in Granada.
Makhoul's own history reflects these elements.
He is a Palestinian, born in Israel, studied art there and in England where he now lives.
Paintings like El-Hejara not only feature stylized calligraphy but their colours black, red, green and white are those of the Palestinian flag, and their use in Israel is punishable by law.
This undertone of political symbolism is less overt in the more recent paintings which effect a happy marriage between Western abstraction and Eastern ornamentation.
Traditionally, these patterns repeat to infinity.
Makhoul sometimes underlines this by not filling in some areas completely.
He also sets the images at a slight angle from horizontal with the edge of the canvas, apparently so that we won't be lulled by the repetitive patterning.
In a new departure, Change, somewhat forlorn rows of clay pots confront enlarged versions of coins of the Ottoman Empire.
It is a synthesis of two elements, two traditions, that give the work its emotional force.
Saxophonist's sweet success
By Philip Key Arts Editor
LIVERPOOL-born saxophonist Simon Haram has won national acclaim in an event set up by the Young Concert Artists Trust.
Haram, 23, was one of just two artists from across the country to be taken on by the charity which promotes ‘young musicians of exceptional quality’.
From 140 applicants only seven were selected to perform at the audition finals at London's Wigmore Hall.
Haram and singer Claire Rutter, a soprano from County Durham, were the only two selected by a panel of musicians.
He now earns a guaranteed series of a concerts and special promotion by the Young Concert Artists Trust.
Haram, who studied at the Guildhall School of Music, made his London debut at the Barbican performing Richard Rodney Bennett's Alto Saxophone Concerto.
He has since recorded Philip Glass's Facades for Virgin Classics and appeared regularly with London orchestras.
Beatles' EC windfall
THE BEATLES and other former pop stars are set for a new royalties bonanza under an artistes' rights deal agreed by the EC yesterday.
From mid-1995, all member states will pay royalties to performers, record producers and broadcasters for 50 years after the original broadcast or publication of work.
Such protection already exists in Britain, where royalties are still flooding in every time Beatles' classics are played in clubs or pubs.
But in some EC countries with lower time limits the money had dried up.
Public money for the arts ‘essential’
PUBLIC funding of the arts is essential to the cultural future of the country, the Government was told yesterday.
Private backers from industry should not be expected to shoulder the full burden, said the Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts.
A conference attended by 200 delegates unanimously supported a motion calling on ministers to scrap proposals to reduce the annual multi-million pound arts budget.
The Arts Council, recently criticised as ‘cumbersome and inefficient’ in a Government report, also supports the motion as Heritage Secretary Peter Brooke tries to persuade the Treasury not to cut its budget.
‘The ABSA conference believes that continued public funding of the arts is essential to the economic and cultural life of our country,’ said Colin Tweedy, ABSA director general.
‘Sponsors wish to supplement, not substitute, Government funding for the arts,’ he told the conference at London's Barbican Centre.
A mystery as dark as Druids' Runes
Tom and Jerry in the Flesh
UNITY THEATRE
Review by Lew Baxter
GOSH, what imagination.
What verve and style.
Ah, what a coup for the Liverpool Festival of Comedy.
The tempered finesse of mime imbued with scatty humour which renders an audience helpless.
Well, one assumes that this is the expected response to such a plotless folly.
The Flying Thing Theatre Company have popped up with a somewhat irreverent effort which has seemingly borrowed the characters of Tom and Jerry, those rascally cartoon tykes, to strut their talent and agility.
However, at no point was there any discernable discipline relating to either theatre or common sense.
In what should have been a single sketch here protracted over two debilitating hours the only observable success was in managing to incite a young child in the audience to enquire with regular insistence: ‘What's going on Mum?’
‘Ah, where are the clothes of the king?’ was a phrase which kept zinging into the consciousness before thankful oblivion, preceded by catatonic shock at the audacity of such pretentious dross, preferred sanctuary.
What larks and japes persuaded this audience to collapse in convulsions is a mystery as dark as the Druids' Runes.
Meanwhile, the cast some in inexplicable garb convorted in anarchic fashion around the limited stage.
Drama must, perforce, have an ultimate target and destination and that was always the Clarion call to the earlier distinguished folk who trod these boards.
Why then have the Cambrian Forces been invited to inveigle such hollowed ground; to sit idly by and scoff while such is imposed by few on the many.
There is no doubting the integrity of the performers and all of those who had the courage to become involved, while certainly the energy, acrobatic skills and enthusiasm is little short of gasp-inducing, but one is inclined to question for what purpose?
Monster success
STEVEN Spielberg's dinosaur epic Jurassic Park shattered box-office records in its opening weekend.
The film grossed more than £32m in ticket sales, Universal Pictures' studio executives said.
With dinosaur-mania sweeping the US and Universal mounting a huge marketing blitz, movie fans packed cinemas across the country to give Spielberg's latest film the biggest four day opening of all time.
Jurassic Park beat the record set by Batman Returns, which took £31.8m in its first four days.