

New plea for redundancies
By Daily Post Correspondent
CASH-starved Clwyd county council has made a fresh appeal to its staff to volunteer for redundancy or take early retirement.
It has given a pledge that compulsory redundancies will not be introduced up to August 31 in the hope that enough volunteers come forward.
And it says that compulsory redundancy will only be used as a last resort.
The county council is facing a serious cash crisis and needs to reduce staff by about 400 to meet a spending cut-back of £12m this financial year.
In a letter to all white collar and manual workers, chief executive Roger Davies is asking the over-50s to consider an early retirement scheme under which up to ten added years benefits are being offered if people agree to go before June 25.
The council is offering enhanced compensatory benefits to make the scheme more attractive.
Union leaders and departmental managers are being consulted before a job is scrapped.
Chief officers have been asked to carry out a survey of people who would like to work reduced hours for less pay if it can be done without hitting the service to the public.
Full-time staff are being asked if they would like to switch to part-time work and various initiatives including job-sharing are being encouraged.
Mr Davies, in his letter to staff, says the council is facing a serious financial situation.
The council, he says, is committed to achieving the financial savings within the current financial year but that compulsory redundancy will only be used as a last resort.
Society begins education vigil
MEMBERS of Cymdeithas yr Iaith Gymraeg, the Welsh Language Society, began a vigil outside a meeting of the Welsh Language Education Committee (PDAG) yesterday.
The demonstration at Cardiff was aimed at giving PDAG one last chance not to co-operate with what the society claims are Government education quangos.
‘PDAG passed a motion opposing the Government's decision to abolish it as a democratic forum involved in education and the transfer its work to Government quangos,’ said society education spokesman, Ffred Ffransis.
‘But PDAG has organised a seminar at the Copthorne Hotel today and tomorrow to discuss how to transfer their work to the quangos.
‘Even though PDAG is not to be abolished until next April, it seems members have already given in to the Tories.
‘We believe the Tories know of the plans PDAG had for developing Welsh medium education because they've spent years trying to avoid financing them.
‘We still believe that a Welsh education development body can develop from PDAG.
‘We shall have to wait and see whether PDAG grasps this last chance to give a lead in this campaign.’
Ffred Ffransis
Mother ‘ignored her girl's rape plea’
By Daily Post Correspondent
A MOTHER ignored her young daughter's pleas for help during a two-year reign of terror in which her step-father raped and sexually abused her, a court heard yesterday.
The 13-year-old repeatedly told her mother that her 40-year-old stepfather had fondled her while she bathed and raped her when she was ill in bed, the court was told.
The girl, who cannot be named, told police that her stepfather had taunted her by saying he fantasised about her lying dead in a ditch, said prosecutor Robin Spencer, at Chester Crown Court.
The alleged attacks were said to have taken place at the family's home in Flint.
The stepfather denies two charges of indecent assault, one of rape and another of attempted rape between September 26, 1990 and May 26, 1992.
Mr Spencer told the jury: ‘For a period of two years, from about the age of 13 onwards, the girl found herself the target of sexual and physical abuse from her stepfather.
‘She told her mother.
But she didn't believe her or didn't want to know.
‘On one occasion when the girl was recovering in bed from ‘flu, and was weak, the defendant came into her room and started to take off his clothes.
‘He took her clothes off and raped her.
She was too weak to stop him.
‘While he was doing this she shouted to her mother, who was sitting downstairs.
When the mother came up to her bedroom she asked what was going on.
‘The defendant said ‘Nothing.
You know what she's like’.
‘You can imagine what confused thoughts she had when there was no response or sympathy from her mother.
‘Unfortunately, like a lot of children, she started to blame herself.’
The trial continues.
All fired up
THIRTY-FIVE tenants in Highfield Road, Bagillt, who signed a protest petition about their gas fires, have provoked action from British Gas Wales.
Larger taps, more suitable for use by the elderly, are being fitted.
Aid appeal AN APPEAL is being made to the Welsh Office to help fund, through Urban Aid, a £20,000 scheme to build a play area for children at Castle Walks maisonettes in Flint.
Getting boot Rhuddlan Borough Council is to clamp down on the number of car boot sales being held regularly at various places, although occasional sales for charities may still be allowed.
Church stalwart dies, 76
A PILLAR of the Baptist Church in North Wales has died in hospital at Wrexham at the age of 76.
Hywel Carey Jones, a former newspaper editor, of Station Road, Trevor, Llangollen, was an active lay preacher for 60 years, often fitting in three engagements at different churches on the same Sunday.
He composed many Welsh hymns, some of which are still in use today, and also translated English hymns into Welsh.
His contributions to Welsh language and culture were recognised when he was admitted as a Bard at the National Eisteddfod at Llanrwst in 1989.
Mr Jones helped set up the Welsh School in Cefn Mawr and was founder of the Cefn Mawr and District Welsh Society.
For many years he edited the Cefn Chronicle and later worked for the North Wales Newspapers group.
He leaves a wife, Margaret.
Britain escapes EC big bike ban
BIG motorbikes are to be banned in all EC countries except Britain, it was agreed last night.
The super bikes, with engines more powerful than 100 brake horsepower, are coming off the road in the interests of accident prevention.
But the British Government, unconvinced the fastest bikes are more dangerous, has won a five year exemption and an EC Commission promise to produce road safety evidence before Britain will come into line.
Last night's decision, among EC trade ministers in Luxembourg, means no more big bike registrations in most of Europe from the end of 1994.
But British bikers can continue registering bikes up to 125 brake horsepower for at least another five years after that.
The EC Commission opposed the agreement reached by the Ministers and demanded the ban be applied equally in all member states.
But Commission officials conceded Britain's case that the evidence linking big bikes to accidents was not convincing.
The decision throws into confusion the single market for free trade between EC member states.
The Triumph company can continue marketing its flagship 125 bhp model in Britain but cannot sell it in other EC countries.
A class apart
IT is too much to hope that John Major's vision of a ‘classless society’ can be realised at the drop of a hat but, if that what he wants, he might at least try to create a climate of equality.
That not only applies to such distinctions as race and gender but also to work.
‘Equal pay for equal work’ was a justifiable battle-cry of the feminist movement and that ambition was achieved some years ago.
Now, however, the clock appears to be turning back.
The Government wants to legalise payment of higher salaries to non-trade union members.
Put another way, that means lower salaries for members a proposal more redolent of second-class citizenship than a classless society.
On the surface the Government's plan is reasonable because it aims to give employers the right to choose how they negotiate with staff.
But the superficiality became readily apparent in yesterday's absurd statement by the Employment Minister, Michael Forsyth.
He said: ‘Discrimination against individual workers on grounds of trade union membership will remain illegal.’
If paying lower wages for the same work is not discrimination, then what is?
It would not be unreasonable for the Government to start a national debate asking whether freedom of association among groups of employees was any longer relevant.
Instead, Mr Forsyth is busy denying the intended legislation would ‘undermine’ that precise tradition.
When trade unions held enormous power they tried to ensure their members were paid most hardly a recommendation for the ‘brotherhood of man’ movement.
Paying them less would be just as reprehensible.
If Mr Major has changed his mind about the desirability of a classless society, he should say so.
Crime rate
NEVER mind the economy, what about the crime rate?
That question, in effect, has been put to a representative sample of small firms.
The answers emphasise that businesses have difficulties with more than bank loans and unpaid debts.
It might surprise some to learn that, apparently, the much-maligned North West does not have the worst record but was fifth in the survey out of the seven British regions, while Wales was second.
But it will surprise no one that most small firms want tougher powers for the police and courts.
Major and Maggie bite back
A LIBERAL Democrat councillor named his two fierce guard dogs after top Tories Major and Maggie and wound up in court yesterday when they proved all too aggressive.
Doberman-cross Major allegedly attacked one of Coun Sydney Emery's neighbours and when a policewoman went to investigate, two-year-old Rhodesian Ridgeback Maggie sunk her teeth into her arm, magistrates at Totton, Hants, were told.
Wheelchair-bound Emery, 69, of Totton, admitted not keeping Maggie under control.
The magistrates ordered him to control the animal in future.
The councillor said after the case: ‘I called one Major because he was doctored and the other Maggie because she was a bitch.
‘Major has now gone back to the animal refuge.
Surprisingly, he was more aggressive than Maggie.’
‘No haste’ over road
NEW Welsh Secretary John Redwood has denied any ‘undue haste’ in plans to improve the A494 road between Ewloe through Queensferry to the River Dee.
In a letter to Alyn and Deeside MP Barry Jones, Mr Redwood also says the building of the proposed new third Dee crossing does not remove the need for widening the A494 up Aston Hill.
UN ‘will not turn blind eye to rights violations’
By Daily Post Correspondent
THE world will not mind its own business or permit exemptions when countries violate basic human rights, the UN secretary-general and America's Secretary of State told a key conference yesterday.
They spoke as US gunships pounded a Somali warlord's stronghold in Mogadishu for the third day running, killing at least one person, and attack helicopters searched out and blasted heavy weapons.
Their speeches to the United Nations World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna delivered a double rebuff to China and other countries which say their circumstances are special and that their peoples' rights are no-one else's affair.
In a major speech on the opening day UN chief Boutros Boutros-Ghali rejected the cloak of ‘non-interference’ that he said was used by authoritarian regimes to conceal rights violations.
Condemned
‘The international community must take over from the states that fail to fulfil their obligations,’ he said.
‘That does not, in my view, harm our contemporary notion of sovereignty.
‘Sovereignty used by authoritarian regimes to hide abuse of men, women and children is already condemned by history’.
American Secretary of State Warren Christopher told delegates from more than 100 countries the largest human rights gathering for 25 years that the US rejected calls from some Asian and Middle East states for feebler standards.
The US ‘will never join those who would undermine the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,’ he said.
The tough talk seemed at odds, however, with some recent US policies, including President Clinton's decision to continue favourable trade benefits for China for at least another year, and the United Nations' own treatment of Tibet's exiled Dalai Lama.
Chinese pressure on the conference organisers has so far prevented the Tibetan spiritual leader from attending.
Meanwhile in Somalia, attacks continued as the UN accused Somali gunmen of using women and children as human shields in a clash with Pakistani peacekeepers on Sunday in which at least 20 protesters were killed.
A US commander also accused Somali militiamen of mutilating Pakistanis captured in the June 5 killing of 23 Pakistani UN peacekeepers, which prompted the current crisis in southern Mogadishu.
The international relief agency, Care, called on the United Nations to stop killing Somali civilians or risk alienating the people it aims to help.
Making his point UN Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali delivers his speech in Vienna yesterday Picture: DIETHER ENDLICHER
Thatcher on the Bosnia attack
By Sarah Womack Daily Post Correspondent
LADY Thatcher severely criticised the role of the United Nations and Europe in former Yugoslavia last night as she issued another grim warning about the failure to curb Serb aggression.
She made her attack following a private meeting in London with Bosnia's president, Alija Izetbegovic, who is on what has been described as his ‘last chance’ tour of Europe.
According to the organiser of the tour, French writer Bernard Henri-Levy, President Izetbegovic wants the arms embargo on Bosnia lifted or air strikes by the West against the Serbs.
Lady Thatcher, who has criticised the Prime Minister's cautious stance on the war, said failure to make it clear that Serb aggression would not be allowed to succeed would lead to more bloodshed in Bosnia and possibly elsewhere.
‘It is the Serbs who are aggressors,’ she said in a statement.
‘This aggression has not been dealt with by the United Nations.
Failure to do this has led to other serious local conflicts.
‘A policy must now be announced which makes it clear that the UN will recognise the rights of Croatia, Slovenia and Bosnia to live in peace, each keeping their own borders intact.
President Izetbegovic, addressing a news conference later at the Dorchester Hotel, described Britain as the western country most opposed to lifting the arms embargo.
‘Britain is the hardest one against lifting the embargo.’
He told reporters: ‘You cannot stop aggression, stop atrocities, by appeals only.’
British bid to expand trade with Cubans
A DELEGATION of British business executives has arrived in Cuba for talks on trade and investment opportunities.
The 14 executives, led by Baroness Young, will meet Cuban trade officials during their three-day stay on the Communist-ruled island.
Raul Taladrid, a vice-president of Cuba's State Committee for Economic Cooperation told Lady Young Cuba was very interested in increasing its trade relations with Britain.
Asked about Britain's attitude to a longstanding US trade embargo against Cuba, which the Cuban government says hinders trade and investment from other countries, Baroness Young said:
‘The British government's position is that we have trade relations with Cuba and we are interested in building them up, as we are a trading nation.’
Britain and other European countries have said they do not accept parts of legislation passed by the US Congress last October, which tightened the US embargo by banning foreign subsidiaries of US companies from trading with Cuba.
Looting charge
A 27-year-old man was led from the dock protesting his innocence yesterday after being refused bail on a charge of looting during the Llandudno floods.
Jonathon Vaughan Williams, a shop owner, of Blaen Cwm, Llandudno, was remanded in custody for a week by the town's magistrates, who directed the case should be tried by the Crown Court.
The charge alleges he stole items, belonging to persons unknown, in the early hours of Sunday.
Prosecuting solicitor Mr Peter Brown said the items had been on TV and in newspapers to try and track the owners.
The charge alleges the theft of a stool, vase, three tankards, five brandy glasses, a whistle, two keys, a ceramic car, a rucksack, a pair of roller skates, a fork, a cup, a torch, a colouring book, two small ornaments, a watch, a spanner, a pen and a small link chain.
MAN JAILED: Warehouseman Peter Gilchrist, 34, of Tottenham, London, jailed for five years at Old Bailey for severing a detective's hand with a Samurai sword.
Hospital fate
WREXHAM Maelor Borough Council last night again refused to say Yes or No to a bid to knock down a former hospital despite being warned it could face legal action.
Clwyd Health Authority is seeking to demolish the former War Memorial Hospital in Wrexham and to get planning permission for a supermarket on the site.
Its agents, the Land Authority for Wales, told borough planning officials yesterday that if there was a third deferment of the issue, it would appeal to the Welsh Office.
Welsh Secretary pledges emergency cash help
By David Rose Political Editor
NORTH Wales will get emergency cash help from the Government to help clear up after the storms.
Welsh Secretary John Redwood promised to pick up 85pc of the bill after Gwynedd County Council has spent £400,000 and Aberconwy Council £21,000 of their own money.
But he angered Welsh MPs by not promising help for families with inadequate private insurance cover or to lift the capping charge on Aberconwy Council, the authority worst hit by the floods.
Mr Redwood told Shadow Welsh Secretary Ron Davies, who pressed him to intervene, that stricken families could get help from a flood disaster appeal fund to be launched by the mayor.
‘I will look at the terms of that fund to see whether there is anything additional the Government can do,’ he added.
Elfyn Llwyd, Plaid Cymru MP for Meirionnydd Nant Conwy, protested: ‘To leave it to a mayoral fund is pathetic.’
It was, he said, beyond belief to expect pensioners to chip in to help flood victims.
And Mr Redwood clashed with MPs when he refused to lift the capping charge, imposed by David Hunt before he replaced him as Welsh Secretary.
Mr Davies warned that with the extra costs of clearing up after the floods, other services could be hit unless the Government changed its mind.
Welsh Liberal Democrat Leader Alex Carlile also urged Mr Redwood to take account of the disaster when deciding on Aberconwy's budget.
The extra cash help will come from the Bellwin scheme, under which the Government automatically picks up 85 per cent of the bill for disasters over and above initial spending by councils.
The Welsh Office estimate to trigger this off Gwynedd County Council will have to spend £400,000 and Aberconwy £21,000.
Bid for new fire tragedy hearing
By John Aston Daily Post Correspondent
THE families of five partygoers who died after being trapped in a house fire yesterday asked the High Court to order a fresh inquest into the tragedy.
The relatives of the victims, three from North Wales, want the original inquiry into the deaths of their loved ones at the five storey house in Hove, East Sussex, in April, 1992, quashed.
The house, in Palmeria Avenue, had no fire escape.
They were infuriated last year when East Sussex coroner Donald Gooding rejected their request to call tycoon Nicholas Hoogstraaten as a witness.
The inquest jury returned verdicts of unlawful killing and one of suicide also challenged in the case of Trevor Carrington, 38, the party guest said to have confessed to setting light to a sofa and starting the blaze.
He escaped the fire but later killed himself by jumping in front of a truck.
Edward Fitzgerald, for the families, told Lord Justice Glidewell and Mr Justice Cresswell the families of the victims wanted to call Mr Hoogstraaten to give evidence about the lack of a fire escape.
But the coroner said there was no evidence that the tycoon, now living in Nice, France, owned the house and refused to call him.
Mr Fitzgerald said there was an affidavit before the court from a journalist to whom Mr Hoogstraaten had admitted that he was a director of De Alnie Property Holdings, the company which owned the house.
Yesterday's challenge was brought by Lea Homberg, of Brighton, whose brother, Adrian Johns, 32, formerly of Llandudno, was overcome by smoke and fumes; Gareth Roberts, from Basingstoke, Hants, son of nurse Mabel Roberts, 46, formerly of Mochdre who fell 60ft to her death; and Jean Manners, of Cheltenham, Glos, whose son Andrew, 29, also fell.
They were supported in their action by Amy Jones, mother of Paul Jones, 33, formerly from Denbigh, who was overcome by smoke and fumes, and Sylvia Pinsent and Geoff Sharpe, parents of Tim Sharpe, 28, who died when he fell trying to climb to safety down a drainpipe.
The hearing was adjourned for 28 days to enable the coroner to produce further evidence.
Flash of generosity
MANWEB is doing its bit to help flood victims.
The electricity company is giving special help to 500 of the worst-affected.
This help includes £75 credit on bills to help with the drying out of homes.
There will also be a 25pc discount on repair and contract work and 20pc cash back on flood-damaged white goods.
Flood victims can buy now and pay later and have free delivery and collection.
Manweb has set up an emergency help caravan in the Asda car park in Llandudno.
Lead theft
RAIDERS stole lead worth £900 from the roof of historic St Elphin's Parish Church, Church Street, Warrington, during the night.
Judge at killers
A JUDGE told a jury yesterday that it ‘might have saved time’ if evil Moors murderers Myra Hindley and Ian Brady had been shot.
Judge Robin David, QC, made the comments to a jury dealing with a burglary case at Chester Crown Court where Hindley and Brady were tried.
Judge David, 71, who also sits as an assistant High Court Judge, was describing why the dock of the court was surrounded by bullet proof glass.
He told the jury: ‘This courtroom was used for the trial of Moors murderers Myra Hindley and Ian Brady.
‘The glass around the dock is of course bullet proof because it was thought somebody might try and shoot them.
‘It might have saved lots of time if they did, but there you are.
‘But I am sure nobody will want to shoot the defendants in this case.’
Church group's crusade to help homeless
By Ann Todd, Religious
Affairs reporter
CHURCHES in Bebington are to help tackle the problem of homelessness in the area.
The Bebington Council of Churches, which comprises 18 member churches of all denominations, has decided to work with experts on the problem.
Chris Allen, of the Forum Housing Association, told the BCC that for the size of the local authority area, Wirral had a major problem of homelessness.
Danger
There are 12,500 on the Council's waiting list for homes, but only a small proportion could be treated as a priority, she said.
Many young people did not qualify and were in danger of being caught up in crime.
Canon Frank Pullen has been appointed new chairman of the BCC.
Flyovers closing for study
THE Conway Street flyovers in central Birkenhead will be closed later this year to assess the viability of eventual demolition proposals.
The Mersey Tunnel Authority will close the flyovers for two months in the autumn so that detailed traffic surveys can be carried out to measure the effect on traffic movement in central Birkenhead and the impact on the operation of the tunnels.
Scrapping of the flyovers seen as a psychological as well as physical barriers to pedestrian movement between Birkenhead's shopping and business areas is a key objective in revamp plans for the town centre.
A special study has been carried out on the need to balance environmental improvements with potential disruption of essential traffic.
Stunned to shed 40 jobs
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
AROUND 40 managerial posts are to be scrapped in a major shake-up at Unilever Research's Port Sunlight Laboratory.
Union representative Peter Garner-Gray said last night that scientists at the complex were deeply shocked by the move.
He commented: ‘In the 30 years I have been with Unilever these are the first redundancies.
I can't recall any major upset like this before.’
Mr Garner-Gray, a member of the branch executive of the National Unilever Management Association part of the Institute of Professionals, Managers and Scientists said staff were too shaken up and surprised to react immediately.
He said: ‘They are scientists and relatively unemotional people.
They will take 48 hours to digest the information before there is any reaction.’
The move is part of a streamlining initiative to create an exploratory division aimed at enhanced performance in future detergent, personal care and speciality chemicals products.
Dr Alan McKinnon, the laboratory's deputy head, said last night: ‘We regret that there will be job losses and we shall be doing all we can to help those affected.
‘Wherever possible the reductions will be reached by early retirement.’
He went on: ‘This reorganisation is critical to the long-term future of the laboratory and the changes will make a significant impact on our ability to meet the challenges facing us.
‘We continue to be a major employer in Port Sunlight, with some 1,300 staff.
With investments such as the £40m on the construction of our new manufacturing technology centre, our commitment to the area remains as strong as ever.’
Bright future for town despite new job losses
A COUNCIL chief says the prospects for a Merseyside town are bright despite the announcement of more than 100 redundancies.
Rita Darwin spoke out after 70 council workers lost their jobs in Bootle and the Reads Engineering firm went into liquidation with the loss of 30 jobs.
Today she said: ‘Naturally job losses tend to be highlighted but just a few weeks ago a new business opened creating 80 jobs.
‘It is my view that many companies have weathered the recession and are coming out of it, but unfortunately there will still be casualties.
‘One of our key objectives is to reduce unemployment in the heart of Bootle where the rate is especially high.’
Business
Sefton is pinning its hopes on the town's regeneration through funds from City Challenge.
Around £37m will be ploughed into the area over the next five years.
Mrs Darwin, an economic development chief, added: ‘The new developments and facilities will encourage new business and one of our tasks is to ensure that local people get the new jobs.
‘Obviously they will not just be handed a job which is why a strategy is already mapped out for training and so on.’
City Challenge is expected to help create up to 5,000 jobs in an area with pockets where male unemployment is up to 50 per cent.
‘Good turn’ driver banned
AN Irby man facing Wirral magistrates yesterday on a drink-driving charge said he attended a friend's birthday.
The ‘sloshed’ friend broke his ankle so as a good turn he took over the driving.
Barry Glyn Ellis, 21, of Somerset Road, Irby, had consumed over one-and-a-half times the limit.
He admitted drink-driving and not having insurance or a licence.
He was fined £48 plus £25 costs and was given a one-year ban.
Students to drive medical supplies to Albania
A LIFELINE FOR THE STARVING
By Jane Croft
A GROUP of students is to take vital medical supplies to Albania to help thousands of poverty-stricken people.
Eight students and four staff from Knowsley Community College in Huyton will travel to Greece by minibus and then drive over the Albanian border in two old ambulances packed with hospital equipment.
Size
Later in the year, fund-raisers at the college are also hoping to buy two emergency bakeries from the Ministry of Defence which would have fed Britain after a nuclear attack.
The emergency bakeries are able to bake about 1,500 loaves an hour and are about the size of ten army trucks.
They are being sold off due to the end of the Cold War and will supply remote country areas where the food supply is particularly dire.
Students at the college have raised £6,000 for the appeal so far by parachute jumps and other fund-raising efforts.
College sports and leisure tutor John Dacey, who is organising the fund- raising, said: ‘We were inspired to raise the money through seeing reports about Albania which is the poorest country in Europe.
‘We need a medical box with other equipment in to take and it will cost us at least £1,000 in petrol to get to Albania.
‘Then we will visit a paediatric hospital and the university at Premet and will spend five days in the country.’
Norman church stages water festival
ONE of Wirral's oldest churches is holding a Water Festival of Light this week.
St Mary's Church, Eastham, has set up water displays and is staging concerts.
The Norman church is holding concerts on Friday and Sunday with a parish dance on Saturday.
Sixties stars' charity show SIXTIES pop stars The Swinging Blue Jeans will join forces with snooker ace John Parrott and members of the Brookside cast on Sunday, June 20, to raise money for charity.
The band will top an allstar bill at the Floral Pavilion, New Brighton, in a special show to raise funds for Claire House children's hospice.
Parrott will hand over a cue, which has been autographed by the quarter finalists in this year's world snooker championships, to be auctioned.
Bids begin at £100.
Community problems A PUBLIC meeting at 7.30pm today will look at community problems in the Neston area.
Chief Insp Vivienne Mills will attend the meeting of Neston Core Group at the town hall.
Licence plea
ELECTRICIAN Terence Thomas, 36, of Hayes Road, Birkenhead, successfully applied to Wirral magistrates yesterday for the return of his driving licence to help him with his work.
He had been banned for three years for drink-driving in January, 1991. 18-month ban A DRINK-driver fractured three ribs when his car hit a skip, Wirral magistrates were told yesterday.
Richard Riding, 36, of Hillside Road, Wallasey, who admitted drink-driving, was banned for 18 months and fined £96.
Sailing ship now berthed on the Clyde
Pride of Mersey revisits home waters
By Echo reporter
A MAGNIFICENT replica schooner slipped in and out of Liverpool virtually unnoticed this week.
But Merseysiders might have recognised the 95ft sailing ship.
For the boat, now called Spirit of Scotland, is none other than the vessel built in this region in the 1980s and launched under the name Spirit of Merseyside.
Seagoing treasure
The training ship for young adventurers disappeared from its Liverpool berth in 1991.
Now it has emerged that the Scots have taken over one of Merseyside's finest seagoing treasures.
The vessel, built by local youngsters with the help of public subscriptions, continues to be run by the Fairbridge Drake charity, but it is now sponsored by Scottish Nuclear Fuels and berthed on the Clyde.
Di Scott, of Fairbridge, explained: ‘After the ship had been in operation for some time it was realised that a great deal of money was needed for maintenance and running costs.
‘Efforts were made to find sponsorship and I must admit Merseyside was not specifically targeted.
‘By chance, the skipper placed an advert in a local newspaper in Scotland and Scottish Nuclear Fuels stepped in.
‘Part of the deal was that the vessel should be renamed and based on the Clyde.
‘But she still does the same job and has crews of young people from all around the country, including Liverpool.
‘It paid a visit this week and will be back in August.’
Graham Evans, of Blundellsands, was an apprentice who worked on the Spirit of Merseyside and later served aboard as bosun.
Cancer blunder doctor has MS
By Alison Cameron Daily Post Correspondent
THE consultant who misdiagnosed a child as having cancer is suffering from multiple sclerosis, it was revealed yesterday.
Dr Carol Starkie has been on sick leave from Selly Oak hospital since May 25, South Birmingham Health Authority said.
The disclosure came as the parents of Matthew Guest, the boy who underwent unnecessary chemotherapy, called for a full and speedy inquiry.
The authority said: ‘Dr Starkie has agreed that it should be made known publically at this juncture that she is suffering progressive neurological disease multiple sclerosis.
‘Many people with this disease are able to continue to work for a very long time and there is no evidence to suggest that her condition and the error are necessarily linked.’
Dr Starkie is seeking early retirement.
Solicitors for the couple, identified only as Mr and Mrs Guest, issued a statement saying their main concern was their son's health.
‘However, they are also concerned that others do not suffer as their family has done with such an error being made about health care.
‘They hope that the inquiry to be carried out by South Birmingham Health Authority will be a full inquiry and will ensure that errors such as they have experienced will not occur again.
‘They also believe that…it should be dealt with speedily and its finding made public so that the confidence of the public in its health care will be restored.’
No further details of the Guest family were released in a bid to protect their privacy.
Matthew was wrongly diagnosed as having a bone tumour.
The authority said: ‘Because the type of malignancy in question can potentially be very serious and very rapid in its development, chemotherapy was started immediately.’
Doctors have apologised to the Guest family.
A top-level inquiry, to be led by the chairman of a health authority outside the West Midlands region, is to be set up.
South Birmingham Health Authority has admitted the treatment was ‘unnecessary’ and there was a ‘slim chance’of other errors having been committed at the hospital.
Heading out…the team from Knowsley Community College, centre, surrounded by students who rebuilt the ambulances
Man charged with boy sex assault
A MAN appeared in court yesterday on charges of child abduction and indecent assault.
Stephen Leach, 35, of no fixed abode, said nothing during the brief hearing before Liverpool magistrates.
The charges arise from an alleged incident involving a boy aged four in Walton at the weekend.
Leach was remanded in custody until Friday.
There was no application for bail.
Pioneer course to combat racism
By Jane Croft A PIONEERING course at Liverpool University aims at improving race relations throughout Britain.
Twenty-six racial equality officers came to the university to enrol in classes for the first ever diploma in race and community relations.
And they now look set to promote more harmonious race relations in the community after passing with flying colours.
The students, who are already working as racial equality officers all over Britain, have all completed the course sponsored by the Commission for Racial Equality.
Ceremony
The students all studied through a long distance learning scheme with four tutors based in different parts of Britain.
They will now be presented with their awards by CRE chairman Herman Oysley in a ceremony at Liverpool University next Tuesday.
Tutor Ray Wan Baines said: ‘They attended regular weekend seminars as well as an Easter school.
‘The course started in 1991 and those students who have completed two years will be awarded diplomas and those who have followed it for a year will get certificates.’
Brothers accused of double murder
By Richard Elias Daily Post Staff
TWO brothers were yesterday remanded in custody, charged with the murders of a young business couple.
Amid tight security, Francis Mullen and his younger brother James appeared before Liverpool city magistrates.
They are accused of murdering Garry Pettitt and his girlfriend, Jean Larkin.
Neither of the brothers spoke during their 13-minute appearance at the court which was attended by Miss Larkin's father, Kevin.
Wearing open-neck, light blue-striped shirts, the pair stood alongside each other in the dock.
Francis Mullen, 31, was represented by Michael Hogan while 24-year-old James Mullen's solicitor was Neil Cobley.
Both were said to be of no fixed abode, although they originate from the Old Swan district of Liverpool.
There were no applications for bail for either defendant and both were granted legal aid by the magistrates.
They will appear before the court again on Thursday.
Security drive after arson spate in schools
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
SECURITY measures are set to be introduced at a borough's schools following a spate of arson attacks which have caused £2m worth of damage.
Among measures being considered to combat the problem are smoke detectors, security fencing, closed-circuit TV and window guards.
The issue was discussed as a matter of urgency last night by Sefton's education committee after two more arson attacks badly damaged schools in Crosby.
In April, a fire at Manor High School destroyed the science block, causing £1,500,000-worth of damage.
Less than a month later, two classrooms at Forefield Infants School were destroyed.
The damages bill there was £250,000.
Initial estimates suggest that effective security systems would cost £67,000 to install at Forefield and £110,000 at Manor High.
Because of the high costs involved, councillors are being asked to consider providing additional security measures at schools most at risk.
John Marsden, the borough's director of education, said: ‘Intruder alarm installations are installed in 142 education premises and are connected by means of a digital communicator to Sefton Security Force HQ in Bootle.
‘Resources in the past have been spread thinly and there are still some 20 small establishments which don't have intruder alarms.
‘Older buildings, particularly those of a less substantial form of construction, therefore present a greater risk.
‘When other factors, such as the history of vandalism in the neighbourhood of a particular school and value of contents within the building are taken into account, the priorities become clearer.’
The ruins after the Manor High School arson
TRIBUTE TO HEROES OF FIRE RESCUE
Life-savers rewarded with top honour
By Vic Gibson
AN heroic team of firefighters is being saluted for saving three people including a mother and baby son from their blazing home.
The entire white watch crew at Wallasey fire station received a prestigious award in recognition of their bravery at the triple rescue.
All nine of them were named on a special commendation given by Merseyside's chief fire officer Andrew Best.
The emergency team made Echo front page headlines when they rescued the 27-year-old mother and her eight-month-old son.
The pair had been trapped in an upstairs' room until firefighters smashed their way in through a window and led them to safety down a ladder.
A 61-year-old man was also carried out of the block of bedsits in Fort Street, New Brighton, after being overcome by smoke.
Besides saving three lives, the fire crew tended to another man, who was badly burnt and injured after jumping from his blazing room.
The commendation reads: ‘A difficult rescue was carried out at a high degree of risk to the crew.
The highly professional standard of firemanship demonstrated by all personnel at this incident contributed to the successful rescue of three persons.’
White watch leader Jim Houston received the award from assistant chief fire officer Brian Richarsdson.
The drama happened on December 22 in 1990.
Six of the heroes are still at Wallasey's white watch.
They are Terry Young, Clive Gale, Graham Sutton, Lawrie Howells, George York and Neil McAllister.
Former station officer Clive Haeney has retired.
Pete Hesketh and Gwilliam Evans are now based elsewhere.
Emergency services ‘not informed’
RAP AFTER POLICE RAFT RACERS ARE RESCUED
By Val Woan and Jane Croft
THE POLICE organisers of the Mersey raft race were blasted today after one man was taken to hospital and several others were rescued by the emergency services.
But the organiser of the event, who received the British Empire Medal in 1991 for his efforts, defended the planning of the race.
The giant fund-raising event took place on Saturday but the choppy waters caused some competitors to capsize.
Several needed help from lifeboat crews, who say they should have been involved in the safety planning of the event, and man found clinging to the moorings at the Woodside landing stage and was taken to hospital.
‘Lucky’
The race, between Speke and New Brighton and back, means hundreds of people being out on the river but neither the Lifeboat service or the Coastguard were officially notified of the arrangements.
Peter Shillinglaw, secretary of New Brighton Lifeboat which had to go into action a few times, said: ‘I cannot help but think the organisers of this race have been very, very lucky over the years.’
The Merseyside Police Raft Race has been running for years and during that time has raised vast sums for local charities.
The Liverpool Coastguard say there were particular problems on Saturday because some rafts were fighting against the tide.
A Coastguard spokesman said: ‘This event takes place every year but although it appears to be well organised, neither the lifeboats nor the beach patrol in Wirral are officially informed.
‘This is ludicrous because we are responsible for getting them out of any real trouble, should it arise.
‘They have their own rescue crafts, but, as Saturday proved, they need the lifeboats too.’
Organiser Merseyside police sergeant Howard Youdan, rejected the criticism, saying the coastguard and rescue services were informed.
‘I telephoned the coastguard and port authority on Friday night to inform them of the event, start times and which VHF frequency we would be using.
The event had also been publicised well in advance.
‘Saturday was chosen because it has one of the smallest tides.
‘Men were rescued after one of the rafts collided with a landing stage and they received immediate support from two of our support vessels.
The inshore lifeboat only came into action to take the men ashore after one of our vessels was damaged.’
Rain hits Southwell again
SOUTHWELL fell victim to the weather for the second time in a week when tonight's Flat turf meeting was called off due to waterlogging.
Clerk of the course Ashley Bealby said: ‘We've had heavy overnight rain and more this morning.’
Ironically, today's programme had been transferred from Wolverhampton where the course is unfit because of work on a new all-weather track.
Torrential rain forced the abandonment of last Thursday's fixture after just one race.
BR staff back at work as dispute ends
By Paul Byrne chief reporter A GROUP of British Rail workers who were being paid thousands of pounds to do nothing have finally gone back to work.
For more than two months the men received full pay but did nothing more strenuous than drink cups of tea and read the paper.
The dispute started when BR decided to contract out the jobs of its ancillary gangs, who look after fencing, rodent control, drainage and tree lopping.
As BR and union leaders tried to resolve the problem of finding new jobs for the teams, the men turned up for work each day at Liverpool's Central Station and simply sat in their vans for eight hours a day.
The wage bill for the two month period has been estimated at more than £13,000.
Resolved
A BR spokeswoman said today: ‘This had been a prolonged negotiation which has now been resolved.
All the men have now received alternative jobs.’
Andy Boyack, from the Rail Maritime and Transport Union, said: ‘The lads have all been allocated other jobs within the normal maintenance sections.’
But he said the RMT were still opposed to the contracting out of the fencing and tree lopping work.
‘These men had been trained to do specific jobs and we did not want to see their skills just thrown away.’
Jockeys banned
TOP jockeys Michael Roberts and Richard Quinn both received riding bans at the San Siro racecourse in Milan yesterday.
British champion Roberts was given a five day ban (June 22–26) and Quinn two days (June 22 & 23) following the Le Piaget D'Or International.
Quinn, aboard John Hammond's Dis Moi Tout, was found guilty of forcing his way out and causing interference three furlongs from home.
Roberts, riding Pride Of King, caused interference inside the final furlong in the same race.
Landlady killed ‘by man on bail’
A MAN murdered a Liverpool landlady while on bail for an earlier attack on her, a court was told today.
David Ashworth, 31, was alleged to have killed his former lover Denise Johnston, after breaching an earlier order not to approach her, Liverpool magistrates heard.
Mrs Johnson, 35, was found dead in the Lion Tavern, in Moorfields, Liverpool city centre, last Thursday morning.
Reporting restrictions were lifted after an appeal by Ashworth's solicitor, Colette Crowley, for witnesses to come forward.
No bail application was made and Ashworth was remanded in custody until June 21.
Miss Crowley can be contacted at Yaffe Jackson Ostrin, 81 Dale Street, Liverpool.
Tel: 236 5555.
‘Safe town’ under seige
BOSNIA'S Moslem-led government said rebel Serbs had intensified their assault on Gorazde, declared a Moslem ‘safe area’ by the United Nations, and appealed for help to avert genocide.
Bosnia's ambassador at the UN wants an urgent meeting of the UN Security Council.
Making waves: An Australian male surf lifesaver, Damien Taylor, 24, has entered a beauty contest designed for women if he wins Miss Wintersun 1993, he can go for the Miss Australia crown.
Soccer tragedy: Nine people were killed and 120 wounded in Baghdad when Iraqis fired shots in the air to celebrate Iraq's 1–0 win over China in a World Cup soccer qualifying match.
Woman PM: Defence minister Kim Campbell, 46, won the leadership of the Conservative party and will become Canada's first woman prime minister.
Jail term: It has been confirmed that Briton Simon Dunn, 23, a resident of Kuwait, is in a Baghdad jail serving an eight-year sentence for illegally entering Iraq.
Lottery joy: Unemployed roadsweeper Mickey Reid, 39, from Enniskillen, County Fermanagh, won £1.8m with a £4 Lotto ticket.
Three die: Rampaging elephants killed three people and destroyed village houses in southeastern Bangladesh.
Two charged with shooting
TWO men were appearing in court today charged with the murder of trainee accountant Martin Jacks, 23, who was shot as he watched TV cricket at his home in Putney, London.
Arron Bamborough, 23, unemployed, of Rippon Gardens, and Roland Thorp, of Frimley Road, both Chessington, Surrey, were appearing before SouthWestern magistrates in London.
Marathon meeting MEMBERS of one of Britain's most exclusive clubs are meeting at Land's End to celebrate their marathons from the far north of Scotland to the tip of Cornwall.
They all belong to the Land's End-John O'Groats Association, set up to monitor and encourage trips between the nation's two extremities.
Healthy eating
STAFF canteens can help prevent cancer by serving healthy fruit and vegetables, says leading preventative medicine expert Dr Aric Sigman.
Swop op
PENNSYLVANIA governor Robert Casey, 61, who is waiting for a heart-and-liver transplant, is continuing his duties from his hospital room.
Killer floods
SEVENTY people were feared dead after floods caused by overflowing rivers spread to new areas of Bangladesh, washing away hundreds of houses, damaging roads and swamping rail tracks.
US renews Somali rocket attack
By Echo reporter
A UNITED States helicopter gunship rained rockets and cannon fire on targets in Mogadishu early today in another attack aimed at ending gun rule in the Somali capital.
Witnesses said most of the fire appeared to be concentrated on an area controlled by Somalia's main warlord, Mohamed Farah Aideed.
Responsible
Residents claimed nine Somalis were killed in the attack but hospital sources confirmed only one dead.
Aideed's fighters have been held responsible for killing 23 Pakistani UN peacekeeping troops on June 5.
The latest raid, following a day in which Pakistani UN soldiers shot dead at least 2O demonstrators, suggested that the UN peacekeeping operation might degenerate into an undeclared war against Somalia's gunmen.
Aideed, asked in an interview with the US television network CBS if he had any message for President Bill Clinton, said: ‘I think the best message I can give is to stop killing the Somali people killing will not solve anything.’
Flares lit up parts of the sprawling capital as tracer bullets criss-crossed the night sky.
The AC-130 Spectre gunship flew over the capital several times and blasted arms depots and ammunition stores with 105mm cannon fire and rockets.
After one explosion, pieces of shrapnel flew into the heavily fortified compound of the International Committee of the Red Cross, aid workers said.
No one was reported injured.
Bill Clinton…appeal
Murdered Brit's wife unaware of tragedy
By Echo reporter
RELATIVES of murdered British tourist Noel Fitzpatrick were today preparing to break the news of his shooting in the United States to his sick wife.
Olive Fitzpatrick suffers with Alzheimer's disease and went into a nursing home so her 72year-old husband could make the ill-fated trip to America with their son Liam.
She is now in Towers Hospital, Leicester, where a spokesman said they expected the family to break the news to her in the next few days.
Mr Fitzpatrick, from Melton Mowbray, Leics, was found dead in an alley in Washington with a single gunshot wound to the chest.
Police are puzzled because although the area is infamous for drugs and prostitution, Mr Fitzpatrick still had 300 dollars and his camera on him.
Mr Fitzpatrick had been looking forward for months to a holiday in the States with his son.
He may have blundered into the area after losing his way.
‘He was a devoted husband and had not been on holidays for two years,’ said Liam.
‘The whole family is devastated and horrified.’
Man charged: Steven Leach, 35, of The Close, Walton, appeared at Liverpool today charged with abducting and indecently assaulting a boy of four, and was remanded in custody until Friday, after a massive police search.
YOUTHS CLEARED: Two youths cleared at Leeds Crown Court of causing death of teenager who was crushed outside chip shop by out-of-control car.
INQUEST PLEA: Families of five party-goers who died after being trapped in fire on third floor of house without fire escape in Hove, east Sussex, asked High Court to order fresh inquest into the tragedy.
Roof-fall boy rescued
PARAMEDICS climbed through a Liverpool school sky-light to reach a teenager who had fallen through the roof.
Firefighters used their ladders to help ambulance crews get to the 13-year-old in Our Lady of Good Help school in South Drive, Wavertree, last night.
The boy suffered a back injury in the fall.
MURDER REMAND:
Cardiff magistrates remanded all four teenagers charged with murder of ‘good neighbour’ Les Reed in custody for eight days until June 22.
Court refused bail applications for two juveniles aged 16 and 17.
Tories accused on inner cities
LABOUR today launched a major inquiry into inner-city life and accused the Tories of failing places like Liverpool.
Shadow Local Government and Inner Cities minister Keith Vaz said the aim was to ‘celebrate our cities’.
Mr Vaz said it was the first initiative of its kind for 16 years.
The inquiry called City 2020 is aimed at finding ways of making cities and towns better places to live in.
Concern
Over the next 18 months the inquiry will produce Labour's vision of what inner-cities should be like.
Mr Vaz said: ‘City 2020 must be a mirror to our inner cities, demonstrating that our concern arises from the people who live and work there, for their aspirations as well as their anguish, and not merely for the profits to be made from the land on which they walk.
‘Throughout the 1980s the inner cities were the battlegrounds for the Tories’ discredited ideologies.
‘Now our inner cities must be in the vanguard of the new alternative that Labour is building philosophies of empowering people, of realising potential rather than wasting it and of celebrating each life.
‘Our cities should be places to celebrate society, not despair of it.
‘Labour intends to celebrate our cities.’
NEW HOPE IN FIGHT TO SAVE LAIRD'S
Euro-MP tries again to win support for shipyard
By Anne Harrison THERE is still real hope of the Cammell Laird shipyard being saved, according to a local Euro MP.
Lyndon Harrison, the member for Cheshire West, is trying again to win grant aid from the EC's shipbuilding funding for the Birkenhead yard which is scheduled to close next month.
Petition
Mr Harrison has called for an urgent meeting with EC officials to restate the case for intervention funding which would make the yard more attractive to potential purchasers.
He also intends to hand them a 9,000-name petition presented to him by the Cammell Laird Community Group today.
‘There is still real hope that the Cammell Laird shipyard could be saved,’ said Mr Harrison.
He added: ‘Following the closure of Swan Hunter's, the government has finally agreed to talk to the EC about getting the same subsidies for all British shipyards that we have been giving to our competitors in the EC for years.
‘I hope this Tory government's change of heart is genuine and that they are not just trying to pass the buck.
‘I and my colleagues will do everything possible to ensure a proper case is put in Brussels.’
COURT DELAY:
Hearing involving four teenagers accused of murder of ‘good neighbour’ Les Reed, 45, and attempted murder of his friend, Phillip Tull, adjourned by Cardiff magistrates until later today to allow legal representation.
NANNY REVENGE:
Nanny in Peking murdered three-year-old in her care to avenge repeated rapes by the boy's father, then gave herself up to police.
TV DEATH:
South Korean TV soap star among seven people killed when helicopter carrying him and film crew crashed into Seoul's Han River near Olympic Stadium.
Teenagers charged with ‘good neighbour’ murder
By Echo reporter
FOUR teenagers appeared in court today accused of murdering ‘good neighbour’ Les Reed.
Police say the 45year-old ex-steelworker was kicked and beaten to death when he tried to stop a gang of vandals near his home.
The teenagers were also jointly charged with attempting to murder Mr Reed's friend, Philip Tull, also 45, who suffered multiple injuries in the incident on Cardiff's troubled Ely housing estate on Friday night.
The four, arrested at the weekend, made a brief appearance before Cardiff magistrates, who adjourned the hearing until later today to allow further legal representation.
Two of the accused are Stephen James, 19, unemployed, of Caerau Court Road, Ely, and Michael Lee Mundell, 19, unemployed, of Plymouthwood Road, Ely.
A 16-year-old and a youth aged 17, also from Ely, are juveniles and cannot be named because of an order by magistrates.
There was a packed public gallery as the charges were formally read out by the court clerk.
The three older defendants stood in the dock flanked by police officers.
The 16-year-old stood in front of the dock with a policeman at his side.
Magistrates adjourned the hearing until later today after a solicitor asked for more time to consult his clients.
Peter's magic formula
AT least someone on Merseyside is doing everything right.
According to chairman Peter Johnson, the only problem facing Birkenhead-based Park Foods is deciding what to do with their spare cash.
Constantly rising profits in what is generally a depressed area, suggest here is a latter day John Moores with a magic formula for success, based on doing the simple things properly.
And like Sir John, Mr Johnson has been quick to share his success, with involvement in his local community that includes the rescue and steady expansion of Tranmere Rovers.
Is it too much to hope that a few other Merseysiders will study his methods, stop waiting for someone else (usually the Government or the EC) to bail them out, and demonstrate similar enterprise?
ECHO report by Ann Todd
THE PARENTS of murdered toddler Jamie Bulger have spoken publicly for the first time about their tragedy and their new hopes for the birth of another child.
Denise and Ralph Bulger talk frankly about the joy they feel over the new baby in a magazine article published tomorrow.
And on the front page they say: ‘We didn't want to share our sorrow but now we have good news to tell.’
Inside, they are featured in a six-page spread, with photographs, in the Spanish-based magazine Hello!
Denise declares: ‘I'll always keep the new baby close to me.
‘We'll be fighting Ralph and I over who gets to push the pram.’
It is the first time Mr and Mrs Bulger have spoken publicly since the death of their twoyear-old son in February.
The cover of the magazine, which normally specialises in glossy features on the rich and famous, is devoted to a full-page picture of the couple.
Denise reveals that they hadn't actually planned another child.
‘No baby could ever replace James,’ she says.
‘We were shocked at first.
The pregnancy came as a real surprise.
‘But now we're made up about the baby.’
She adds: ‘We're still taking every day as it comes.
We can't plan ahead.’
They say in the Hello! magazine article that they are breaking their silence in the exclusive interview because ‘now we have something positive to tell.’
They say contrary to reports that they have required psychiatric intervention, they have neither sought nor received any counselling.
They've found their support in their large family.
Ralph is one of six children and Denise the youngest but one of 13 brothers and sisters.
Poignantly, the article tells how they kept Thumper, a flop-eared bunny which kept vigil with James in the chapel of rest.
It says Ralph and Denise are only too aware there can be no substitute for James but are beginning to hope that better times could just be coming.
‘We've had all the bad luck’ they say.
‘We couldn't take any more.’
On not speaking to the press before, Ralph says: ‘What could we say before?
We like to keep ourselves to ourselves and what happened wasn't something to boast about.
‘We didn't want to share our sorrow.
But now we have good news to tell that we're going to have a baby some time in December or January.’
Denise says: ‘I'm really looking forward to it now that I'm sure it's a reality.
I'm aware of it all the time, and I'm always thinking about it.
‘I'm waiting for the baby to actually move I've already sensed some little flutters.’
Emotional
She went on: ‘I felt I'd only believe I was pregnant when I could see it.
And that was a fortnight ago when I had the first scan.
We could hear its little heartbeat and see the shape of a small body.
‘It was an emotional moment.
I didn't ask if they could tell the sex yet, because I don't want to know.
I'd sooner leave that to be a surprise at the birth.’
Talking to Hello! magazine about how people shared their sorrow, Denise says: ‘There were 12,500 letters sent to the police station and we've had 4,000 here at home
…just the thought of people caring helps.
And people really do care.’
The couple were quick to defend their home city.
Ralph said: ‘We certainly don't hold Liverpool responsible.
It's a great place, full of warm people.
‘If only the people who criticise it from afar would actually come here and see it for themselves.
‘One journalist compared Kirkby to Alcatraz!
But there are far worse places.
We like it here and whatever happens, we're definitely going to stay long-term in this area where we were born and bred.
‘There's a really good sense of community and neighbours are always glad to help each other.’
They talk about how they met when Denise was 20 at a Kirkby Town Football Club disco and it was love at first sight.
Learning to drive
Denise says they do a lot together and take it in turns to cook.
She likes curry and chips, but Ralph's stir fry is probably better.
Denise says she is learning to drive.
She says her first question when the baby is born will be: ‘Is everything okay?
We really don't mind which sex the baby is, as long as it's healthy.’
Ralph says he will be there at the birth.
‘But Denise copes very well with the breathing herself.
I tend to sit there going funny colours.
Afterwards my job is to phone the grandmothers who pass the news down the line.’
Close
Denise says they'd like to have more than one child.
And she says: ‘I'll always keep the baby close to me.
We'll be fighting, Ralph and I, over who gets to push the pram.’
She tells Hello! of her wishes for the baby: ‘One is that everything goes well at the birth.
The second must be that he or she has a long life.
‘That's really all you could ever ask for, isn't it a long and healthy life?
‘And hopefully, a happy one too.’
An appeal fund set up after the tragedy has so far raised £149,664 in memory of James.
Two 10-year-old boys have been charged with his murder.
Turn to Page Four.
From Page One.
Body found
Police investigating the death of a man who walked into a shop in west London today and set himself alight found the body of a woman in a house opposite.
She had been stabbed several times.
Brothers on murder charges
By Caroline Storah HIGH security surrounded the appearance of two brothers at Liverpool City Magistrates court today charged with a double murder.
A convoy of police cars and motorcycle outriders accompanied the arrival of Francis Mullen, 31, and James Mullen, 24, just before 10am today.
The brothers, both of no fixed address, are accused of the murders of Gary Pettitt and Jean Larkin.
Neither spoke during the ten minute hearing.
Solicitors Neil Cobley representing James Mullen and Mike Hogan representing his brother made successful applications for legal aid.
Neither made a bail application.
The two men were remanded in custody until Thursday.
Gary and Jean disappeared from their home in Jericho Farm Walk, Aigburth, six weeks ago.
Clean-up begins for flood victims
AN estimated 500 people are still homeless after the devastating storms in Llandudno.
Some were able to return home yesterday for the first time since Thursday.
But the scenes on many estates were reminiscent of those at
Towyn in 1990, with carpets and ruined furniture outside every house.
The drains were at last able to carry the surface water and only a few isolated areas remained flooded.
Teams of workers made their way through the streets ensuring that properties were safe to re-enter.
Hotels
Red Cross volunteers distributed provisions and members of the
Territorial Army helped with the cleanup operation.
Today members of the
1st Staffordshire
Regiment will be drafted in, concentrating first on badly hit flats at Conwy.
Some people, many of whom will be displaced for months, are staying with friends.
Others are in hotels and guest houses.
Advice centres have been set up.
Many businesses, still without electricity, remain shut.
Terror tales
HAVING lost four general elections I can understand the socialists being busy and trying to scare the electorate with a terror story every day.
At the same time, socialists do not like being reminded of their own dismal record when in government a long time ago.
The hope is that people will forget how hopeless they were.
We have recently seen inflation fall to its lowest level for 30 years, at less than 2%, the lowest in Europe.
Interest rates, too, are very low and many in business are confident about the future.
Let us remember that under Labour inflation was an average 15% and at one time a massive 27%.
Had it not been for the I.M.F.
the socialists would have made Britain bankrupt.
Campaign plea
I WRITE to ask if any readers of this letter will join me in the campaign to see justice done for the men accused of the crime of killing Carl Bridgewater in 1978.
These men have now spent 15 years in jail and Michael Hickey who was 16 when he was sentenced is now in Ashworth Secure Hospital.
I am convinced that these men are innocent.
If anyone is interested in forming a group to go out and get petitions signed, or anything else we can think of as a group, please will they write to me as soon as possible.
I am aware that Carl Bridgewater's parents must suffer every time this case comes up for review, but they too, surely, must want true justice to prevail.
J. Morton, 31 New Road, Liverpool L13 8BG.
Kind people ON Friday, May 28, I was on my way home to Maghull from Central Station when I had a very nasty fall on the escalator.
I struck my head on the moving machinery and hurt my back.
I should like to say how grateful I was to the kind gentleman who pulled me clear.
I was so shaken up and upset I did not get to say thank you or even see his face, just the helpful hand outstretched to me.
Thanks also to the kind young woman with two young children who helped me on the train and gave me an orange drink.
She reassured me, as I was very frightened, and was kindness itself.
So if you are reading this, the kind gentleman or the young mother, thank you so very much for looking after me that day.
I don't know what I would have done without you both!
Government has failed Liverpool, say Labour chiefs
TORIES ACCUSED IN CITY-LIFE ROW
By Mark Davies
LABOUR today launched a major inquiry into inner-city life and accused the Tories of failing places like Liverpool.
Shadow Local Government and Inner Cities minister Keith Vaz said the aim was to ‘celebrate our cities’.
Mr Vaz said it was the first initiative of its kind for 16 years.
The inquiry called City 2020 is aimed at finding ways of making cities and towns better places to live in.
Over the next 18 months the inquiry will produce Labour's vision of what inner-cities should be like.
Mr Vaz said: ‘City 2020 must be a mirror to our inner cities, demonstrating that our concern arises from the people who live and work there, for their aspirations as well as their anguish, and not merely for the profits to be made from the land on which they walk.
‘Throughout the 1980s the inner cities were the battlegrounds for the Tories’ discredited ideologies.
‘Now our inner cities must be in the vanguard of the new alternative that Labour is building philosophies of empowering people, of realising potential rather than wasting it and of celebrating each life.
‘Our cities should be places to celebrate society, not despair of it.
‘Labour intends to celebrate our cities.
‘There is a new consensus in this country, on the continent, and in America, amongst local government, business, and people a consensus that only this government refuses to join.’
Keith Vaz…initiative
How war changed one Cheshires officer
‘I will never be the again after Bosnia’
By Philippa Bellis health reporter
LIEUTENANT ALEX Watts clenches his fist in anger as he remembers discovering the charred remains of a family slaughtered by Croatian fighters in Bosnia.
Three adults and five children, all Muslim, had been wiped out by soldiers — innocent members of a community Lt Watts had insisted television crews be allowed to film the gruesome scenes in Ahinici to expose the true horrors of the bloody conflict in what was Yugoslavia.
At home the television reports were prefaced with warnings about the shocking content to give viewers the option of switching off.
The Cheshires enjoyed no such luxury and had to control the anger and revulsion that engulfed them as they experienced the horror for real.
Contorted
Says the young officer: ‘One house was particularly tragic.
‘We found the bodies of two men upstairs.
They had been killed and burnt.
‘Downstairs we found an adult, we presume it was the mother, with her children.
‘They had been burnt alive — probably with a flame thrower.
Their bodies were contorted and you could see they had been trying to protect their faces with their hands.’
He continues: ‘I just cannot understand a soldier, whether he is a Croat, a Muslim or a Serb, standing there with a flame thrower and burning five children alive.
‘He must have heard their screams yet he still did it.’
At 23 years old, Alex Watts has the presence of a man ten years his senior, tempered with a new-found impatience he knows frustrates his family and friends.
‘I can't sit still for long any more and I get bored quickly,’ he says.
‘Bosnia didn't so much change me, more my priorities.
‘I come across as being intolerant because I have a different sense of what is important these days.
‘But inside I feel more compassion, really quite deeply — it's just hard to let it show.’
Lt Watts was the only platoon commander in Bosnia to lose one of his men.
In January L/Cpl Wayne Edwards was hit by a sniper in Gornji Vakuf.
‘It was an intended kill,’ says the lieutenant, ‘by some lunatic who just liked killing people.
‘Killing is like a drug it gets to be a way of life.
We soon learned that.
‘When we dragged Cpl Edwards out of his seat the back of his head had been blown off — but I still thought he would be OK when we got him to hospital.
‘When I got back to the base and was told he was dead my legs went from under me.
‘I felt such a terrible sense of loss and failure.
Before we left for Bosnia I told my platoon that my ultimate aim was to bring them all home alive.
‘It was as though I had let them all down.
It also brought home my own mortality — it suddenly seemed very easy to get your head blown off.’
For days after the killing, Cpl Edward's closest colleagues felt a strong resentment towards the locals as they came to terms with losing a popular member of the platoon.
‘It used to be a tradition that when you drove past a gang of kids they would wave and you would wave back,’ says Lt Watts.
‘But for days after Cpl Edwards was killed the lads just ignored the children.
‘It sounds terrible but for a while you felt like the local people were to blame.’
During their six month tour of duty in Bosnia the Cheshires faced up to death and mass devastation on a daily basis.
Many of the 2,000-plus troops were teenagers who had never seen a dead body before, let alone large-scale massacres.
Says Lt Watts, a Northern Ireland veteran: ‘Before Bosnia I'd seen a couple of bodies in road accidents but that was just it.
‘After literally a few weeks in Bosnia you became used to death.
But every body you saw was a victim of this civil war, there was no real reason for them to die.
‘You started to see the bodies as inanimate objects which you had to move.
‘They had no feelings and felt no pain.
The nightmare was over for them — it was the living you really felt for.’
Adds Lt Watts: ‘What often made situations all the more tragic was the fact that these poor From here is single col for page 7 people were trying to carry on with their lives.
‘There were pots on the cookers and washing on the lines — so symbolic of normal life — yet all around would be chaos and death.
‘After a while one dead body looks much like another.
‘But the pain and fear on the faces of people who have lost their homes and their loved ones is absolutely haunting.’
L t Watts hopes to return to Bosnia where he experienced the most stimulating six months of an army career he embarked on at just 18years-old.
‘My platoon was superb,’ he says.
‘We became such a strong unit and the experience was very binding.
‘There's something quite exhilarating about working so closely in a team and doing your job so well.
‘It was hard in way handing over to the Prince of Wales Own Regiment — you wanted to carry helping to get aid through to people who so desperately needed it.
‘There is a part of me still wants to be back in Bosnia and if I get the chance I'll be there like a shot.’
All the soldiers who served in Bosnia have been told about the possibility of developing Post Traumatic Stress Disorder as a result of the atrocities they have seen.
So far few have opted for counselling.
Says Lt Watts: ‘We don't know much about it but those who need help will get it.
Back-fired
‘Many of us do find it difficult to relax and that kind of thing.
‘I have jumped a bit when a car has backfired or the central heating has rumbled thinking for a moment I was hearing gun fire.
‘But most of us really are OK.
We went out there to do a job and we achieved a lot.
‘Everyone of us knows that we did what we could to help the people in Bosnia — that's what is important in the end.’
‘Move on’ notice still not published
STREET TRADERS IN WAITING GAME
By Jules Stenson, local government reporter
FEARS are growing that street traders will ‘drag out’ moves to remove them from Liverpool's showpiece shopping area for months.
The city council has still not published an official notice telling the traders of the changes more than SIX months after the controversial decision was approved by councillors.
Once the notice is published, the traders are likely to exercise their right to an appeal.
If that goes against them, they could stall the process further by seeking a judicial review.
The council wants the traders moved from Church Street, Lord Street and popular shopping areas nearby, by the time the £300,000 city improvements are completed in September.
The aim is to establish a more ‘up market’ central shopping area which will be attractive to shoppers and visitors.
The traders sometimes called swagmen have battled against the plan and are keen to hold on to their pitches for as long as they can.
Relocation
Transport and General Workers Union official Kevin Coyne hopes councillors will overturn the decision to move the traders at the appeal.
He is calling for good conditions for traders at the new pitches in Tarleton Street, Williamson Square and Paradise Street.
Under the plan, only traditional traders flowers, fruit and vegetable sellers will be allowed to stay in their present pitches.
Liberal Democrat Councillor Eddie Clein, a member of the council committee which approved the relocation plan, said: ‘We are very unhappy about this.
‘They are going to use spoiling tactics.
‘I have been trying to get the traders out for eight years, but there have been so many obstructions.’
A council spokeswoman said a notice about the changes would be published in the Echo shortly.
She said the notice was very detailed and it had taken longer than expected to draw up.
Brothers face murder court
TWO BROTHERS were appearing before Liverpool city magistrates today, charged with the murders of missing couple Gary Pettitt and Jean Larkin.
Mr Pettitt and Miss Larkin vanished from their home, in Jericho Farm Walk, Aigburth, six weeks ago and sparked a major hunt.
Two weeks ago, the search switched to a remote clearing in Coppull, near Chorley in Lancashire.
Forensic tests were made on various items removed from the area.
There has been no trace of Miss Larkin, but the search is continuing in the Coppull area.
Mr Pettitt ran the Calypso Blind Co., in Aigburth.
The two men, aged 31 and 24 and both from Liverpool, were charged late on Saturday.
Two on murder charges
TWO BROTHERS were appearing before Liverpool city magistrates today, charged with the murders of missing couple Gary Pettitt and Jean Larkin.
They are Francis Mullen, 31, of no fixed address and James Mullen, 24, of Dyfed, South Wales.
Mr Pettitt and Miss Larkin vanished from their home, in Jericho Farm Walk, Aigburth, six weeks ago and sparked a major hunt.
Two weeks ago, the search switched to a remote clearing in Coppull, near Chorley in Lancashire.
Search
There has been no trace of Miss Larkin, but the search is continuing in the Coppull area.
Mr Pettitt ran the Calypso Blind Co., in Aigburth.
Rivers chiefs in rates battle
THE National Rivers Authority and Warrington Borough Council are on a collision course over the authority's £156,780 rate bill.
NRA chiefs believe they should not have to pay rates on their regional headquarters building and workshops in Warrington.
But the borough's finance director Jack Clark, disagrees.
Relief
The NRA has applied for discretionary rate relief but Mr Clark is opposing the plan.
He says that if the council gave 100% rate relief, 25% would have to be borne by tax payers£39,195 this year.
The council is allowed to give relief to non-profit making organisations whose main objects are ‘charitable or are otherwise philanthropic.’
NRA estates officer John Atherton said many of the authority's functions, as ‘guardians of the environment’ were concerned with social welfare.
Sobbing in witness box as court hears of girl's fears
JULIE'S MUM IN TRIAL OUTBURST
By Echo reporter
A GRIEVING mother today pointed an accusing finger across a courtroom at the man accused of murdering her daughter and shouted: ‘He is mine him.’
Mrs Lynn Dart, the mother of murdered Leeds teenager Julie Dart, had just completed her evidence in the trial of Michael Sams at Nottingham Crown Court.
But as she walked from the witness box towards the courtroom door, passing within feet of the dock, Mrs Dart staged her outburst.
Sams showed little emotion as she was led away by court ushers.
Earlier, Mrs Dart had sobbed as she recalled her daughter's fear of confined spaces.
After being kidnapped Julie was held prisoner in a coffin-like box before being beaten unconscious and strangled.
Shaking with emotion and crying, Mrs Dart said that ever since Julie was a little girl she was reluctant to go into lifts or in enclosed areas.
Staring straight at Sams, she said her daughter did not even like short journeys in the car.
Sams, 51, of Barrel Hill Road, Sutton-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire, has admitted kidnapping Birmingham estate agent Stephanie Slater, unlawfully imprisoning her and demanding a £175,000 ransom with menaces.
But he has denied murdering and kidnapping Julie, two charges of blackmailing Leeds police with a demand for £140,000, and has also pleaded not guilty to demanding £200,000 from British Rail with menaces.
By JANET TANSLEY
MANY women find out all too soon their man is a Jekyll and Hyde.
Just like the fictional character, he makes unpredictable and bewildering behaviour switches from charm to rage in a matter of minutes.
One moment he is the loving, caring man who first attracted her, the next he is a ranting, domineering bully.
‘These men are torn between yearning to be close to a woman and having a deep fear of hostility towards them,’ says psychologist Dr Susan Forward.
‘Some are quietly angry, passive and withdrawn.
Either way they can leave deep scars.
‘Whatever style the man uses, the woman gets the message very clearly: It's up to her to figure out how to keep him happy and how to adjust to his everchanging demands.
‘And the signal is always changing.
The woman is never sure what it takes to make him happy.’
According to him, she can never get it right.
But between his outbursts, says Dr Forward, he is liable to be as charming as the moment you met him.
She adds: ‘That encourages a woman to be hopeful things will improve but, unfortunately, there is no way of knowing how he will react to anything.’
Steve McQueen was a typical Jekyll and Hyde, according to the two wives who survived him.
He was angry when wife number one Neile Adams had a baby girl: ‘He went into total shock.
He became angry, as though I had personally betrayed him by not giving him a boy.’
Ali McGraw, who became wife number two, says she hated machines and motorbikes but had to share his fascination.
She also had to cope with his temper.
She says she hated being cooped up at home, concocting his favourite tuna fish salad.
But he told people that if she ever worked again it would only be with his approval.
But he wasn't always cold and abrasive.
His charity was limitless, especially to young people in trouble.
Tina Turner says of ex-husband Ike: ‘I looked on him as big brother and mentor but, after our marriage, he revealed a terrible temper.
‘He started to beat me and I was afraid of him.
I would do whatever he wanted.’
Allowing such a relationship to continue will eventually strip a woman of her self-esteem, says Dr Forward.
But you can try to improve the situation by realising you are not responsible for his behaviour and, slowly but firmly, letting him know what is no longer acceptable.
Ike and Tina Turner…happy, but it didn't last
Cruel theft
MEAN-HEARTED thieves have struck for the third time at the Wrexham depot of the Operation Christmas Child charity, stealing a fax machine used to send out vital documents for aid convoys.
Jobs plans
NORTH Wales MEP Joe Wilson is supporting plans to use European grants to fund food processing plants in rural areas which he says would create jobs and help protect rural communities.
Serious fun
SERIOUSLY Fun, an exhibition of models made out of Lego toy building bricks, is to go on show at Bersham Heritage Centre, near Wrexham, from June 26 August 22.
Teachers learning fast
TEACHERS appear to be mastering the art of showing championship winning sheep with two collecting commemorative Golden Jubilee rosettes the show.
When George and Hilary Wheeler moved to Llangurig, Powys, from Gloucestershire, they acquired four acres of land.
So George, a carpenter, bought his primary school teacher wife her first ewes, although at the time she admitted ‘not knowing one end of a sheep from the other.’
A Jacob shearling ewe from Hilary's mini-flock made her debut at Aberyswyth to collect the breed championship and book a trip to this year's Royal Welsh.
Retired teacher Geri Hazelby, and his wife Rowena, showed the champion Charollaisa ewe lamb, bred by near neighbour and former Welsh Agricultural College principal Dr Dai Davies which they bought at the society's Banbury show and sale.
The Hazelby's started keeping the Continental breed two years ago and now have a flock of 35 at Brongest, Newcastle Emlyn.
Grieving mother screams at murder accused
A GRIEVING mother pointed an accusing finger across a courtroom at the man accused of murdering her daughter and shouted: ‘He is mine, him.’
Lynn Dart, the mother of murdered Leeds teenager Julie Dart, had just completed her evidence in the trial of Michael Sams at Nottingham Crown Court yesterday.
But as she walked from the witness box towards the courtroom door, passing within feet of the dock, Mrs Dart staged her outburst.
Sams showed little emotion as she was led away by court ushers.
Earlier, Mrs Dart had sobbed as she recalled her daughter's fear of confined spaces.
After being kidnapped Julie was held prisoner in a coffin-like box before being beaten unconscious and strangled.
Shaking with emotion and crying, Mrs Dart said that ever since Julie was a little girl she was reluctant to go into lifts or in enclosed areas.
Earlier, the jury heard from a prostitute referred to as Mary not her real name who gave evidence from behind hospital-type screens.
She described seeing Julie soliciting with other girls near the White Swan public house known locally as the ‘Mucky Duck’ in Chapeltown, Leeds, on the evening she disappeared, July 9, 1991.
Sams, 51, of Barrel Hill Road, Sutton-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire, has admitted kidnapping Birmingham estate agent Stephanie Slater, unlawfully imprisoning her and demanding a £175,000 ransom with menaces from her then employers.
But he has denied murdering and kidnapping Julie, two charges of blackmailing Leeds police with a demand for £140,000, and has also pleaded not guilty to demanding £200,000 from British Rail.
The trial continues.
Lynn Dart
Warning on Aids to heterosexuals
THE number of Aids cases among heterosexuals is set to rise steadily, according to a report.
It estimates approximately 23,400 people were infected with the Aids virus, HIV, in England and Wales at the end of 1991 the last year full figures are available.
Of these, around 13,900 had been infected through male homosexual activity, 2,000 through drug use and 6,500 through heterosexual activity.
The Government report predicts there will be between 2,015 and 2,720 new Aids cases in England and Wales in 1995, and between 1,945 and 3,215 in 1997.
Junior Health Minister Baroness Cumberledge told a London news conference yesterday the report pointed to a levelling off of Aids cases among homosexuals and HIV infection was also slowing down among drug users.
However, a steady increase in new cases among heterosexuals would carry on for at least the medium term.
She added: ‘The UK now has one of the lowest estimated HIV prevalence rates in Western Europe.’
She said future Government strategy would include continuing to target sections of the population at particular risk, including homosexual and bisexual men and drug users.
But Julian Meldrum, of the National Aids Trust, said the report showed that HIV infection, the early stages of full-blown Aids, was increasing among gay men following a levelling-off in the mid-1980s.
A drain on resources
A £30,000 flood alleviation scheme at Llanwrin near Machynlleth has been approved by Montgomeryshire District Council.
Technical services director Edward Carswell said rain had caused serious flooding in council houses on a number of occasions and a new drain was needed.
He said members had questioned the cost of the scheme but alternatives involved problems which could increase costs.
Mr Carswell said: ‘We cannot see any more economic way of dealing with the serious problem.’
Funds boost for research
A RESEARCH unit at the North East Wales Institute of Higher Education in Wrexham has been given a £130,000 boost by a funding body.
The award to NEWI's Multi-disciplinary Research and Innovation Centre is part of £2m earmarked for high quality research in Wales.
The extra funds will be used to appoint a professor of advanced material at the centre which has gained international acclaim for its applied research.
Road toll
FIVE people were killed, 44 seriously injured and 296 were slightly hurt in road accidents in North Wales last month.
‘No’ to houses A WELSH Office inspector has dismissed an appeal by D E and J H Hughes against a decision by Arfon Borough Council to refuse planning permission for a terrace of houses at Dolddafydd yard, Bethesda.
Taxi shuffle
PLANNERS are looking to reorganise the taxi-rank system in Bangor city centre.
New facilities, close to the Register Office, would replace the existing rank in Garth Road.
Hockey date AN under 14's hockey international for boys between Wales and Ireland will be staged on the new synthetic pitch at Ysgol Dyffryn Ogwen, Bethesda, on July 11.
Super-cafe Planning consent is being sought for a cafeteria for customers at Leo's Superstore in Marsh Road, Rhyl.
Splashing out
A HYDROSLIDE costing £19O,000 may soon be built at Bangor swimming pool.
One slide will be 66 metres long and the other 42 metres.
Flat refusal
PLANS to convert a house in Palace Avenue, Rhyl, into separate flats have been turned down by a Welsh Office inspector.
Owner Les Hughes had earlier appealed against Rhuddlan Borough Council's refusal to allow the development.
Bosnia pen-pals appeal
THE mother of a North Wales soldier serving in Bosnia has appealed for pen-pals for him and his colleagues.
Barbara Andrews of Rhyl said her son Mark and his friends were desperate for letters as there was so little for them to do in their spare time.
Mark, 27, who is married with two children, has been a soldier for nine years and has served with the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers.
Anyone interested should write to: Penfriends, c/o 24592635 Cpl M W Andrews, Vitez Garage, 1PWO LAD REME, OP Grapple, BFPO 547.
Carers in cash protest trip
CARERS fighting new £25a-week charges for mentally handicapped people to attend day centres are to take their campaign to Westminster.
Warrington South MP Mike Hall has promised to organise a lobby for the newly-formed Cheshire Carers group.
He and another North West MP, Ian McCartney of Makerfield, discussed the controversial charges with Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley last week.
And he now wants to take a 100-strong group of carers to the House of Commons to attract national attention to their case.
The carers are angry at the new charges, brought in under Care in the Community, which are well above neighbouring authorities.
Clwyd charges only £5 a week and other counties do not charge at all for the day centres.
Councillors have promised to review the charges and consult the carers.
The carers are meeting at County Hall, Chester this morning to lobby councillors arriving for the Social Services Committee.
They will hand over a 4,000-signature petition.
Job cuts blamed on power costs
ROCKETING power prices have been blamed for job losses at a Cheshire chemical firm.
Cheshire's chemical industry has been lobbying hard for cuts in electricity pricing.
They warned that price rises of up to 70pc were endangering jobs in the region's chlorine production plants.
The prediction seems to have come true, with Hays Chemicals announcing 25 job losses at its Sandbach site.
The company partly blames the recession, but says its ability to stay competitive has been limited, ‘due to the increased costs and uncertainty surrounding the major raw material, electricity, over the last two years.’
Amalgamated Electrical and Engineering Union district secretary, Ron Yarwood, reacted angrily, claiming his members were being used as ‘political footballs.’
Hays Chemical Distribution employing 225 people at Sandbach, is one of the smaller chlorine producers in Cheshire.
Firms like ICI in Runcorn have far more workers whom they claim are in danger of losing their jobs because of electricity costs.
ICI's bill soared by 70pc to more than £60m per year after electricity privatisation.
Cheshire County Council has prepared two documents warning of the danger faced by Cheshire industry.
The power generators have argued that the price rises came about when subsidies were given to large firms, which added to the domestic power bills.
Policeman stabbed
A POLICEMAN was recovering in hospital yesterday after being stabbed.
The constable had five stitches inserted in a wound in his left wrist.
He was attacked in Sandbach after confronting a suspected burglar.
Police believe he was knifed during an argument with the man.
He was treated at Leighton Hospital, in Crewe.
A 22-year-old man was last night charged at Crewe police station in connection with the attack and will be appearing at Crewe Magistrates' Court today.
He was also charged with assault on a policeman in Crewe last Wednesday, burglary, criminal deception, theft of a motor vehicle, taking a vehicle without consent and driving without insurance.
Army office staff refuse to move
THE Government has been warned that skilled staff at an Army office in Chester will refuse a move to Scotland.
The National Union of Civil and Public Servants branch at the Chester pay office has warned that 99pc of its members will not go to Glasgow.
The Government is planning to locate its centralised army pay and personnel centre in Scotland.
The NUCPS, which together with the Civil and Public Servants Association, represents the 180 staff at Chester, has sent its response to the Government.
In the letter prepared by the NUCPS at Chester, the case for a move to Stockport is strongly backed.
The NUCPS also warned if the move to Glasgow went ahead, staff who were expert in dealing with the army officers' pay system would leave.
Drug pony is saved
A HORSE rescue group made a successful bid for a drugged pony at an auction where he was about to be sold for meat.
Carlo is the ninth horse to be saved from the knacker's yard since Horse Aid, Care and Knowledge was set up.
The group nurses the animals back to health at Rossett, near Chester, before finding a good home for them.
Pamela Bluck, chairman, said: ‘Carlo was drugged, undernourished and had an eye infection when we bought him.
He looked very sad.
‘I know nothing about his history, other than he is a 12 month-old gelding.
He is wild but has a lovely temperament.’
Another of the group's rescued ponies, Cola, has given birth to a foal which is being named Derek.
Further information on the group is available from Ms Bluck on .
Pony Carlo saved from butcher
By David Jones Daily Post Staff
A HORSE rescue group made a successful bid for a drugged pony at an auction where he was about to be sold for meat.
Carlo is the ninth horse to be saved from the knacker's yard since Clwyd-based Horse Aid, Care and Knowledge was set up.
The group nurses the animals back to health at Rossett, near Wrexham, before finding a good home for them.
Pamela Bluck, chairman, said: ‘Carlo was drugged, undernourished and had an eye infection when we bought him.
He looked very sad.
‘I know nothing about his history, other than he is a 12 month-old gelding.
He is wild but has a lovely temperament.
He wants to come to you to be friends but is not sure.
‘I was at our sanctuary in Rossett feeding him this morning.
He let me stroke him but he was very hesitant.’
Another of the group's rescued ponies, Cola, has given birth to a foal which is being named Derek.
Two events are to be held to raise funds for HACK which is shortly to apply for charity registration.
A 25-mile sponsored country ride from Burton to Bangor-on-Dee and back is to be held in August.
And three women supporters who work on Chester Business Park are each aiming to lose a stone in a sponsored diet.
The group has received donations from well-wishers from as far as Bangor and Holyhead.
Further information is available from Ms Bluck on .
Pamela Bluck makes friends with Cola and her new foal, Derek Picture: VIC CLEVELEY
Murder charge man remanded
A LOCAL government officer accused of the murder of his aunt was remanded in custody for a further fortnight by Denbigh magistrates yesterday.
Bevan Roberts, 55, is charged with killing Mattie Edwards, 87, at her home in Mwrog Street, Ruthin, on June 7.
Mr Roberts, a senior planner with Rhuddlan Borough Council, lives across the street.
Roberts' solicitor, John Grey Lloyd, did not apply for bail during the 17-minute hearing.
‘Eyesore’ BR office storm looms
CHESTER City Council may take action against British Rail over its failure to remove a portable ticket office from outside the city's station.
The ticket office, which has been branded an eyesore, was opened as a temporary measure over a year ago in preparation for the station's £1m refurbishment.
Phase one of the restoration work is now under way after some delays, but it is expected that phase two, which includes the replacement of the ticket office, may be put on hold because of a shortage of funds.
If BR does not come up with the money the council is warning it may take action to force them to remove the ticket office.
‘What we may consider doing is to threaten to refuse to renew the temporary planning permission for the portakabin,’ said Coun Christine Russell.
‘At the end of the day the money has to be found and there must be an acknowledgement at the higher echelons of British Rail that Chester is a major tourist destination and deserves a station to match.’
Chamber of Trade secretary, Bob Clough Parker, has written to British Rail to complain about the ticket office.
‘I am worried by reports that even though the station itself will have its long overdue facelift there is still a prospect of there not being a new booking office,’ he said.
‘Though it is ghastly to contemplate, we might well be stuck with that portable cabin, albeit in a different position.’
Regional Railways plans to meet next week to discuss how to fund phase two of the refurbishment.
Yesterday, a spokesperson would only say: ‘We are still committed to this part of the scheme and we will be going ahead with it as soon as the funding becomes available.’
Boy breaks arm at vandal-hit play area
A SIX-YEAR-OLD boy broke his arm at a council park when he tripped over a vandalised safety surface.
David Riley had safely negotiated the slide and a climbing frame when he tripped on scattered pieces of safety surfacing, breaking a bone in his lower right arm.
The safety surface at the play area near his home in Kendal Drive, Great Sutton, had been torn up and the debris dumped around the climbing frame.
His mother Elizabeth said debris lying around the park was more dangerous than if the area under the play equipment had been left grassed.
Ellesmere Port and Neston leisure chief Philip Hearfield said yesterday the clearing of the park would be a top priority.
‘I am always sorry to hear when someone has been hurt in an accident, particularly if it is safety surfacing which has been vandalised that has some way been responsible for the injury.
‘It has cost a lot of money to lay safety surfacing on our parks,’ he said.
David Riley at the council park where he broke his arm Picture: CLIFF BRETT
Baby Craig given hope of new life
AIRCRAFT workers have rallied round to give a workmate's son the chance of a new life.
Just 60 British Aerospace workers managed to raise £2,320 in four weeks for Craig Bean.
Craig, 21 months, suffers from cerebral palsy.
Experts from the financial Peto Institute in Hungary told his parents, Alan and Evelyn, that he was probably too severe a case for them to tackle.
However, the couple found help for their son closer to home at the Brain Injury Rehabilitation and Development Centre, near BAe's Broughton plant.
Mr Bean, 29, of Glen Road, Great Sutton, said: ‘The lads did a great job for us.’
Now the family has enough money to send Craig to the centre for two years.
Music for platform souls
Commuters step off their trains to station serenade
By Andrew Forgrave Daily Post Staff
BEMUSED rail commuters could hardly believe their eyes when they stepped off trains at a rainswept Merseyside station yesterday.
A 12-piece ensemble of the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra conducted by international musician Carl Davis had gathered on the platform at Hooton.
As trains halted, the orchestra struck up Aaron Copland's Fanfare For The Common Man much to the amusement and delight of curious passengers.
They were not busking, but were playing to herald Merseytravel's Green Transport Week, starting on Saturday.
Backed by conservationist David Bellamy, a series of events has been planned aimed at raising awareness of the links between transport and the environment.
On the Hooton to Chester and Ellesmere Port line, a new aluminium conductor rail is being installed to cut electricity waste.
Other events include an early morning aerobics session on the Mersey Ferries and shrub planting sessions at local stations.
Yesterday Alyn and Deeside Labour MP Barry Jones pressed the Government at Commons Question Time to boost assistance to the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra.
Pointing to pressures on the Arts Council budget, he warned that the orchestra faced ‘considerable financial difficulties’.
Junior National Heritage minister Iain Sproat pointed out that both the Halle (Manchester) and Liverpool's Philharmonic orchestras were given 6pc extra in grants last year more than the other main regional orchestras, reflecting their importance.
Just the ticket!
A Merseyrail conductor lends a trained ear to trumpet player Des Worthington at Hooton Station yesterday Pictures: EDDIE BARFORD
Trackside tune-up Philharmonic conductor Carl Davis with members of the orchestra on the platform at Hooton
Israelis bid to offer Ronny a Come home!
EXCLUSIVE by PETER JARDINE ISRAELI
Cup winners Maccabi Haifa want to offer Ronny Rosenthal a return ticket.
Maccabi were Rosenthal's first club and are now tracking the out-of-favour Liverpool striker.
A report in an Israeli newspaper yesterday insisted that Reds boss Graeme Souness has told Maccabi: ‘Give me £500,000 and he's yours.’
Attacked scout leader faced Hitler Youth jibe
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
A SCOUT leader taking part in an annual parade was attacked by a pensioner who thought he was a Hitler Youth member.
The 21-year-old was battered around his head with a walking stick by the man, who was in his 60s.
He was walking with a group of scouts from Warrington down Northgate Street in Chester when the man approached them.
He mistook the scouts' military-style uniform for Hitler Youth regalia and started shouting abuse at them.
And then as they passed the Odeon cinema the man lunged at him with his walking stick beating him over the head and arms.
The scout leader, who has not been named, was not seriously injured, but was shaken after the incident.
Scouts assistant county commissioner Dave Jackson said: ‘They were in full uniform and the old man started shouting Hitler Youth at them and hitting them with a stick.
‘He is a big lad and it was a good job he did not turn on him.
It was a nasty attack and a very strange one.
Most people got to hear about it afterwards and he did get a bit of stick.
‘The children with him were only young but thankfully they were not involved with what happened.’
The scouts were walking to Chester cathedral for an afternoon service as part of the scouts Service of Praise.
It is an annual event, where four Cheshire scout bands parade their colours from Castle Square to the Cathedral.
They then take part in the annual service of praise at the cathedral in the presence of the Lord Lieutenant of Cheshire William Bromley Davenport.
Mr Jackson said: ‘I have never heard of anything like this before but it did not really spoil our day.
It was a very strange incident but thankfully not serious and nobody was hurt.’
Chester police said they had received no report of the incident.
Pamela Bluck makes friends with Cola and her new foal Derek
Tatton security alert
SECURITY at Tatton Park is to be stepped up after valuable garden ornaments were stolen in a night-time raid.
Thieves cut their way through a garden fence and wrenched free statues and vases from the grounds of Tatton Park at Knutsford.
But the weighty haul may have proved too much for the raiders.
They got away with only two statues and left the rest.
Now security guards will being night patrols of the grounds.
‘It is a sad reflection, but it affects all stately homes,’ Tatton Park director Mike Beaufoy said.
HTV strikes first blow in ownership battle
By Ian Herbert
HTV last night claimed a first victory in its fight to prevent a rival ITV company swallowing it up.
The Wales and the West company met Heritage Secretary Peter Brooke to argue against a relaxation in rules on ITV ownership.
A company spokesman emerged to insist the Secretary of State had heard ‘no new compelling arguments for changing the status quo.’
Debate
But Mr Brooke's aides insisted he had made no decision.
A Department spokesman said: ‘The Secretary of State called the meeting so he could hear from all sides of the debate.
‘He believes the meeting was a constructive and valuable exercise and proved useful in bringing out prominent issues.
‘It was convivial but the Secretary of State will now reflect on the arguments.’
At HTV's annual general meeting last week, chairman Louis Sherwood warned shareholders of the consequences of changes in ownership rules.
Midland group Central and London-based Carlton are among those believed to be interested in expansion, on the grounds it could result in savings of up to £100m in the network.
Stockbroker Barrie Tyler of Cardiff-based Bell, Lawrie White yesterday said Mr Sherwood's comments were more than a warning shot.
Tight
They indicated the acute concerns and feeling of vulnerability preying on each of the smaller independent television companies.
Bids
‘They have turned the company around against a tight economic background and it would be shame if it was pounced on.
‘A lot of shareholders have turned down generous takeover bids over the last few years and have regretted it,’ he said.
‘There is a price for everything.’
HTV made a pre-tax loss of £2.1m last year and shareholders are receiving no dividend as it copes with a £20.5m bill this year for its franchise licence to broadcast.
Peter Brooke
Spinster ‘battered to death by man she minded as boy’
Victim, 70, had ‘a heart of gold’
By Lynda Roughley Daily Post Correspondent
AN ELDERLY spinster with ‘a heart of gold’ was battered to death in her home by a man she had minded as a boy, a court was told yesterday.
Muriel Brunton, 70, was found a few hours after ‘a ferocious attack’ lying dead in the hall of her home in Haigh Road, Aspull, Wigan.
Her attacker was staying with his parents just yards from her house, Liverpool Crown Court was told.
Paul Abram, 25, of Baldwin Street, Scholes, Wigan, denies murder.
Prosecuting John Burke, QC, said Abram was brought up in Aspull and, after moving to Scholes, still visited his parents in Cross Street.
Miss Brunton's home backed on to an alleyway at the rear of their house.
‘She had been a lifelong friend of the Abrams,’ Mr Burke said.
‘When the defendant was a child she used to baby-sit for his parents.
He later told police that she was ‘like a grandma to me’.
‘But when the child became a man he killed her,’ he said.
‘She was well known in Aspull and it had been said she had a heart of gold.’
From 1990 she was virtually housebound with chest problems and people in the community rallied round to help her and brought her meals.
In the early hours of February 16 last year Abram broke into her home through the bathroom window and when she disturbed him as he searched for money for drink and to have his hair cut he killed her, Mr Burke said.
‘He turned to face her, brought her to the floor and battered her to death,’ he said.
In a ‘ferocious’ attack, probably using a combination of his fists and feet, her brain was bruised, her facial bones smashed, her larynx ‘dreadfully’damaged and her ribs broken, it was claimed.
‘He left her lying there motionless in her own hall, the walls spattered with her blood, lying on her back and he carried on with his plan to steal,’ Mr Burke said.
After going to his parents' home at about 5am, Abram, who had earlier been out drinking in the nearby Valkaries pub, washed his blood stained trainers and dried them in the microwave oven, it was claimed.
He washed his jeans in the bath as he did not know how to use the washing machine, Mr Burke said.
A small amount of blood was later found on the trainers of the same group as Miss Brunton, he said.
His victim's body was found at lunchtime by a neighbour who had brought her lunch and, when told, Abram expressed amazement and outrage at her fate, Mr Burke said.
Abrams allegedly said that he did not think she was dead ‘just knocked out.’
The case continues.
Probation for arsonist
A 59-YEAR-OLD woman WHO tried to burn down a council flat she had been evicted from narrowly escaped prison yesterday.
Irene Lound pleaded guilty to attempted arson on September 26 last year.
Robert Trevor Jones, prosecuting, at Chester Crown Court, said Lound had been evicted from Valiant Close, Warrington because of rent arrears.
She was sentenced to two years probation.
FLOODS FURY BOILS OVER
Flats residents clash over ‘unsafe’ homes
RESIDENTS of flats devastated by floods in Conwy Morfa last night refused to move back into their property, amid claims that they were now structurally unsound.
There were angry scenes outside the flats yesterday, as a tenants' group called on Aberconwy Council to demolish the two-storey buildings and borough officials insisted that they were still perfectly safe.
Many tenants claim to have lost everything in last week's storms, as sewage contaminated floodwaters surged into their homes.
Floods latest Page 5 
Conwy Morfa tenant Michelle Parry surveys the damage in her ruined home with neighbour Alan Jones yesterday
Murder accused was out on bail, magistrates told
By Richard Elias Daily Post Staff
A MAN charged with murdering the licensee of a public house was on bail for an alleged attack on her, a court was told yesterday.
David Ashworth, 31, is accused of murdering his ex-lover, Denise Johnston, last week.
The prosecution told Liverpool City Magistrates' Court: ‘The accused was in breach of bail not to approach the complainant or the premises.
You can see that he did approach the premises and that he did approach the complainant.’
Ashworth's solicitor successfully applied for reporting restrictions to be lifted.
Colette Crowley told the court: ‘Having considered the matter carefully, and in view of the various charges that my client faces, we believe that it is in his best interests that this application be made.
Miss Crowley then appealed for help from anyone who may have seen Ashworth in a number of locations around the city last Wednesday evening.
She said: ‘We want any witnesses during a vital period to contact us immediately.
Anyone in the Moorfields area of the city centre between 7.15pm and 8.15pm last Wednesday should come forward.
‘Also, anyone near the Vernon public house, Dale Street, near the magistrates’ court, or the Texaco garage on Vauxhall Road at the same time, should do the same.’
Miss Crowley added: ‘A lady and a young child were present at the garage when he bought cigarettes.
It is imperative that this woman comes forward.’
Mrs Johnston, 35, was found dead at The Lion public house on Moorfields in Liverpool city centre last Thursday lunchtime.
Ashworth was arrested at a hotel in Newcastle-upon-Tyne on Saturday morning.
At yesterday's hearing, he spoke only to confirm his name.
The magistrates remanded him in custody for seven days.
David Ashworth
Parents fuming over bus posters
A COUNCIL-owned bus company has been attacked for carrying tobacco advertising on school buses.
Linda Dirir, a parent and governor at Penketh High School, near Warrington, says Warrington Borough Transport should hang its head in shame.
‘The tobacco companies must be laughing up their sleeves,’ she said.
‘It is the best advertising scheme I have seen in years, completely by-passing legal restrictions on targeting children.’
She said Penketh High School takes the problem of children smoking very seriously.
But a ‘huge cigarette advertisement’ is brought to the school's 12,000 pupils at closing time on a bus.
‘All those potential young customers read it as they are told to queue by the very teachers who have been engaged in the battle against them smoking.
Little wonder teachers are disillusioned!’
A spokesman for Warrington Borough Transport said: ‘The company has a no-smoking policy in force on all buses.
Steps are already being taken by the company, and the advertising agency which places adverts on local buses, to have them removed.
‘But it is not just a question of ripping them down.
They are contracted for set periods.’
Smiling Alan Sugar (left) and Terry Venables after yesterday's decision
Killer ‘desperate for sex with girl’
A COCAINE and heroin user killed his 17-year-old girlfriend because she would not have sex with him, a court heard yesterday.
Timothy Harris, 33, had been working in Ilfracombe, Devon when he met his girlfriend Faye Whitehead.
Harris, from Wallasey, has been accused of murdering Miss Whitehead because she refused to have sex with him.
He pleads not guilty of murder, but has admitted stabbing Faye.
Under cross-examination Timothy Harris has admitted using drugs for the past twelve years and that he desperately wanted sex with Miss Whitehead.
A psychiatrist called in for the defence, Dr Nicholas Rice, told Exeter Crown Court he believed Mr Harris to be so abnormal his responsibility at the time of the stabbing was diminished.
Timothy Harris admitted to the court he had been jealous of the pretty teenager's friendship with other young men and he was desperate to have sex with her.
Harris had said that the reason he killed Faye Whitehead was that he lost control and he has been questioned about his state of mind in the days before the incident.
The court was told he had used cocaine and heroin and he also admitted that in addition to a cocktail of drugs he had been drinking heavily the evening before the incident.
The defence have said medical evidence gleaned from tests on Mr Harris' brain shows he suffers from a rare abnormality.
The trial continues
Flyovers close for revamp study
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
THE Conway Street flyovers in central Birkenhead will be closed later this year to assess the viability of eventual demolition proposals.
The Mersey Tunnel Authority will close the flyovers for two months in the autumn so that detailed traffic surveys can be carried out to measure the effect on traffic movement in central Birkenhead and the impact on the operation of the tunnels.
Scrapping of the flyovers seen as a psychological as well as physical barriers to pedestrian movement between Birkenhead's shopping and business areas is a key objective in revamp plans for the town centre.
A special study has been carried out on the need to balance environmental improvements with potential disruption of essential traffic.
As part of the study, consultants developed special models which mathematically replicate the movement of traffic on the highway network.
The consultants concluded that demolition of the flyovers would not lead to an unacceptable worsening of peak-hour traffic conditions across the network, when viewed against the environmental gains.
The results of the study are still being assessed by Wirral Council's engineers.
Extra work has been commissioned to determine which highway links and junctions would need improvement to relieve any potential traffic logjam.
Tunnel-bound traffic would continue to use Conway Street, but traffic presently leaving the tunnel to Conway Street would be re-routed via Borough Road.
Subject to the results of the trial closure, which is expected to start in October, it is envisaged that the flyover will be removed in 1995 following completion of any necessary junction improvements.
Sir Cyril backing arson repair appeal
By Andrew Forgrave Daily Post Staff
LARGER-than-life Liberal Democrat Sir Cyril Smith is to throw his weight behind an appeal to raise funds for repairs to the fire-ravaged offices of Liverpool MP David Alton.
The 29-stone former Rochdale MP immediately offered to help after hearing of the disaster that befell his Liberal Democrat colleague.
And former Liverpool City Council leader, Sir Trevor Jones, has volunteered to act as appeal treasurer.
Party workers have been rallying around since last Thursday night's arson attack which caused tens of thousands worth of damage.
A bookcase was set alight in what was the latest in a series of death threats and vandalism aimed at the Mossley Hill MP.
He has polarised opinion with his controversial antiabortion views.
Slogans have often been daubed on the walls of his constituency office in Smithdown Road, Wavertree.
‘The offices are used not just by us but also by several local voluntary organisations, and we are anxious that they can have access to them again as soon as possible,’ Mr Alton said.
‘We are determined not to be beaten by whoever did this.’
Although the blaze caused extensive damage, a number of artefacts and papers were recovered.
Among them was a portrait of Sir Henry Campbell Bannerman, Britain's Liberal prime minister when the building opened in 1906.
Sir Cyril Smith
Boutique hit by ram raid
RAM raiders smashed a stolen BMW car through the window of an exclusive boutique stealing thousands of pounds worth of clothes.
The thieves, wearing yellow balaclavas, targeted La Femme in Bridge Road, Blundellsands, near Liverpool, shortly before 3am yesterday.
They grabbed the garments and escaped but were spotted by police in a patrol car who followed them but lost them in Litherland several miles away.
Manager David Waring said: ‘We are still assessing the damage and what was taken but we think we've lost about 30 garments worth about £2,500.’
Careless driver hit doctor
A 76-YEAR-OLD doctor suffered extensive injuries when he was hit by a car on a pedestrian crossing at Bebington Village, Wirral magistrates heard yesterday.
Electronics engineer Brian Marsland, 37, of Moorside Avenue, Parkgate, admitted a charge of careless driving and was fined £530.
He saw the pedestrian too late, the court was told.
Death case husband ‘told of backing Eric Clapton’
By Richard Elias and Lynda Roughley
THE husband of a heavily-pregnant woman found hanging in a garage told one of her friends that he used to be a backing guitarist for Eric Clapton, a court heard yesterday.
Auxiliary nurse, Eddie Gilfoyle, who is accused of murdering his wife, Paula, 32, also said he was allowed to help out in surgical operations at the hospital where he worked.
Susan Coltman, a long-standing friend of Paula, giving evidence on the third day of the trial, said Gilfoyle added he was training to be part of a specialist emergency team dealing specifically with suicides.
Gilfoyle, 31, who denies murder, worked at the private Murrayfield Hospital in Thingwall, Wirral.
Addressing Liverpool Crown Court, Miss Coltman: ‘He said he was carrying out operations at the hospital.
He said he learnt to do it in the field during the Falklands War.
‘He said the surgeons asked him how he learnt to do such a good job and he said it was in the army.’
But she added: ‘I thought he was lying.’
Factory worker, Paula Gilfoyle, was eight-and-a-half months pregnant when she was discovered dead at her home in Grafton Drive, Upton, Wirral, on Thursday, June 4, last year.
She was found suspended by a rope, tied to a central beam in the garage adjacent to the house.
Her feet were resting on a small, aluminium step-ladder.
Miss Coltman, a friend of the deceased since they were teenagers, told the court: ‘Paula was saying that Eddie was going to be promoted.
I asked him what he was going to be.
‘He said he was going to trained to go on a crash team.
Trained to go out to suicide cases.’
Cross-examined by David Turner QC, defending, Miss Coltman said: ‘He (Eddie) said he had worked for EMI and backed people and played guitar.
‘He said he had backed Eric Clapton.
I asked if he was having us on and he said ‘no’.’
She then went on to speak about a letter which Mrs Gilfoyle, 33, had shown her while the two were having an evening together.
It was allegedly from a woman called Sandra with whom Gilfoyle had been seen.
‘Paula started to tell me about another woman who Eddie had begun seeing and she said that the marriage had gone through a bad patch and divorce proceedings had been started,’ Miss Coltman said.
Earlier, the alleged author of the letter, Sandra Davies told how she and the accused had prepared to set up home together.
But the young mother's plans were dashed when she discovered that Gilfoyle was still married and that his wife was expecting.
However, Mrs Davies, denied the pair had any sexual relationship.
She said: ‘The only physical contact was a kiss on the cheek.’
Wearing a smart, grey check suit Mrs Davies explained how she and Gilfoyle met at the Murrayfield Hospital where she was employed as a food service assistant.
They became friendly and eventually fell in love.
The trial continues.
Sandra Davies ‘fell in love with Gilfoyle’
Eddie Gilfoyle
Blaze kills family's pet cat
A FIERCE house fire killed a family's pet cat yesterday.
But firemen rescued an Alsatian dog from the kitchen of the house, in Hamstead Road, Wallasey, as the flames took hold.
Sub-officer Keith Lepoidevin of Wallasey fire station said yesterday: ‘We got to the dog just in time, but I'm afraid it was too late for the cat.’
He said that his men were held back by the heat of the fire, which stripped plaster from the walls, burnt floorboards and brought ceilings crashing down onto the ground floor of the semidetached house.
Neighbours called the fire brigade when the blaze broke out yesterday morning while the occupants were at work.
Smoke and flames caused severe damage to the contents of the building.
Ex-town crier recovering
CHESTER'S former town crier was continuing his recovery in hospital yesterday after turning himself into a human fireball last week.
Mike Chittenden, who was town crier in Chester for 10 years, was said to be ‘comfortable’ in Merseyside's Whiston Hospital yesterday.
Parrot poser is solved
A GREY parrot had detectives baffled last night when it was handed in at a Liverpool police station.
It had been found in the Pope Street area of Bootle and was submitted to the lost property section at Bootle police station.
Several hours later the bird's relieved owner arrived at the station, explaining the parrot has flown off as she took it to her grandchildren for a treat.
Suicide followed lovers' dispute
A YOUNG man hanged himself after a row with his girlfriend, an inquest heard yesterday.
Stephen Dutton, 21, tied a rope to a door handle and threaded it through a pulley into an adjoining kitchen before looping it around his neck.
The unemployed electrician had been living with girlfriend Andrea McCardle at the flat in Lee Park Drive, Belle Vale, for two years.
She told the Liverpool inquest that on March 9 this year they had argued about her going out for a drink with some friends in the city centre.
‘Normally he didn't mind but that night he was different,’ she said.
She went out and returned around midnight.
They both went to bed but Stephen was restless and said he wanted to sleep on the couch.
Andrea told the hearing: ‘I woke up about 3.30am and all the lights were still on.
I went into the hall and that's when I saw the rope.’
The court heard that Stephen had taken an overdose of paracetamol tablets 12 months earlier.
Coroner Roy Barter recorded a verdict that Stephen killed himself.
Traffic delays
SERIOUS traffic delays are expected while British Gas carry out excavations of the A59 at Rice Lane, near Walton Hospital, Liverpool.
Work is likely to last four weeks.
Poems to order
LIVERPOOL poet Cath Willis will be available in Huyton Library on Thursday to write poems on request from members of the public.
The event will raise cash for the deaf.
Husband fears killers may escape justice
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
THE husband of a woman murdered as she sunbathed on a South African beach spoke of his fears last night that her killer may never be brought to justice.
Tim Godwin believes that the hunt for the murderer of his wife, Julie, and her friend, Elizabeth Over, has been overshadowed by the assassination of black leader Chris Hani.
And he criticized the South African Police for failing to send back personal possessions belonging to 30-year-old Julie, who was born and brought up in Churchtown, Southport.
‘I fear that the investigation has descended into total chaos,’ he said.
‘I have been kept very much in the dark about what is going on.
Most of what I have heard has been through the press.
‘I also feel we have all been treated shabbily.
Julie and Elizabeth's relatives have been over to South Africa and were not treated very well at all by the police.
‘I think the Chris Hani murder has just paled everything else into insignificance.’
The mutilated bodies of the women were found on a remote beach in northern Natal, near the Mozambique border, last December.
‘I am also upset because Julie's personal possessions have not been returned.
Among them were several pieces of sentimental jewellery,’ said Mr Godwin.
‘I have also tried to establish some sort of memorial within the nature park where Julie and Elizabeth were murdered but South African officials at the embassy don't seem particularly interested.’
Mr Godwin's claims were denied by South African Police.
Lieutenant Sharon Schutte, speaking from Pretoria, said: ‘I have every sympathy with Mr Godwin.
But I would like to reassure him that everything possible is being done.
‘While the Chris Hani case did have a tremendous impact on South Africa it has not taken away from investigations into the murders of Julie and Elizabeth.’
Mrs Godwin left behind a little girl Sophie, who was two in January.
‘She's such a happy little soul just getting on with her life,’ said Mr Godwin.
Tim Godwin
Boy, 14, on OAP charge
A BOY of 14 will appear before a youth court in Crewe today, charged with the attempted rape of a 92-year-old woman.
The incident is alleged to have happened at the pensioner's home in Crewe early yesterday morning.
The youngster, from Manchester, is also charged with burglary.
Crewe police say that the woman is being kept under observation at Leighton Hospital, Crewe.
Brothers accused of couple's murder
TWO brothers have been remanded in custody charged with the murders of a young business couple.
Amid tight security, Francis Mullen and his younger brother James appeared before Liverpool city magistrates yesterday morning.
They are accused of murdering Garry Pettitt and his girlfriend Jean Larkin.
Neither of the brothers spoke during their 13-minute appearance at the court which was attended by the dead girl's father Kevin.
Wearing open-neck light blue-striped shirts, the pair stood alongside each other in the dock.
Francis Mullen, 31, was represented by Michael Hogan while 24-year-old James Mullen's solicitor was Neil Cobley.
Both defendants were said to be of no fixed abode, although they originate from the Old Swan district of Liverpool.
There were no applications for bail for either, and both were granted legal aid by the magistrates.
They will both reappear before the court on Thursday morning.
Doorman ‘broke his own leg’
A DOORMAN who struck a woman during a ‘confused’ incident at Suzi Cue's pool club at Bebington finished up with a broken leg, Wirral magistrates were told.
Peter Ronald Mitchell, 37, of Windsor Close, New Ferry was convicted yesterday of causing actual bodily harm to Jo Crinyion.
He had pleaded not guilty.
Prosecutor Neil Tyrell said Mitchell struck her when she tried to pull her boyfriend away from him.
James Clarke, defending, claimed there was a lot of confusion and Mitchell did not intend any harm.
He said Mitchell would appeal.
Mitchell was conditionally discharged for 12 months and ordered to pay £180 compensation and £85 costs.