

Hidden history
THE story of St Winifred, who give her name to the holy well of Holywell, is given a new twist in the first programme in a new television series, Home Ground, to be screened by HTV weekly from next Tuesday.
The basic tale of how young Winifred Gwenffrwd, was attacked and beheaded by her thwarted assailant only to be revived by her uncle, St Beuno, is one of the better known legends of ancient Wales.
The water that formed the well sprang up at the spot.
Later, she became a nun and abbess of Gwytherin, where, in 1698, the historian Edward Llhuyd claimed to have discovered the remains of her shrine.
Gwytherin became a place of pilgrimage to followers of her cult.
Llhuyd paid a shilling to the verger for a portion of it, for it seems it had long been the practice to saw off portions of it to sell to pilgrims probably an early example of Welsh private enterprise.
The story might have ended there, as, for many years, there had been no trace of any reliquaries of the 6th century Celtic saint.
Until that is, a local man, Tristan Grey Hulse, of Bontnewydd, went searching, with permission given with a chuckle by the priest, through an old cupboard at St Winifred's Church.
It had been almost the unofficial waste basket papers were dumped there to be kept but no one had been through it carefully for perhaps a century.
After four hours of diligent searching, he found a small parcel which looked rather like a discarded packet of sandwiches.
Inside was a small piece of wood.
There was some old, spidery writing on the outside covering.
Was this, he wondered, part of the missing shrine?
There was evidence of rivets in it and an X-ray revealed traces of a metal covering, which confirmed to experts that it might well have come from the gable end of just such a shrine, and that it could well have been the piece described by the father of Welsh historical research.
For the record, the darkened piece of centuries-old wood that is a link with a 1,400-year-old cult is now kept in a safe.
Historical research of another kind is explained by Hafina Clwyd, of Ruthin, an acknowledged expert on family history, in another short item.
Half a dozen programmes in the series are being produced and directed by Medwen Roberts of Mold-based Ffilmiau Hiraethog, one of the few independent producers in Clwyd.
Facilities at Theatr Clwyd, are being used for editing.
Golfer's waiting-game win
IT'S never too late to achieve an ambition and Gerry Perks, 64, has just proved the point.
At the sixth attempt Mr Perks, from Llanddaniel, Anglesey, has won the Welsh Seniors' Golf Championship which is staged annually at Aberdovey Golf Club.
The retired menswear representative did it in style, winning by five shots with rounds of 76 and 73 and beating 149 other players.
Mr Perks, who plays off a handicap of five, is a member of Baron Hill Golf Club, Beaumaris.
He took up the game about 30 years ago.
‘I feel absolutely chuffed about winning.
It really is a dream come true.
It's like winning an open championship but at senior level.
‘I have won age-group medals at the championship before, but this overall title was always my aim.’
Gerry Perks, Welsh Seniors' golf champion at the sixth attempt Picture: GERALLT LLEWELYN
Pa excellence
The best dads on Merseyside
WHAT marvellous Merseyside dads there are.
We asked you to tell us why your dad was Top of the Pops and you kept those letters pouring in.
We chose the following three dads as the winners of our Top of the Pops Competition because they either warmed our hearts or made us laugh.
Each dad will receive a £100 goodie bag from Marks and Spencer.
JANET TANSLEY spoke to them all.
Love a duck
A DUCK Race, organised by a group of members, made £220 for the building fund of the Welsh Congregational Chapel, Newtown.
THANK you for such a fascinating glimpse at some of the features of Liverpool life in years past and some of the historic Echo stories of the past.
Your recollections will no doubt revive a lot of memories for many of our older readers and provide quite a few talking points for younger ones.
Do any other readers have interesting memories of the old Echo?
Plain sailing hope for regatta
SOME of the world's best known yachting personalities will visit Pwllheli during this year's Celtic/ISORA Regatta Week, between June 28 and July 4.
Visiting the town on Wednesday, June 30 the day is sponsored by Nuclear Electric will be Chay Blyth, well-known skipper and organiser of the British Steel Round the World Yacht Challenge.
Skippering two of the boats taking part in the Ultra 30s Series, a new spectator-friendly sailing event on July 3 and 4, will be Laurie Smith and Ossie Stewart, bronze medallists at the 1992 Barcelona Olympics.
Pwllheli's Richard Tudor, one of the skippers in the British Steel Challenge, will also be there for most of the week, giving his expert opinion on local sailing conditions and recalling his recent globe-spanning experiences.
During the weekend the Tremadog Bay area will also host the J24 Northern and Contenders Open Championships, making the bay the busiest sailing stretch of water in the British Isles.
All three sailing clubs in the region Madoc Yacht Club at Porthmadog, Pwllheli Yacht Club and the South Caernarfonshire Yacht Club at Abersoch are co-operating in the organisation, in an attempt to develop the enormous potential that Tremadog Bay holds.
Set The Fashion takes Trophy back to Palace
THE QUEEN retained one of her favourite awards when Set The Fashion won the Brighton Mile Challenge Trophy yesterday.
Talent won the race in the royal colours last year and Her Majesty was impressed with the trophy a gold embossed casket, inset with pictures of the Royal Calcutta Racecourse.
The trophy was even cleaned up and refurbished before being returned to the course for the race.
Trainer Lord Huntingdon said: ‘The Queen so wanted to win the race again that we originally had two in it, but we took Piquant out and relied on Set The Fashion.
‘There is a lot of history about the trophy which fascinated her.’
Supporters of the 7–2 favourite had a 20-minute wait before the stewards confirmed the result.
An inquiry was held into two incidents of possible interference at about the three furlong marker.
The stewards were satisfied that both were accidental and the prized trophy was on its way back to Buckingham Palace on the eve of Royal Ascot.
Sugar tells of family's terror
By Ian Chadband and Mike Taylor
SPURS chairman Alan Sugar said yesterday that his family had been terrified by the hate campaign surrounding his legal battle with Terry Venables.
Mr Sugar revealed that at one point one of his children had tried to persuade him to ‘throw in the towel’.
He told a news conference at the club's White Hart Lane ground: ‘I've been threatened, spat on, chased after and have been called all the names under the sun.
‘When I got home on the evening that it was announced Terry Venables had taken out an injunction, one of my children was very nervous and said ‘Why don't you throw in the towel?
It's not worth the aggravation’.
‘But within half-an-hour we were firing on all cylinders again.’
Mr Sugar called the news conference after a judge had accepted his ‘unreserved’ apology for contempt of court during the High Court battle.
The judge said Mr Sugar had been ‘sufficiently scarred’ by the vilification and abuse of Spurs fans outside the court.
Backing
Mr Venables also held a news conference yesterday at which he vowed again that he would continue his fight to wrest control of the club from Mr Sugar.
Mr Venables said he had full but anonymous financial backing.
Yesterday, Mr Sugar claimed that Mr Venables could face a bill of £800,000 if he failed in the court battle for the club.
This action is due back in the High Court in October.
Mr Sugar said he would be applying for a ‘security of costs’ ruling from the courts to force Mr Venables to prove he could afford to pay costs of this order.
Mr Sugar also claimed that Mr Venables had told him before he was sacked as chief executive last month that he was prepared to embark on a ‘suicide mission’, even if it meant he finished up broke.
Outlining the depth of the campaign of abuse aimed at him, Mr Sugar said: ‘I've had to have security guards outside my house, which has been daubed.
‘And some illiterates even scraped my name on the bonnet of my car, alongside some expletives.’
The Spurs chairman added: ‘They spelled Sugar with an ‘e’.’
Alan Sugar
By Peter Grant
RAY Gosling sips from a glass of beer at a preview cinema in London.
He pauses when asked a question.
He pushes a hand through his hair, and pauses once more.
Then, as if something amusing has suddenly hit him, he smiles.
He is ready to talk.
Pauses are important to Nottingham-born Ray.
They work so well in most of his sharp, documentary-style insights on the telly.
His latest series is probably his best yet and will make many people stop and think about their own lives and relationships.
Adultery (BBC2, 9.45pm, tonight) is compulsive viewing.
While Lady Chatterley outrages viewers on BBC1, and Carlton Television invest in a major three-part drama called A Woman's Guide to Adultery (to be screened in the autumn) Ray has pulled off a major scoop now.
His stars are real, the issues are real and, yes, the pauses those emotional, heart-felt mental delays when people open up for the cameras they, too, are so very, very real.
Ray, one of this country's best all-round broadcasters, is at his best listening to individuals.
And here he asks the victims and the adulterers searching questions in a voice that can't fail to get results.
‘The most amazing part of the series for me was discovering that marriage is still very popular,’ he says, shaking his head.
‘Whatever people have been through, they are still looking for that perfect one-to-one relationship.’
And Ray praises highly the many people from across the country who agreed to take part in the four-part series.
‘I went on a nationwide tour of radio stations and did the same on Merseyside during Radio City's Pete Price show.
I wanted to hear from people who were prepared to talk about adultery with stories that would work on television.
The response was fantastic.
‘One lady called Claudette Jones is in tonight's opener.
She is a strong woman and offers another angle, another viewpoint.
‘But all the people who took part were very, very brave and I have nothing but admiration for them all.
This is THEIR series.
‘It takes a lot of courage to confront these issues; to ask yourself things you would rather not know the answers to.
It's exceptionally courageous to share that knowledge,’ adds Ray.
Each of the 40-minute films has its own theme, starting with Breaking Up, followed by Second Time Around, then Revenge and the final episode Coming To Terms.
Claudette, from Liverpool 15, believes she was 75 per cent to blame for the breakdown of her marriage, but couldn't forgive her husband of 21 years for his adultery.
Ray is filmed in Liverpool visiting Claudette at her home, where there is little time for pauses: She talks very frankly about herself.
‘The one and only thing you share ultimately together is sex and if you step outside your marriage you are sharing that one ultimate thing with another body another person,’ Claudette tells him.
Lady Sarah Graham Moon took Revenge on her baronet husband Sir Peter Moon for his affair with a younger woman who lived nearby.
Lady Sarah, who also attended the launch, made news headlines for distributing the contents of her hubby's exclusive wine cellar around the village in Berkshire where they lived.
Neighbours received bottles on their doorsteps.
She also covered his car with litres of white paint and shortened one sleeve on each of his expensive suits!
No ‘arm done, squire but there was bitterness!
‘I didn't think he was into women,’ she reveals.
‘He was not a womaniser; he didn't have a lot of confidence as far as women were concerned.
‘But he WAS going to get what I really, deeply wanted myself the excitement of first being in love.
‘If I had had a gun I would have killed him…’
Pause for thought, indeed…
‘Super Phil’ is Postie of the Year
THE POSTMAN never has to ring twice at the home of Patricia Parsons he is her most welcome visitor of the day.
Phil Bellto, 46, not only reads the post to the blind former civil servant, but even takes her washing around to the launderette.
He was named Postie of the Year yesterday, winning a £1,000 travel voucher in a competition organised by BBC Radio Two and the Royal Mail.
Phil, from Paddington, West London, who has been a postman for 20 years, also wins £1,000 for his sorting office.
Miss Parsons said: ‘People call our postman Super Phil.
Apart from helping read my mail, taking my letters to the Post Office and even giving me weather reports, he is always cheerful.
His favourite phrase is ‘It's a pleasure’.’
Royal Mail managing director Peter Howarth said: ‘Phil epitomises the community commitment which our post men and women bring to their work.’
Story of the greatest
FORMER boxing champion Muhammad Ali, left, arrived in Britain yesterday to see his life story unfold on stage.
He will attend a charity performance of Ali tonight, at London's Mermaid Theatre, and meet some of Britain's sporting heroes, including Frank Bruno and old adversary Henry Cooper.
Boxing's least modest ambassador is played by American actor Geoffrey C Ewing, right, who was taught Ali's fancy footwork by his old sparring partner, Ron Lipton.
Palm out
GREAT Palm misses the Prince of Wales's Stakes at Ascot after meeting with a slight setback.
‘It's nothing serious, but he's just not right and will have to miss Ascot,’ said trainer Paul Cole's assistant, Rupert Arnold.
Local lore
ANYONE interested in local history can take part in a guided tour around Neston Park this evening.
The boundaries of the medieval deer park, which gave the village its name, will be examined.
Walkers should meet at the Old Quay pub car park at 7pm.
Strong stuff
TWO of TV's Gladiators will be signing autographs in the Port Arcades, Ellesmere Port, on August 25.
The super-fit stars of the popular show will be visiting Allsports.
Olazabal votes for Europe in US Open
Great American dream
MASTER CLASS…
Nick Faldo and caddie
Fanny Sunesson during US Open practice
JOSE MARIA OLAZABAL, still arguably the best player in the world without a major title to his name, today radiated confidence about European prospects in the US Open at Baltusrol.
The dashing Spaniard, who has struggled to recapture peak form since his narrow Masters defeat by Ian Woosnam two years ago, genuinely believes that one of the 10-strong European contingent can strike gold on Sunday night.
Olazabal's dislike of US Open courses and their preparation is well-known, but he said today: ‘This course offers us much more hope than in previous years.’
Encouragement
The 27-year-old Spaniard, who has won twice on the US Tour in the past, added: ‘The rough is still too high for my liking, but is not set up as difficult as I've seen US Open courses.
‘We should do well this time it will suit some of our players better.’
That said, Olazabal offered little encouragement that he is finally ready to drop the tag of ‘the great pretender’ and capture the major championship that his enormous talents deserve.
‘I worked hard on my whole game last week at home, but it's not as good as I would have liked it to be.’
Olazabal's compatriot Sevvy Ballesteros, who has fallen upon hard times after 68 tournament victories worldwide, said: ‘The US Open is not my type of golf course, but I try to do my best and see what happens.’
Nick Faldo is confident after a back-breaking weekend, in which he played the nearby Pine Valley course and completed two full rounds at Baltusrol.
He revealed: ‘On Sunday, I spent three hours alone working on my putting.’
Now Faldo and his European colleagues can only wait and see if the hard work and application pays off at the weekend.
Lawnswood goes nap at Edinburgh
LAWNSWOOD Junior confirmed his liking for Edinburgh when he registered a fifth course success in yesterday's Levy Board Handicap.
In-form jockey Kevin Darley sent Lawnswood Junior past Thornton Gate a furlong out, and he held on well from the latter's renewed challenge and the late flourish of Routing.
Owner Graham Treglown said: ‘The horse is brilliant around here, and is definitely improving.
Apart from his wins, he has run here on three other occasions and was second each time.’
Not every horse handles the tight bends of the Musselburgh circuit so well, and Claire Balding was lucky to get away without serious injury after Dusky Duchess lost her back legs and came down.
It is just as well that Plainsong seemed to take to the track on her debut in the Fillies' Maiden she was aimed at the race because owner Peter Innes was a steward at the meeting.
Trainer Denys Smith said: ‘She has always done her job nicely at home, and she will improve for that, and get further.’
Apprentice Ollie Pears continued his fine progress with a double, courtesy of Our Aisling and Call Me I'm Blue.
Our Aisling, two months in foal to Efisio, romped home by six lengths under top weight in the Millerhill Handicap, while Call Me I'm Blue became the fifth favourite to oblige in the Tranent Handicap.
Laurel Queen took her career score to 17 from 45 outings in the claimer, trainer Jack Berry shrugging: ‘She is not bad in this sort of company, but is a bit moody and never the same two days in a row.’
She may put her reputation for unreliability on the line at Ayr on Friday.
Cyclist Chris launches clinic
OLYMPIC gold medallist Chris Boardman used a bit of pedal power to launch a new Merseyside surgery.
The ace cyclist went along to the Glover's Lane Surgery in Netherton to start a week of Health Promotion events.
Patients at the new surgery tested their fitness against Chris in a Better than Boardman exercise bike challenge.
The surgery is a new base for five doctors who have moved out of the adjacent Netherton Health Centre.
It will run a sports injury clinic and counselling on stress, bereavement and tranquilliser addiction as well as the usual GP services.
Health visitors and district nurses will also be on site.
Chris Boardman has warned youngsters to kick the drugs habit and find another way of getting ‘high.’
He spoke at the launch of a new antidrugs campaign in Wirral.
The poster is a joint initiative between Wirral Drug Prevention Team and the Mersey Regional Health Authority.
Snooker ace John Parrott and soccer stars from Tranmere Rovers were featured in previous poster campaigns.
Pedal power…
Chris has his pulse checked by Dr Sarah Johnstone
Party games
‘DESPITE my feelings on Europe, the party must have no musical chairs.
We have got the right Prime Minister and he must lead us into the next election.’
Baroness Thatcher.
‘The country is led by a Prime Minister who is a cross between Mr Pastry and Eddie the Eagle.’
Labour MP Tony Banks.
‘Terry Venables has put me through hell.’
Amstrad boss Alan Sugar.
‘If Sugar so much as points a finger in our direction, I'll snap it off.’
West Brom chairman Trevor Summers worried that Sugar now may move for Hawthorns manager Ossie Ardilles.
‘One of the wonderful things when we go out together is all heads turn towards her and I'm the sideshow.’
Hollywood tough guy Arnold Schwarzenegger admitting he is constantly upstaged by his wife Maria Shriver.
‘It was a nightmare.’
EastEnders star June Brown, alias Dot Cotton, who had costumes and jewellery stolen from her car in Bristol on Saturday.
Alan Sugar
Ship ahoy:
The Soren Larson, the sailing ship that starred in The Onedin Line, is in Liverpool for a week-long stay.
It is moored by the Maritime Museum and will be open to the public.
Airman service: Flight Lieutenant Stephen McNally, 27, of Wirral, one of nine airmen killed when an RAF Hercules plane crashed into the Scottish highlands, was being buried with full military honours this afternoon.
On hold: Ministers have told West Derby MP Bob Wareing that a decision on Merseyside's bid for a billion pound Euro cash bonanza is not expected soon.
Fab news: Beatles Story boss Mike Byrne, 50, expects his Fab Four show at the Albert Dock to make a profit this year, for the first time.
Pavarotti quitting rumour ‘rubbish’
By Daily Post Correspondent
ITALY'S heavyweight opera star Luciano Pavarotti yesterday dismissed reports that he plans to quit opera to concentrate on recitals.
‘Leave the opera?
That's rubbish,’ the 57-year-old tenor said at his home near the northern Italian town of Modena.
‘I'm in good shape and I will sing for as long as I have the strength to do so,’ he added.
Pavarotti's manager, Herbert Breslin, was quoted by New Yorker magazine as saying the singer would leave opera in a year or two.
Yesterday, Pavarotti insisted: ‘His words have probably been distorted by the Press.’
But in an interview with the Corriere della Sera newspaper he acknowledged he nearly retired after a miserable year in 1992.
‘The state of my health and my voice last year were making me think seriously of my pension,’ he said.
But after losing weight and boosting his morale with several good performances he changed his mind.
‘I feel like a lion now,’ he said.
Pavarotti told the paper he had obligations up to 1996 which he wanted to fulfil.
He also plans to return to Milan's La Scala opera house where he was jeered last December for missing a note during a performance of Verdi's ‘Don Carlos.’
‘I missed a simple note and if it had been anyone else, nobody would have batted an eyelid,’ he said.
‘Still, I intend to go back there as soon as possible, hopefully this time to be applauded.’
Opera lover: Pavarotti
Zafonic to miss Ascot
THE British climate has robbed Royal Ascot of its biggest draw.
French superstar Zafonic was pulled out of the St James's Palace Stakes when owner Prince Khalid Abdulla decided not to risk him on the rain-softened surface.
Zafonic, who shattered the course record to win the 2,000 Guineas on fast ground, is not at his best on soft.
He suffered his only defeat at the hands of Kingmambo in the mud at Maisons-Laffitte in April.
The Prince's racing manager, Grant Pritchard-Gordon, said: ‘He has run three times on soft and each run has proved conclusively that he doesn't like it.’
Zafonic may have run his last race in Britain.
He is now likely to be off the track until Deauville in mid-August, followed by a tilt at the Breeders' Cup.
My promotion dream-Swain
KENNY SWAIN, Wigan Athletic's new manager, issued a firm message today: ‘The only way is up.’
But his first job is to assemble a side before attempting to win promotion at the first attempt.
Birkenhead-born Swain, who tasted life at the top as a player with Chelsea, Nottingham Forest and Aston Villa, said: ‘Relegation is a terrible feeling for everyone involved and it won't go away until the first game of the season.
‘Obviously you can't build a side overnight.
But if I get the right sort of backing I'm sure we can turn things round.
The number one objective is to get promotion.
Time for assessment
‘I intend doing it my own way but I won't be rocking the boat.
I've got lots of videos and I'll be doing a crash course over the next few weeks to assess strengths and weaknesses.’
Swain, previously number two to Dario Gradi at Crewe, has been told money is available to strengthen the squad.
He is also due to have discussions with five out-of-contract players.
He said: ‘I have been waiting for the last three years for an opportunity like this and I see it as the right time in my career to take it.
Attractive soccer
‘I want my team to play good entertaining football with a bit of steel in it.
I've already been asked why on earth I'm taking this job in a rugby town.
‘But there is plenty of scope for drawing the crowds if we produce the right brand of football and the results.’
Wigan chairman Stephen Gage said: ‘Kenny is a very ambitious young man and I'm confident we are set fair for a good recovery.’
KENNY SWAIN…confidence
YOU can get a fuller forecast of what the stars have in store for YOU today by calling Russell's Horoscope Hotline for YOUR Starsign.
Each call costs 36p a minute cheap rate, and 48p at other times.
You will be semi-detached from the world around you for a wee while Wednesday and all the people and places that make up your life will take on a shadowy irrelevance until you come to terms with your own innermost thoughts and feelings.
Confusion causes problems in any travel arrangements Wednesday.
Don't worry or get frustrated, you should use the days ahead to take a second look at your international or community interests.
Is there room for improvement?
Should you widen your options?
Everyday life takes a nebulous turn Wednesday and everything looks so out of sorts.
What you need is a break or a holiday so count your pennies and weigh up your chances of a few days in the sun or short spell staying with friends.
Expect everything to take longer than anticipated and you won't be disappointed by the slow pace of events and developments in the days to come.
Be positive, this could be a blessing in disguise, use the time gained wisely.
This is not a good time to rush forward and seize what looks like a golden opportunity.
Take all the time you need to mull over a plan or proposal, don't let anyone pressurise you into snap decisions.
Your part in a love affair or society needs revising and reassessing.
Time has moved on since you first started dealing with someone who has become a major influence in your life and now you need to re-work your thoughts and opinions.
A small, but far reaching change in personal habits, career practices or attitudes and approaches to life could increase your efficiency and awareness.
Take the plunge and opt for change, you'll soon begin to fell the benefits.
Just when you're looking forward to pushing the boat out and having a spending spree, your sensible side reminds you of all the practical and prudent things you should be doing with any extra money you have.
You might find you've one too many problems to handle at the moment and a final hassle or irritation will be the straw that breaks the camel's back.
You could run a mile, but you're too disciplined and responsible for that.
Wednesday's a rather muddled time when people and events force you to rethink certain situations and change one or two recent decisions.
Be gentle when handling children or a partner who can't understand that you need time to get your act together.
You get another warning to pull your horns in and cut unnecessary spending Wednesday.
If you carry on spending money like it's going out of style you'll end up in debt with a mass of interest to pay off.
If you can find the time amidst the hustle and bustle of modern life to simply sit and enjoy your own company, you'll be granted a rare insight into what's vital for your happiness and fulfilment.
Don't miss this chance to decide what you want from life.
Long mundane months of boredom could make this a dull and tedious year, so make sure you take the initiative and fill your life with exciting and interesting things.
Ex-boxing champ on assault charge
FORMER world boxing champion Paul Hodkinson appeared before a court yesterday charged with a nightclub assault.
The 27-year-old ex-featherweight title holder known as Hoko, is accused of assaulting Paul Richards in the Paradox nightclub, Aintree, on February 6.
Crown
Hodkinson spoke only once during the hearing before magistrates at Bootle near Liverpool, giving his address as Beattock Close, Melling, Merseyside.
He lost his World Boxing Council crown to Mexican Goyo Vargas in Dublin two months ago.
His solicitor, David Watson, applied for a two week adjournment and Hodkinson was remanded on unconditional bail until June 29.
Reporting restrictions were not lifted.
Paul Hodkinson arrives in court with his wife
Tenby had bit of a problem
HENRY CECIL, trainer of Tenby, has offered a possible explanation for the Derby favourite's Epsom flop.
Speculation that the colt was ‘got at’ before he trailed in 10th behind stable-mate Commander In Chief was ended when the Jockey Club announced that a dope test proved negative.
And Cecil now suggests that Tenby may have been short of oxygen because his tongue was over his bit.
‘Tenby's tongue was hanging out and there is a possibility that it may have got over his bit,’ said the Newmarket trainer.
‘When this happens it can stop the oxygen supply.
This may have been the reason for his poor showing.’
Tenby may reappear in the Coral Eclipse Stakes at Sandown next month.
Motor racing mourning its golden boy
James Hunt, a champion and gentleman, dies at 45
By John von Radowitz and Michael Harvey
THE world of motor racing was mourning one of its greatest champions last night after the sudden death from a heart attack of British former world champion James Hunt.
The golden boy of the sport during the 1970s died in bed at his semi-detached home in Wimbledon, southwest London, on Monday night.
He was just 45.
Hunt found fame and fortune in the glamorous world of Grand Prix culminating in his Formula One world championship victory in 1976 before settling down to a more sedate career as a BBC TV commentator.
But despite the vast amounts he earned in his career, Hunt was reportedly penniless at the time of his death.
He had apparently lost his fortune through business failures and was claiming legal aid in an action over his 1990 divorce from his second wife Sarah.
But his younger brother, David, 33, said reports of financial problems were exaggerated.
‘I spoke to him last month and he was laughing about it.’
His sudden death shocked the world of Formula One racing, where he remained an extremely popular figure.
McLaren International, the racing team for whom he drove in his championship-winning season, said in a statement: ‘He was a gentleman and a great champion.’
Hunt, born in Surrey in 1947, excelled at sports at his public school, Wellington College, playing tennis at junior Wimbledon.
He was heading for a career in medicine when, at the age of 18, he saw his first motor race.
He retired at 31 in 1979.
He had competed in 92 Grand Prix, winning 10.
After his retirement, media interest focused almost exclusively on a string of glamorous relationships.
He was married for 18 months to former model Susie Miller but they separated in 1976.
Hunt lived for a time as a tax exile in Marbella, sharing an estate with another ex model, Jane ‘Hottie’ Birbeck.
He married Sarah Lomax in 1983 and the couple had two sons, Tom and Freddie, seven and five.
In recent years, Hunt had become better known for his highly successful double-act with commentator Murray Walker for the BBC coverage of Grand Prix.
Hunt's laconic expertise provided a perfect counterpoint to Walker's high-octane delivery.
Walker said: ‘What James Hunt was to me was what he was to any Grand Prix enthusiast the world over a chap with enormous experience and gigantic expertise.’
At the time of his death he was living with his 26-year-old girlfriend, Helen Dyson.
He was using an elderly Austin A35 van to ferry himself and his sons around London.
The glamour man James Hunt with Jane ‘Hottie’ Birbeck in 1980
Cricketer Ian's on a sticky wicket
ONE-legged cricketer Ian Harris has been stumped by umpires who have banned him from having a runner to sprint his singles.
The 22-year-old all rounder, who has an artificial leg following a farm tractor accident, has played village cricket for five years.
Rival skippers have always agreed that Ian, who plays for Veryan, near Truro, Cornwall, could bat with a runner because he is only able to walk.
Game
But this season he has played for Veryan's first team in a division which has qualified umpires.
The Cornwall Umpires Association says MCC laws only allow runners if a player is injured during a game.
‘I can still play, but I will have to score fours and sixes,’ said Ian.
Gerald Penberthy, of the CUA, said the cricket league secretary had raised the matter.
He described it as an ‘unfortunate incident’ which could be solved by the introduction of a new rule at the league's annual meeting.
Is Raine potty?
THE more you learn about Raine Spencer the more you goggle.
It seems that, while she was married to Earl Spencer, she regularly had her lunch and her tea in one of her silk and antique negligees, gave orders that because the noise might disturb her, no-one should flush the loo before noon when she got up, and was forever tracing her finger around the furniture to make sure the servants had dusted properly.
But did she really use a potty at night, keeping it in a cupboard by her bed?
Elizabeth to take crown in Coronation
THE FRENCH always make a big mark from the catwalk at Royal Ascot but this year their horses also look set to enjoy a couple of cakewalks on the racecourse itself.
Elizabeth Bay is fancied to bounce back to form in the £135,000 Coronation Stakes at the Royal meeting tomorrow.
She ran as though she was wearing high heels when a terrible flop on her last visit to Britain, having been made hot favourite for the 1,000 Guineas won by Sayyedati.
Unbeaten in two starts as a juvenile, Elizabeth Bay had been ridiculously unlucky to be beaten on her reappearance in the Prix Imprudence at Maisons- Laffitte a race apparently named in honour of Thierry Jarnet's riding tactics.
Though having to go via Le Touquet, Biarritz and the French Congo when hampered two furlongs out, Elizabeth Bay finished so strongly that she was beaten only a couple of lengths by Wixon.
Michael Roberts was duly entrusted with the steering in the Newmarket Classic, but his mount was never going well and trailed in eighth.
Something was clearly wrong with the Mr Prospector filly, and maybe not just the faster ground.
Either way, she will relish a return to a soft surface here, and it could well pay to forgive her single lapse.
Sixth in the Guineas was Lyric Fantasy, now hot favourite for the King's Stand Stakes on Friday.
Lyric Fantasy burst onto the scene in last year's Queen Mary Stakes, and her stablemates Pommes Frites and Risky bid to follow up this time round.
Risky looks the pick on form but suffered a harder race than ideal at Sandown last time, and it may be worth taking a chance with Snipe Hall a real pork pie among the caviar here from the minor league stable of Melton Mowbray trainer John Wharton.
Snipe Hall is unbeaten in three starts, including a Windsor clash with Pommes Frites.
Half Term, halfbrother to the 1987 St James's Palace Stakes winner Half A Year, rates a bet and a half in the Jersey Stakes.
He has looked a tremendous prospect on both starts to date, and will relish the extra furlong here.
Another sure to improve for being stepped up in trip is Saint Keyne, who bolted up at Haydock last time and now goes for the Queen's Vase.
Blackpatch Hill will be all the rage for the Bessborough Handicap whatever his price.
And Sand Table gives every indication that his trainer has laid him out with the Royal Hunt Cup in mind.
MPs call for fresh Aintree probe
By David Rose Political Editor
BRITAIN'S new racing chiefs are under pressure to order a fresh probe into who really was to blame for the Grand National fiasco.
Merseyside Labour MPs yesterday accused the Jockey Club of ‘class bias’ and ‘elitism’in pinning most of the blame on the £5-a-race flagman.
They called on the newly-formed British Horseracing Board to ‘demonstrate its own independence’ by carrying out its own inquiry ‘on more egalitarian lines’.
A Jockey Club inquiry rejected the claims of 57-year-old Ken Evans Aintree recall man for the past seven years that he waved his red flag to stop riders in the two false starts.
But Merseyside Labour MPs denounced the verdict as further evidence of the elitist nature of the horseracing hierarchy.
‘Millions of people witnessed on their television screens the role of Captain Keith Brown in signalling two false starts,’ they said in a Commons motion.
Captain Brown was the starter and Mr Evans of Bryn, near Wigan, acted under his orders.
The MPs said the horseracing authorities should modernise their procedures and act ‘in a less class biased fashion in attributing blame for these events’.
The motion was tabled by Bob Wareing, MP for Liverpool West Derby, and backed by Frank Field (Birkenhead), Peter Kilfoyle (Liverpool Walton) Eddie O'Hara (Knowsley South), Andrew Miller (Ellesmere Port and Neston), Gerry Bermingham (St Helens South), John Evans (St Helens North) and George Howarth (Knowlsey North).
Mr Wareing said: ‘I was outraged when I heard of the decision to condemn this poor fellow who earns £28 a day and is bereft of a bowler, which I think coloured the views of the Jockey Club.’
Hardy fighting for right to face Hoko
BILLY HARDY is hot on the trail of former world featherweight champion Paul Hodkinson.
Sunderland's value-for-money fighter is the leading contender for European title and if Hodkinson beats Italy's reigning EBU champion Maurizio Stecca this autumn, Hardy will qualify to challenge the Liverpudlian by right.
It is the kind of high profile chance Hardy has been seeking ever since bravely losing two IBF bantam weight tilts to the formidable Texan Orlando Canizales in 1990 and 1991.
And that is the reason why a slip-up by the determined Hardy against Mexico's Angel Fernandez at the Dacorum Pavilion, Hemel Hempstead, tonight would be unthinkable.
‘This is a ticking over fight for Billy.
We want to keep him busy while we are waiting to see what happens with Hodkinson and the European title,’ said Hardy's manager, Dennie Mancini.
The European Boxing Union have placed a September 10 deadline for the Hodkinson Stecca promotional negotiations.
Commonwealth champion Hardy will be fighting some 300 miles away from home and the major support will be noisily reserved for local fighting man Billy Schwer, the former British lightweight title holder on his comeback.
Schwer, 24, is bidding to reroute his career back to championship status against rugged Frenchman Farid Benredjeb, in his first outing since losing his crowns to Paul Burke in February.
Schwer saw his unbeaten record slip away on cuts, although Burke fought splendidly on the way to an upset victory.
‘I learned so much about myself and the people around me during and after that setback,’ said Schwer.
‘Although it was horrible to lose my titles, I look back at that fight as a great experience.’
Benredjeb gave former WBC champion Hodkinson a few problems before being stopped in the eighth round of a European featherweight title challenge in December 1989.
Paul Hodkinson…challenge
Champ Sean opts out
THE British Professional road race championship which rounds off the 1993 Isle of Man International Cycling Week (June 20–27) will produce a new champion.
Champion Sean Yates misses the race on June 27.
Notable entries from abroad include American-based Malcolm Elliott and climbing specialist Robert Miller.
The pro title race covers one lap of the TT course (37 miles) before riders tackle 12 laps of a seven-mile circuit.
One of the favourites is Brian Smith (Banana), the 1991 champion who now lives on the Isle of Man.
He finished fifth in the Milk Race, only 37 seconds behind winner Chris Lillywhite.
A late entry for the Manx International cycle race over three laps of the TT course (113 miles) on June 25 is Conor Henry from Ireland, winner of the Milk Race in 1992.
SUGAR SORRY:
Spurs case judge accepted ‘unreserved’ apology from chairman Alan Sugar for contempt of court in allegedly trying to interfere with witness.
Player accused
NOTTINGHAM Forest goalkeeper Mark Crossley appeared in court yesterday charged with assault.
Crossley, 24, and Andrew Crossley, 25, were jointly accused of assaulting Charles Drury at Kirk Balk, Hoyland, near Barnsley, on Monday.
They were remanded on bail by Barnsley magistrates until next month.
By Jason Burt OLD soldier Bill Brownbill, 102, has been granted his dearest wish a brand new bath with help from your ECHO.
His delighted sister Florence Robson, 88, said today: ‘He's very happy although he's started grumbling about the disruption it will cause.’
World War 1 veteran Mr Brownbill has been waiting two years to see if his application for a house renovation grant would be successful.
Now Mr Brownbill, whose plight was taken up by the Echo's Champ, Bill Jackson, has been told that work will start within the next few days at his South Liverpool home.
A Liverpool City Council spokesman said: ‘He has been granted both a disabled facilities grant and mandatory renovation grant.’
Mrs Robson had contacted the Echo a few weeks ago to say that her brother's cast-iron bath was 40 years old and had not been used for 12 years.
He had applied for a grant but at the time Liverpool City Council was snowed under by applications.
Bill's was still being considered.
SAINTS OFFER SPURS WARD
ST HELENS have offered Kevin Ward, their 35-years-old ex-Great Britain prop, a new 12 month contract — despite worries about his playing future.
Ward suffered a compound fracture of the left leg in Good Friday's derby match at Wigan.
Ward almost lost the leg after developing severe complications and he is back in hospital this week for further treatment.
He said: ‘The contract offer is a marvellous gesture.
I hope to play again after Christmas but won't be rushing a comeback.
‘I feel I have another two years left and Saints are on the brink of achieving more success after their Premiership triumph.
I want to be part of any glory.’
Meanwhile Aussie coach John Dorahy will stick to the best of British to keep Wigan at the top of the Rugby League world.
Dorahy has taken over from fellow Aussie John Monie, the most successful coach in the club's history.
He said: ‘I'm relishing the opportunity to follow someone like John.
Wigan is a class act.
‘I have my goals and all I can do is set out to emulate his feats.’
Dorahy, 38, played with Leigh and Hull Kingston Rovers and also led Halifax to the Regal Trophy final as player-coach before returning to Australia as number two at Newcastle Knights.
He added: ‘The game here has improved tremendously — but I hope it doesn't move too much towards the Australian way of playing.
‘I don't intend to change Wigan's style.
They play a great entertaining game.
‘My love of English football goes back to 1973 when I was with Leigh.
‘I like the open style, which is about using the ball, and Wigan have the players of flair to accommodate that type of game.’
Dorahy, who was in the Hull KR side beaten by Castleford in the Challenge Cup final at Wembley in 1986, has signed a three year contract.
Wigan chairman Jack Robinson said: ‘John stood out like a beacon among the applicants.’
Kevin Ward…new offer
Signed on
TWO ‘Gladiators’ will be signing autographs in the Port Arcades, Ellesmere Port, on August 25.
The super-fit stars of the popular television show will be visiting ‘Allsports’.
CAB meeting MEMBERS of Ellesmere Port CAB are holding their annual general meeting this morning in Our Lady's Social Centre, Enfield Road at 11.20am.
The meeting will be attended by the Mayor and Mayoress, Coun and Mrs Tony Sherlock.
Nightclub wins award
THE Ritzy nightclub in Bromborough was awarded first place in the regional heat of the 1993 Molson British Entertainment and Discotheque Awards.
Runners-up were the Paradox club in Aintree, Liverpool and Tokyo Joe's in Preston.
Kicking off Youth Games in grand style
BRITAIN'S fastest growing sport women's soccer takes centre stage on Saturday on the opening day of the Merseyside Youth Games, whose main sponsors are Littlewood Home Shopping and Reebok.
Teams from Knowsley, Liverpool, St Helens, Sefton and Wirral will compete at under-11 and under-14 level, the first games in the Bebington Sports Centre athletics' arena kicking off at 10am.
St Helens won both age groups last year and two of the girls who starred for them then Sue Smith and Rebecca Smith will be returning with that borough's under-14 side.
In the inaugural games last year, the girls' soccer was one of the top attractions with spectators.
Games of 10 minutes each way will be played between 10am-noon and 1.30pm-3.30pm each day with the competitions, which are sponsored by Puma, switching to the back field on Sunday.
Tennis The competitions involve boys and girls in the under-12 and under-14 age groups and the first matches on the centre's main tennis courts are at 9.30 am each day.
It was won last year by Wirral.
Champions
The short tennis tournament starts indoors on Sunday, starting at 1pm.
Both are sponsored by Vauxhall.
Hockey Training for the event has already indicated that the hockey standard will be better than 12 months ago.
Matches will be of half-hour duration, with each playing the other twice over two days.
The start is at 9am each day and the competition sponsored by McDonald's.
Netball Sefton, the defending champions, will have to work hard particularly against a Wirral side.
The double round robin competition, sponsored by Littlewoods/Reebok, will be played on outdoor courts, starting at 11am on Saturday and 10am on Sunday.
Wheelchair Basketball This is a demonstration sport this year, with the aim of introducing competition between the boroughs in 12 months' time.
There will be a Littlewoods Home Shopping/ Reebok road-show at Bebington on the Saturday morning, when questions/queries about the sport will be answered by the professional staff present.
The demonstration starts in the Sports Hall at 9.30am.
Sefton girls' team captain Judy King proudly holds last year's Echo
Cup aloft
Three to put best feet forward
DAVE Buck, Chris Jones and Ian Davenport hope to raise more than £2,000 for Warrington District General Hospital's neonatal unit by doing the famous 200-mile coast to coast walk from Robin Hood's Bay, near Scarborough, to St Bee's Head, near Whitehaven, Cumbria.
Mr Buck, 32, of Newton-le-Willows, and his friends are seeking sponsorships and can be contacted on .
THE FRENCH always make a big mark from the catwalk at Royal Ascot but this year their horses also look set to enjoy a couple of cakewalks on the racecourse itself.
Elizabeth Bay is fancied to bounce back to form in the £135,000 Coronation Stakes at the Royal meeting tomorrow.
She ran as though she was wearing high heels when a terrible flop on her last visit to Britain, having been made hot favourite for the 1,000 Guineas won by Sayyedati.
Unbeaten in two starts as a juvenile, Elizabeth Bay had been ridiculously unlucky to be beaten on her reappearance in the Prix Imprudence at Maisons Laffitte.
Though having to go via Le Touquet, Biarritz and the French Congo when hampered two furlongs out, Elizabeth Bay finished so strongly that she was beaten only a couple of lengths by Wixon.
Michael Roberts was duly entrusted with the steering in the Newmarket Classic, but his mount was never going well and came eighth.
Something was clearly wrong with the Mr Prospector filly, and maybe not just the faster ground.
Either way, she will relish a return to a soft surface here.
Sixth in the Guineas was Lyric Fantasy, now hot favourite for the King's Stand Stakes on Friday.
Lyric Fantasy burst onto the scene in last year's Queen Mary Stakes, and her stablemates Pommes Frites and Risky bid to follow up this time round.
Risky looks the pick on form but suffered a harder race than ideal at Sandown last time, and it may be worth taking a chance with Snipe Hall a real pork pie among the caviar here from the minor league stable of Melton Mowbray trainer John Wharton.
Snipe Hall is unbeaten in three starts, including a Windsor clash with Pommes Frites, and may well be better than she can be strictly rated on her length win at Beverley last time.
Pembroke, who finished lame when last in the 2,000 Guineas, should better advertise his abilities in the Jersey Stakes.
Impressive in winning both starts last year, Pembroke had looked a certain winner of the Feilden Stakes on his reappearance until faltering near the end of the nine furlongs contest.
Blackpatch Hill will be all the rage for the Bessborough Handicap.
Saint Keyne, who bolted up at Haydock last time, will improve for the step up in trip for the Queen's Vase.
And Sand Table gives every indication that his trainer has laid him out with the Royal Hunt Cup in mind.
MPs demand Aintree ‘fiasco’ probe
BRITAIN'S new racing chiefs are under pressure to order a fresh probe into who really was to blame for the Grand National fiasco.
Merseyside Labour MPs yesterday accused the Jockey Club of ‘class bias’ in pinning most of the blame on the £5-a-race flagman.
They called on the newly-formed British Horseracing Board to demonstrate its independence by carrying out its own inquiry.
A Jockey Club inquiry rejected the claims of 57-year-old Ken Evans Aintree recall man for seven years that he waved his red flag to stop riders in the two false starts.
But Merseyside Labour MPs yesterday denounced the verdict which blamed Mr Evans of Wigan who they said was under the orders of the starter, Captain Keith Brown.
Bob Wareing, MP for Liverpool West Derby said: ‘I was outraged when I heard of the decision to condemn this poor fellow who earns £28 a day and is bereft of a bowler which I think coloured the views of the Jockey Club.’
MP Bob Wareing
Blast hits award-winning butcher
A BUTCHER'S shop was devastated by a gas explosion less than 24 hours after winning first prize in a national meat competition.
The explosion ripped through Callaghan's Butcher's in Maghull Square, Sefton, early yesterday morning causing about £20,000-worth of damage.
Master Butcher Howard Callaghan and shop manager Alan Dean who had picked up first prize for an impressive window display in a competition in Harrogate on Monday, spent yesterday cleaning up the mess.
Bomb squad detectives were called when initial reports suggested animal rights campaigners were responsible.
But firemen confirmed the blast at 3.42am was caused by a gas leak from a water heater.
Mr Dean, 27, said yesterday: ‘It is a total disaster.
I was telephoned at home as soon as it happened and when I arrived everyone was here, police, fire brigade, the gas board and the bomb squad.
‘Everything was in a total mess.
The entire shop front had been blown away and the ceiling was badly damaged.
‘We think the explosion has caused about £15,000 to £20,000 worth of damage but we hope to re-open for business on Friday or Saturday.’
Butcher Howard Callaghan outside the shop after the gas blast Picture: FRANK LOUGHLIN
WHERE TO FISH
With the coarse fishing season opening at a minute past midnight tonight June 16 anglers all over the region will be itching to get to their favourite waters.
Reports tend to confirm that most of the fish have completed spawning activities and seem ready to feed.
But do bear in mind the very wet weather leading up to the weekend which means rivers such as the Ribble, Wyre, Dane, Dee and mid-Wales waters such as Severn and Banwy, are going to be in a terrible state.
On canal and lakes that have not been fished since March it makes sense to take it easy.
Do not bombard the water with groundbait and feed, but begin with the ‘little and often’ approach and wait for the fishing to develop.
Remember, it is always possible to put more groundbait into the water, but impossible to take it back out!
WIN A SUPER FISHING HOLIDAY
THERE are two prize fishing holidays up for grabs in the Echo's Catch of the Season competition.
It costs nothing to enter, all we need is the support (within 3 days of capture) for use in the Echo angling columns.
Details should be telephoned to Dave Houghton on .
Sugar ‘sorry’:
Spurs chairman Alan Sugar admitted contempt of court after allegations he tried to interfere with a witness in the High Court row over control of the soccer club.
The judge accepted an ‘unreserved’ apology.
Tough test for Agassi
ANDRE AGASSI today landed a difficult opening match for the launch of his Wimbledon title defence next Monday.
The eighth seed was paired with world No 36 Bernd Karbacher — a player with a track record of giant-killing.
The 24-year-old German put out former French champion Michael Chang at the French Open and will be an awkward test for the American, who plays his first match in Halle today after eight weeks out with a wrist injury.
Top seed Pete Sampras faces Australian Neil Borwick, ranked 119 in the world.
ANDRE AGASSI will claim a slice of unwanted history if his Wimbledon defence falters at the first hurdle next Monday.
And the eighth seed's hopes of an easy Centre Court opening were dashed when he landed awkward German Bernd Karbacher, ranked 36 in the world, in today's draw.
First round defeat for Agassi would put him alongside Manuel Santana as the only returning champion to be eliminated in the first round.
The Spaniard lost 10–8 6–3 2–6 8–6 to Charlie Pasarell in 1967.
And even if Agassi survives his first test, his path to a second successive final is strewn with trip wire, with former champions Boris Becker and Michael Stich top seed Pete Sampras and powerful ninth seeded Dutchman Richard Krajicek all in his half of the draw.
However, second seed Stefan Edberg can afford a smile as he looks up from the bottom of the draw.
He shares his quarter with three seeds including projected quarter-final opponent Ivan Lendl whose games are unlikely to flourish on grass.
Although Karbacher's best results have come on clay, he still threatens to give Agassi playing his first match in Halle, Germany, today after eight weeks out of action with a wrist injury a rough ride.
The 24-year-old Bavarian already has a giant-killing reputation after knocking former champion Michael Chang out of the French Open last month.
Victory for Agassi would give him relatively straightforward second and third round matches in a section of the draw bursting with qualifiers.
But the champion has cold comfort from a scheduled fourth round clash with Krajicek and a quarter-final showdown with world No 1 Sampras, who opens against world No 119 Neil Borwick, of Australia.
The placing of Becker and Stich in the same section of the draw throws up an intriguing quarter-final clash, assuming they justify their seedings.
Steffi Graf launches the defence of her women's crown against a qualifier and should meet American Jennifer Capriati in a repeat of their Paris quarter-final clash.
Nine times former champion Martina Navratilova, who was granted her wish to be seeded second over Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, starts against Australian Michelle Jaggard-Lai.
Projected quarter-final line-ups:
(1) Pete Sampras v (8) Andre Agassi;(4) Boris Becker v (6) Michael Stich;(5) Goran Ivanisevic v (3) Jim Courier;(7) Ivan Lendl v (2) Stefan Edberg.
(1) Steffi Graf v (7) Jennifer Capriati;(3) Arantxa Sanchez-Vicario v (6) Conchita Martinez;(8) Jana Novotna v (4) Gabriela Sabatini;(5) Mary Joe Fernandez v (2) Martina Navratilova.
Moscow date for McCrory
CONTRACTS have been signed for Glenn McCrory to challenge for his former IBF cruiserweight title in Moscow.
McCrory will face reigning champion Alfred ‘Ice Man’ Cole on July 16, the Briton's advisor Dave Gregory confirmed today.
It is the first professional world title to be contested in Moscow, and will be co-promoted by the Spaniard Enrique Soria.
Where truth is a foreign word
THERE is a face that pops up on TV screens that is the most instantly dislikeable I've ever seen on the tube; a medium that sets Olympic standards in throwing up instantly dislikeable mugs.
It's that impish, freckled, cheeky chappie with a red wig and a deformed grin whose face is superimposed on a Royals' bikini or a soap star's breasts to utter five devastating words: ‘Life's better in The Sun.’
Well last Friday a man with a white wig, Lord Justice McCowan used five even more devastating words to sum up life in The Sun: ‘Sensational, inaccurate and misleading coverage.’
He was referring to the atrocious reporting in that paper and other tabloids of the trial of Michelle and Lisa Taylor.
And what, pray, was The Sun Justice would be better served if there were fewer judges from Brasenose College, Oxford, and more Sun readers from the University of Life on the Bench.’
No regret for painting the picture of a crazed sex siren instead of the balanced reporting of a tragic murder.
No, just another chance to show that if you want The Truth, you'll find it in your good old Sun.
It's the same Truth that declared 14 months ago that if John Major lost The General Election we should all emigrate.
That hounded Bobby Robson out of his job as England manager and welcomed in Graham Taylor.
The same paper that wants to take both of these traitors out now and hang them.
Yes it would be lovely to see a Sun reader from The University of Life on the Bench.
He could hang everything is sight including what his favourite paper hangs regularly: The Truth.
From scrap heap riches!
MIKE LYONS has had a change of fortune in his coaching career — literally!
The former Everton skipper, who has been out of work since January, has landed a plum job in the country of the world's richest man.
Lyons flies out to Brunei this week to take charge of the national team less than six months after being surplus to requirements at Huddersfield Town.
It is a remarkable turnaround for the ex-Blues' star, who never dreamed he would be offered such a lucrative post, having suffered so much frustration in the domestic game.
Lyons is relishing the challenge ahead, and he is determined to succeed.
He told the Echo today: ‘It all came out of the blue.
‘I'd been offered a couple of things in the league, and I could have gone to Kuwait or South Africa.
This was my best offer.’
Mike has never lost his appetite for football, although his Huddersfield experience left him disillusioned.
‘I was assistant manager there, but I wasn't under contract,’ he explained.
‘It all came to an end when the new chairman took over.
I left to cut costs.
‘Since then I've been training every day, and going on runs.
To be honest, it's been very frustrating.
‘I saw Everton more times in the last few months of last season than I have for a long time.’
And he added: ‘In the lower divisions it's just a battle.
If you're not a manager or well in with the directors it's very hard.
‘You can stay in the lower divisions in England and be out working every night, only to lose what you have when a new face comes in.
‘You seem to spend all your time grafting with no reward and you become disillusioned.
And you find you get a lot of criticism when there is no need for it.
‘The job in Brunei gives me the chance to manage rather than be in the background.’
It is also a job full of eastern promise.
He said: ‘If we do well the rewards will be good.
‘Everyone keeps saying how the Sultan of Brunei is the world's richest man.
I believe his son is quite keen on soccer, so we have to do well!
‘Obviously there will be some perks.
Danny Begara, who had the job eight years ago, was given a Mercedes, for example.’
Mike, who has been given a car and a house by his new employers, has yet to see his new surroundings, and it will certainly be a journey into the unknown.
‘I'm going there with my eyes open.
It's a great adventure for me and a big challenge.
I've done a lot of homework on what lies ahead.
‘It's going to be strange because due to the country's climate training will have to start at 6.30am.
That won't be easy, but you have to adapt.
‘I've been told the players pray five times a day — even if it means interrupting training!
‘Hopefully I can stay out there for two years or so.
I really want to be successful.’
Lyons has pulled out of next week's Veterans' World Cup in Italy to take charge of a team which competes in an Asian League as well as the Asian Cup.
The League programme starts on July 2, with an away fixture against Borneo-based Sabah, and other destinations include Jakarta, Singapore, Kuala Lumpar, Penang, Hong Kong, Bangkok, Manilla, Calcutta, Peking, Seoul and Japan.
Lyons added: ‘This proves that football does not start and end in England, which is what most of us think in this country.
‘The game is played worldwide, and my objective is to make Brunei successful in that part of the world.’
Regulations allow Mike, who will work with an English commercial manager, to field three foreigners.
But although his selected trio — Northwich Victoria's Liverpool-born defender Jeff Parker, Warrington Town utility man Paul McNally and Northern Ireland Under-21 midfielder Norman Kelly may not be household names, he is convinced they are the right choice.
He said: ‘I've studied the PFA list for players available.
It is bigger than ever this year.
‘I must have spent the last week talking to hundreds of players.
‘Northwich have been excellent with me.
Jeff was voted their Player of the Year last season, but they've let me have him for six months.
I'm very grateful to them.
‘I need lads who had no ties, and who had the right character.
‘The lads I'm taking with me will ensure there is a British influence and a British type of discipline throughout the side.’
But Mike won't be losing touch with his beloved Everton: ‘I'll still get the Football Echo sent out to me, so I can keep in touch with Everton.
I have to do that!’
AGASSI THREAT
By Nick Robinson
ANDRE AGASSI today landed a difficult opening match for the launch of his Wimbledon title defence next Monday.
The eighth seed was paired with world No 36 Bernd Karbacher in the draw a player with a track record of giant-killing already this year.
The 24-year-old German put out former French champion Michael Chang at the French Open last month and will be an awkward test for the American who plays his first match in Halle today after eight weeks out of action with a wrist injury.
Top seed Pete Sampras projected quarter-final opponent for Agassi has an easier first round match against Australian Neil Borwick, ranked 119 in the world.
Former champions Boris Becker and Michael Stich are on collision course for a quarter-final showdown a repeat of their 1991 final and their Stella Artois clash last week, both of which Stich won.
And Becker could hardly have landed a more dangerous floater with a first round match against compatriot Marc Goellner who, along with Karbacher, is part of the new wave of top German players.
The powerful Goellner, 6ft 5in, put out Petr Korda in Paris last month to help boost his ranking to 34, but showed at Queen's last week that he has a game for grass.
Sixth seed Stich opens against Dutchman Jan Siemerink.
Goran Ivanisevic, last year's beaten finalist, starts against Jonathan Stark an American who failed to win on his only Wimbledon appearance 12 months ago.
The giant Croat, seeded five, is scheduled to meet deposed world No 1 Jim Courier, the third seed for a place in the last eight.
The American, who crashed to Russian qualifier Andrei Olhovskiy in last year's third round, should have a straightforward opening match against Italian Gianluca Pozzi.
Twice former champion Stefan Edberg is in the easiest quarter of the draw.
The three other seeds in his section Ivan Lendl, Andrei Medvedev and Thomas Muster all have games better suited to slower surfaces.
The London-based Swede, champion in 1988 and 1990, launches his hat-trick bid against a qualifier and would face either another qualifier or Israeli claycourter Amos Mansdorf in the second round.
Britain's Jeremy Bates, who memorably reached the fourth round 12 months ago, has an encouraging first round match against another clay court specialist, Javier Frana, Argentina's world No 87.
British No 2 Chris Wilkinson, conqueror of Ivanisevic at Queen's last week, also has a chance to make progress after drawing another Argentine, Daniel Orsanic, the late replacement for French Open champion Sergi Bruguera who pulled out complaining of exhaustion.
Andre Agassi tough opener
Hands off Ossie warn West Brom
THE scramble for the Spurs manager's job has already sparked a furious row with West Bromwich Albion issuing a ‘hands off Ossie Ardiles’ warning.
Ardiles is believed to be top of Spurs chairman Alan Sugar's wanted list to take over as manager and is expected to fly back from a holiday in Argentina to discuss a possible move later this week.
Yesterday's High Court decision not to have Terry Venables reinstated as Tottenham's chief executive prompted an angry attack on Sugar by Albion chairman Trevor Summers who fears Spurs may move to entice Ardiles to White Hart Lane.
Summers was quoted in national newspapers as saying: ‘If Sugar thinks we are a run of the mill first division club, he is in for a big shock.
‘He is in for one hell of a battle and we will take him all the way to court if we have to.’
Sugar's QC Phillip Heslop revealed in court that the Spurs board had already made approaches to other top bosses about taking charge at White Hart Lane.
But Summers, anxious to keep the former Argentinian international at The Hawthorns, is quoted as saying: ‘If Sugar so much as points a finger in our direction, I'll snap it off.
Ossie has not signed a contract but we have shaken hands on a three-year deal.’
Doug Livermore is the first-team coach at Spurs and Ray Clemence his assistant with both, until now, overseen by chief executive Venables.
Sugar said: ‘We need a new leader of the football team whether it comes from inside or outside.
We will do what we have to do.
‘We've got excellent people in Doug and Ray.
I'm not knocking Mr Venables but they did most of the work in the season anyway.
The real donkey work was actually done by those guys.
‘One thing is for sure I will have sorted it all out before the start of the new season.’
Ossie Ardiles…hands-off warning.
AS A MATTER OF FACT
EVERYONE knows one and we all have our own favourite fact that is.
Be it about history, UFOs, electric underwear or incendiary bats.
Over the next 12 weeks Jonathan Ross and a brand team will astound, amaze and ‘all that’ with silly snippets and tacky trivia from all over the world.
Yet each and every one of the weird and wacky items have one thing in common they are all absolutely 100% true.
Regular guest and eccentric inventor Wilf Lunn will be the real star of this cult, entertaining series starting tonight (ITV, 7pm).
‘I present some of the world's little known devices,’ says Wilf, sporting a huge handle bar moustache and a regulation white coat.
Wilf has been on the telly screens since the 1960s when he was the resident potty professor in the arty award-winning show Vision On.
For 12 years he aided Tony Hart in making children's television more entertaining.
Then came the show Eureka.
At first glance, Tony wearing his off-duty clothes, a panama hat and blazer looks like a cricket umpire, but his line of work is far, far battier.
‘There's currently a cartoon series being made about me,’ says Wilf.
‘It's all about a character co-incidentally called Wilf who makes a living by developing new inventions that no home should be without.
‘You can do without them, of course,’ he laughs.
Viewers will love some of the crazy contraptions that the man from Huddersfield has created and those he has since discovered such as sandals for nudists with a built-in purse and the safety bra for female acrobats.
‘There's a cure for hiccups which completely fooled Jonathan,’ grins Wilf.
‘And throughout the series my white coat does come in very handy in the event of accidents such as the exploding ice scream!’
In real life, Wilf devotes his time to dreaming up new ideas that could help make this planet a better place to be.
But, failing that, they do provide a lot of visual fun for those who will tune in each week.
Educational or entertainment wise, whatever way you take it, Wilf wants people to unwind with the team.
‘One week I look at the various uses of manure, another, say, a flat cap that can improve your golf swing or the cup and spoon for people with moustaches.’
Fantastic facts will be a novel way to spend 30 minutes along with host Jonathan Ross, investigative globe trotter Fiona Armstrong and Wilf who once worked as an actor at Merseyside Everyman during Ken Campbell's reign.
‘I patented an exploding fox deterrent called the hen grenade,’ says Wilf.
And with that he was gone to go where no other inventor has gone before…and no doubt to the top of the telly ratings.
Here are a few fantastic facts from Wilf's file: Every year 7,000 people suffer injuries related to television from fainting after seeing blood to choking on tea and biscuits.
Gaungit is the Burmese word for hangover translated it means That which makes a man feel that the clapper of the heaviest temple bell for miles around is playing tunes on the inside of his skull.
The chance of being hit by lightening is 200,000 to one.
During the course of tonight's programme the people of Great Britain will drink 4 million and 516,2000 cups of tea.
A burglar who took his socks off and put them on his hands to avoid leaving fingerprints was caught red-footed when he was arrested…because of the footprints he left.
‘Rosy’ looks towards Europe
RONNY ROSENTHAL is more likely to continue his career in Western Europe than in Israel.
The Liverpool star's former club, Maccabi Haifa, is reported to want to bring him back from Anfield, following his refusal to sign a one-year deal with the Reds.
Liverpool would want at least £500,000 for his services, and it remains to be seen whether Cup winners Haifa would be able to afford such a fee, plus the player's pay demands.
Moreover, at 29, Rosenthal, who looks set to miss tomorrow's World Cup qualifier in Helsinki due to thigh trouble, still wants to play top grade football.
I understand he is particularly attracted by France, with St. Etienne possibly poised to renew their recent interest.
Acceptable
With ‘Rosy’ being out-of-contract, clubs do not need Liverpool's permission to negotiate any deal, and the Israeli striker will study all offers before deciding his future.
And I believe that if none proves acceptable, he could even remain at Anfield on a week-to-week contract.
Meanwhile, Liverpool boss Graeme Souness still hopes to persuade Leeds to part with midfielder David Batty.
However, as with Wimbledon defender John Scales, he faces a fight because of the price tag slapped on the player.
Souness is also monitoring the situation at Tottenham and, in the wake of Terry Venables' ousting as chief executive, could move for centreback Neil Ruddock if he fails to sign Scales.
Summer op
But the arrival of a new defender would not necessarily signal the end of Mark Wright's Anfield career.
The former England man, who has been linked with Sheffield Wednesday and who has undergone summer knee surgery, is not up for sale, and is expected to start his third season in Reds' colours.
Report by Will Rolston
FORMER world motor racing formula one champion James Hunt collapsed and died today, aged 45.
Hunt, who became a BBC commentator after retiring, and who commentated on the weekend's Canadian Grand Prix, died at home in Wimbledon, south London.
His brother Peter was too upset to come to the phone today but his secretary confirmed that Hunt, a father-of-two, died of a heart attack during the night.
‘He has no history of heart trouble whatsoever,’ she added.
‘It was completely out of the blue.
‘Peter is in a state of shock, as are the rest of us.’
Hunt became a national motor racing hero in 1976 when he lifted the world formula one championship driving for McLaren at the age of 28.
It was one of the most thrilling finishes ever with Hunt finishing one point ahead of Austrian Niki Lauda.
Hunt, who gave up a career in medicine to be a racing driver in 1967, was given his chance by Lord Hesketh, the British peer who ran his own motor racing team.
He was quickly involved in a series of crashes which earned him the nickname
‘Hunt the Shunt.’
He went on to complete 92 grand prix before retiring in 1979, telling the world it was for ‘reasons of self preservation.’
He and took up a career as a TV commentator with Murray Walker and was recently reported to have cash problems.
Lifestyle
In 1977 Hunt said: ‘I intend to keep going full chat until the day I retire because it makes sense.
Life's too short it certainly can be in a racing driver's career to relax.’
Hunt, who had a playboy lifestyle during his racing driver career, was a sports fanatic and played squash, tennis and golf.
But he also smoked and drank and boasted that he would sometimes have sex before a race because he enjoyed the physical release.
Mills quits in World Cup row
JIM MILLS yesterday resigned as manager of the Welsh Rugby League team in protest at his side's omission from the World Cup, to be staged in Britain in 1995.
Mills, also the Widnes chairman, has been in charge of Wales since their reintroduction two years ago since when they have beaten France twice and Papua New Guinea.
‘Our only defeat in four internationals has been against England and we deserved a place in the World Cup,’ said Mills, who gained 13 Welsh caps between 1975–79.
The International Board decided not to separate England and Wales for the World Cup.
Great Britain will compete alongside Australia, New Zealand, France, Papua New Guinea, Western Samoa, Tonga and Fiji.
South Africa, the Cook Islands and CIS are on stand-by.
But Mills adds: ‘We have been let down and treated badly.
We are a proud nation and at least we should have been put on stand-by.’
Eddie gunning for top job:
EDDIE McGoldrick will have to fight for his place after a £1m move to Arsenal.
The Crystal Palace star signed on for four years after talks with Highbury boss George Graham and admitted: ‘The manager has outlined his plans, but he hasn't guaranteed me a first-team place.’
Keane delay: Roy Keane flew out with the Republic of Ireland squad today for World Cup duty in Lithuania with his record transfer still on ice.
Nottingham Forest's new manager Frank Clark is demanding £5m for Keane but says Blackburn have only offered £3.5m.
Murray slip: Britain's athletics selectors were left with red faces again today after picking world indoor champion Yvonne Murray for the wrong event at the European Cup.
The Scottish star had only agreed to run if selected for the 1,500m but a communication breakdown meant she was chosen for 3,000m instead.
An infuriated Murray was quickly switched.
Barnes bid: Stuart Barnes stakes his claim for a place in the British Lions Test team when he captains the side against Taranaki in New Plymouth tomorrow.
Barnes missed Saturday's Test defeat by the All Blacks with a gashed head.
Super show: Bootle-born Shirli-Ann Siddall produced a dogged performance against third seed Mary Joe Fernandez in the opening round of the Volkswagen Cup at Eastbourne today before bowing out 6–4 7–5.
Diego bust-up: Seville directors will today discuss Diego Maradona's future after he stormed out of the Spanish club's stadium after being substituted at the weekend.
BRITISH featherweight champion Sean Murphy is out to make it third time lucky when he challenges for the WBO world title next month.
‘I'm 28 now, so this is my last chance,’ the St Albans boxer said at a press conference yesterday to announce his clash with champion Steve Robinson in Cardiff on July 10.
Welshman Robinson won the vacant title by out-pointing John
Davison and is confident of treating his home-town fans to historic victory in Wales' first world title fight for 25 years.
Charlton's by Bill Pierce in Vilnius
JACK CHARLTON'S Republic of Ireland are on the brink of two mighty milestones as they prepare to for today's group three World Cup qualifier in Lithuania.
There is the prospect of a 100th goal under Charlton's inspiring managership and the completion of a first-ever hat-trick of away wins to provide added incentive.
Victory over also-rans Lithuania would put Charlton's men two points clear of leaders Spain with just three more qualifying matches left to play making the dream of another appearance in the World Cup finals next summer a virtual reality.
Key defender Paul McGrath, set to win his 61st cap, said: ‘I didn't even know that we were near these records.
All we are really concerned about is picking up two more points to ease our way to the United States next year.
Controversy
‘It might still be a bit premature to suggest that we have made it if we beat Lithuania, but it would then become very close especially as we play them again in Dublin in September.’
The Aston Villa centre half, now settled comfortably back in the Irish fold after the controversy of his failure to appear for the game in Albania three weeks ago, is a major figure in Charlton's plans.
In a side that trades heavily on the commitment of a classy midfield quartet, the cool defender's ability to score vital goals has often proved a trump card for Charlton.
McGrath was on target with a header to seal a 2–0 win over little Latvia on the Republic's first visit to the Baltic last Wednesday.
Now they should add their third win in a row even though Lithuania are rated a tougher proposition than their neighbours and bottom-of-the-table Albania.
Two Irish goals would bring up the century in Charlton's seven-year reign, during which he has lost only nine of 69 full internationals.
Decisive
It would leave them with just three more qualifiers to close the series and all of them to be played in Ireland against Lithuania in September, Spain in October and Northern Ireland, in Belfast, in November.
Charlton believes that European Champions Denmark are the most likely side to fill the other qualifying place in group three.
Spain, notoriously bad travellers, must still go to Albania as well as Dublin before finishing off with a potentially decisive home clash with the Danes.
‘Denmark seem to have the easier run-in and they have already beaten Spain in Copenhagen,’ said Charlton.
‘But really I'm only concerned with our own progress.
‘The players are all in confident mood and they know I demand 100% concentration on this task.
As always they know what is expected from them.’
A big softie
IT'S Dad's Week in the Echo and everyday we are talking to sons and daughters about the favourite man in their lives their dad.
Today we meet Louise Johannsen, daughter of former leader of Liverpool City council Sir Trevor Jones.
DESPITE his tough political image, veteran Liberal Sir Trevor Jones is a soft touch at heart…says his daughter, Louise.
When she and her brother, Glyn, were growing up, it was her mother, Doreen, who was the disciplinarian.
‘Dad used to threaten that if he misbehaved he would put our heads in the sink and turn the tap on, but he never did,’ she says.
Louise who is co-ordinator at the Eaton Hall Workshop, at Aldford, says her two young sons, Thomas, aged two and a half, and George, three months, are the apple of her father's eye.
Both children spend each weekend in Liverpool with Trevor and Doreen Jones, leaving Louise and her husband, Peter Johannsen, free to relax.
‘My father and mother took my boys to Paris for a weekend recently just to buy them clothes,’ says Louise.
‘They came back loaded with stuff.
‘It's only recently that Dad has taken to having holidays.
When I was a child my grandparents took us away.
‘Dad never wanted to go away.
He was too busy.
‘Though I was always aware of his political activities, I never thought of him as absent.
He seemed to be there at the right time.’
She says Trevor is the kindest person she knows.
‘He will do anything for anyone without expecting anything in return, which is just as well.
It isn't often he gets anything in return!’
Sir Trevor Jones Louise Johannsen
Big Ben clocks up Lions man of Towering glory
by Terry Cooper in New Plymouth
ENGLAND'S Ben Clarke is fast becoming the success story of the British Lions tour of New Zealand.
Last week the tour selectors picked the 6ft 5in 17st back-row forward as their first choice blind-side flanker for the opening Test against the All Blacks, even though he was originally picked as a No 8.
Huge letdown
He justified the faith shown in him with a storming display, and Lions coach Ian McGeechan said: ‘It was never a gamble.
I knew that Ben was a good enough footballer to play effectively where we wanted him.’
Clarke looks sure to play in the final two Tests on the blind-side of the scrum and his promotion is a huge letdown for the two original selections in that position, Mike Teague and Mick Galwey.
But it is back to No 8 for Clarke come September.
‘At domestic club level I would not consider playing in the No 6 shirt,’ said Clarke who made his England debut against South African last November.
‘For a start, next season the Bath captain is John Hall, who occupies that position.
But if England wanted me to switch, I would do so.
‘The Lions were obviously disappointed about losing that first Test 20–18, but we now realise that we are pretty close to the All Blacks.
‘I managed to win a few line-out takes and the backrow picked up a bit of their possession which pleased us as a unit.
Preparation
‘The change was suggested a couple of weeks ago.
The opposition were winning a lot of line-out ball at the back and were getting to our midfield.
The intention was to close down that area of attack.
‘I had only three practise sessions there, but Nos 6 and 8 are very similar.
It was not much preparation to take into a Test, but I was confident enough.’
And he will be boosted by the Lions forward coach Dick Best's assessment that ‘a good player can perform anywhere’.
Best added: ‘Ben is making noises all round New Zealand and the back-row men are the kings down here.’
MR VERSATILE:
Bath's Ben Clarke has so far established himself as the pick of the British Lions touring squad in New Zealand
Please give headline to Sid in process A day to be together
By Roy Wright IT will be my second Father's Day on Sunday and it has to be better than my first.
Then, a long-standing commitment had seen me jet off abroad…to disaster.
I spent seven long days pining for my new family and staring miserably at two crumpled photos.
The judgement from on high was six days' heavy rain.
Father's Day was the nadir.
I was feeling stomach-turningly homesick and spent the morning day moping around in my room.
So, after choked phone calls back to Liverpool, I was mightily relieved to touch down at Manchester Airport.
The welcome from son and wife was the first warmth I'd felt in seven days.
This year, the decks have been cleared and I wouldn't be anywhere else.
Now my 18-month-old toddler isn't just the son and heir, he's a walking, talking playmate.
We spent last Sunday at an agriculture show and paid a fortune for various rides, candyfloss and pointing at the prize ‘baa-baas.’
It was worth it just to see the fun he had going round in circles on a toy fire engine.
But life with Thomas isn't just a merry-go-round it can be swings and roundabouts.
We rarely get out at night, because keeping up with the little fella leaves us dog-tired.
But in a strange way he has done wonders for our social life.
Our nightly promenade up and down the road has put us on speaking terms with the whole neighbourhood.
The wife and I are shy types but our little chap is fearless.
His favourite ploy is to simply walk up to someone, smile engagingly and shout: ‘Hiya.’
I realise I'm biased but I'd defy anyone not to be won over.
It's not all good: you can never find a toothbrush in our house and you daren't put your keys down for even an instance.
Despite that, while I'm looking forward to this Father's Day, most days are father's day with Thomas.
Maybe I'll make his mother happy and make the family breakfast this Father's Day.
After last year, I think I owe them one.
Hand in hand…
Roy and Thomas take a stroll together
Rosemary's wonderful year
I WOULD like to say a big thank you to last year's lord mayor, dear Rosemary Cooper.
What a wonderful year she had.
Everywhere she went she worked like a trooper and her wonderful smile let you know she was enjoying everything she did.
E. Johnson, Southport.
The Coronation, 1937.
I HAVE a small dish, four inches in diameter.
On the front it has a picture of George VI and Elizabeth, with the words ‘Coronation, May, 1937’.
It is china, stamped Royal Dalton with a lion standing on a crown with green branches on either side.
The registration number is 812540.
Is it worth anything?
Your dish needs to be seen by an expert.
Is it stamped Royal Dalton or Royal Doulton, for instance?
If it is Royal Doulton, Bill McMahon of auctioneers and valuers Outhwaite and Litherland thinks its value is somewhere between £15 and £20.
But to be more accurate he really needs to see it.
Waterloo stars ready to blow whistle
THREE senior players from Waterloo Rugby Club will be in action at the Merseyside Youth Games, sponsored by Littlewoods Home Shopping and Reebok this weekend as referees.
North of England star Mark Beckett, London Division player Andrew Clarke and Stuart Turner, the North of England under-21 Player of the Year, will be the men in the middle at the New Image rugby competition.
Teams of under-11 boys and girls, five of each on the pitch in a 10-strong team and eight of each in the squads of 16, will play a series of games starting at 1pm on Saturday and 10am on Sunday.
The World Rugby Sevens Cup, won by England this winter, will be on display at the Oval at about noon on Sunday.
Champions Sefton, who have been trained by senior Rugby Union coach Barry Lloyd, are the team to beat.
Liverpool will again be represented by Rice Lane Juniors, Knowsley by Roseheath (Halewood) and St Helens by Bleak Hill.
St Helens, coached by Dave Southern, are optimistic about improving their runners-up spot of 12 months ago; Wirral have an experienced side; and Liverpool are the dark horses, according to organiser Peter Buckton.
John Fletcher, Rugby Union's head coaching co-ordinator, will perform the opening.
National Westminster Bank are the competition sponsors.
Rugby League St Helens, the only traditional Rugby League area in the competition, should dominate.
Wirral are strong and the other boroughs are expected to show considerable improvement on 12 months ago.
Games will be played at under-11 level between 9am and 4 pm on Sunday.
Barclays Bank are the sponsors.
Swimming Diane Jameson, organiser of the swimming competition, expects a repeat of last year's close battle between Liverpool and Sefton for the main honours.
Competitors to look out for, she says, are:
Stephen Parry (16) Liverpool national medallist; Alison Green (14), Liverpool national medallist; Sue Maddock (13), Sefton national finalist; Sam Fearnley (13), Sefton national finalist; Helen Lawrenson (14), Liverpool national breaststroke champion; David Potter (15), national medallist; Sue Marrow (15), national finalist; Janine Calley (15), Sefton national finalist; Danny Roberts (12), Wirral national qualifier; Vicky Tomkinson (14), Sefton national finalist; and Chinela Ojukwu (12), Liverpool national qualifier.
Vauxhalls sponsor the championships, which start at 1pm on Sunday.
Waterpolo Wirral, drawing players from the Birkenhead club who are in Division One of the National League, seem slight favourites.
Each borough is allowed a squad of 10 players, two of whom must be female, and these females must be involved in every game of the round robin competition sponsored by Littlewoods/Reebok.
Organiser Alan Murray, however, sees danger from Liverpool and Knowsley.
Welsh internationals Andrew Evans and Jonathon Waring, who play for the Birkenhead club, will be on hand to encourage the players and present the water polo awards.
It all starts at 9.30am and finishes just before the swimming events.
There are no facilities for spectators at the pool.
Both are sponsored by Vauxhall.
Handball Although Merseyside is a hotbed of the sport, with no fewer than five national league men's and women's team, this is the first time handball has been included in the Games.
Knowsley, the home of national women's champions Halewood, and Wirral appear to be the teams to watch in this mixed under-11 competition, sponsored by Littlewoods/Reebok, but Liverpool are dark horses.
The round robin competition will be played in the sports hall between 1am and 3pm on Sunday.
Cricket this year switches to an eight-aside round robin for under-12 teams, run over two days.
Games are restricted to 12 overs each.
National Westminster Bank are sponsoring the competition.
The first games on Saturday start at 10am, those on Sunday at 10.30am.
Mark Beckett…man in the middle
MIXED EMOTIONS
Boys off to a flyer then taste defeat
Schools Sports Scene by Paul O'Brien
LIVERPOOL'S under-11 side has made a mixed start to the schools cricket season.
They won their opening match by 51 runs, but lost the second by four wickets.
Adam Knox (Northcote), 43 not out, and Adam Clare (King David), 41, shared an opening partnership of 95 in the victory against Lancaster at Liverpool CC, with Anthony Mullins (Our Lady of Good Help) taking four for 14 and Stuart Rusell (Sudley) two for 5.
Against Pendle at Colne CC, Liverpool were dismissed for 53 despite a fine knock of 26 by skipper Mullins.
Pendle made 54 for 6.
Other members of the Liverpool squad are: James Burrows (Liverpool College), Thomas Ainsworth, Nathan Davies, John Paul Donakey (Booker), Chris Roberts, John Fletcher (Northcote), Robert Hopkins (Arnot), Dean Stockton (Sudley), Neil Shack (Rudston) and Manu Singh (St Edward's).
The city team will play Pendle at Liverpool CC on June 24; Lancaster at Torisholme CC on June 26; Salford away on June 30; and Salford at home on July 14.
In the Primary knock-out cup, Marvin Abdul performed a hattrick in Arnot's defeat of Anfield; Bishop Eton have beaten Sudley; and Northcote overcame Arnot.
Manu Singh scored an undefeated half century in St Edwards' league success against Arnot.
The city under-12 team to represent Liverpool in the Merseyside Youth Games this weekend is:
Mark Foulder, Stuart Evans (St Margaret's), Kevin Pringle, Gary Gavan, David Browne (Alsop), Neil Bennett (Blue Coat), Lee Gallagher (Cardinal Heenan), Chris Davies (St Margaret's) and Andrew Lewis (Liverpool College).
Blue Coat players Stephen Neally and Chris Wylie have reached the final trials for the Lancashire under-16 side.
Alsop reached the semi-finals of the Liverpool U14 Cup with a thrilling last ball victory against Blue Coat.
The Walton school scored 68, thanks to excellent batting by Stuart Ferguson and Kevin Smith, then restricted Blue Coat to 65 in their allocated overs.
The Ice Man cometh for Britain's ex IBF champ
McCrory's Moscow
CONTRACTS have been signed for Glenn McCrory to challenge for his former IBF cruiserweight title in Moscow.
McCrory will face reigning champion Alfred ‘Ice Man’ Cole on July 16, the Briton's advisor Dave Gregory confirmed yesterday.
It is the first professional world title to be contested in Moscow, and will be co-promoted by the Spaniard Enrique Soria.
The unique chance of McCrory boxing for a world crown in hitherto banned territory was first hatched in Las Vegas last month following the big Geordie's win over Mark Young, and put into operation at the recent IBF convention in Alberqueque, New Mexico.
‘After being dropped out of the rankings because of inactivity, Glenn has now been re-rated,’ said Gregory.
‘Remember, Glenn has only lost twice in seven years, once to lose his title to Jeff Lampkin and the other at heavyweight to Lennox Lewis.
‘He was weight-weakened for the Lampkin defeat, so it was a case of being to heavy for that fight, and too light when he lost to Lewis.’
Cole, at 6ft 5in, will be a shade taller than McCrory and is imposing enough in stature to have been recently shortlisted as a possible opponent for WBC and IBF heavyweight champion Riddick Bowe.
He beat James Warring for the title, defended it once against Uriah Grant and has reversed the only defeat in his 22-fight career.
McCrory, 28, quit to the ring after being knocked out in two rounds by Lewis 21 months ago but trimmed back down to cruiser and felt strong enough to make a comeback.
Bronze finish
FIVE schoolgirls from City of Liverpool Gymnastics Club took bronze in the British Women's Championships, at Park Road Sports Centre.
It was a spectacular result for Claire Duffy (13), Andrea Murray (14), Sioban Simcock (13), Lyndsey Green (12) and Kate Rimmer (12) who were competing against 17 of the country's top teams.
Sioban fought off many national squad members to finish a brilliant second behind senior international Gemma Cuff, and will make her international debut against Hungary in Somerset on Friday.
Coalville won the British championship with 131.05 points, East London scoring 130.65 and City of Liverpool 129.70.
Blue Coat won the Fair Play award at an under-18 international badminton tournament in Barcelona despite not winning a match.
About 70 local athletes compete in Saturday's annual intercounty meeting at Warley.
The Liverpool City boys individual athletics championships take place at Wavertree next Tuesday (1.00pm).
TERRY VENABLES last night urged Tottenham players and fans to carry on backing the club.
The ousted chief executive confirmed he'll continue his fight to win control of the club from chairman Alan Sugar, and that he had full but anonymous financial backing to buy him out.
Venables, who also dismissed reports linking him with jobs in Spain, said: ‘I've spoken to the players and suggested they don't get further involved they've shown their support.
‘To the supporters I would say, ‘Go and support your team’.
I would get a lot of satisfaction if the players went on to do well.’
And after Sugar made veiled threats of further allegations of ‘foul play’, Venables challenged his rival to speak up or shut up.
‘When I see these unreliable, irresponsible comments, it strengthens my resolve to go forward with the case,’ said Venables.
Interest
‘He can mud-sling, try to save his face, do anything to try to turn public opinion against me but I'm strong enough to say, ‘Say it, don't make innuendos’.
I don't think I'd be going to court if I had anything to be concerned about.
‘He says he doesn't screw his employees maybe he has made an exception in my case.’
Venables takes the fight back to the High Court in October, when he will attempt to buy Sugar's 48 per cent controlling interest in Spurs.
‘I could have won yesterday and lost the trial, or vice versa.
All it meant was I could attack the trial in the job, which would have made it better for me, or from outside the job.’
Venables added: ‘I just want to be in charge of a successful football club challenging for the league.
As Darren Anderton said, I said I wouldn't swap the future of Tottenham Hotspur for any other club and that still stands true.’
Venables added he felt Sugar didn't know much about football.
‘I don't particularly think so.
He wants full control of the club and yet he's going to have to rely on other people.’
Coach Kurt's happy return
POPULAR American Kurt Walton, who ran a basketball coaching week for youngsters 12 months ago, is returning to the city for a repeat performance.
This time the sessions will be bigger and better, for Walton is bringing with him two other top American coaches, Mike Harris and Tom Johnston.
And they will be joined by Great Britain and Cheshire jets star Doug Gardiner.
Organiser John Rees, who can be contacted in the evening on 724–2992, says 100 youngsters have already enrolled, but that there are still some vacancies.
Cost for the week is £39.
The course runs from July 26–30, and is split into morning (9–14 years) and afternoon (over-14) sessions.
Mr Rees says: ‘Apart from the Americans and Doug Gardiner, we will also have top British coaches in attendance which will enable us to cater for beginners, intermediates and experienced players.’
It all takes place at the I.M. Marsh Campus of the John Moores University, which is in Bankhill Road, Aigburth.
DEVON youngster Lucie Ahl recorded her best-ever victory after beating American Patti O'Reilly 7–5 6–2 in the first round of the Wimbledon qualifying tournament at Roehampton.
Ahl, 18, from Exeter, outplayed her opponent particularly in the second set when she took the first five games.
Having survived a British pre-qualifying event last week for a wild card place in this week's draw, Ahl said she felt she had nothing to lose against a player who is about 200 places higher in the world rankings.
‘It was tough at the start but I knew I had to hang on to my serve at all costs,’ she said afterwards.
In today's second round she meets ninth seed Dutch player, Claire Wegink.
Hero Jeremy gets a chance to shine again
Action replay!
Report by Nick Robinson
JEREMY BATES is on course to repeat his Wimbledon heroics after avoiding top grass court players in the draw for the Championships.
The 31-year-old British No.1, who put out seventh seed Michael Chang en route to the fourth round 12 months ago, opens against Argentinian clay court specialist Javier Frana, ranked just above him in the world at 87.
Victory would give him a second round match against veteran Australian doubles specialist John Fitzgerald, a wild card whose singles ranking has slumped to 293 through inactivity, or Belgian Bart Wuyts, who lost on his only previous Wimbledon appearance in 1991.
If Bates comes through that, he could face one of the most vulnerable seeds No16 Thomas Muster, of Austria, who has never won a match at Wimbledon.
However, if Bates can conjure up a repeat of last year's progress to the fourth round, he is unlikely to go any further with second seed and twice former champion Stefan Edberg blocking his path.
British No2 Chris Wilkinson would meet Edberg a round earlier if he disposes of another Argentinian clay court expert, Daniel Orsanic, in the first round, then beats the winner of the match between a qualifier and Sweden's Jonas Svensson, the former world No10.
Jo Durie also has the chance to progress with a first round match against fellow stalwart Liz Smylie, ranked four places below her.
But Britain's other women did not fare so well.
Crosby's Shirli-Ann Siddall, now based in Dorset, is up against seventh seed Jennifer Capriati in the first round and junior Lorna Woodroffe, languishing at 532 in the rankings, faces Switzerland's 11th seed Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere.
Upset
Said Siddall: ‘Bloody hell!
I would like to have had a good first round match first.
I'll be able to learn from it, but it's not the kind of draw I wanted.’
Clare Wood, the British No2, could play defending champion Steffi Graf in the second round but only if she can first upset world No21 Kimiko Date, of Japan.
Steffi Graf launches the defence of her crown against a qualifier and should meet American Jennifer Capriati in a repeat of their Paris quarterfinal clash.
Nine times former champion Martina Navratilova, who was granted her wish to be seeded second over Arantxa SanchezVicario, starts against Australian Michelle Jaggard-Lai, who has not won a match at Wimbledon in three previous attempts.
The 36-year-old American is due to meet revitalised French Open finalist Mary Joe Fernandez for a place in the semifinals.
Gabriela Sabatini opens against Carrie Cunningham.
THE MAJORITY of anglers are environmentalists who help conserve fish populations, says Echo angling correspondent Dave Houghton.
He is totally convinced that angling is cruelty-free, causing no permanent harm to the fish.
‘If I thought I was causing any pain to the fish I wouldn't go fishing and I think all anglers feel that way,’ he says.
The abolition movement's main scientific claim that fish feel pain is a deliberate misrepresentation of the RSPCA's Medway report, say angling organisations.
According to the Angling Mail, the report stated there was NO conclusive evidence that fish feel pain.
Anglers say it is highly unlikely as they are cold-blooded creatures.
All coarse fishermen return the fish to the water almost immediately, unless they are involved in competition, when the fish are retained for a matter of hours in specially designed nets.
And many anglers are also switching to barbless hooks with some angling clubs already requiring them.
‘Why shouldn't people have an activity or hobby which causes no harm to anyone, and doesn't hurt the fish,’ says Mr Houghton.
‘It actually improves the quality of life, even for people not connected with angling, because anglers are the first to tackle pollution.
‘They clear up large areas of riverbank, and provide an early warning of problems like pollution and algae-bloom which DO kill fish.’
Claims that anglers discard tackle causing a hazard to wildlife are also denied.
‘Every reasonable angler knows the difficulties caused by discarded line, tackle and litter and the majority take the line home it breaks,’ says Mr Houghton.
‘In competitions your fish won't be weighed if there is any litter or discarded tackle around you.’
Angling has mass appeal, and is growing in popularity rather than shrinking, says Mr Houghton.
‘It becomes part of people's lives.
A lot of people take their family to have a picnic on the bank.’
Mr Houghton has come across protests, but has little time for their case or their tactics.
‘These people have turned up at competitions and disrupted them by throwing things into the water.
There have actually been fights in different parts of the country.
‘I don't know why anyone gives them any credence.’
HOOKED: Echo angling correspondent Dave Houghton
CHRIS WILKINSON gave both himself and Jeremy Bates a massive pre-Wimbledon lift when he beat Argentinian left-hander Javier Frana 7–5 6–4 in the first round of the Direct Line Insurance Manchester Open at Didsbury.
Frana is ranked 87 in the world and Wilkinson, who also won two matches at the Stella Artois championships at Queen's Club last week, will continue to move nearer his goal of reaching the top 100.
Currently he is ranked 145.
Bates, who beat Byron Black of Zimbabwe 3–6 6–3 7–5 in his first round match, can find comfort, too, in Wilkinson's victory because he is due to meet Frana in the first round at Wimbledon.
Wilkinson was in poor spirits after losing both his matches in the recent Davis Cup match with Hungary in Budapest, on clay, but the grass court season has given him renewed zest and he is playing the best tennis of his career.
Last week's victory over Goran Ivanisevic was his first over a top 10 player and against Frana he never lost heart, even though his rival was holding serve far more comfortably in the early stages of both sets.
‘I was struggling on my serve at times,’ admitted Wilkinson, ‘but on the big points I was playing really well.
I feel I can beat anyone at the moment.’
Bates trailed 3–0 in the final set against Black, his doubles partner this week, and went to the front for the first time in the match when he broke for 6–5 and then served out for victory.
‘It was a good match and because I always felt I had a chance to break Byron I was not too unhappy when I went 3–0 down in the last set.
I felt I played well,’ said Bates.
Then Chris Bailey, the 6ft 5in Norwich player, caused the shock of the day by beating top seeded American MaliVai Washington 7–6 (7–5) 6–2, to give Britain their third success in a row.
Bailey was 5–2 down in the first set tie breaker but won five successive points to draw first blood and then broke his rival in both the third and fifth games of the second set for an astounding victory.
Bailey is 316 in the world rankings while Washington is 17 and seeded 14th at Wimbledon next week.
JO DURIE brushed aside worries about her injured knee to reach the second round of the Volkswagen Cup at Eastbourne with a 6–3 4–6 6–1 win over Elena Likhovtseva.
Although the Russian qualifier is ranked only 238, she won her first two tournaments ever on grass and Durie did not take her lightly.
Aches
Struggling to play her normal serve and volley game after undergoing surgery a month ago, Durie dropped the second set but hit back strongly in the third.
‘I've got aches and pains.
I'm a poor old dear but just have to get on with it,’ said the 32-year-old British No 1.
Monique Javer pulled off a rare victory on grass only her third in six years beating Marianne Werdel 6–4 7–5.
But she was later overwhelmed 6–2 6–1 by the fourth seeded Czech, Helena Sukova.
Crosby-born Shirli-Ann Siddall put up a courageous fight against third seed Mary Joe Fernandez, but the French Open finalist edged through to the second round with a 6–4 7–5 victory.
Fernandez later became the first major upset in the tournament when she lost 6–2 6–2 to fellow American Ginger Helgeson in the second round.
Clare Wood was beaten 6–4 6–1 by defending champion Lori McNeil and Lancashire's Amanda Grunfeld lost 6–3 6–2 to Latvia's Larisa Neiland.
Llani fate still in air
by John Bridgwater
LLANIDLOES Town are still waiting to hear whether they have been officially relegated from the Konica League of Wales.
Although they have been pencilled in for the Cymru Alliance next season, Llani have faint hopes of winning a reprieve if a present club pulls out of the Konica League.
Said club chairman Byron Hughes: ‘We have not been told anything officially so far and I hope we would be the first to hear.’
The club will be sending two delegates to the league's annual meeting on June 26.
England help in
by Rob King in Detroit
ENGLAND will create a little bit of history on Saturday when they play their first indoor international on grass grown thousands of miles away.
The Americans have pulled off a technological miracle to stage the US Cup game against Germany in Detroit's Silverdome.
And they have proved that they intend to let nothing stand in the way of a World Cup triumph when they stage the finals next summer.
Already more than 50,000 tickets have been sold for Saturday's game to a public as curious about the million-dollar pitch as this new phenomenon of soccer which is gathering momentum throughout the States.
The breathtaking background to this unique game began in 1990 down in New Orleans where an experiment in the Louisiana Superdome proved that grass could survive under a roof.
Natural
That persuaded FIFA to allow World Cup games to be staged indoors, with Detroit eventually chosen.
US Cup press officer Jim Trecker says: ‘If you didn't know the story, you wouldn't think it was anything out of the ordinary, it looks just like a plain grass field.
‘It is not growing, but it is being maintained with growth agents.
After the game it will be taken out and saved for next year in a natural setting.’
England and Germany have been told they will not be allowed onto the pitch to practice until Friday.
England captain David Platt says the whole team is eager for the game, but admits: ‘It seems weird, it's hard to imagine what it will be like with a roof.
The noise will be deafening.
‘But I'm sure when the game starts we won't notice it.
We're all looking forward to it, it will be a little bit of history.’
England have taken a well-earned break after four games in the past three weeks, and with Platt proving his recovery from an ankle injury with the opening goal against Brazil on Sunday in Washington, manager Graham Taylor should be able to pick from a full squad.
OCS CLWYD Premier Division champions St Asaph City have had a re-shuffle in the boardroom.
Martin Brookes has been appointed as the new chairman and succeeds Charlie Jones, who drops to vice chairman.
Dennis McNamee has resigned as secretary after three years but has accepted the post of president.
Mark Jones, who is on the playing staff, takes over as treasurer.
St Asaph are hoping to be admitted to the Sealink Stena Welsh Alliance league at Saturday's AGM in Cemaes Bay.
As Venables issued his plea, Alan Sugar delivered a vote of confidence to Spurs' management team of Doug Livermore and Ray Clemence.
New rule will lead to chaos say clubs
Report by KEITH EVANS
CLUBS in the Sain Caernarfon and District League are to protest to the Welsh FA against a new rule over the registration of players.
From next season, players will be allowed to sign for two Saturday clubs and one Sunday club.
‘That situation will lead to chaos,’ complained the Caernarfon League chairman Clarence Jones.
His league's annual meeting at Mountain Rangers clubhouse at Rhosgadfan had been expected to put in place a new stipulation to limit one player to one club.
But delegates were advised that any such local ruling would be overridden by the FA's decree which was explained by Northern members on the council of the national governing body.
Protest
The Caernarfon League decided to send a strongly worded letter of protest to the FA and the chairman urged individual clubs to write along similar lines.
Penrhyndeudraeth resigned membership of the Sain League and their place is likely to be filled by Bangor Normal College, seemingly due for relegation from the Gwynedd League.
But while the Sain champions Caernarfon Athletic have been promoted to the Gwynedd level, the club at The Oval will continue to be involved at the grass roots by the newly formed Caernarfon Athletic Reserves.
Awards presented were: Player of the season, Tony Bohana, Caernarfon Athletic; Top scorer, Steve Tindall, Caernarfon Ath with 42 goals; Best club linesman, Eric Roberts, Nefyn Utd; Best club secretary, Colin Worth, Deiniolen.
An inscribed silver salver was given to previous league secretary John Pritchard who retired after four seasons in the job.
Natasha so close
WALES number one woman player Natasha Williams, 16, of Prestatyn, finished runner-up in the ninth annual international youth table tennis championships in Luxembourg.
KONICA Rejects got their hands on the Glaslyn Cup competed for at Porthmadog after a break of 16 years when they beat Harry's Bluebirds in a penalty shoot-out in a dramatic final.
The Rejects made it 3–1 from the spot after the teams had been deadlocked at 2–2 even with extra-time.
The tournament, organised by Porthmadog FC, had attracted a total of 20 entries and lasted three weeks with a battery of games at The Traeth.
The Rejects, who had reached the last stage without conceding a goal, were two down inside 20 minutes through Tommy Collins and Arwel Owen.
However, former Welsh international Ian Edwards replied twice.
ANDRE AGASSI last night insisted that he was determined to defend his Wimbledon title next week despite a heavy defeat in his first match for two months in the Halle grass court tournament in Munich.
The American, playing his first serious match since April 9 because of tendonitis in his right wrist, lost 5–7 6–2 6–1 to German Carl-Uwe Steeb in the first round.
But Agassi, who looked slightly overweight and sluggish in the 96-minute match, said he would be ready for a testing Centre Court clash next Monday against German world No 36 Bernd Karbacher.
‘I would have probably gone to Wimbledon with a cast on, against the medical opinion I have had,’ said Agassi.
‘There was no pain in the wrist today.
But my elbow gave me a bit of concern.
It is possibly a once-in-a-lifetime chance to go and defend the title and I am committed regardless.’
Agassi wore a strapping on his right elbow that he injured during a 45-minute training session on Monday.
After less than three hours hitting a ball on a tennis court in the last four weeks, the American will be desperately short of match practice at the start of the sport's most traditional tournament.
But he was just happy to be on a court again at the Halle arena, a new stadium which has been modelled on the All-England club.
WELSH international golfer Mathew Ellis, from Wrexham, shot a five-under-par second round of 67 to win the Denbighshire County Championship for the first time at Llangollen.
His 36-hole total of 145, after a disappointing opening round of 78, left him four shots clear of runner-up and former champion Hew Parry of Denbigh.
Contention
Wrexham's Kingsley Evans was third on 151 and Wrexham also won the team championship.
Nick Tomlinson, of Mold, the new Flintshire county champion, after rounds of 70 and 71 gave him a winning two-round total of 141 at Padeswood and Buckley.
He finished a shot ahead of the host club's Tim Roberts, with Jason Snead, of Flint, a further shot away in third place.
Former Wales football manager Mike England (Rhuddlan) led the field after a morning round of 68 but he fell out of contention with a 76 in the afternoon.
Mark Evans of Padeswood and Buckley won the best nett prize with 131 and Mold won the team title with Padeswood and Buckley second and Flint third.
Holyhead's Medwyn Owen won the Angelsey county title on his home course with rounds of 72 and 69.
The green staff worked miracles to get the course fit for play after it had been under water from Thursday night's storms.
But flooding was too severe at Llandudno's Maesdu course to allow the Caernarfonshire Cup Gwynedd Championship to go ahead.
WINNERS at the Welsh Northern Counties Lady Veterans Association Spring Meeting at Abersoch were: Silver Division: M Roberts (Denby) 87–14–73; Bronze: R Chalker-Pearson (Conwy) 89–19–70; Gross: Betty Burnell (Hollyhead) 81; Senior Veterans Nine Holes: Dorothy Roberts (Nefyn) 50–15.5–34.5; Team: Llandudno North Wales.
ANDY Jones shot the lowest round of the year with a nett 62 to win the June monthly medal at Rhuddlan.
Souness insists Wright is NOT leaving Anfield
Here to stay
GRAEME SOUNESS has told Mark Wright: ‘You're staying at Anfield!’
The Liverpool manager has made no secret of his desire to sign a top-class defender this summer with John Scales and Neil Ruddock his main targets.
But Souness has firmly kicked into touch suggestions that Wright will be sacrificed to make way for any newcomer.
And the Reds boss has delivered a surprise vote-of-confidence in his £2.2m signing from Derby even tipping him for a return to the England side.
Said Souness: ‘Mark Wright is most definitely not for sale.
‘He is a valuable player and as far as I'm concerned he is staying at Liverpool.
‘Yes, he has had his problems since coming here from Derby but he's not the only one.
‘I'm looking to keep my best players, not sell them.’
Wright was a summer signing from the Baseball Ground outfit two years ago but has had an indifferent Anfield career.
Surgery
The 29-year-old skippered the Reds to their FA Cup success at Wembley in 1992 but last season he was hit by injuries and lost his England place.
He underwent knee surgery recently and Souness insists that although Wright has been linked with a transfer to Sheffield Wednesday he isn't about to Kop a move.
Added Souness: ‘He had a bad run with injuries and was unlucky.
Our crowd have not seen the best of Wright yet.
‘He was definitely our best player in the final weeks of the season and even then he was carrying an injury.
‘I'm certain when he is fully fit he will prove his worth to this club and force his way back onto the international scene with England.’
LIVERPOOL will play first division Birmingham City at St Andrews in their first pre-season game on July 28.
Three days later they visit Prenton Park to meet Tranmere.
THE WRIGHT STUFF: Liverpool have yet to see the best of Mark Wright, says manager Graeme Souness
Henry gets set
A LATE entry for the Manx International cycle race over three laps of the TT course (113 miles) on June 25 is Conor Henry, from Ireland, winner of the 1992 Milk Race.
Bailey tees for glory
by Trevor Peake
CAPTAIN Phil Bailey sparked off a run of six wins out of seven in the singles to lead Cheshire to their second successive victory in this year's Northern Counties League when they beat Northumberland 11–8 at Stockport.
Lancashire, meanwhile, suffered a serious blow to their ambition to win the title for the first time since 1987 when they lost 9–8 to Durham at Seaton Carew.
Cheshire, champions in 1990 and ‘91, had halved the morning foursomes and shared the first four singles when Caldy's Bailey claimed a 4 and 3 win over Neil Graham of Newcastle United.
Wins followed from Heswall's Dave Cottrell, Dave Watson of Helsby and Bromborough's new county match-play champion, Stephen Shaw, who fought back from three down at the turn to beat Ian Ferrie of Alnmouth 2&1.
Phil Taylor beat Phil Bolton to keep Northumberland's hopes alive but Caldy's Ray Hughes and Jan Higginbotham of Bramhall both won and Jamie Curtis of Didsbury got a half to clinch it for Cheshire.
Lancashire had a point lead over Durham after the morning foursomes 3–2 but after new county champion Greg Helsby had halved his opening singles, they lost three of the next four, Southport and Ainsdale's England international Raife Hutt, losing his to Craig Kilgour of Ravensworth 3&2.
Bob Bardsley of Denton and captain Alan Squires from Oldham won to edge Lancashire back in front in the middle of the order but there were heavy defeats for Martin Wild, Gary Boardman and Steve Ainscough which clinched the match for Durham, before Worsley's Dan Harding closed with a win for Lancashire.
Langer racing in for the kill
REFORMED slow-coach Bernhard Langer is in a hurry to claim the second leg of golf's elusive ‘grand slam’ in the U.S. Open.
‘It's not unreasonable to believe someone can win all four majors.
It is possible but the odds are not good.
Maybe about 1,000–1,’ said the only man who can pull off the improbable four-timer this year.
Enhanced
The 35-year-old German, with just two top-10 finishes in his nine previous U.S. Opens, admitted he has speeded up his routine but said if anything it had enhanced, rather than impaired, his performances.
The USGA have made clear their intention to crack down on slow play at Baltusrol and Langer believes he is not one of the worst offenders.
He declared: ‘I've played 16 competitive rounds in America this year and haven't been warned once.
‘I don't think I'm even in the top 10 of slow players.
When I read things about me being slow, I just smile to myself and ignore it.
It certainly won't be a distraction to me this week.’
Iron-fist Monty's Euro battle-cry
Report by GORDON SIMPSON
COLIN Montgomerie experienced the torture chamber of Baltusrol for the first time yesterday and insisted the time had come for Europe to demolish America's stranglehold on the U.S. Open.
The sturdy Scot, who came so close to doing precisely that at Pebble Beach 12 months ago, is convinced the gruelling par-70 course demands wonderful, long iron play.
He declared: ‘That's where we Europeans have an edge over the Americans.
‘In Europe we tend to hit our irons better than the average American but we tend to lose shots around the greens.
‘The Americans have a greater variety of shot around the greens and there is no doubt they putt better than us.
‘However, I really believe in terms of pure striking, our iron play is superior and we can get the ball closer to the hole.
‘I think the reason for that is that we spend about 45 minutes hitting balls on the range and 10 minutes putting before we tee off.
Advantage
‘I'm sure we should reverse things and do it the other way around as the Americans do but it certainly means we can hit our irons well and, believe me, this course is going to demand exceptional iron play.
That's why I rate the European chances very highly.
‘Any advantage the Americans have around the greens has been taken away this year because the rough isn't so severe,’ added the Scot, who learned much about himself at Pebble Beach when he finished third behind Tom Kite.
Early in the final round last year, no less an authority than Jack Nicklaus tipped Montgomerie after a final round of 70.
Nicklaus spoke prematurely but the event helped Montgomerie psychologically.
He said: ‘I felt unfortunate to lose that tournament but it told me I was good enough to win a major and I've come here hitting the ball as well as I ever have.’
‘I think Baltusrol is suited to my game.
I am driving the ball really well and my irons are good.
When you get the putter going, things can happen.’
If he doesn't win, Montgomerie believes that US Masters champion Bernhard Langer, Nick Faldo or Payne Stewart are the men to beat.
While Montgomerie radiated confidence and respect for the course, it was a typically down-beat Sandy Lyle who prepared to re-acquaint himself with the course where he made his U.S. Open debut in 1980.
On that occasion Lyle missed the cut and he admitted his record in the event is ‘diabolical’.
This will be his 10th attempt and, with a highest place finish of 16th in 1991, the former Open and US Masters champion confessed he does not know what lies ahead.
‘I'm not expecting too much.
I'll just be my usual laid-back self this week.’
COLIN MONTGOMERIE: ‘Baltusrol suits my game’
What do YOU think?
IS angling cruel, or just a relaxing way to spend a sunny afternoon?
We want to hear your views.
Write to Letters, Liverpool Echo, PO Box 48, Old Hall Street, Liverpool, L69 3EB.
CHRIS Balderstone will create history at Lord's tomorrow when he becomes the first umpire to sit in judgement during a Test in England.
After weeks of deliberation and three domestic trial runs, a third umpire making decisions from the stand after studying TV replays will be in place for the rest of the Ashes series.
The trio will make contact via radios, with the men in the middle physically giving the final decision.
The chief innovation is allowing the third umpire to make the first move in decision-making, which the TCCB admits could lead to: ‘Suspension of a decision already made’.
BOTH the weather and Viv Richards frustrated Surrey's victory bid at The Oval as Glamorgan retained joint leadership of the county championship with Middlesex.
Glamorgan, needing 427 to win after starting the day on a 16 for three, were grateful the weather permitted only 17.1 overs.
They lost Tony Cottey but Richards stood firm to finish on 44 not out in a total of 93 for four.
Fast retreat?
LAST September Paddy Ashdown dismissively described David Alton the Liberal Democrat MP for Mossley Hill thus: ‘It is true that David has not played a large national part in the Liberal Democrats since our reform in 1988.’
Soon after Mr Ashdown added:
‘He has played no part in either building the party or campaigning for it for four years now.’
Now Mr Ashdown says:
‘David is a valued MP, a superb campaigner for Liberal Democracy, and will always be a welcome member…’
In military parlance this is called a fast retreat.
Any explanations?
Worn with pride
THANK you Miss McKenna for your very nice, and sincere comments regarding medals worn with pride.
I wish many more of today's youth would realise, think and feel like Miss McKenna.
It is a fact that only for the bravery, courage, and the ultimate sacrifice made by thousands of young men and women, we would all be under jack boot rule at this moment.
Left luggage?
CAN anyone of your readers justify any parent leaving two young children unattended in a main shopping centre on a busy Saturday afternoon?
Believe it or not, two young children were found apparently lost in the store that I work in.
The youngest of the two was very distressed and crying.
The elder informed my colleague that they were not lost, but had been told by their parents to stay in the store and play on the escalators while they went to a cafe for a coffee.
I say to their parents, why bother having children if you do not take the time of effort to care for them?
Children are not fashion accessories that can be pushed aside.
Would they care if the children were injured?
What would their reaction be if the children were abducted?
I am a young woman of 30 years, married with one loved and cared for child, whom I would never leave in such a situation.
Smith put in a spin
Report by David Lloyd
ROBIN SMITH was last night given a welcome vote of confidence after his latest painful examination by legspin.
Smith, dismissed twice by Aussie wonder boy Shane Warne during the Old Trafford Test defeat, had a couple of lengthy net sessions at Lord's yesterday when England began their preparation for round two of the Ashes battle.
But he looked far from confident facing an Indian legspinner, specially drafted in for the occasion by manager Keith Fletcher.
Sandeep Joshi, who is playing league cricket for Hayes this summer, comprehensively beat England's key middle-order batsman several times.
‘Robin improved with spin in India and I think he will be able to get runs against Warne this summer,’ said Fletcher.
‘He'll get stuck in against him and we all know if the chips are down when the seamers are on, Robin is the one.
He's got tremendous guts.
‘We are not underestimating Warne but the pitch at Old Trafford did respond to spin.
‘The one at Lord's could be totally different and he might get nought for 100.’
Smith has always struggled against top class spinners when he first meets them -but worked it out in the end.
Fletcher admitted last night, however, that Smith and the rest of England's top six with the exception of Graham Gooch are in danger of running out of time.
‘We want them to get runs in this Test,’ he said.
‘I believe they will, but if not, we'll need to have a rethink.
‘Nobody has a God-given right to play for England but they all know that.’
However, England's biggest gamble at Lord's is to bank on the fitness of Neil Foster.
The 31-year-old Essex paceman, recalled after an absence of nearly four years, took no chances with his operation-scarred knees yesterday, neither bowling nor batting.
ROBIN SMITH 
Kenneth Clarke last night blunt warning to Cabinet
say the activists
THERE'S no doubt about it, say the organisers of Anti-Angling Week fish feel pain.
And as well as the injury caused by hooking, they suffer distress from being hauled out of the water and handled.
The Campaign for the Abolition of Angling (CAA) was formed in 1980 on the back of the RSPCA-sponsored Medway Report.
Press Officer David Shephard says it proves unequivocally that fish suffer pain.
He quotes the report as stating:’…it is reasonable for mankind to behave on the assumption that all vertebrates are capable of suffering to some degree or another.’
The report's findings justify active protests against angling, says Mr Shephard including sabotage.
‘We enter the water, sometimes wearing wet suits, we've used canoes, and we've used poles tied together to splash water near hooks,’ he said.
‘But we don't fling half bricks into the water because that is as likely to endanger fish as it is anybody else.’
Fish are not the only creatures at risk from angling, says Mr Shephard.
‘There are also the victims of discarded tackle to bear in mind.’
he said.
‘Microfilament line does not degrade.
It stays forever which means that swans, coots, moorhens and even domestic pets can be killed or maimed.
‘The RSPB puts the figure in thousands, and the RSPCA believe that's the tip of the iceberg.’
Mr Shephard would like legislation to make sure that anglers act responsibly and compassionately.
But in the long-term the organisation wants an absolute ban.
‘There was a time when dog-fighting was legal,’ said Mr Shephard.
‘But there has been a massive change in public opinion.
‘The anti-angling movement is only just taking off it's just a matter of time.’
How they line up today
Hall six hold key
FLINTSHIRE team manager Tudor Jones has called up six Northop Hall players in a bold bid to topple old foes Denbighshire in today's crunch clash in the Welsh Cricket Association's Ansells Cup at Brymbo.
Flintshire must win by at least five wickets to snatch second in the four-strong group and thus qualify for the semi-final knockout stage.
Already beaten by South Wales at Northop Hall in their opening match, Flintshire were denied the chance of restoring their credentials when the second fixture against Breconshire at Builth Wells was washed out.
Denbighshire, in contrast, defeated Breconshire and had their trip to South Wales at Ammanford rained off, so all now hinges on the outcome of today's derby date.
‘Denbighshire can afford to lose by fewer than four wickets and still pip us on the calculation of wickets lost where the points are equal,’ explained manager Jones, of Buckley.
‘This has put the pressure on us and although it will still be a tall order because Denbighshire are always a force to be reckoned with, I am confident we have the players who could pull it off.’
Different
Because of their involvement with the magnetic Rothmans National Village Knockout tie at Christleton on Sunday, no Northop Hall players were included in Flintshire's side which routed Montgomeryshire by eight wickets in double-quick time at Hawarden Park.
Now a very different lineup will be in action today although one notable absentee will be key bowler Keith Madeley, of St Asaph, who won the man of the match award on Sunday for his four for nine in eight overs against Montgomery.
‘Keith has a back problem which has forced him to pull out’ said Jones.
As replacement, he has called up Welsh international Paul Higginson, a prolific run-maker and more-than-useful bowler.
He will feel entirely at home with five of his club-mates in the power-packed Flintshire side.
Denbighshire have matched Flintshire's show of strength by naming their most formidable line-up in pursuit of the coveted last-four ticket.
Nigel Roberts, Brymbo's dynamic match-winner, is one of six full Welsh international looking to put the blocks on Flintshire's bid for a repeat appearance in the final.
Fresh from his 78 and five for 41 in Sunday's drubbing of Merionethshire, Roberts is not the only player likely to cause Flintshire problems.
Team-mate Mark Jones and father Alan are a family partnership capable of turning a game while teenage batsman Jude Chaminda, of Colwyn Bay, already has a century to his credit this season, not to mention Wales' current captain and prodigious run-maker Andy Puddle, also of Colwyn Bay.
Denbighshire: Phillip Lloyd (Brymbo), captain, Jude Chaminda (Colwyn Bay), Richard Buckley-Jones (Marchweil), Andy Puddle (Colwyn Bay), Mark Jones (Brymbo), Nigel Roberts (Brymbo), Gareth Davies (Mochdre), Alan Jones (Brymbo), Lloyd Conoway (Colwyn Bay), Nigel Owen ((Brymbo), Glyn Gibbons (Colwyn Bay).
Flintshire: Gareth Ryan (St Asaph), captain, Paul Higginson (Northop Hall), Tudor Hughes (St Asaph), Paul Trickett (Northop Hall), Craig Wilson (Northop Hall), Russell Wiseman (Broughton Hall), Ian Rowlands (Northop Hall), Kevin Owen (Northop Hall), Brian Williams (Mold), Steve Burkhill (Northop Hall), Nigel Morris (Mold).
PAUL HIGGINSON: Will feel at home
Quotes of the week
QUOTE OF WEEK 1 from Screaming Lord Sutch, an early applicant for the England manager's job, even though it's not yet vacant: ‘Discipline?
Not a problem.
No birds, no booze, no groupies hanging about.
I know all about that scene and what it can do to a man.’
QUOTE OF THE WEEK 2 again from Lord Sutch: ‘Motivation?
If they're losing at half-time, make them really angry.
In my case, I'll sing to them.
That will get them back in the game.’
QUOTE OF THE WEEK 3 from yes, you've guessed it, Lord Sutch: ‘Press relations?
None.
Say absolutely nothing when you've lost or drawn a game, tell them how brilliant the team is when you've won.’
(That's enough Lord Sutch — Ed).
QUOTE OF THE WEEK 4 from Crystal Palace player Geoff Thomas before his shock signing by Wolves: ‘I would walk up the motorway to sign for my hometown side Manchester City.’
First victim of serial killer?
Liverpool-born theatre director Peter Walker
England batsmen make
NEWS that the Australian tour management have banned Shane Warne from any contact with female admirers and quote-crazy reporters begs a very important question.
Why can't they go the last mile and ban him from bowling against England batsman who clearly would find reading Sanskrit easier than spotting than ‘Hollywood's’ wrong ‘un.
Warne's exploits in the Old Trafford Test, when he grabbed eight wickets, have catapulted him into the Top 10 of the Coopers and Lybrand Ratings, where he is within sight of another Aussie scourge of England, absent medium-fast bowler Bruce Reid.
Warne's rise of nine places to 7th spot now gives the Australians four bowlers in the Top 10 (Merv Hughes, Reid, Warne and Craig McDermott) against two for the West Indies (Curtly Ambrose and the presently Ian Bishop) and two Pakistanis (Waqar Younis and Wasim Akram).
Nowadays the route to the top of the Coopers and Lybrand tree appears to be on the back of despairing England batsman.
It won't have escaped anybody's attention that the Indian spinner Anil Kumble rose to the dizzy heights of No 3 in the world thanks to the vain attempts of Robin Smith and Co to fathom him out during the disastrous tour of the subcontinent.
Shane may now be shorn of groping groupies and desperate sports hacks who ring him at five o'clock in the morning, but there's certainly no shortage of England batsmen who are prepared to play dazzled rabbits to his Mack truck headlights.
We haven't beaten the Aussies at Lord's since 1933 and I don't see us winning now.
The best we can hope for is rain and that may not be too much to hope for with Wimbledon on the horizon.
WARNE: Now enjoys a top ten place
Hold the sackcloth, Taylor's still alive!
THERE must have been some very unhappy sports-writers at the RFK Stadium in Washington on Sunday night.
They had already dug Graham Taylor's grave.
All they had to do was pile the earth back on top of the coffin and toss in a few bulbs of garlic just to be on the safe side.
Then what happens?
With the death notices written and the last will and testament naming Kevin Keenan (some mistake surely!) as the main beneficiary, Taylor clambers out of the pit, dusts himself off, and bursts into three rousing choruses of There's a Rainbow Round My Shoulder.
Decent man
That's the trouble with England soccer managers.
No matter how much Norse manure you splatter on to them, they've a habit of coming up smelling of roses.
I must admit at this juncture that I'm on Graham Taylor's side on this one.
A decent man doing a difficult job with players who are light years away from being the world's best, he has been treated for the last week like a cross between a child molester and a Nazi war criminal.
He is said to have siege mentality.
But is it any wonder?
I think I'd have a siege mentality if I was pursued relentlessly by a pack of slavering tabloid reporters baying for blood.
Let's be honest, a good many journalists in the RFK stadium wanted another humiliating England defeat.
They wanted stories that would lend themselves to lurid headlines such as FOR GOD'S SAKE GO!
What they got — and I hope they then choked on their own bile in the process — was a performance that enabled English football to hold its head high again.
Of course we don't want to overdo it the praise that is.
After all, England have another chance to fall from grace when they meet Germany on Saturday.
Soccer
Stalinist And once again the mad axemen from Wapping and elsewhere will be sharpening their stilettos (knives not heels) in the hope of finally despatching the manager they see as a soccer Satanist.
But why are they so het up about Taylor and his team?
Is it because they care for the future of English soccer?
Is it because they want to see an England team that attacks like the Brazilians and absorbs pressure like the Germans?
In a word, No.
What they're defending is their all-expenses paid trips to the U.S. of A for next year's World Cup junket.
If England fail to reach the finals every national newspaper proprietor will need a lot of convincing that the exploits of, say, gallant Wales (let's hope) and the never-say-die Republic of Ireland merit the first-class dispersement of teams of highly-paid hacks.
There's a lot riding on this.
BURIED BUT NOT DEAD…
Graham Taylor may survive his tabloid execution to haunt his tormentors
DUCHESS ‘A LOVELY LADY WHO TAKES A GREAT DEAL OF INTEREST IN PEOPLE’
Waves and smiles on tour of special homes
By Carmel Brown Daily Post Staff
An excited fan planted a kiss on the Duchess of York's cheek yesterday as she practised for her new role as a United Nations roving ambassador.
Michael Stott, 40, beamed with pride after taking her by surprise and snatching the kiss.
The Duchess giggled as he then picked up his guitar and sang Michael Row The Boat Ashore.
‘She's a wonderful, lovely person,’ said Michael, one of a group of former hospital residents the Duchess visited on a tour of the Wirral in Merseyside.
‘I couldn't think of anyone nicer to have the new job she's been given.
She's my favourite lady.’
The Duchess breezed into the North West yesterday on a whistle-stop tour in her capacity as patron of the MacIntyre Trust, a charity dedicated to helping people with mental disabilities overcome their handicaps.
Looking tired and drawn as she paid a visit to the homes in Wirral and Warrington, she was quick to point out to photographers that she'd had an early start.
‘I've had quite an early start and I'm feeling pretty tired,’ she admitted.
‘I think the most important thing for the residents is that they have been given their dignity back,’ said the Duchess afterwards.
‘They don't need to rely on hospital staff to bring them every cup of tea.
‘They are able to choose whether they want baked beans or spaghetti for tea like everyone else.
That is very important.
‘The MacIntyre scheme is absolutely marvellous.
Some people have been in hospital for 34 years and have never had their independence.
It is wonderful for them.’
Debbie George, 32, showed her round her new home in a pretty stone cottage in Little Storeton Lane, Storeton, Wirral.
‘She is a lovely lady who takes a great interest in people,’ said Miss George.
‘I have been looking forward to her visit for weeks and was very excited when I met her.’
The Duchess also visited houses in Dudley Road, New Brighton; Bedford Drive, Rock Ferry; The Wiend in Bebington; and Penkett Road, Warrington.
Most of the 22 people have moved from Newchurch Hospital, Warrington.
The Duchess of York waves to residents as she arrives at the Bedford Drive homes in Rock Ferry, and right, chatting to Mark Kinsley Picture: JASON ROBERTS
Michael Stott, above, catches the Duchess unawares as he plants a kiss on her cheek and, inset, the Duchess talks to Andrew Taylor
Women reunited after 50 years
TWO pensioners who met at a wedding ceremony half a century ago have become close friends after being reunited by the Daily Post.
Gwendoline Jones was the organist at Margaret Harrison's wedding in September 1942.
Mrs Harrison spent only 10 days with her husband, Bernard, before he was killed in World War II.
They spent those few days in Blackpool and she last saw him as he left for duty from Chester station.
But yesterday, the Daily Post brought a smile back to her face by arranging a meeting with Mrs Jones.
Now 72, she hardly recognised the figure from 51 years ago, who lived most of her life in Buckley, but now lives in Saltney.
Together they relived the beautiful sunny day at St Anthony's Church, Saltney, when their paths last crossed.
Mrs Jones wrote to the Daily Post after reading Mrs Harrison's tragic story as part of our Battle of the Atlantic coverage.
We arranged a special meeting in Chester and now they have become friends.
Mrs Harrison, who lives in Lache, Chester, said: ‘I thought it would be quite strange to see Gwendoline again and it was.
‘She remembers the day very well and it was wonderful to talk about it again.
‘I have rebuilt my life, but that day is very special to me as were the 10 days I spent with my husband.’
Mrs Jones, who lives in Saltney, said Mrs Harrison's story moved her.
She said: ‘I remember it very clearly because they were such a beautiful couple.
‘I have played the organ at quite a few weddings but this is one that stood out.
‘It is so sad what happened and it made me cry when I read her story but she is a remarkable woman.’
Mrs Harrison, who never remarried, is still in touch with her husband's family in Wiltshire.
She added: ‘I have still got my pictures and my memories.’
Together again Margaret Harrison and Gwendoline Jones Picture: CLIFF BRETT
OF COURSE someone had to be blamed for the Grand National that never was.
But it couldn't be the Jockey Club, who knew that the ‘grey gate’ system using a 65 yard long elastic tape was flawed yet did nothing about it.
And it couldn't be starter Captain Keith Brown, who allegedly rejected the possibility of using a different system TWO MONTHS before the race.
That left only £5-a-race flagman Ken Evans, a man of no consequence to the Mandarins of the Jockey Club.
Thus Aintree's recall man for the past seven years became the sacrificial offering so that the Jockey Club bigwigs could get on with more important business like tarting themselves up for Ascot and tea with the Royals.
The train now standing at Llangollen Bridge…traffic came to a stop yesterday when locomotive 80079 arrived in town by road from the Severn Valley to pull passengers through the Dee Valley during the summer Picture: CLIFF BRETT
University title within the reach of college
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
A COLLEGE'S bid for university college status could go ahead despite a frosty reception from the Government.
Chester College is pressing to be allowed the title of university college, but its hopes appeared to have been dashed last month by education junior minister Tim Boswell.
Now the Standing Conference of Principals, the national body which represents colleges like Chester, is to meet to discuss the next move and there are calls to ignore Mr Boswell's rejection of their case.
Tim Cox, general secretary of SCOP, said: ‘The letter from Mr Boswell said the Government could not endorse the use of the title.
‘Some of our members are asking what this means and there are some suggestions that they should go ahead and use the title anyway.’
The members of SCOP will be meeting early next month and the question of university college status and whether the colleges should use the title regardless will be high on the agenda.
The colleges, including Chester, have argued that the breadth and standard of their courses is good enough for them to compete on equal footing with the old polytechnics, which are now universities.
Chester College was recently found by a Government survey to be providing the best value for money higher education in the country, beating the likes of Oxford and Cambridge.
Another survey also found that the college was the best-known in the country.
Chester College currently has 2,000 full-time undergraduate students and as many again on part-time, or non-degree courses.
The college is expanding rapidly and its student numbers are increasing by 10pc every year.
The Department of Education claims the title university college would lead to confusion.
Boost for Big Jack by Bill Pierce
A KEY trio of Lithuanian players look certain to miss tomorrow's World Cup qualifier against the Republic of Ireland in Vilnius after a row over insurance cover.
The trio, who all play for FK Austria in Vienna, have not been allowed to travel back to their country.
FK Austria, who played Arsenal in the European Cup two seasons ago, claim they cannot afford to pay the insurance cover needed for their international release.
Two of the players, Robertas Fidrikas and Asminas Narberkovas, scored the goals in a shock 2–2 draw against Northern Ireland in Belfast in April last year.
The third, Valdas Ivananusko, is an influential midfielder.
Their absence will cause a major reshuffle of the side by Lithuania's coach Algi Mantas Liubinskas but Irish manager Jack Charlton will not be carried away by what seems an unexpected boost.
Excellent
Charlton, who yesterday named an unchanged Republic side following their first training session in Vilnius, said: ‘If it is the three players who I have watched four times give excellent performances for Lithuania, then I will be delighted.
‘But the names mean nothing to me because I only take note of the positions people play in.
It could even be a problem if the three players are not coming.
‘When we played Albania three weeks ago in Tirana, I made plans to deal with them but on the day they fielded a much different side to the one I expected.’
Wilmslow bowlers profit on wet pitch
IN the Cheshire Cricket Competition leaders Wilmslow enjoyed an easy victory at Mosley.
Many of the matches in the league showed low scores from teams batting first, one of the perils of batting on uncovered wickets after a week of heavy rain.
Mosley, who are still looking for their first win of the season were dismissed for 93, Wilmslow reaching 95 for the loss of 4 wickets.
Andy Vaughan starred for Wilmslow reaching an unbeaten 59 off only 42 deliveries.
Radbroke Hall had an easy win at home to Langley, dismissing the visitors for 97 and reaching 102–4 themselves.
Highest score
Parkside were another team which benefitted from batting second, they put visitors Fisons in to bat and bowled then out for 62, knocking off the runs for the loss of only one wicket.
Highest score of the day went to Norbury who hit 228–5 at Hartford, Pete Holland scoring 116.
Holland had a good day all round taking 3–41 as Hartford struggled to 125–8.
Alderley Edge side Icicals scored 186–6 when they visited Burnage, the home side managed 163–9 in reply.
Heaton Mersey Village visited Wayfarers and scored 142 all out, a total they successfully defended bowling out Wayfarers for 112.
Second XI's: Heaton Mersey Village 95, Wayfarers 68–9; Norbury 179–5, Hartford 101–7; Fisons 109–6, Parkside 108; Icicals 144–8, Burnage 152–6; Wilmslow 158–3, Mosley 157.
Warne takes turn for better
IT WILL come as no consolation at all to the majority of English batsmen but leg-spin bowling was once a mystery to Shane Warne as well.
At 23 and with just 12 Tests behind him, the blond Aussie is cricket's hottest property right now.
He is the bowler everyone wants to see, the autograph every kid wants to collect…and the opponent most likely to keep on giving Graham Gooch's men nightmares this summer.
Mike Gatting's worst dream is already reality, of course, thanks to that outrageous delivery during the opening Test at Old Trafford which turned fully two feet.
Wonder ball
Warne's wonder ball was all the more special because it was the first he had bowled in an Ashes contest.
But if people now think everything he has touched has turned instantly to gold then Gatting was not alone in being deceived that day.
For a start, Warne might easily have abandoned the idea of becoming a ‘leggie’ while still in short pants.
He liked the idea of tricking batsmen from the moment he saw older boys having a go in the nets.
‘But when I tried it as a young kid I couldn't even hit the pitch for several years.
‘I started bowling a bit of medium pace but I stuck with the leg spin as well and I'm glad I did.’
So are Australia.
Warne's eight wickets at Old Trafford helped send England plunging towards defeat while lifting his overall haul to 39.
Not bad for a boy whose first two Tests, against India the winter before last, ended with him nursing figures of one for 228.
One wonders whether an England bowler would have been picked for a tour after a start like that.
Only one winner
Warne was and earned the Aussies a vital victory over Sri Lanka by taking three for 11 in 31 deliveries.
More success followed against West Indies back at home, then came the series earlier this year which confirmed his rich talent.
New Zealand's slow, low pitches were not supposed to suit a leg-spinner and Kiwi captain Martin Crowe did his best to bury the young upstart during an early tour match.
Warne's figures 17 Test wickets at 15 runs apiece suggest there was only one winner.
A star was well and truly born.
Bleached hair, a diamond stud ear-ring and a reputation for being something of a hell-raiser were wonderful extras for the media to latch on to.
There is a far less glamorous side to Warne, however.
Determination, dedication and self-discipline may not fit the image but, without them, the boy from Black Rock, Victoria, would probably be nothing more than a beach bum right now.
‘I don't have a natural talent,’ he said recently.
‘Nothing comes easy.
I enjoy working at it.
‘I've matured as a cricketer through playing against better players but I'm still the same bloke I was three or four years ago,’ he said.
‘Just a little bit smaller,’ added coach Bob Simpson.
‘What's happened so far won't go to my head,’ Warne insists.
‘I know I've still got a lot to learn and there are five Tests still to play.’
England can only hope Warne doesn't learn too much more too soon.
But the way he works at his game, don't rule out the possibility of a few more wonder balls this summer.
WARNE Matured
Lancashire hit rowdies
LANCASHIRE have pledged to crack down on foulmouthed fans.
The club received several complaints about unruly behaviour during the first Test at Old Trafford, and ‘is determined not to allow the antics of a small minority ruin the enjoyment of a day's cricket,’ according to Chief Executive John Bower.
Lancashire introduced extra crowd control measures for the Test and the one-day international.
But Bowler said: ‘It is abundantly clear from our recent correspondence that the actions taken by the club were insufficient, despite 145 arrests and 20 ejections at the Test match alone.
‘We will therefore identify what additional measures need to be taken in future.’
These measures will include more use of the public address systems, periodic closure of bars, and possibly plain clothes police officers in popular stands.
county buildings
By Carl Butler Daily Post Staff
A WARNING has been given that some council buildings in Clwyd may have to close if maintenance is not carried out.
About £16m is needed to tackle repairs and maintenance on many civic buildings constructed in the 1960s and 70s.
But all the county council can afford to allocate this year is just over £5m.
County council chairman Peter Walker told Clwyd's property sub-committee in Mold yesterday: ‘The budget for repairs is £5m and we need £16m.
The worrying aspect is that it gets worse each year.’
The insurance value of Clwyd's 730 properties is £780m.
Director of architecture, planning and estates Philip Eyton-Jones said that required an annual maintenance budget of more than £11mfar more than Clwyd has been allocating.
With a shortage of money, Mr Eyton-Jones's department had been trying to ensure there was no serious disruption to buildings, closure or breaches of the law.
Staff also try to prevent serious deterioration of the fabric of buildings.
‘Within these criteria I have so far ensured that buildings have not suffered closure, but in the future this may not be possible owing to the shrinking budget,’ said Mr Eyton Jones.
It is essential, says Mr Eyton-Jones, that more money is poured into looking after Clwyd's buildings.
‘I have looked at the backlog of repairs and, basically, we are talking mainly about roofs and general structures, then electrical and heating systems.
The majority of our buildings were built in the 60s and 70s and many of these installations are coming to the end of their life,’ said Mr Eyton-Jones.
Councillors have agreed that they must make a bid for a share of the money the county is reaping from the sale of land at Point of Ayr to Hamilton Oil for its oil and gas terminal.
Meanwhile, the sports hall at the Deeside Further Education College, in Kelsterton, Connah's Quay, is closed for maintenance work.
The college is now an independent corporate institution, separated from Clwyd education authority in April.
Merseyside snooker
DEFENDING champions Liverpool's Thingwall Recs club reached the quarter final of the Licat top Merseyside League Snooker Team Championship when they beat Garston Woodcutters 3–0 last night.
They now face Chester YMCA who beat Club Snooker Bootle, the Liverpool Conservative League Champions, 3–1.
Tomorrow Southport Snooker Centre play St Richards and Liverpool
Billiards meet Fords of Halewood.
Royals miss ancient Windsor ceremony
THE Queen Mother and the Prince of Wales yesterday missed the traditional Garter ceremony at Windsor.
The Prince pulled out after aggravating a back strain playing polo but the Queen Mother's surprise absence was put down to her age by Royal aides.
Both cancelled plans to join the annual procession almost at the last moment.
But a senior Palace source insisted the Queen Mother was fit and well.
She joined the Garter knights for a reception and lunch before the ceremony before deciding not to join them for the service at St George's Chapel.
A Palace spokesman said: ‘There is nothing wrong with her.
She was there for the reception and for the lunch.
She was in good form at both.
‘You have to give a certain deference to her age.’
It is the first time in recent memory she has missed the ceremony.
The Prince missed it two years ago with the same back trouble.
The procession, which included only the Queen, the Duke of Edinburgh and the Duke of Kent from the Royal Family, arrived at the chapel in pouring rain.
Some of the Garter knights, including former prime minister Lord Wilson of Rievaulx, missed the procession but made the journey by car.
The Prince of Wales also cancelled plans to attend Royal Ascot to take the opportunity to recover from the back injury he aggravated at polo on Sunday.
He will spend the week doing exercises and having physiotherapy sessions.
Sunderland star has ex-world champ in sights
Hardy victory sets up Hoko fight
Billy Hardy, Sunderland's Commonwealth featherweight champion, produced an accomplished display of boxing to dispose of Mexico's Angel Fernandez in Hemel Hempstead last night.
The wins earns Hardy the right to take on Paul Hodkinson if the Liverpudlian defeats EBU champion Maurizio Stecca of Italy this autumn.
Hardy took the verdict of referee Larry O'Connell by a comfortable 99 points to 96, less than a month after successfully defending his Commonwealth crown against Canada's Barrington Francis.
Hardy needed three rounds to work out the Mexican southpaw before taking over.
Fernandez, winner of 19 of his 25 bouts, landed some useful shots at the start before Hardy took control and in the third Hardy made the mistake of giving Fernandez too much of a target, but thereafter made himself more scarce, hitting and moving effectively.
It enabled Hardy to mount up the points, but Fernandez never gave up trying, despite visibly tiring from the halfway stage.
The Mexican landed the better punches in the final round, catching Hardy as he became a trifle careless.
But there was not enough sting in the Mexican's punches to ever trouble him.
Hardy is the leading contender for the European title, but manager Dennie Mancini said: ‘Although he's the number one contender for the EBU crown, why can't we go for the WBO title held by Steve Robinson?’
Invitation to battle the best of British
THE Lawn Tennis Association celebrate 10 years of tournament ratings this summer — the message: ‘The sport in Britain at its grass roots is prospering like never before.’
Liverpool City Council are planning to start a tournament in the winter which could be the first step of a journey up the British rankings right up to a match against number one players Jeremy Bates and Joe Durie.
A £2 million scheme between the LTA and Volkswagon means every player in the country — however good, however experienced — can match their rating against that of Bates and Durie.
‘Just by joining the ratings system doesn't mean a player will immediately come up against Bates or Durie,’ the LTA's events manager Gavin Fletcher told me.
‘But with local events and regional qualifying events available, the chance is there for every participant to play against the leading British players at Telford in the national championships.’
Vagabonds
There are around three million players in Britain, but only 10 per cent of these are actually affiliated to a club and around 10 per cent of the club members are actually rated.
More than 800 tournaments throughout Britain come under the ratings jurisdiction, and LTA-approved events include the likes of tournaments at Palmerston, East Wavertree, Vagabonds in Liverpool and the Candy in Wirral.
The new indoor tennis centre in Wavertree, which could be ready for use in September, may turn out to be the venue for a winter LTA-rated tournament.
Regional LTA official Keith Eckershall said: ‘We haven't received an application for an LTA tournament from Liverpool but there is a lot going in there and we are optimistic for the growth of the sport in the city.’
Gavin Fletcher says: ‘Any player can apply for an LTA rating.
When he or she does we ask for details like what club they are in and what experience they've had’.
With 200,000 rated players in France, is the ratings system the shot in the arm British tennis had needed over the years?
‘It's not the whole answer,’ insists Fletcher, ‘But it's an integral part of the answer.
We've got a lot of catching up to do with countries such as Germany, France and Sweden.
Membership to the LTA rating system costs £20 and the application forms are available from the LTA Membership Department, Queen's Club, West Kensington, London, W14 9EG.
Under-fire England boss takes fresh heart from Brazil draw
Triple boost for Republic hopes
A KEY trio of Lithuanian players look certain to miss tomorrow's World Cup qualifier against the Republic of Ireland in Vilnius after a row over insurance cover.
The trio, who all play for FK Austria in Vienna, have not been allowed to travel back to their country.
FK Austria, who played Arsenal in the European Cup two seasons ago, claim they cannot afford to pay the insurance cover needed for their international release.
Two of the players, Robertas Fidrikas and Asminas Narberkovas, scored the goals which enabled Lithuania to grab a shock 2–2 draw against Northern Ireland in Belfast in April last year.
The third, Valdas Ivananusko, is an influential midfielder.
Their absence will cause a major reshuffle of the side by Lithuania's coach Algi Mantas Liubinskas but Irish manager Jack Charlton is refusing to be carried away by what seems an unexpected boost.
Charlton, who yesterday named an unchanged Republic side following their first training session in Vilnius, said: ‘If it is the three players who I have watched four times give excellent performances for Lithuania, then I will be delighted.
‘But the names mean nothing to me because I only take note of the positions people play in.
It could even be a problem if the three players are not coming.
‘When we played Albania three weeks ago in Tirana, I made plans to deal with them but on the day they fielded a much different side to the one I expected.’
LIFT OFF A FLYING START TO FESTIVAL
Bicycle aerobatics Chris Hanley, a member of the New Brighton Mountain Bike Club, puts his machine through its paces at Wirral Cycling Festival at Thurstaston Country Park
Picture: Frazer Bird
System for start of National now inevitable by ‘94
By Andrew Forgrave Daily Post Staff
CHANGES to the starting system for next year's Grand National are now inevitable in the wake of the official report into the fiasco.
The Connell inquiry found that the ‘grey gate’ starting system used at Aintree was outdated and inadequate and blamed the course executive and the Jockey Club for not replacing it.
A separate Jockey Club inquiry into starting procedures, headed by Brigadier Andrew Parker Bowles, is expected to report by the end of the summer when several changes are likely to be recommended.
Prominent racing historian Reg Green said urgent action was needed to prevent the National that never was turning into the National without a future.
‘The National is the racing showpiece of the world and we need to act now to stop it being destroyed by the apathy and negligence of the ruling body and the actions of a few animal rights protestors and rowdies.
‘It is no wonder we are becoming the laughing stock of the world,’ he said.
Since last April's farce, more than 60 innovative suggestions for alternative starting methods have flooded into Aintree from racing organisations and individuals all over the world.
They range from the simple, such as sawdust starting lines, to the sophisticated, including electromagnetic beams and parallel tapes.
So far, only starting stalls have been ruled out.
Difficulties with the present ‘grey gate’ system, in which the starter pulls a lever to raise a 65 yard-long elastic tape, have been known for some years.
Rain on the day of the National made the tape sag more than normal.
When the system was tested during the three days leading up to the event, it responded properly on each occasion.
The Sir Michael Connell inquiry discovered that in 1991, official starter Capt Keith Brown had requested two alterations reduction in the width of the starting gate and switching the side of the starter's rostrum.
Only the second change was implemented.
Two months before the race, acting course steward Rod Fabricius telephoned Captain Brown to discuss the possibility of using a different system.
But this was allegedly rejected by the starter.
The following month he urged Captain Brown to check carefully ‘for everybody's peace of mind’ that the grey gate system at Aintree was working properly.
This has been strenuously denied by Capt Brown.
Mr Green, 55, author of the Grand National chronicle, A Race Apart, said: ‘There's nothing wrong with the present starting system so long as it is operated properly.
‘It's been in use since 1925 and accommodated fields as large as 66 for the 1929 National.
But this time the tape was sagging so low it was around the horse's knees.
It was an accident waiting to happen.’
Recall stewards, dressed in day-glo bibs, should be positioned 150 metres up the course with more officials further up the track as a fail-safe, he said.
‘The horses don't need to be lined up military fashion waiting for the cavalry charge,’ added Mr Green, who has seen every National live since 1946.
‘Thoroughbreds will always be able to catch up in a race over a long distance.
In this year's Scottish National, Run For Free was left 30 lengths behind but still went on to win.’
Capt Keith Brown: A strenuous denial
Letter to the Post of 51 years
Reunion brings back wedding day memories
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
TWO pensioners who met at a wedding ceremony half a century ago have become close friends after being reunited by the Daily Post.
Gwendoline Jones was the organist at Margaret Harrison's wedding in September 1942.
Mrs Harrison spent only 10 days with her husband, Bernard, before he was killed in action during World War II.
They spent those few days in Blackpool and she last saw him as he left for duty from Chester railway station.
But yesterday, the Daily Post brought a smile back to her face by arranging a special meeting with Mrs Jones.
Now aged 72, she hardly recognised the figure from 51 years ago, who lived most of her life in Buckley but now lives in Saltney.
Together they relived the beautiful sunny day at St Anthony's Church, Saltney, when their paths last crossed.
Mrs Jones wrote to the Daily Post after reading Mrs Harrison's tragic story as part of our Battle of the Atlantic coverage.
She remembers the wedding day vividly.
Despite living only about 10 minutes from each other, the two have not met for 50 years.
We arranged a special meeting between them in Chester and now they have become friends.
Mrs Harrison, who lives in Lache, Chester, said: ‘I thought it would be quite strange to see Gwendoline again and it was.
‘She remembers the day very well and it was wonderful to talk about it again.
‘I have rebuilt my life but that day is very special to me as were the 10 days I spent with my husband.’
Mrs Jones, who lives in Saltney, said Mrs Harrison's story moved her.
She said: ‘I remember it very clearly because they were such a beautiful couple.
‘I have played the organ at quite a few weddings but this is one that stood out.
‘It is so sad what happened and it made me cry when I read her story but she is a remarkable woman.’
Mrs Harrison, who never remarried, is still in touch with her husband's family in Wiltshire.
She added: ‘I have still got my pictures and my memories.’
Together again Margaret Harrison and Gwendoline Jones Picture: CLIFF BRETT
Queen Mother misses Ascot
The Queen leads from the front as Royals stay away from a day at the races
Culture zone: Conwy got a new artistic treasure Mecca yesterday when the Royal Cambrian Academy threw open the doors to a new gallery.
Pictured at the opening are (from left): Vice President Keith Andrew, Kyffin Williams, president, and honorary secretary Audrey Hind Picture: COLIN PAXTON
By James Hardy and Heather Tyrrell
THE QUEEN Mother yesterday pulled out of her second public appearance in as many days, missing the opening day of Royal Ascot for the first time in recent memory.
Buckingham Palace discounted fears for her health, insisting there was ‘absolutely no cause for alarm’, but her last minute decision surprised race-goers on a day which saw an unusually small turn-out from the Royal Family.
The 92-year-old Queen Mother rarely misses the four days of racing and socialising and the news followed hard on the heels of her decision to skip the Garter Ceremony at Windsor on Monday.
Palace officials stressed there was no mystery behind her absence from either event but royal watchers were struck by the fact she chose to cancel plans for engagements at which she has an almost ever-present record.
A spokeswoman at her Clarence House office said: ‘There is nothing wrong with her at all.
She has had a very busy weekend and she felt a little tired.
‘She decided it would be very much more sensible to conserve her energies for her programme later in the summer and not to go to the races.
‘She went back to work very quickly after her operation and if she goes on with her busy life as she fully intends to do, she needs a day or two off occasionally.
‘A decision on whether she attends today will be taken mid-morning.
It entirely depends on how she feels.’
Last month the Queen Mother spent several days in an Aberdeen hospital after an operation to remove a piece of fish lodged in her throat.
Royal aides described her as being ‘on good form’ at the lunch and reception before the Garter ceremony but said at her age she decided it could be tiring to attend.
A Buckingham Palace spokeswoman added yesterday: ‘There is absolutely no cause for alarm.
She is simply taking it easy.’
The Queen Mother's absence left the royal party depleted as it arrived by carriage procession down the racecourse.
The Queen, the Duke of Edinburgh and the Duchess of Kent were the only members of the Royal Family in the four coaches making the mile-long journey, which starts in Windsor Great Park.
RATHER embarrassingly, as the crowds were cheering their arrival, the Princess Royal was being barred from entry on the other side of the course at the Sovereigns Gate.
Bowler-hatted gateman Eric Petheridge failed to recognise the princess, who was wearing sunglasses and no immediately noticeable formal identification or entry badge, when she arrived with her detective after a car park lunch with friends.
He steadfastly blocked her way until the detective leaned over and said: ‘This is the Princess Royal.’
Slightly taken aback, Mr Petheridge recovered quickly and allowed the pair in.
Afterwards he said: ‘Well, she was wearing dark glasses, wasn't she.
I did not recognise her straight away.
She took it very well, I am sure she understands that security is paramount.’
The princess, wearing a red jacket and black skirt and hat, was spotted soon afterwards making her way to the paddock, chatting happily with Andrew Parker Bowles, husband of the Prince of Wales' friend Camilla, who was not seen at the meeting.
It is understood the princess was not a guest at the Queen's lunch and therefore part of the Royal carriage procession and decided to make her own way to Ascot.
In the races, the Queen suffered an early setback when her jockey Frankie Dettori failed to match his Derby Day win on her horse Enharmonic in the Prince of Wales' Stakes.
The horse came in sixth in a field of 11.
The Prince of Wales himself is missing the entire Ascot week recovering from a back strain at his Highgrove home in Gloucestershire.
The Princess of Wales, also absent yesterday, was spotted in the newly opened London celebrity restaurant Planet Hollywood with Princes William and Harry, who are on half-term holiday.
The Duke of York is thought to be away on naval duties and the Duchess of York, believed not to have been invited, was in Birkenhead touring flats for young people with learning difficulties.
The low royal turnout was a disappointment to some race-goers who travelled to Ascot in droves dressed in their finery to see and be seen at one of the greatest annual events of the high society calendar.
the National fiasco
By Andrew Forgrave Daily Post Staff
A £5-A-RACE flagman was today facing the prospect of disciplinary action over the Grand National fiasco after being made the scapegoat in the official inquiry report.
Aintree race course officials and National starter, Capt Keith Brown, could also face heavy fines after coming in for stiff criticism.
Senior Jockey Club stewards will today decide whether to summon 57-year-old part-timer Ken Evans before a disciplinary committee after the inquiry found he twice failed to signal a false start.
The world's most famous steeplechase, watched by 50,000 spectators and a global TV audience of millions, ended in farce when 30 riders failed to realise that a second false start had been declared.
Mr Justice Connell's inquiry, set up by the Jockey Club, refused to accept Mr Evans' evidence that on both occasions he waved his flag to signal to the riders that the race had been stopped.
The inquiry report also said he appeared to have sprinted off the track for his own safety a finding strongly challenged by course officials.
Last night Aintree officials leapt to the defence of Mr Evans and vowed to vigorously challenge any disciplinary action against alleged breaches of racecourse rules.
Course chairman Peter Greenall said: ‘We are standing by him.
He is well qualified to do the job he has done for many years and we will continue to employ him at races.’
Father-of-two Mr Evans, the Aintree recall man for the past seven years, was not at his home in Bryn, near Wigan, yesterday.
He and his wife, Edna, were known to be distraught by the National furore.
Nevertheless, Mr Evans has continued working at Aintree's sister course at Haydock.
The inquiry also blasted Mr Evans for standing too close to the start- line.
‘We suspect that he was primarily concerned to leave the course as soon as possible because of the proximity of his selected position to the start,’ it said.
But the investigators stressed it would be ‘unfair and unrealistic’ for Mr Evans to carry the sole blame for fiasco.
Race starter Captain Keith Brown was also criticised for allowing the horses to line up too close to the start line, which led to the tape twice being broken.
It also found that the ‘grey gate’ starting system used at Aintree was outdated and inadequate and blamed the course executive and the Jockey Club for not replacing it.
When stewards realised what had happened after the second false start there was ‘a period of shocked dismay’ before anyone tried to stop the runaway field.
The judge, a Jockey Club member, said they had reached their conclusion after studying hours of video tape of the race.
Captain Brown yesterday issued a statement welcoming the report in which he refuted allegations made in the racing newspaper, Sporting Life, that he had prevented a review of the starting procedures.
Comment Page 16 
Flashback to the start of the Grand National a farce that shocked a worldwide TV audience
Mr Justice Connell and fellow-Jockey Club members Len
Cowburn, left, and Stan Mellor at yesterday's conference 
Flagman Ken Evans: Not at his Wigan home yesterday
Aussie star under wraps after 5.00am phone calls
Shane-spotters Warned-off
SHANE WARNE is officially out of bounds to admiring females and story-hunting newsmen.
Australia's match-winning legspinner broke hearts on both sides of the world this weekend by announcing his engagement to his Melbourne sweetheart Simone Callahan.
And the tourists' management then dealt a blow to the posse of reporters chasing Warne by declaring: ‘No more interviews.’
Talent
The 23-year-old Victorian, nicknamed ‘Hollywood’ because of his film star looks, has become cricket's hottest property for years.
These days, that's because of his success rate on the field.
But there were times when he had just as big a reputation off it.
By Warne's own admission, the summer of 1989 he spent playing club cricket in Bristol was memorable because ‘we used to drink, drink and drink and do what boys would do.’
All that changed, however, when he realised a rich talent for spin bowling was in danger of going to waste.
The first Test at Old Trafford eight wickets, including that unforgettable first ball dismissal of Mike Gatting must have convinced any remaining doubters that Warne will be a key figure this summer.
His private life also looks in good order following that weekend proposal to blonde model Simone, who is following the tour from London.
‘It's all official I'm engaged and both sets of parents are very happy with the news,’ said Warne.
He celebrated the occasion, appropriately enough in Bristol, by helping to polish off Gloucestershire's first innings yesterday morning.
Having taken four wickets on Saturday, Warne had Jack Russell caught behind off a top edged sweep to finish with 5–61.
The spinner was then allowed to talk about his engagement ‘we haven't fixed a wedding day yet’ before being put under wraps.
‘All the attention Shane has been receiving from the media is very flattering, but it's getting a bit out of control with phone calls at 5.00am,’ said coach Bob Simpson.
‘We want him to be able to concentrate on the Tests from here on.’
Having dismissed Gloucs for 211 Australia raced to 400 all out by close of play with Matthew Hayden, David Boon, Mark Waugh and Damien Martyn all contributing explosive half centuries.
SHANE WARNE
Fenced in
Decision delights Aintree officials
No knuckles rapped over National fiasco
By Andrew Forgrave Daily Post Staff
JOCKEY Club officials investigating last April's Grand National fiasco have voted against disciplinary action.
Yesterday's decision concluded one of the most embarrassing chapters in racing history and brought the curtain down on the ‘National That Never Was.’
Aintree Racecourse management last night welcomed the verdict which, it said, vindicated its position.
Jockey Club stewards ruled there was no breach of racing's regulations despite the failure of the recall system which reduced the world's greatest steeplechase to a shambles.
Under the rules, the Aintree executive could have faced stiff fines.
Chairman Peter Greenall said: ‘Of course we are delighted with the decision.
‘We've had three months of investigation and it's important that we now look forward to next year's National when we are expecting large crowds.’
The Jockey Club was meeting in London yesterday to discuss the findings of an inquiry led by Mr Justice Connell
The Connell report said £28-a-day recall man Ken Evans had twice failed to raise his flag and accused him of standing too close to the start line.
It also criticised starter Captain Keith Brown for lining up the horses too close to the tape and described the starting gate as outdated.
The case centred on whether acting Aintree steward Rod Fabricus had thoroughly briefed Capt Brown and Mr Evans on their duties during the race.
The fact that mistakes happened was irrelevant.
A Jockey Club statement said: ‘In the view of the stewards, no error of judgment highlighted by the committee arises from or is attributable to any breach of the rules of racing, nor does any such error of itself amount to such a breach.
‘Accordingly, there will be no disciplinary inquiry.’
Many observers feel 57year-old Mr Evans, of Bryn, near Wigan, was made the scapegoat for the Grand National disaster.
He and his wife, Edna, are on holiday in Germany.
A Jockey Club inquiry into alternative starting procedures is expected to recommend changes when it reports at the end of the summer.
Ken Evans
Peter Greenall
Jones throat scare forces management to bolster tour squad
Bangor college's delight at £330,000 cash bonanza
By David Greenwood Daily Post Staff
RESEARCH programmes at a North Wales college were given a big cash boost last night.
University College, Bangor, has revealed that it is to get an extra £330,000 from the Higher Education Funding Council for Wales as part of a £2.1m handout to Welsh colleges.
Bangor's share is the second highest award and follows £830,000 given to University College, Cardiff.
Delighted Bangor principal Professor Eric Sunderland said the money would be used for two projects involving quality and collaborative research initiatives.
On the quality research side it will enable the college to create a chair in ecology, two post doctoral fellows and a research technician in the School of Biological Sciences, a marine geochemistry chair in the School of Ocean Sciences and two post doctoral fellows in the department of psychology.
Said Prof Sunderland: ‘We believe that it was the international reputation of these departments, together with the strength and imaginative nature of the particular proposals that ensured that Bangor did so well.’
The other initiative is designed to promote collaborative research between higher education institutions in Wales.
With the University Colleges of Cardiff and Swansea, Bangor's departments of psychology and Welsh will study the Welsh language and the school of history and Welsh history, and along with University College Aberystwyth will examine Welsh rulers in the 12th and 13th centuries.
Other Bangor departments involved are: Agricultural and forest sciences, mathematics, electronic engineering and computer systems, chemistry and english and linguistics.
Under the awards £284,000 will go to Aberystwyth and £130,000 to the North East Wales Institute.
Professor Sir John Cadogan, chairman of the research council which advised the council on the allocations, said: ‘We went straight to the heads of the institutions to ask them what were their best bets for boosting the numbers of their top-notch research ratings.
‘We wanted to find out where this money could really make a difference and were excited by what we saw.’