

The Northern Echo
DOWN TOWN
THE year of the monkey dawned last week.
Stowell Street, Newcastle's Chinatown, first-footed trepidantly.
Physically the street is little changed.
Telephone kiosks remain pagoda-topped, Chinese lanterns hang high from harm's way, the School of English and the snooker club are neighbours.
Table talk is of hard times, though.
The Good Food Guide has also been dropping Stowell Street like a hot skillet, only the Dragon House among its dozen or so restaurants surviving into the 1992 edition.
In 1987 there were four.
A little gift shop (there's a Chinese supermarket too) sells effigies of Chinese high priests ‘to ward off evil,’ says the ticket.
Perhaps they've heard the economic forecast.
We lunched at the Royal Circle, immaculate and relaxed except for the restless pacings of the under-employed waiters.
Maybe they were anxious to be at the School of English, maybe at the place next door to it.
(Memo to restless waiter: old English proverb say unhygienic to wipe nose on back of hand.)
Last Monday, New Year's Eve, they had a £22 a head banquet attended by that great Peking tradition, the karaoke machine.
(Second old English proverb; if you can't beat ‘em, join ‘em.)
The restaurant specialises in fish, though not, hopefully, the ‘shredded duck in oyster flavour’ soup.
If that's how oyster's flavoured, it's nearest equivalent is brine.
King prawns cooked in chilli salt and pepper was very much better, a simple dish succulently executed.
Set lunch is £5.50, with a couple of Cokes (honest) and a coffee this one came to nearly £15.
New Year treat.
TAKING NOTE
A CHAP in Middlesbrough has written concerning our reference, ages ago, to the youth of that fair town as ‘vacuous’.
‘Now I've finally discovered what it means, I'm surprised you were so kind,’ he says.
A typewritten letter, too, from dear old Indecipherable of Chester-le-Street enthusing about the ‘delightful’ Thai grub at the Wardles Bridge Inn between Durham and Stanley.
He also encloses a Sunday Times piece on singer Lou Reed ‘the biggest problem Lou Reed has faced over the years,’ it says, ‘a scourge more potent than all the addictions, the feuds and fights with record companies, is his handwriting.’
We can't make this out at all.
SCHOOL'S OWT
SOMEONE from our organisation gave a talk at a primary school in Darlington the other day.
Just about the most common spelling mistake, they told him, is that the bairns spell ‘owt’ like that.
Obviously high fliers.
RICHMOND RICHES
PLENTY of good, home-made hot dishes at Willows, a new-ish and informal place in Richmond upstairs inside the Gray Friars arcade past some cartoons of a dog named Sam.
Staples embrace baked potatoes, giant Yorkshires, Welsh rarebit, curry and salads; specials one lunchtime last week included  tagliatelle , steak and kidney pie and a fish dish that eludes the memory.
Children can have half portions.
(Perhaps if we ate more fish the old brain cells might multiply a bit.)
Leek and potato soup (£1.55) came with excellent bread but would have been less bland with a few spices thrown around; conversely a fresh off the bone chicken curry (£3.50) could have been enhanced by some fruit.
Reader recommendations are uniformly encouraging.
‘The best little restaurant in Richmond,’ says one.
We wouldn't disagree.
GONE WEST
IF THERE are two tomatoes on horseback, asked our bairns, which one's the cowboy?
Neither.
They're both redskins.
THREE pretty  indescribable but noisy bands with growing national, even international, reputations play at Darlington Arts Centre on Friday.
An insider in what used to be termed ‘hardcore’ until techno stole the word has kindly agreed to outline the attributes of Sofa Head, Leatherface and Gan.
Gan: ‘Melodic pop-punk from Lincolnshire.
Four geeks with a fine line in catchy, hard-hitting thrash tunes and a nasty habit of covering Wombles songs’.
Leatherface: ‘Scrap-metal punk from Sunderland’.
Their third LP Mush has spent ‘80 per cent of the time since its release in the indie Top 20’, and the Arts Centre date is their last appearance in the UK before a 46-date tour of Europe which will be following by excursions to Japan and the U.S.
Sofa Head: ‘We make no excuses and expect none back’.
The Darlington-based band's new LP Acres of Geeses reached the Indie Top 30 in its first week of release.
It is said to be ‘a frantic cocktail of hardcore, funk and psychedelic country acappella from the North's third best band’.
In a recent interview the rather eccentric group claimed to be the disciples of David Icke.
Further details, if there can possibly be any, from Darlington Arts Centre (0325–483168).
Hug, The Poppyfield and Procession have joined forces for a three-band, three-date extravaganza.
Hartlepool's Procession host the first show at the Empire in Middlesbrough on Monday; Hug take the tour to Newcastle Poly on March 2, and on March 5 the Poppyfield bring it to Perry's in Darlington where the Autumn Divers will also be on the bill.
Nearly-legendary Darlington saxophonist Steve Bone and his new band the Jazz Providers have lined up two residencies.
On February 18 they start at the Tap and Spile in Darlington where they will play every other Tuesday, and on February 23 they play their first date at Queen Catherines Hotel, Osmotherly, which is also a fortnightly affair.
Stop press announcement: this weekend tickets should go on sale for The Rye's concert at Doc's Orders in Darlington on March 27.
The date will be the first time the group's new seven-track CD recording for which finished earlier this week will be on sale.
It is expected the £3 tickets for the show will sell out quickly.
Further details from Doc's Orders or HMR Management (0642–240170).
Chris Lloyd
Inspiral Carpets; Middlesbrough Town Hall YOU can tell that Inspiral Carpets are a big name band.
They've got an expensive light show to prove it.
It seemed a touch ill-suited to the Town Hall on Tuesday night but at least the music shone through.
The band, who promised to be massive after an effortless rise to the top during the Manchester thingy in 1990, eventually became a figure of fun in the music Press.
They came across as corporate mercenaries obsessed with money and equipment and, fittingly, they were big in Japan.
The pop formula that produced Hammond organ-driven classics like Joe and Find Out Why was ditched in favour of ponderous, ‘meaningful’ singles.
It was all a bit pompous.
Two years ago at an exhibition centre gig the military two-step intro to their Top 20 hit She Comes in the Fall was played by Lancashire's version of the Dagenham Girl Pipers.
An Essex Girl joke but everyone was laughing at the Carpets.
The release of a new single, Dragging Me Down, and a tour of more modest venues is proof of a going back to their roots approach to catch a new generation of fans.
Why else would they book two support acts, Airhead and the Frank and Walters, from the latest vintage of hip young things.
Airhead, especially, put on an impressive live showing of reliable pop that belied their rather ordinary singles.
The rug has been pulled from under the feet of Inspiral Carpets as the kids have turned to Techno but they will always find a market for the sprightly pop fun delivered tonight, even if there was 20 minutes too much.
Graham Dunbar
Fast acting
WHEN Graham Gabriel says he needs three actors who can learn lines quickly and accurately he is not being over-dramatic.
If they start today they have something under three weeks before treading the boards.
The parts are key ones in an adaptation of a novel by Flann O'Brien called The Third Policeman.
If the play is half as funny as the book it will be a rip-roaring affair.
‘There aren't that many words to learn but they are are important ones,’ said director Gabriel by way of encouragement.
The production, under the auspices of writers' group Action Faction, will be at Dovecot Arts Centre and Queen's Hall, Hexham.
It also requires two sit up and beg bicycles, against the handlebars of which, presumably, it may be possible to lean a copy of the script.
Inside out CONTINUING on matters dramatic.
It may be nothing or it may be something that Durham Theatre Company, formed one thought to take theatre to places in the county which never have the opportunity to see it, has a new production out soon.
Women In Love will be seen ten times inside Co Durham and 16 times outside it.
But investigations by The Northern Echo and the Durham Co-operative Development Association (DCDA) have revealed that some of the places earmarked for men from Plawsworth hostel in County Durham are already spoken for.
And 21 of the alternative places identified by Ann Widdecombe, parliamentary secretary for social security, are actually in a North Tyneside hostel set aside for women only.
Others hostels are already either full or will not be ready when the Plawsworth hostel closes.
The Northern highlighted on Saturday the plight of the men at the 74bed Resettlement Agency at Plawsworth, between Durham City and Chester-le-Street.
It is one of four units run by the agency, which comes under the Department of Social Security, which are due to close next month.
Staff have formed a co-operative and hoped to buy the hostel and run it with backing from Durham County Council.
But their bid has been knocked back by the Government which claimed their independent valuation was only about half the real value.
They are preparing a new bid but meanwhile homeless men are already being turned away as staff have been told to run down the unit ready for closure on March 31.
There are currently 43 men aged between 18 and 75, living at the Plawsworth.
Keith Briars, Northern director of the Resettlement Agency, said 82 alternative places were being provided, 64 of which would be open by the time Plawsworth closed.
Ann Widdecombe backed his claim.
However, eighteen beds said to be available at the Peasholme Centre in York are already full.
A member of staff at the centre, who asked not to be named, said: ‘If there were another six beds here we could fill them without any help from outside.’
According to a DCDA telephone survey four places in Stockton are said to be very rarely vacant and 21 on North Tyneside, due to be ready from April, are already subject to a long waiting list.
The DCDA said a further 18 beds in Middlesbrough were unlikely to be available before summer 1993.
Karl Friedrich Schinkel (1781–1841), City Art Gallery, York (until March 14).
REGARDED as the greatest German architect of the 19th century, Karl Friedrich Schinkel could, in the spirit of the age, turn his hand to most things from a design in spiky Gothic to the boldly neo-classical of the Greek revival.
First known as a Romantic painter of German landscape, he also distinguished himself as a set designer, an architect and a designer of churches.
And added to his talents was that of great traveller.
The drawings he made at various ports of call provide the main burden of this show arranged by the Goethe-Institut.
These include a number of drawings from Britain though there is nothing, alas, from York, Durham or Newcastle, all of which were visited.
Studying industry and industrial working conditions provided Schinkel's diary with room for drawings of canals and mills in Manchester as well as bridges throughout the land.
Together with all this there is a most damning expose of working class conditions.
All in all, it is a most fascinating outsider's insight into our industrial history.
Cleveland Art Society Winter Exhibition, Municipal Art Gallery, Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough (until February 29).
Thanks to some very skilful hanging each of the four rooms used has a very distinctive flavour all its own.
Room two has a very real salty tang of the sea with a range of nautical themes including three-dimensional sculptural work including a superb leaping Dolphin in gypsums and acrylic by Harry Spensley as well as a pair of porcelain ducks by Shirley Hetherington.
Room Three has powerful landscapes in a great variety of media by John Carter and Dennis Watling with landscapes overflowing into Room Four, this time predominantly in watercolour and pastel, effectively a series of one-person shows by Ronald Durrans, Maurice Heatley (again), Elsie Robertson, Eric Gendle and Joan Waddington.
Upstairs, Room Five opens out with a sequence of flowers paintings introduced by Tom McAndrew with a little gem of an African Violet and between the Abstracts, portraits and a few more still life paintings.
Beyond in Room Eight Victoria Tansley Davison, one of four young students from Cleveland College of Art exhibited, offers a striking package deal in red, black and white of invitation card, catalogue cover, poster and carrier bag for goodies for her own projected, first one-person exhibition.
Sideshow Jewellery by Jenni Neal, Cleveland Crafts Centre, Gilkes Street, Middlesbrough (until February 22) Recently graduated from Epsom College of Art and Design, Jenni Neal is setting up a workshop in Cleveland where she intends to specialise in making a range of stained wood and inlaid jewellery.
In this fascinating introductory Sideshow, she offers a number of choice things that range from small, long drop, earrings in silver and in pine that is coloured either red or green and retail at £10 a pair, to much larger things such as the brass and oxidised copper weighing Scales with their central zigzag column motif that will set you back a mere £270.
For good measure there are also bangles in a combination of either silver and rosewood or padouk and copper which are tastefully represent at an angle on neatly placed, shallow paper cones.
John Brelstaff Early and Late, Dovecot Art Centre, Stockton (until February 28).
Now that he has retired from full time teaching, Guisborough-based John Brelstaff is able to devote more of his time to painting and has been able to resume the work left off when he left the Slade in the mid-Fifties.
As the title of this present show suggests, there are works from those early student days with a leavening from his period of teaching in between and now brought up to date with a batch of more recent work.
Many of the paintings are portraits but there is also a large, panoramic, hotly-coloured Expressionist canvas of the Judas kiss in the Betrayal of Christ, set somewhat exotically in North Africa.
Other equally emotional involved works include a handful of landscapes of the countryside around Guisborough itself.
Best of all though, is the number of fine etched and engraved Life studies and to cap it all the two post-Cubist paintings of the Nude.
Kites of the Far East, Durham Art Gallery in the DLI Museum, Aykley Heads (until February 23).
From the annual kite flying festivals here in the North-East, as well as the input to the Japanese festivals of both 1986 and 1991, one might almost think the Land of the Rising Sun had a monopoly in this particular form of art and entertainment.
Not so.
Indeed, the whole idea stems from China and is credited to a General Han Hsin some time in the fifth century.
The Chinese tended to make their kites in the outlined shapes of either fish such as the blue or red card or as birds such as the stuffed owls and vultures shown here.
Japanese kites, and there are almost a score here to set beside nearly 90 examples from China, tend to be either square or diamond-shaped and to be emblazoned with fearsome images of the heads of actors from the Kabuki stage.
From the token half dozen kits from Malaysia we can also see not only the difference in basic shape, but also the lavishly conspicuous consumption of gold paint to provide an overall decoration of either flowers or clouds.
For children of all ages this is a fascinating display and one, dare I say it, which reaches new heights.
Name: Chris Rea.
Born: Middlesbrough, March 4, 1951.
How do you pronounce his name?
Chris as in hiss.
Not his first name, his surname: In future make your questions clear, ferret features.
The answer is: rear as in diarrhoea.
Other famous Reas: Rear window; bring up the rear; Anneka Rice.
The list is bottomless, no doubt, but what about his humble origins?
His father was a North-East ice cream trader.
Early music influences: His sister's record collection.
Late starter, was he?
Sure was, he didn't have any interest personally in music until he was 20 when he started playing the guitar.
What he says about it: ‘Music was always with me.
The first time I heard Joe Walsh it was like a religious revelation.
Within a week of that, I owned a guitar.’.
First public appearances: In an acoustic trio on a ‘sing-song level in cafe-bar situation’.
Gigs with a working men's club band and a solo stint in a club in Saltburn.
Other jobs: labourer on a building site; a rheumatic therapy chair salesman.
Please continue: He was in a local professional band called Magdelene, recorded So Much Love (but nobody noticed).
The group changed its name to The Beautiful Losers and won Melody Maker's best newcomers of 1975 award (but nobody noticed).
Rea split from the group (but nobody noticed).
What next?
Developed as a singer-songwriter.
In the late 1970s people in England and America finally began to notice him.
Facts and figures, please: His first single Fool (If You Think It's Over) was a top ten hit in America six months after it was first released (when nobody noticed).
Other songs: Include Stainsby Girls, inspired by a Middlesbrough school close to his heart.
How's he been described?
A thick-set Middlesbrough man with a combative side to his nature and a Teessider's impatience with the bull he finds inherent in the music industry.
Anything else?
Reluctant rock star; Britain's top secret pop star; cornershop (because he's careful with his; singer-songwriter with the conquistadorial looks; somewhere between Marlboro man and Middlesbrough man, part philosophising cowboy, part dour Northerner.
What they've said about his music: There's a degree of sentimentality in his songs.
And about his voice?
As much a part of Middlesbrough as the Transporter Bridge.
Words of Rea himself: There's no room for showbiz in my life; I'm down to earth; I take all that fame with a pinch of salt.
Odd fact: In 1988 a statue fell on his hand while he was building a fountain at his Windsor home.
If he wasn't so careful with his money, of course, he'd employ a builder and not risk injuring his guitar hand.
THE Wolfgang Press, the enigmatic 4AD band, make a rare visit to the North-East next week.
The band, who have a knack of warping classic soul songs, play Newcastle Riverside on Sunday and Middlesbrough Arena on Monday.
The Wolfies have been around for almost ten years but have never made any major dents on the charts.
But they found funk with their last album Queer and have created their own highly danceable, hypnotic music.
Further details on their tour are available from Riverside on  or the Arena on .
Top form:
Over 400  schoolchildren this week visited the Redcar City Challenge exhibition at the Redcar Bowl which runs all day today.
Noteworthy concert:
Alfred Walter will conduct flautist David Haslam and harpist Bryn Lewis, who are to perform with the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra in a Viennese evening of Strauss and Mozart with the Northern Sinfonia Orchestra at Middlesbrough Town Hall on February 26.
Way forward:
A workshop on training opportunities and the potential for women on Teesside is being held at Deltic House, Middlesbrough on February 26.
Theatre visit:
Mockbeggar Theatre Company, the North's long-estestablished disabled people's theatre company, visits Kirby College, Middlesbrough on February 26 as part of its national with a production of In Through The Out Door.
Today
BILLINGHAM:
Billingham Gingerbread, a friendly group for single parents and their children, both males and females, meetings every Saturday, 46pm.
Details, tel..
HARTLEPOOL:
Hartlepool Film Society presents Postcards From The Edge, College of Art, Church Square, 7pm.
Membership details, tel.
Hartlepool 269028.
Concert by the Carlton Main Frickley Colliery Band, Town Hall Theatre, Raby Road, 7.30pm.
Tickets, tel.
Hartlepool 266522 ext 2407.
REDCAR:
Redcar Gingerbread, Redcar Youth Centre, Coatham Road, 10am.
Details, tel.
Eileen on Redcar 471800.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Guisborough Folk Club, guest Nick Dow, Rugby Club, Belmangate, Guisborough, 8pm.
Farmscapes Saxon to Modern, a guided walk around the mixed farmland of Hart Village to look at farming, history and wildlife, meet Mike Pratt outside Saxon Church, Hart, 2pm.
Hartlepool Folk Song Club, singers, musicians and listeners all welcome, Tap and Spile, Stranton Green, Hartlepool, 8.30pm.
Jazz with the Jeremy McMurray Quintet, Potters Bar, Dundas Mews, Dundas Arcade, Middlesbrough, 8.30–11pm.
Bridge to Bridge, walk along the Teesdale Way from Stockton to Middlesbrough, meet Tees Valley wardens at Riverside Car Park, Stockton, 10am.
Transport provided back to Stockton. 3 hours duration.
Cleveland Group of the Ramblers, 6 mile walk, meet at Town Hall, Stokesley, 2pm.
Details, tel.
Redcar 474864.
Leven Antique Fair, Village Hall, Wolviston.
MONDAY:
Folk at the Vic, local singers and musicians, The Victoria, Dundas Street, Saltburn, 8.30pm.
Stockton Hard of Hearing, Alma Street Centre, Stockton, 6.30pm.
TUESDAY:
Middlesbrough Barbershop Singers, Methodist Church Hall, The Grove, Marton, Middlesbrough.
Details, tel.
821908.
New members welcome.
Stockton band Dirty Boots are appearing at The Waterfront, Stockton, 9pm.
WEDNESDAY:
Hartlepool Jazz Club, with Jack Liang and Douggie Pugh, Images Bar, The Grand Hotel, Hartlepool, 8pm.
Free.
New Orleans Ragtime Band play at the Travellers Rest, Hartlepool, 8.30pm.
Every Wednesday.
Transport 2000 meeting, 100 Miles Of North East Railway To Go?
Plus Politics and Privatisation, Library, Church Road, Stockton, 7pm.
Details, tel.
Stockton 611032.
Left standing
NED KELLY, the dirtiest comic this side of the ozone layer, never swore once when he was on the phone the other day.
The Profesor of Filth, soon to be star of a video, is a decent bloke, hardly blinds at all off the stage.
But whether he retains his title may be  doubtful .
News has come through about one Alan Parker who performs in York next week.
Parker is said to be the self-confessed most Left wing man in Britain, an urban warrior with a mission.
‘Like a mad young Alf Garnett,’ it is said, ‘he gives his thoughts and offers solutions on various subjects like the government, the situation, the environment, the police, the pol tax, art, society.’
and so on.
Well, young Alan may be wilder, may even swear more but old Geordie Ned, a pound to a penny, is funnier.
Water colour
RECONSTRUCTING a lifeboat rescue is not far off being as difficult as the rescue itself.
Of course, you don't have the rocky seas, the ten feet waves and real men at risk of drowning and these aspects are hard to simulate.
Still, artist Philip Boville who is depicting a rescue in the North Sea off Redcar 15 years ago is making progress.
He reports that a trip to Catterick Camp to set up rope ladders on the  assault course was heavy going.
But he now hopes to assemble original crew members, perhaps in their original positions with other RNLI lads playing other roles in the rescue effected by the Sir James Knott.
‘I can then get some sketches, build on them and get a true picture of what happened.
I still hope I can finish by July.’
Dream on…
FROM the North-East's premier orchestra comes an offer which surely could be refused.
‘A visit to the city of dreams is on offer from the Northern Sinfonia on their next visit to Middlesbrough,’ it discloses.
What, one wondered, had the Boro to do with dreams?
It turns out Middlesbrough is not what the musicians have in mind.
Later this month in Middlesbrough they are playing a programme entirely from Vienna.
A small but important part of Middlesbrough's Vistorian heritage is to be saved and restored and used as an education centre.
West Lodge in Albert Park, designed by C J Adams, who designed the now demolished Royal Exchange in Albert Road, was built in 1866 but has been empty since 1979.
Lifetime's passion for painting
THE quality control laboratories at ICI Billingham may seem an unlikely place for artistic yearnings.
But for Mr Maurice Healey, 13 years spent testing the strength of cotton and looking for flaws caused his passion for painting to blossom.
And this month he saw four of his works displayed in an exhibition by members of Cleveland Art Society at Middlesbrough Art Gallery in Linthorpe Road.
He describes his work with the chemical company as ‘one of the single most soul-destroying things you can do.’
‘After 13 years of it I knew I wanted to go into painting full-time,’ he said.
‘When I first left school I did a foundation course in art but after my national service I went into industry.’
In his spare time he painted with Cleveland Art Society and took his paints with him whenever his family went on holiday.
‘We took the caravan to Teesdale every weekend during the season and I would make sketches of landscapes or take photos and paint them when I got home.
‘Langstrath in Borrowdale is a particular favourite and I have painted that one lots of times,’ he says Mr Healey, aged 57, who lives in Kirkleatham Avenue, Redcar, left his job and enrolled on a teaching degree course at Teesside College of Education, to combine his love of painting with his desire to share the skill When he qualified in 1974, he started teaching art at St. Thomas' School, Middlesbrough, before moving to St. Peter's Roman Catholic School, South Bank, where he has taught for 13 years.
He still finds time to draw and paint for pleasure during the day.
‘I get most of my paintings done during lunch-times,’ he says.
‘Some take a month to complete and some only take about a week, but it's very difficult to put a time on paintings.’
He is current chairman of Cleveland Art Society, which has around 100 members and meets once a week at Middlesbrough Art Gallery.
The exhibition runs until the beginning of March.
‘I joined 25 years ago and I became chairman in 1981 for five years,’ he says.
‘I have just been elected chairman again for this year I am very much involved with the society so it just makes sense really.’
In fact he admits that art seems to take over his life at times.
‘It's a compulsion I have, to draw, to paint.
For as long as I can remember it's been that way.’
‘I never get sick of it but I think my wife does.’
Mr Healey with some of his work.
SINGER Sam Sorono, who appeared on the last series of Granada TV's Stars in their Eyes competition impersonating Tom Jones and again last Saturday has been voted Vocalist of the Year by readers of the national club magazine Club Mirror.
The award came as a big surprise for Sam but an even bigger surprise for the Joe Borrows Agency who already had the Bradford-based singer booked at the Great Ayton Social Club on the night of the awards show.
However, Great Ayton members won't miss out on the deal because his appearance there has been rescheduled for Sunday, March 1.
Other dates in the region include Sunday, March 22, at Owton Manor Social Club; Wednesday, March 25, at Grangetown British Legion and Saturday, March 28 the day before the awards show at Brambles Farm Social Club.
— A Charity Night at Peterlee Labour Club next Thursday will feature local singer Ray Graveson.
There will also be raffles and bingo in aid of The MacMillan Nurses Fund for Cancer Relief.
Admission 50p. — Don't miss Johnny McEvoy and his six piece Irish Band at Cockerton Band Club on Wednesday, February 26.
Tickets £4. — Dormans Social Club, Oxford Road, Middlesbrough, still presents top entertainment six nights a week with first class shows every Thursday to Monday inclusive.
Dancers are also catered for, with music by Chris and Mick every Wednesday and Sunday.
Included in their forthcoming attractions is the appearance of TV comedian Tom O'Connor on Tuesday March 24. — Nostalgia is the keyword at the fortnightly meetings of the Dad's Music Club at Seaton Social Club, Station Road, Seaton Carew.
The afternoon session is organised and hosted by Ian Charlton, the popular presenter of the BBC Radio Cleveland Sunday lunchtime programme Dad's Music, and currently attracts around 80 members every other Thursday.
The session starts around 2pm when the old faithfuls sit back and wallow in nostalgia as they listen to their favourite bands and singers Chick Henderson is always high on the list of course or dance to the records, spinning at 78rpm.
The Dad's Music programme has been running on Middlesbrough's local radio station ever since it started broadcasting in 1970.
Ian took over in 1974 and will soon be celebrating his 90th programme in the chair.
— Ex-Starz vocalist Steven is now into his fourth week as a solo act working under the name of Wade Steven.
The popular four-piece group Starz split up at the beginning of the year.
— The 1992 Pubs, Clubs and Hotels Exhibition will be held at Gateshead International Stadium on March 3, 4 and 5. — A show organised by clubland entertainer Terry Milligan in memory of his mother-in-law and former stewardess at Newcastle East Conservative Club, the late Katie Brown, raised £1,000 for the Fight Against Cancer Trust, based at Newcastle Freeman Hosptial. — Presentations to the winners of the West Durham Snooker League will be held at Horndale Social Club, Newton Aycliffe on Friday, April 3. — Popular organiser John Beattie is now resident at Old Shildon Social Club every Saturday and Monday night playing for dancing.
— In the past few weeks, Alan Butterfield and Fred Wilcoxson, members of the club committee have received Certificates of Merit from the CIU. — Darlington's Hopetown and Whessoe Social Club is aiming to raise at least £1,000 for charity before Easter.
The club holds an annual Charity Round, between Christmas and Easter, raising money for local charities through raffles, weekly tickets, concerts and a prize draw with a £500 top prize.
Secretary Gordon Dixon explained: ‘Over the past few years we have given cheques to various charities including Childen in Need and this year it was decided to send the proceeds of our charity drive to the Darlington and District Hospice.
Members of the club also add their bit to the organised Charity Round.
In 1990 the club's oldest member Sid Arrowsmith celebrated his 90th birthday by taking a 13-mile stroll in aid of Talking Books for the Blind.
He was made an honorary member of the club and given the promise of free beer for the rest of his life.
— News from your club is always welcome.
Telephone Neil Harris on  now!
Awards night:
An awards ceremony will be held at Darlington College of Technology on March 6 at 7.30pm.
Dr Oliver Coulthard, deputy director of Teesside Polytechnic, is to present about 50 awards to students.
Stardust tonic:
Pop star Alvin Stardust, who is appearing at Darlington's Civic Theatre in the musical, A Slice of Saturday Night, will present cheques to various charities at the Cleveland shopping centre, Middlesbrough, next Wednesday.
The cash was collected when the centre held a display of animated panto characters during the Christmas period.
Hospital mural:
A second mural is to be painted by children's ward patients and local artist Steven Cairney at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
Today
BROMPTON:
Live music with Fidler Hill, Three Horse Shoes, Station Road, Northallerton, 8.30pm.
Free admission.
HACKFORTH:
Domino Drive, proceeds for Northallerton and District Diabetic Club, Village Hall, nr Bedale, 7.30pm.
LEYBURN:
Table Top Sale, Methodist Church Hall, 2pm.
REETH:
Cake Stall, Community Centre, 2–4pm.
RICHMOND:
Soroptimists coffee morning, Town Hall, 9am-noon.
Richmondshire Ramblers nine-mile Harland Hill walk, Nun's Close car park, Richmond, 9.30am.
Belly dancing classes, every Saturday, Eau de Vie Health Club, Darlington Road, Richmond, 2–4pm.
Ladies Meet Committee organised dance with the Ozzy Osbourne Road Show and group Dynamite, Richmond Cricket Club, Richmond, 8pm-12midnight.
Tickets £3, tel Richmond 822840.
Proceeds to Centenary funds.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Book Fair, Allertonshire School, Brompton Road, Northallerton, 10am-4.30pm.
Antiquarian, secondhand books and postcards.
Admission 50p.
Stand inquiries, tel 0609–773964 evenings.
Hambleton Ramblers, Stan Everington leads a ten-mile walk taking in forest rides, field paths and open moors, Laskill pastures and Pockly Moor, meet Market Cross, Northallerton, 9am or Clark Bank 9.45am GR 595904.
MONDAY:
National Council for Divorced and Separated, Town Football Club, Northallerton, 8pm.
Details, tel 777326.
TUESDAY:
Northallerton Mowbray Folk Dance Club, Grammar School, Northallerton, 7.30pm.
Every Tuesday.
Details, tel 770439.
Today
BILLINGHAM:
Billingham Gingerbread Group for single parents and their children, meets 4–6pm.
Details, tel.
Billingham 361608.
REDCAR:
Redcar Gingerbread Group, Redcar Youth Centre, Coatham Road, 10am.
Details, tel.Redcar 471800.
The Clare Singers presents Joseph and the Amazing Technicolour Dreamcoat, in aid of the Children's Society, Rye Hills School Hall, Redcar, 7.15pm.
Tickets, tel.482681.
STOCKTON:
Stockton Theatre Company presents Whose Line Is It Anyway?
The Bar, Dovecot Arts Centre, 9pm.
Admission free.
Photography Workshop with Paul Hill, Dovecot Arts Centre, Stockton, 10am-5pm.
Fee £15.
Booking, tel.Stockton 611625.
All materials provided.
Coming up
SUNDAY:
Shaping Up The Woodland, have a go at traditional woodland management by taking part in coppicing work at Thorpe Wood, Castle Eden Walkway CP, meet at the visitor centre, 10am.
Leven Antiques Fair, Village Hall, Hutton Rudby.
Details, tel.
. Sandy Lane Hike, join Graham Megson to follow the ancient route, meet at Lazenby Bank Car Park off the A174, 10am.
Transport back from Guisborough.
Cleveland Group of the Ramblers, 6 mile walk, meet at Angel Hotel, Loftus, 2pm.
Details, tel.Redcar 474864.
MONDAY:
The Graham Russell Show, The Ritz, Park Road, Hartlepool, show starts 8.45pm.
Live jazz with the Old Glory Band, Highland Lad, Norton, Stockton, 8.30pm.
Folk at the Vic, local singers and musicians, The Victoria, Dundas Street, Saltburn, 8.30pm.
Stockton Folk Club, singaround, Sun Inn, Knowles Street, Stockton, 7.45pm.
Comedy Club Night, Harvey's Club Cafe, Stockton, 9pm.
Admission £2.
Stockton Hard of Hearing Club, Alma Street Centre, Stockton, 6.30pm.
TUESDAY:
Middlesbrough Barbershop Singers, Methodist Church Hall, The Grove, Marton, Middlesbrough.
Details, tel.821908.
Tuesday's Folk, singer's night, Tap & Barrel, Newport Road, Middlesbrough, 8.30pm.
Teesside Gramophone Society, Leeds University Centre, Harrow Road, Middlesbrough, 7.30pm.
North Tees Speakers' Club, The Stockton Club, 44 Yarm Road, Stockton, 7.30pm.
Details, tel.Stockton 583738.
Teesside Archaeological Society lecture, Lecture Hall, Library, Stockton, 7.15pm.
Entrance from the car park at the rear of the library.
IT'S just an illusion is the message from sculptor David Dye, who is confounding the eye with his ‘staircase’ at Cleveland Art Gallery.
People climb the staircase only to find it isn't a staircase at all.
The magical illusion is created using mirrors, lights and paint.
It is on show at the gallery in Victoria Road, Middlesbrough, until March 25.
There's something about a pot that fires the imagination: normally they are on a human manageable scale, are often made to be handled, and have attractive and eye-catching decoration.
Among the most striking types of decoration on pottery and porcelain is Lustre.
Recipes for it varied, but the basic result was a coloured metallic sheen on the surface of a pot.
This was created by painting onto the pot a thin film of gold, or platinum suspended in oils or solvents; when fired in a special kiln, the metals fused onto the pot, giving the lustrous effect.
The main colours created were gold,(known as copper lustre) silver and, perhaps most famously, pink or purple.
Here in the North-East lustreware pottery has been collected, written about and displayed in our museums.
This is because a large amount of lustre pottery was made in the region — so much so that any white-bodied pottery decorated with pink or purple lustre was, and sometimes still is, called Sunderland lustre, whether it was made in Sunderland or not.
The recently published book Collecting Lustreware goes a long way to correct such assumptions, for it gives a comprehensive account of all British pottery and porcelain manufacturers who are known to have made and/or decorated lustreware — and there was no shortage of them.
There were over 300 producers in Staffordshire alone.
The book conveniently divides them into Staffordshire and non-Staffordshire, this is an entirely justifiable division, for throughout the period when lustre decoration was used (from 1805 to the present) Staffordshire was the workshop of the world as far as ceramic production was concerned.
The non-Staffordshire firms include those of Wearside and Tyneside, Middlesbrough, Yorkshire, Wales and Scotland.
Little was known about the products of many of these areas, and much research still needs to be done but Collecting Lustreware goes a long way to redressing the balance.
It is gratifying to the region that tribute is paid to Sunderland Museum and Art Gallery: ‘The output of the Sunderland potteries as a whole is without doubt the best documented — one must be grateful to the Sunderland Museum for the research done — and for summarising it so admirably in the publication Sunderland Pottery.
‘The museum itself has a representative display of locally produced lustred earthenwares.’
The authors of Collecting Lustreware are eminent figures in the field of pottery and porcelain research and have each published books which advance the subject considerably.
They have sifted through an  extraordinary amount of information, and compiled a readable, thorough and ground-breaking account of the subject.
In describing the origins of lustre decoration, and attributing products or proprietors to particular factories, the authors turn detective to establish the facts behind the myths.
Who owned, and where was, the mysterious Factory Z?
Why was there thought to be a factory called Bramble in Newcastle?
Far from being dry and insignificant facts, the questions of attributing particular pots to particular people and places are treated with real and infectious enthusiasm.
An important, but often-neglected area in ceramic history is the consideration of ‘the people behind the pots’.
When admiring a piece of pottery it is sometime difficult to think of the individuals involved in its manufacture — not the proprietors or owners of the firm, but the workforce; the potters, the kilnmen who stacked, fired and controlled the kilns, the printers, the decorators and the numerous other people who performed their often strenuous tasks in conditions ranging from good to awful.
Though it is not within the province of Collecting Lustreware to treat this topic in depth, it is reassuring that this personal side of the industry is noted —‘British potters, often quite humble and now unremembered potters and their decorators — who were very often young boys or girls — used (lustre) to enhance inexpensive everyday earthenware articles.’
The book is also very well illustrated.
Thinking to the future, this will enable more accurate attributions to particular factories or regions as unmarked pieces are compared to the illustrated example.
However, as the authors themselves say: ‘Searching as we do for dates and names to attach to our pieces, we must never forget that such information is a mere bonus.’
The beauty of these pieces often speaks for itself, and is the main reason for them being collectable.
Unfortunately, the price of the book is terribly high — £75.
This will restrict the readership considerably, and this is a shame, for it is, and will remain for decades, the main book on the subject.
However, it could be obtained through local libraries if they are persuaded to stock this wonderful work of reference.
Collecting Lustreware will be of enormous benefit to this and future generations wanting to know more about the pottery and porcelain that comes their way.
It will also mean that prices of lustre pottery will rocket upwards — a good thing if you have some, but not so good for those collectors just starting out.
However, with knowledge gleaned from books like this, displays in museums, an eagle eye and infinite patience, bargains could, and will still be found — for tens of pounds, rather than hundreds.
Collecting Lustreware by Geoffrey Godden and Michael Gibson is published by Barrie and Jenkins.
YOUNG model makers Kenton Smith and Sarah Szikora have set up in business with cash help and a little inspiration from a 1960s pop record.
Their firm, Wild Thing named after The Troggs' hit officially starts next week, making large papier mache models and sculptures.
Yesterday Kenton, 22, and Sarah, 20, both of Brompton-on-Swale, near Richmond, received a £1,000 cheque from the Prince's Youth Business Trust to help their venture.
The two-year loan, one of 150 given by the trust to young businesses in North Yorkshire, will go towards the cost of a van and machinery for their workshop at Brompton-on-Swale.
Kenton, a former attendant at Hambleton leisure centre, and Sarah, who has just finished her HND in illustration at Cleveland College, Middlesbrough, have also received £700 from North Yorkshire County Council and are awaiting the result of a grant application to Richmondshire District Council.
They will make the models which include sheep, giraffes, elephants and rhinos, for craft and gift shops to sell but also hope to receive commissions for shop window displays and from firms wanting the models as promotional displays.
They keep their production costs low and help the environment by recycling waste material such as newspapers and household plastic bottles.
The Prince's Youth Business Trust has also appointed a voluntary business adviser to the pair Colin Stegeman whose firm is in Brompton-on-Swale.
Their village post office has helped by providing them with a window display of Wild Thing models.
Kenton said: ‘We chose the name from The Troggs’ song because it symbolises what we make.’
Independent film productions have a hard time in this country.
Amber Film's latest success, Dream On, has achieved far more than most, with its inspiring blend of magic and realism.
The further you go, however, the bigger the obstacles.
The plus side has been remarkable.
Following its premiere at the Newcastle Odeon, it has been kept on, now, for a third week.
‘The audiences have been really good,’ says Amber's Kitty Fitzgerald.
‘In terms of numbers, box office records have been broken, but it's also the reaction the film gets.
Women start shouting out warnings to Kathy when they see Sharkey passing the window of the Indian restaurant.
I've not seen anything like it since I went to the cinema as a child.’
The reaction is a testimony to the female solidarity that the film celebrates and it hasn't just been a regional popularity.
Almost unprecedented in the independent film world, Dream On was given a London premiere at the Odeon, Leicester Square.
It's been kept on there for a second week with good houses and rave reviews from Time Out, What's On and Spare Rib.
These are reasons to be cheerful, but the studied neglect of the national press doesn't make only Kitty angry.
Independent British film makers from all over have been writing letters of complaint.
‘The Odeon in Leicester Square organised a press showing and we invited every national newspaper and all the London papers too.
‘The only critic to turn up was Dilys Powell and she's retired now.
‘She only came because she wanted to see the film.’
What do you have to do?
For years Amber were told that the problem lay in the lack of a London release.
There is a metropolitan parochialism in so much of London's media and arts world.
International work rooted in the regions of other countries is fine, but they look askance at anything coming from another British region.
‘You can see it in their eyes when they're talking to you.
You get a momentary flicker as if they acknowledge, suddenly, that there's an intelligent life form here, but it passes.
‘We've been told by distributors that if our films were French, they'd have no trouble with them at all.
‘We were asking people what we'd done wrong down there.
‘We were told what you needed to do was to start drinking in the Groucho Club, where all the critics go.’
Amber's Murray Martin is working with other independents on a strategy to counter the problem: ‘One of the basic assumptions we have to deal with is that films made in Britain cannot either break into the major circuit or survive in the market place,’ he says.
‘For some time, independents have argued for intervention on behalf of a British film industry: an initiative based around support for films with low production budgets, which neither copy American styles, nor turn into Euro-puddings.
‘We've been using Dream On as a kind of practical research, testing the possibilities.
‘It's being done in tandem with academic research into British production, distribution and exhibition over the past ten years.
The aim is to produce a proper strategy for the future of British cinema.’
Dream On is currently showing in Middlesbrough as well as Newcastle.
Showings in South Shields and Whitley Bay are coming up.
Meanwhile, it is launching into an impressive national tour.
Go and see it if you can.
MANAGERS of Binns in Middlesbrough yesterday covered up mannequins left naked in a shop window during a display change after a passer-by complained.
The woman, who asked not to be named, rang The Northern Echo and said: ‘I blinked in astonishment as I walked past.
They look so real.
Even when you realise they are dummies, they could still be considered offensive.’
Display manager John Birch said the complaint could have arisen because the store was using some male dummies for the first time in several years.
He said: ‘They are 100pc lifelike.
I got a postcard of one recently and I honestly thought it was a real woman.’
TEN more years!
That was the rallying cry of Cleveland Arts after its tenth anniversary exhibition in the St Mary's Centre, Middlesbrough, yesterday.
Administrator Denise Gilgallon said many exciting projects were in the pipeline.
Royal Liverpool Philharmonic: Middlesbrough
A spacious and dedicated performance of the Vaughan Williams London Symphony was  undoubtedly the highlight of a fine programme at Middlesbrough Town Hall.
Thus splendid orchestra responded to the persuasive direction of Vernon Handley in admirable fashion and the result must have convinced any doubter that Vaughan Williams is a symphonist of stature.
This work with great and powerful climaxes in first and last movements; with a scherzo as light as thistledown, a truly poetic slow movement and tremendous pageantry in the finale is much more than a series of vignettes of a great city.
The architecture of the work is tremendously impressive, the playing of the orchestra was equally so.
This came as the climax of a well-balance programme which began with a lithe rendering of Weber's Oberon Overture, fluent and energetic.
Piotr Anderszewski, the young Polish pianist of high reputation, was the competent soloist in Beethoven's third piano concerto.
This was a satisfying performance, in which the soloist demonstrated a fine technique; one which healed great clarity in the taxing scale work and sensitive and tender response in the slow movement.
The orchestral accompaniment her was again alert, matching the pianist's skill in fine style.
Local artist:
The local artist of the month at the Gray Art Gallery in Hartlepool is Fred Fowler, of Sunderland, who has illustrated poetry and story books.
He also designed the sets for a recent pantomime in his home town.
Today
BILLINGHAM:
Billingham Gingerbread Group for single parents and their children, meets 4–6pm.
Details, tel Billingham 361608.
REDCAR:
Redcar Gingerbread Group, Redcar Youth Centre, Coatham Road, 10am.
Details, tel Redcar 471800.
Antique/Collectors' Fair, Billingham Forum, Town Centre, Billingham, 9.304pm, admission 40p, senior citizens 20pm.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Antiques Fair, Tall Trees, Yarm.
MONDAY:
Wilton Camera Club, Wilton Recreation Club, Grangetown, 7.30pm.
Stockton Folk Club, singaround, Sun Inn, Knowles Street, Stockton, 7.45pm.
Stockton Hard of Hearing Club, Alma Street Centre, Stockton, 6.30pm.
New members welcome.
TUESDAY:
Middlesbrough Barbershop Singers, Methodist Church Hall, The Grove, Marton, Middlesbrough.
Details, tel 821908.
New members welcome.
Tuesday's Folk, singer's night, Tap and Barrel, Newport Road, Middlesbrough, 8.30pm.
Teesside Gramaphone Society, Leeds University Centre, Harrow Road, Middlesbrough, 7.30pm.
North Tees Speakers' Club, improve all aspects of public speaking, The Stockton Club, 44 Yarm Road, Stockton, 7.30pm.
Details, tel Stockton 583738.
WEDNESDAY:
Teesmouth Bird Club meets Billingham Arms Hotel, Billingham.
Bon Ami Club for divorced/widowed/separated over 25, Function Room, Swan Hotel, Redcar, 8.30pm.
Details, tel Jack on Guisborough 643657.
Stockton Camera Club, Elmwood Community Centre, Hartburn, 7.30pm.
NOT all schools have a sculptured wooden archway in the playground but Middlesbrough's Easterside Primary does.
The work of art by Antony Holloway, officially opened yesterday, has created massive interest in the area, said headteacher Bob Green.
‘The children have been actively involved with the project and now we are left with a permanent resource,’ he added.
‘It's also educational it depicts the elements and wildlife and functional, because it includes three carved benches.’
Comedian Les Dawson (above) is recovering at home after being discharged from hospital in Preston where he was being treated for a blood infection after a prostate operation.
Doctors tell him he needs a complete rest for six months.
Roman Catholic police sergeant, Hugh McCormac, is shot dead in front of his wife and children as he leaves church at St Gabriel's monastery near Enniskillen.
He is the 11th policeman killed in a fortnight in Northern Ireland.
Five teams of firemen struggle through the early hours to control a blaze at Finkles Bar, Lorne Terrace, in South Bank, Middlesbrough.
Eight patients at a Plymouth hospital have died of flu, it is revealed, but hospital authorities say the outbreak is under control.
Disruption in schools in England and Wales will escalate this week as the two biggest teaching unions step up industrial action in support of their pay claim.
The Middlesbrough group of the Doctor Who Appreciation Society is racing against time to save the TV time lord from an enforced break by his masters, the BBC.
Members are trying to raise a petition against a decision to take the programme off the air for 18 months at the end of the current series.
Group leader, 20-year-old student David Dean, says: ‘We're disgusted.
A lot of people fear that if the Doctor is taken off for 18 months, he may never return.’
Echo and The Bunnymen: The Arena, Middlesbrough THE last time Echo & The Bunnymen graced a stage in Middlesbrough they brought their own detective story with them entitled The Strange Case of the Disappearing Audience.
This time around, most of the crowd stayed for the full set yet the number of people gathered at The Arena told its own story of one band's fall from grace.
With the briefest of intros emanating from somewhere in the swathe of dry ice, The Bunnymen arrived to polite applause and tore into a set devoid of any material dating back to the days of Ian McCulloch.
Someone must have had a word with the band about their playing after the last tour and subsequent departure from east west Records because this show as a 200pc better affair.
While it still wasn't possible to discern Noel James's lyrics as they're growled into the microphone, the music had a n edge to it that was missing from their Teesside Poly gig.
I can't see the band picking up decent airplay for new single Inside Of Me, Inside Of You, as a mishmash of noise in the song isn't exactly daytime friendly material.
A couple of new songs had a few ideas ‘borrowed’ from The Mission and New Model Army and could give a few clues as to which market Echo & The Bunnymen see themselves operating in during their climb back up the ladder to fame and fortune.
Whether they actually make it is up to the music buying public.
Keith Rickaby
Prints by Edouard Manet (1832–1883), Polytechnic Gallery, Newcastle (Until March 13)
This Arts Council touring collection of 29 prints is taken from a portfolio printed in 1905 by the German editor Strolin.
It features such exciting inclusions as the study of the little girl holding a baby from the left-hand side of his early painting of The Old Musician, the mature Spanish ballet dancer Lola de Valence, and etchings of both the reclining nude, Olympia and a late portrait, in a large decorative hat, of the lady painter Berthe Morisot.
These distinguished prints are divided into eight parts, ranging through The Poor in Paris, Manet and Spain, Paris Spectacle, Olympia, Portraits, War and Commune (referring to the FrancoPrussian war of 1871–2), Japonisme (the theme of an exhibition in Sunderland a year or two ago) and La Parisienne.
Recent paintings by Russell Platt, Bar Convent Museum, York (Until April 11) OVER the past 40 years or so, Russell Platt has earned an enviable reputation for his single colour, multi-faceted views of York Minster.
This exhibition shows that he has other strings to his artistic bow.
The event opens with some of his more recent ‘topiary’ interpretations of the Minster, where the whole is dominated by a very powerful interpretation of the Crucifixion that owes much to Matthias Grunewald (1475/801528) the Mathis der Maler of Hindemith's opera.
Transcriptions are, in fact, very much the order of the day here: The Descent from the Cross, after the Rubens in Antwerp Cathedral, the Virgin and St Anne, after Leonardo da Vinci, and The Jewish Bride, after Rembrandt.
If Rubens, Leonardo and Rembrandt are Russell Platt's own artistic heroes most of the others are musicians, composers and even music critics.
Vaughan Williams, Edward Elgar and Frederick Delius all take their place, alongside George Bernard-Shaw a painting that the National Portrait Gallery might well like to know about for its pending festivities.
For good measure, we also have the tennis star Suzanne Lenglen and the aviatrix Amy Johnson.
Finally, there is a whole sequence of paintings of folk gathered around a table, in teaparty fashion, and all executed in a curiously ‘faux-naif’ sort of way.
As the other side of Russell's artistic coin, it is intriguing to come across so many interesting and unexpected ‘truisms’ or Plattitudes.
David Dye Installation and Sculpture, Cleveland County Gallery, Middlesbrough (Until March 25) CLEARLY it is David Dye's intention to provoke, to make us reexamine a number of basic tenets.
My Bed 1990, a construction of UV lights, canvas, wood and paint, certainly isn't my idea of a comfy, horizontal resting place for weary bones.
Instead it is like some kind of wall-hung body scanner.
Lifeline 1990 consists of a two-way mirror, paint, light, timers and wood.
From a darkened light box, a fork of green lightning is emitted, followed, at an interval, by a red one and then by another, which appears to be a combination of the other two.
Finally, as the third of these  constucted works, Core 1989 is made from wood, bolts, mirrors and light, and looks a bit like a cross between a rather primitive juke-box and a wood-encased convector radiator.
The two mirrors are close together and at right angles, with a narrow slit-like space in between.
The effect of this is to turn us upside-down and virtually blindfold us, since we can no longer see our eyes, which are hidden in the blank space between the mirrors.
If all three of these things make us explore new territories of the imagination, the flight of ten blue-lined Steps which rise to a pinnacle in the room next door is another matter all together.
The advance publicity for the show was very coy about this particular piece, promising us a surprise that could not be revealed in advance.
Rather than spoil the fun I'll content myself by saying that this really is a flight of fancy even fantasy and one that, questioning our all-too-ready acceptance of linear perspective, makes this whole adventure very worthwhile.
Paul Strand (1890–1976) The Hebridean Photographs; Kevin MacLean and Edward Scott Landforms; Brian Griffin Work, Durham Art Gallery, in the DLI Museum, Durham (Until March 29) THIS is a magnificent, three-pronged photographic attack.
For starters, the American Paul Strand shows the work that he produced way back in 1954 when, in his middle sixties, he visited the Hebridean islands of South Uist, Eriskay and Benbecula.
Apart from making a number of impressive black and white studies of the rugged terrain, he also photographed local people, always on the look-out for strength and dignity in their faces that showed they had not been eroded by the harsh circumstances in which they lived.
Many years later, Kevin MacLean and Edward Scott zeroed in on pebbles and stones as they investigated their own kind of erosion, this time that of the landscape seen in close-up.
Even more innovative, and with the larger of the two galleries at his disposal, Brian Griffin, takes as his subject that rudest of all four-letter words work.
Using a large square format, and working again in monochrome, he produces prints in sequence, so we have four shots of a man with a girder who, by means of trick photography, is sent on a kind of perennial job replacement, and a sequence of workers, in their hardhats, giving the ‘kiss of life’ to saws, drain-pipes and other tools of their trade.
LAUGH and the world laughs with you.
That's the motto of an 82-year-old North Yorkshire woman who's just been accepted into the Writers Guild.
Born in poverty and now blind, Pat Wilson, of Marwood Drive, Great Ayton, is a prolific writer and even in times of adversity in her youth managed to produce work.
One of her plays, My Funeral Tea, is a best-seller in the United States and is also known in Australia.
A former teacher at Longlands College, Middlesbrough, Pat always believes in laughter as the best medicine for loneliness.
She said: ‘I like to make people laugh and always wanted to be able to do something for elderly and lonely people.’
Born in Bow Street, Middlesbrough, her father died when she was 18.
Her mother became ill when Pat was young and she brought up her brother Arthur, who became head of maths at Sandhurst.
Now unable to write due to her eye condition, she and her husband, Oliver, who has overcome a stroke and broken arm, keep in close touch with their children by tape and video, But her works drew the attention of actress Dame Flora Robson, Scarborough-based playwright Alan Ayckbourn and radio presenter Brian Johnston, who interviewed her in Down Your Way.
Today
BILLINGHAM:
Billingham Gingerbread Group for single parents and their children, 4–6pm.
Details, tel .
YARM:
Jumble Sale, Bentley Wynd Social Centre, 1pm.
In aid of the Church Restoration Fund.
Enquiries, tel 786567/780897.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Corn Dollies, demonstrations throughout the day of the traditional art of corn dolly making with local craftsman Tom Ridley, Castle Eden Walkway Country Park Visitor Centre, 10am3pm.
Cleveland Group of The Ramblers, seven mile walk, meet at Lazenby Bank, 2pm.
Details, tel Redcar 474864.
Leven Antiques Fair, Kings Manor School Hall Drive, Acklam, Middlesbrough.
Details, tel  — MONDAY: Hartlepool Writers' Circle, Peoples Centre, Raby Road, Hartlepool, 10am.
Live jazz with the Old Glory Band, Highland Lad, Norton, 8.30pm.
Cleveland Outlook, talk on the Cleveland Wildlife Trust, The Settlement, Union Street, 8pm.
Details, tel Guis 635898.
Ride in concert, Town Hall, Middlesbrough, 7.30pm.
Box office, tel 242561.
Life Drawing Group, Toc H, Albion Terrace, Saltburn, 7.30pm.
Details, tel Guis 624400.
Stockton Hard of Hearing Club, Alma Street Centre, Stockton, 6.30pm.
Disraeli Gears: Nothing's Going to Get Me Down EP (Ram Raid Records)
ROCK music is the most difficult genre to play very well.
Even the major labels constantly release naff rock records by groups like Roadhouse and Kingofthehill, and so kicking around the provinces must be hundreds of audio-nightmares waiting to come out of daddy's garage.
Disraeli Gears from Tesside are rather different as they look to the energy and rawness of the Sixties rather the dull produced stomp of Nineties' heavy rock/ metal.
They call their music ‘grooved up RnB’ which is fair enough.
All four songs on the EP are self-written, but it is the arrangements that are really special.
The guitars are crystal clear and know where they are going, and the Gears are not afraid of changing paces, enjoying a rambling slower section in Ninety Nine Per Cent while Fear is 100pc power-driven complete with ‘wooh, woos’ from Sympathy for the Devil.
The 12 inch single is available (at varying prices) in many record shops across the region, and if you like good and honest rock, catching a live performance would probably be a good idea.
Phone .
Middlesbrough's Hope Springs Eternal THEY are touching base in the North-East for five gigs before heading off again to play elsewhere in the nation.
Today and on March 23 they come to Doc's Orders, Darlington; March 12 at Bonding Warehouse, York; March 13 at Stage Door, Scarborough; March 25 at the Empire in Middlesbrough.
Durham St Studio Open Days HOPEFUL musicians have a wealth of advice at their fingertips over the next few days.
From Tuesday to Friday this week the Durham Street Studio in Hartlepool is running open days which will include demonstrations of four-track, 16-track and computer-controlled recording systems.
The open days free to unwaged people; £2.50 to others are to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the opening of Durham Street, which was the first community recording studio in the country.
Several big NorthEast names have worked at the studio including The Rye, The Candy Ranch and Procession.
Booking is advisable.
Phone .
MUzicTech ALSO next week, MUzicTech comes to the North-East.
It is a free workshop run by four musicians-producers who have worked with many of the great names: Pete Towhshend, Chaka Khan, Desmond Dekker, Alexander O'Neal, Joan Armatrading, The Gypsy Kings and question mark Sinitta.
They will be showing fledgling superstars what it takes to be successful in the business and give an insight into studio sampling and computer techniques.
MUzicTech days are free, and will be taking place at the Buddle Arts Centre, Station Road, Wallsend, tomorrow Tuesday March 10, and on Wednesday at the Dovecot Arts Centre, Stockton.
Curve:
Middlesbrough Arena: TONI Halliday said she was nearly at home in Middlesbrough.
An adopted daughter of Washington she sees herself as a bit of a hard North-East woman.
Which is just as well considering what she had to put up with from the fans.
Toni, recently voted the Most Fanciable Object of Desire, had to contend with numerous assaults on to the stage.
During every song fans jumped up and dived back into the crowd much to her initial annoyance and then amusement.
The barricades at the front had to be removed to stop everyone getting crushed and it brought back memories of the heady days of punk.
But Curve's sound is far more sophisticated than that.
Toni's soaring vocals sounded a treat against Dean Garcia's guitars.
Not one bum note was played and you have to hand it to the band for their professionalism.
The rest of the band, recruited from a newspaper ad, also blended in well with some nifty guitar work from Debbie Smith.
Old favourites from the Cherry and Frozen EP went down well with much thumping of the air and pogoing.
Toni knows how to manipulate the audience and it was good to see a singer particularly a Gothic-looking one actually smiling.
Curve are on a roll now.
High in the charts with their brilliant single Fait Accompli and with a new album Doppelganger out today they are a name to look out for.
Margaret Hussey
BEER enthusiasts have been told not to be put off by the ‘folky’ image of Darlington's Small Beer Festival.
The festival, due to be held at the Arts Centre from March 19 to 22, coincides with the annual Darlington Spring Thing folk festival.
Brendan Boyle, of the Darlington Campaign For Real Ale, said the beer festival should be a big success but it is not exclusively for folk music fans.
‘Admission to the beer hall is free and the beer buffs won't be turned away for not having clogs or bells or a finger in the ear,’ said Brendan.
He is confident the event should prove popular and has ordered more beer to meet the expected high demand.
Among the specialities on offer at the Small Beer Festival are the local favourites Butterknowle, Hambleton, Hadrian and the North Yorkshire brewery of Middlesbrough.
Ride:
Middlesbrough Town Hall RIDE grew up a lot in public in 1990 a year when bands like themselves and the Charlatans made it very big, very quickly.
The floppy fringes and pouting lips of the respective lead singers are another story entirely.
Ride do not seem to have developed very much since then, just quietly maturing into a dependable guitar band.
Certainly, few of their contemporaries can get the range and quality of tunes from the classic bass, guitars and drums line-up.
The early single Like A Daydream, their finest pop moment, was a monster of a song tonight.
But if you saw their scorching live performance of Leave Them All Behind on Top of the Pops a few weeks ago then there was little else here to be surprised at.
And it was a strangely muted Town Hall.
Apart from the sullen indie kids, a  pallid Monday night atmosphere draped the venue and the gig was wrapped up by 10.15pm after a solid set and perfunctory encore.
For a band that was formed because four teenagers were blown away by a Wedding Present gig in Oxford they still have a lot to learn from their masters.
Having said that their newly-released album Going Blank Again is likely to be one of the better buys of the year and tonight's showing should not have put anyone off.
Graham Dunbar
Nerys Johnson Takes A Fresh Look Municipal Art Gallery, Middlesbrough, until May 16.
AMONG the great delights of the South Bank's Moments of Vision touring exhibition back in 1988 were the thumbnail sketches and descriptions of each painting made by Nerys Johnson.
Her brief had been to visit a number of Northern provincial collections and select works that would fit neatly within her chosen theme.
It is this same idea which she develops here, as she takes a long and loving look at the work of 28 contemporary artists who have an honoured place in the Middlesbrough permanent collection.
Some of the artists Edward Burra, Sheila Fell, Henri GaudierBrzeska, Ivon Hitchens, Tom McGuinness and Keith Vaughan are represented twice, but for the most part the individual works of others are grouped under a great variety of headings.
In room two we have the heavily impasted canvases of both Frank Auerback and David Bombert as representatives of the Borough Group shown side by side under the heading Pigment, while Sir William McTaggart, Anne Redpath and William Scott are grouped together under Texture.
Next door, Frank Dobson's modelled terracotta study for Pax is set beside the work of five other portrait painters.
There is also the interesting combination of a lithographed People on a Pavement (1967) by L.S. Lowry and the gouache and crayon drawing of a group of five hunched miners Waiting for Opening Time by Tom McGuinness.
Finally we are offered such topics as Landscape-Movement (Joan Eardley, W.G. Gilles, John Minton and Ivon Hitchens) and Landscape-Space, with last but not least an Elizabeth Blackadder still life and Edward Middleditch's panoramic vision of sea and rocks.
The selection provides ample evidence that since she retired for health reasons from her full-time post as curator of the DLI Museum in Durham, Nerys has obviously been enjoying herself enormously.
It makes the familiar look sparklingly new.
Jasper Lyon Something in the Air King's Manor, Exhibition Square, York, until March 30 THIS is all very enigmatic.
There is no catalogue, only one of the 14 pieces mainly cast in bronze has a title and there are no details of the artist.
We are not sure whether Jasper Lyon is an elderly gentleman reminiscing about World War Two or a young man who just had a bee in his bonnet as a schoolboy about flying a Stirling bomber rather than becoming a Spitfire pilot.
The seventh piece shows one such fresh-faced and owlishly bespectacled lad in school tie with a kind of three-dimensional think bubble quite literally flying overhead.
For the rest, tin hats abound everywhere, not only on top of the curls of a very glamorous AFS girl but also rather oddly around the back of a classical Venus de Mile torso.
Later on there is a figure in confrontation with a Barbie doll, who shows a vicious streak as she cuts his throat and asks, almost as though she were offering a round of toast, ‘one slice or two?’
As well as enigmatic, this is all powerfully disturbing.
Do They Mean Us?
The Comic Art of BIFF Dovecot Art Centre, Stockton, until March 27 SUDDENLY it seems, everyone is into the funnies.
Last November the Northern Centre for Contemporary Arts in Sunderland, offered us Manga the Art of the Japanese Paperback, and pages from Viz. Next month Cleveland County Gallery has the touring exhibition Strip Search.
Slotted between these two, the Dovecot is offering an insight into The Guardian's long-running comic strip known as BIFF, with such intriguing episodes as The Aesthetics of Poverty and the irreverent God for Beginners.
Almost all of the 32 works on view have a collage of inserts taken from the world of advertising among their drawn work as they continue their extended storylines.
BIFF is also into one-off postcards, with such series as Great Beatniks and Adventures in Conservation.
The begetters of the whole event are artist Chris Garratt and writer Mick Kidd, who will be running a practical workshop in the Dovecot tomorrow, when they intend to work to a deadline to produce a complete comic strip.
See you there.
Julian Le Bas Landscapes Bede Gallery, Springwell Park, Jarrow, until March 20 I AM delighted to discover that Newcastle Polytechnic's long-time art historian Alf Corlett is alive and well and living in well-earned retirement in East Sussex, where he has been on the look-out as a talent spotter for the Bede Gallery.
It is on his recommendation that young Sussex-born fine art graduate Julian Le Bas a distant relative of the more famous Edward is exhibiting here.
A distinguished and powerful draughtsman, Julian has ranged far and wide both in this country and abroad for his landscapes, from the extremely colourful Devil's Dyke to the bold but featureless Birling Gap.
‘I WILL lift up mine hills to the hills.’
Indeed.
The author of the 121st psalm has few more ardent disciples than me.
Every day, almost my first act is to glance at the hills near my home.
Their ever-changing moods and appearance provide great pleasure.
Sometimes these hills, the plunging northern escarpment of the North York Moors, seem to hang over my village, two miles away.
At other times they retreat into the blue distance.
A further trick of the light throws their roller-coaster ridge into sharp relief, like a cardboard cut-out.
But I relish them best when cloud shadows race across their bracken-and-tree clad slopes.
And I welcome the hint of wildness which the brown heather spilling over their brow brings to my tame lowland domain.
But not far away stand other hills to which I do not lift my eyes.
Rather, I avert them.
And yet these hills are the first I knew and loved.
They are the reason I could not contemplate a life lacking a daily sight of hills.
My debt is owed to the Eston Hills.
A final upthrust of the North York Moors, they were virtually unspoilt when I roamed them as a boy in the 1950s.
Their craggy Nab, poised above the Tees estuary, was as proud a landmark as neighbouring Roseberry Topping.
But today the Nab bristles with telecommunication masts and dishes.
The hills themselves are festooned with pylons and wires.
The latest outrage is ‘the world's biggest dry ski slope’, destined to have its own Ski Village.
The Eston Hills, a priceless piece of rugged countryside penetrating almost to the heart of Teesside, have thus been raped and defiled.
So I can't bear to look at them.
I've written about this before.
I do so again to counter the growing myth that Teesside is becoming some sort of earthly paradise a wonderland where industry and nature have achieved perfect harmony.
As the hype has it, captains of industry and conservationists link hands in a landscape where every industrial plant arises from a jewelled setting of buttercup meadows, bosky woods and shy, coot-haunted lakes.
This vision was well to the fore at this week's launch of ‘the UK's biggest man-made nature reserve’ an intended 2,500-acre oasis along the Tees estuary.
Ron Norman, chairman of the Teesside Development Corporation, one of the promoters, hailed the project as further evidence of Teesside as ‘a Gainsborough landscape.’
And Prof David Bellamy, whose consultancy designed the reserve, declared: ‘I have always said industry and nature can exist alongside each other.
This is the proof.’
Of course David is right.
But the new reserve doesn't quite make good the vast sacrifice of natural habitat to industry.
Of the original 6,000 acres of Seal Sands, the heart of the new reserve, just over 400 survive.
Only a last-ditch struggle saved that fragment.
And the rampant exploitation that almost devoured Seal Sands continues unchecked on Eston Hills.
Even back at the estuary all is not the sweetness and light that events like this week's launch suggests.
The river still carries a lethal dose of poisons.
Much of it comes from from ICI, benevolent provider of land for the new reserve.
But despite the company's own long-running antipollution programme the final lever to a clean River Tees looks like being what the company calls the ‘very tough targets’ set by the National Rivers Authority.
A company statement that these might shut down plants implies that their polluting operations would otherwise continue.
Meanwhile, with virtually all its 19th century industry cleared, Teesside apparently still needs to gobble up green fields.
Middlesbrough Environment City plans a ‘business park’ on farmland at Hemlington, near its southern boundary.
And there are fears of development in the parkland of redundant Poole Hospital, just a few fields from Roseberry Topping.
At present, it's still safe to lift one's eyes to the hills in that quarter.
But soon it might be depressing to look down from the Topping.
Especially if a proposed line of pylons from a new power station now being built at ICI Wilton comes stamping across the foreground.
Industry and nature in harmony?
I rest my case.
SO HE left yesterday's slaughter of the South Africans to others.
But as a curtain-raiser to his Durham debut, Ian Botham has been dramatically ‘doing the business’ to use the hideous modern phrase in cricket's World Cup.
Most reports of his single handed massacre of the Aussies sheepishly admitted he had been ‘written off as major force’ consigned to a bit part on cricket's international stage.
O ye of little faith.
Did not this column say, when the apparently creaking colossus joined Durham, that as long as he is capable of playing for a county he must play for England.
Averages, current form, even physical condition (puff puff) are  irrelevant with ITB, who has the God-given capacity suddenly to take any game by the scruff of the neck and shape it to his own explosive ends.
Not within most present lifetimes will cricket again see anyone remotely like him.
THE Cure, one of the most popular cult bands of the last 15 years, have announced a one off show at Newcastle's Mayfair club.
Tickets for the show on April 22 go on sale at the club, in Newgate Street, at 10am on Wednesday morning.
There are only a limited number of tickets available and demand is expected to be high.
A spokeswoman for the band, whose hits include Love Cats and The Walk, said it is the first time The Cure will have played at such an intimate venue for almost ten years.
The visit to Newcastle is part of a brief UK tour to get in shape for a major world tour which begins later this year.
Because few tickets are available fans will be limited to just one pair of tickets each.
Simply Red look set for a sellout concert at Gateshead this summer.
Hundreds of tickets have already been sold for the July 25 gig and organisers predict all 35,000 tickets will be gone by next weekend.
Organiser Rosemary Waters said: ‘The phone hasn't stopped ringing for credit card enquiries.
And we expect hundreds of people queueing today in person.’
Simply Red complete an impressive line-up at Gateshead this summer including Dire Straits on June 13, Guns ‘N Roses on June 16 and Bryan Adams on July 12.
Tickets costing £20 are available today from the Gateshead Stadium; Middlesbrough Town Hall; The Other Record Shop, Hartlepool; Durham and Sunderland Volume Record; Whitley Bay Ice Rink; Rockbus, Darlington, and Gateshead Leisure Centre.
Bookings are also available on  or  or by post to GIS Events, PO Box 18, Gateshead NE8 1EA.
Capital concert:
Teesside teenagers Anna McKay and Lisa Thompson, both 14, of Bilingham Campus School, will be playing in a concert at John Smith Square, London, today, in the national finals of the chamber music for schools competition.
TO suit BBC TV demands, the British semi finals of the ABA championships will be held at Gateshead Leisure Centre on Monday and Tuesday April 13 and 14, and not the 14th and 15th.
Fast flows experience of the Tees towards cultural exchanges in art VISUAL arts officer Mr Steve Chettle wants to see Cleveland taken seriously as a place to visit and admire its arts as well as being an area of historic interest because of its heavy industries.
Mr Chettle, working from the Middlesbrough office of Cleveland Arts, speaks excitedly of projects being undertaken in the area, saying: ‘We want people to know they are happening.’
One such venture is Riverscape, which opened last October and runs for another 14 months.
Altogether it will encompass 64 talks, workshops and open studios by artists looking at the subject from their own cultural dimension.
British, Polish, Indian and Japanese artists are involved in the only multi-international residency in the country, designed to raise the profile of the River Tees through the arts and, in the process, examine the ways in which the river affects our lives.
The enthusiastic Mr Chettle has made cultural contacts within the embassies of the various countries involved with Riverscape and hopes the project will also lead to artist exchanges.
Organisers also hope international links will be forged through another project now into its second year.
They want to include German craft makers in Marking the Ways, which is being handled by several agencies, including Cleveland Arts.
‘We have started to commission artists and craft makers right along the river to highlight leisure as well as art, working closely with Cleveland County Council,’ says Mr Chettle, whose experience with Arts 2,000 leaves him hopeful of greatly expanded international contacts through Marking the Ways.
Cleveland County has also recently set up a drawing residency with a Cypriot artist who is Newcastlebased and whose work is to be exhibited at the Cleveland Gallery.
He is looking at services offered by the council and his drawings include the mobile bus which takes books to isolated farmhouses.
Mr Chettle was responsible for the staging of a major exhibition of about 40 ‘computer artists’ in 1988.
The exhibition at the Cleveland Gallery later enjoyed a national tour before going on to Holland, says Mr Chettle, who has more recently been inspired in this direction through his nine-year-old son, Thomas, who is now learning to paint and draw by computer…
Mr Chettle was something of a late starter.
He went through a schools system which made art compulsory, failing the subject at O-level but passed with flying colours to gain an Alevel in sculpture.
Having failed English Alevel, five years on he made up for this by getting a first for his thesis and a fine arts degree from Portsmouth Polytechnic.
Mr Chettle, who comes originally from St Albans, helped set up the Aspex Gallery, a major artists studio base in Portsmouth.
He came to Teesside from Newcastle where he ran a fine art print workshop.
And he says things have changed greatly in Cleveland over the last five years.
His office, which works in fine arts, craft, film and video and photography, may proffer straight advice on projects or simply point applicants in the right direction for funding.
Sometimes they may even become directly involved in helping to set things up.
Mr Chettle, who lives in Saltburn and who has led workshops and lectured in Amsterdam, recalled how Cleveland Arts was once asked to paint a mural for a hospital.
Having had only two weeks in which to complete the work, Mr Chettle burned more than the midnight oil to finish it in time.
The last brush stroke was put in by 3am on the day it was unveiled in the children's ward at South Cleveland Hospital!
In his spare time, Mr Chettle enjoys looking for fossils and  regards the east coast as ‘a brilliant area’ for his hobby.
Mr Steve Chettle.
Ayton scholars are a noteworthy lot due to Martin's sound decisions MATTHEW Best, founder of the Croydon Singers and Croydon Orchestra, often appears at concerts given by pupils of Ayton School in Cleveland.
Not that Mr Best was ever a pupil there.
He owes his allegiance to the school's director of music and head of the music department, Mr Martin Essex, without whom, he says, he would never be where he is today.
Mr Essex, who taught the renowned singer and conductor at Sevenoaks School, in Kent, has been at Ayton 18 years.
And in that time, it is largely due to his efforts that the school's musical reputation has grown.
Each year a house music competition is held and every single one of the school's senior pupils takes part.
‘And not many schools can say that,’ added the proud father-of-four.
Had he not taught music, his second choice would have been PE, says Mr Essex, who comes originally from Didcot.
He was educated at Wallingford Grammar School, on the Thames, where his own ability was aroused by a ‘whizz-kid’ music teacher.
But Mr Essex, who plays piano and double bass, said: ‘I never wanted to be a performing musician.’
His mother, Monica, aged 80, who now lives next door to him in Wheatlands, not far from the school, was a primary school teacher and his late father a railway signalman.
His only brother, Vincent, who is a scientist, is also musically inclined: he plays cello and piano and sings in a choral society and he is married to a music teacher.
Mr Essex trained at Dartington College of Arts, a progressive place of the 60s which centred on music, art and drama and which, he says, proved to be the making of him in many ways.
After a year at training college to qualify as a teacher, he had two years at a comprehensive school in St Neots, Hunts., but he wanted to achieve much more as a music teacher and did so when he became assistant director at Sevenoaks.
‘That's where life as a music teacher for me took off.
It was a boys’ school.
Bright boys who wanted to learn and joined the choir and the orchestra which I ran.
‘The first term I was there I remember doing a large choral concert, an opera with the junior school and a carol service.’
But it was a very academic school, added Mr Essex, comparing Ayton favourably because its prime aim is not to get pupils to Oxford and Cambridge.
‘For the size of the school, we have done some remarkable things,’ added the 47-year-old, who has something musical in the pipeline every term at the school which, over the years, has variously been known as the North of England Agricultural School, Ayton School, The Friends School, Great Ayton, and recently reverted to Ayton School.
There are 230 pupils at the High Green school, founded by Quakers in 1841, and although it does not enter competitive festivals, several of its musically-gifted pupils have gone on to bigger and better things with more than a little help from Mr Essex.
Matthew Truskett, who plays in the national youth orchestra, hopes to study music in a big way and become a violinist; Janine Peacock, who was principal cellist in the national children's orchestra, recently played solo in a concert at Stockton Parish Church; and many others have won singing prizes.
Mr Essex says music is a two-way thing: ‘My pupils inspire me as much as I inspire them.’
He has taken pupils to America where there are lots of Quaker schools.
‘The chamber choir went in 1978 and spent three weeks there visiting schools in Washington, on Rhode Island, Philadelphia and New York,’ he said.
Mr Essex's wife, Denise, teaches English and PE.
She, too, has taught at Ayton and at Redhouse, Stockton, and is currently on supply at Brambles Farm, Middlesbrough.
They have two daughters, Helen, five, and Rachel, two, and Mr Essex also has an 18-year-old son, Joe, and 13-year-old daughter, Tamsin, from a previous marriage.
Matthew Best is probably his most well known pupil in musical circles, a ‘rising star in the music world’ who performs all over the country and who will shortly be coming to Opera North, he says.
But at Sevenoaks, he taught other well-known personalities for whom music was to become less important, including actor Daniel Day Lewis and former Test cricketers Paul Downton and Chris Tavaré, who now captains Somerset.
At the end of this term, the Ayton School choir goes to Coventry Cathedral and Mr Essex, who will sing there with them, is currently rehearsing them for this occasion.
A keen sportsman who especially enjoys skiing and used to play hockey and rugby, Mr Essex is involved in the Northern Friends' Schools triennial performance which draws together about 300 singers from Quaker schools in York, Pontefract and Ayton as well as professional soloists.
But the one performance he will never forget is from his student days at Dartington.
During a performance of Mozart's Requiem, the conductor had a heart attack, collapsed and died.
It happened, said Mr Essex, at the beginning of the last movement the point at which Mozart is himself said to have died, leaving the work to be completed by one of his students.
Man of music Mr Martin Essex.
The school has devoted considerable thought to improving facilities for musical tuition in keeping with its proud record.
Give him a pen, a pint and a puzzle and he's happy LUNCH for Bill Pilkington usually comprises a pint and The Times crossword lingering over one and whizzing through the other.
The crossword is normally finished in under ten minutes.
For Mr Pilkington, of Clevegate, Nunthorpe, Middlesbrough, is a crossword fanatic who has twice been The Times' national champion.
Having just won this year's regional final, the  agile-thinking Mr Pilkington is now in training for the national stakes in July.
‘I usually do the crossword in my lunch hour.
I try to do it in less than ten minutes, timing myself for practice,’ said the 43-year-old bachelor.
His latest coup was in the Leeds regional final of the 22nd Times Crossword Championship.
Mr Pilkington, budget officer for Cleveland, has been hooked on crosswords since his mid-teens at school when he started with the Guardian.
He comes from the South and has worked in Middlesbrough for five years, his job proving that numeracy and literacy can go hand-in-hand.
These days, he does The Times and The Listener, which is published in The Sunday Times.
He is also a member of the Crossword Club, which publishes two puzzles each month which are more of a challenge than the others, he says.
‘I have done a fair bit of business travelling to meetings in London,’ said Mr Pilkington, who seizes the opportunity for more practice on train journeys appropriately since BR is sponsoring this year's Times championship.
His quickest time for a 30-question puzzle was three-and-a-half minutes, which he did in the national championships though doing less well on the second puzzle meant he missed coming top.
Mr Pilkington says The Times crossword calls for a certain amount of literary background but it helps generally to get to know the minds of the compilers.
Sometimes that means not looking for the obvious, adds Mr Pilkington, who is also a real ale connoisseur and member of CAMRA.
He won every regional heat when he lived in the South and says lots of familiar faces reappear in the competition each year.
Dr John Sykes, of Oxford, has won the national title ten times; not too surprising when you consider he is a lexicographer (a compiler of dictionaries).
Mr Pilkington, who reckons to complete a giant puzzle in about 45 minutes, beamed as he announced: ‘I have had the pleasure of beating him twice.’
There is no special training for competitions.
‘I just do a crossword a day,’ said Mr Pilkington, who was among about 180 contestants in the Leeds challenge.
Despite his ability for solving puzzles, he has never attempted to compile a crossword.
‘I am told it is a different skill.
Compilers aren't usually that good at solving puzzles and vice-versa.’
Mr Bill Pilkington gets to work on the D&S crossword, which took him a mere six-and-a-half minutes.
Magician in the making
young Philip aims high
PHILIP Weeks has plenty of tricks up his sleeve.
More than 200, in fact, at the last count.
His hocus pocus includes escapology, mind reading, card tricks and a traditional rabbit-out-of-a-hat routine improvised with Henry, his toy bunny.
Philip, aged 12, from Skara Brae, Cassell Bank, Middleton-in-Teesdale, is the youngest semi-professional magician in the North East performing at school shows and children's birthday parties.
He cannot join the Magic Circle until he is 18, but no one can fail to be impressed when he slips out of handcuffs in under one minute.
Philip continues his show with mind-reading using extra sensory perception charts.
Henry the bunny keeps disappearing and reappearing in a top hat, paper flowers blossom from a seemingly empty vase and handkerchiefs change colour to the call of Abracadabra.
Philip, whose hero is Houdini, first became interested when his parents, Adrian and Stella, bought him a magic set for Christmas five years ago.
He gave private shows for relatives before his teacher at Middleton-in-Teesdale primary school asked him to perform a weekly trick before the class.
But his breakthrough came before Christmas when he gave paid performances to children at Middleton school and a Bishop Auckland primary school.
Philip, who attends Teesdale comprehensive in Barnard Castle, is now advertising in Upper Teesdale for children's birthday parties.
‘Everybody has a birthday, everybody has a party, so it is quite good business really,’ he said especially now that he has increased his fee from £5 to £15 for half an hour.
He spends his earnings on the latest tricks, which can cost £100 each, and are sent from shops and magic clubs throughout Britain.
Philip prefers parties where the children are aged between five and nine, because they do not ask too many questions.
‘It gets a bit harder with children my age because they lose interest quicker or try to catch you out.
‘Everyone has a trick that goes wrong, but you can turn this to your advantage by pretending it was deliberate and making the audience laugh,’ he said.
He practices every day, memorising the routine before a show, with homework, Grade Four piano practice and amateur dramatics being obstacles to negotiate before he achieves his ambition of presenting a television magic show.
‘Young people are finding it very hard to get into magic today.
Only if you are determined and prove yourself will people recommend new tricks and local clubs.’
Philip will not base his television show on Paul Daniels, whom he dislikes for intimidating members of the audience chosen for tricks.
‘Paul Daniels learned the ropes on the Middlesbrough club scene where he had to be a little tougher to survive the wisecracks, but he comes across as unfriendly on television,’ he said.
His father Adrian, a joiner, has made Philip equipment including a magic black box.
‘I would rather see Philip play the piano than workingmen's clubs but he has set his heart on being a magician and we are supporting him,’ said his mother Stella.
Abracadabra: Philip Weeks, young magician, whose tricks are a treat
Borodin Piano Trio: Middlesbrough Little Theatre RARELY is it possible, even in this present age of high standard professionalism among musicians to use the word perfect about a particular performance.
Yet it is the only word to describe the playing of the Borodin Piano Trio on Sunday evening in the final concert of the Teesside Music Society.
These three Russian executante exiles from their native land, have a maturity born of long years together and a rapport so easeful and tangible that, from the first note in Rachmaninov's Elegiac Trio, the audience was completely enthralled.
Rachmaninov was 17 when he wrote this work and the germs of his later facility and gift for appealing melody are already very evident.
Perhaps it goes on a little too long and the sweetness can tend to cloy, but it was beautifully played.
Shostakovich's Piano Trio No 2 was the highlight of the evening.
Written in memory of a Jewish friend who died in an Nazi concentration camp, it is a work of great depth and imagination; Shostakovich at his very best.
Again the playing was exemplary.
Tchaikovsky's Piano Trio in A Minor, another piece written in memory of a friend, completed the programme.
It is a monumental work, the two movements staking up 50 minutes of beautiful music of true Tchaikovsky tunefulness.
The second movement, a series of variations, was particularly enjoyable and led to a wonderfully played encore by Dvorak.
How many fathers would drive their daughter 120 miles through mountainous terrain so she could attend weekly ballet and singing lessons?
Not many, probably — but then Leo Brennan is exceptional by most standards.
And he would be the first to say that the time spent on making those long, hazardous journeys has paid dividends.
For although his daughter Maire never became a top ballet star she is a member of a highly successful family band.
The Brennans, who currently boast millions of album sales around the world, are better known as the Irish folk band, Clannad — while Maire's younger sister Enya is also enjoying great success with a new solo album in both the UK and American charts.
Clannad is Gaelic for family.
It's good name for a band whose musical roots extend backwards and sideways through parents, grandparents, aunts and uncles in a maze that would throw the most diligent researcher.
They became a household name in 1982 with the theme music for the hit TV series, Harry's Game, for which they received an Ivor Novello award and a BAFTA nomination.
Although they didn't win the BAFTA award that time they did in 1985 — with the theme music for another television series, Robin of Sherwood.
But the band are not just successful recording artists.
They are constantly touring and have enjoyed concert hall acclaim in Australia, America and Canada as well as the UK.
Leo, who is credited with encouraging all of this exceptional musical talent, used to run a showband in the Fifties.
Today he describes himself as ‘an active pensioner’— and, indeed, is very sprightly both in mind and body.
Along with age, retirement is another word that doesn't belong in this Irishman's vocabulary; he runs a bar, Leo's Bar, in Meenaleck on the County Donegal coast, where with very little persuasion he will put on musical performances for customers.
Many visitors come from the North-East of England following the introduction of whistle-stop tours of Ireland by tour operators Wallace Arnold.
‘Every Monday afternoon the bus calls with people from Cleveland and North Yorkshire,’ says Leo.
‘All of them are given a warm Irish welcome to make them feel at home.’
This genial host admits that many English people don't really know what to expect when they visit the Emerald Isles.
‘I say to people to come and see Ireland for themselves because if they come they'll never want to leave — like others who have been here from the North-East of England.
I think Donegal is noted more than any other county in Ireland for its welcome to visitors.’
Leo and his family have all toured the North-East — with Clannad performing in Newcastle most recently.
Enya plans to tour here soon while Leo and his wife, Baba, are hoping to take a holiday in Cleveland.
‘We've heard that Middlesbrough has a large Irish community and I'm sure there must be some Brennans who are related to us,’ says Leo.
‘The Middlesbrough football player Bernie Slaven's family comes from this part of Donegal as well.’
There is talk of Clannad headlining this year's Redcar Folk Festival to be held in August.
During a recent interview on BBC Radio Cleveland's Alan Wright programme, Maire Brennan said their best audiences are found in the North-East and the group will be returning here as soon as they can.
One thing that hasn't changed in the Brennan household since the family's phenomenal musical success is their relationship with their parents.
We wouldn't pay any attention to them if they started acting like stars,’ laughs Leo.
‘Our policy is not to make a fuss of one more than the others — that way there's no aggro.
‘Lots of people say it must be easy for my family to carry on in music and that I must have taught them everything — but I feel they just inherited their love of music as it's in our blood.’
Planned tours aside, it's just possible that all of the Brennan family could soon find themselves in the charts.
Enya has just released her Shepherd's Moon album, Clannad are busy writing a new album of th
Tracer
TWO biographers are appealing for details concerning the life of Sir Nikolaus Pevsner.
Meirion and Susie Harries are writing a biography of the great architectural compiler, which is due to be published in 1994.
They would be grateful for anyone who has photographs, correspondence, or just memories to contact them at:
Flat 2, Creston House, 13 Kensington Court, London.
Brendan Boyle, chairman of the Darlington branch of CAMRA (Campaign for Real Ale).
The Darlington CAMRA begins its annual Small Beer Festival tomorrow at the Arts Centre.
We're now in our sixth year of the festival and our range of beers continues to grow.
The event is part of the town's Spring Thing folk festival run by Darlington Folk Club.
When we first started, we had just eight beers on offer.
Over the years, our stock increased more than threefold, and this year we are offering 25 different varieties.
Amongst the usual milds, bitters, best bitters, strong ales and barley wines, we have five special beers this year.
It takes quite a while to organise each festival.
I spent most of last week putting the finishing touches to the event.
The first task was to finish putting together the ‘Darlington Drinker’, a local magazine which goes out five or six times a year to pubs around the area.
Then the local Camra committee held a meeting to finalise details of the scaffolding hire, beer deliveries and drinking glasses.
For the festival, we deliberately choose beers from small breweries which are able to offer rare brews, which often outshine those of the big brewers.
Our supplies this year are coming from the local Butterknowle Brewery, the North Yorkshire Brewery in Middlesbrough, the Hambleton Brewery and the Hadrian Brewery in Byker, Newcastle.
The rest come to us through the Northern Real Ale Agency, a wholesaler based in Newcastle.
On Monday, a number of our members took the day off work to help us set up our bar and begin to take deliveries and start tapping some of the beer.
This year, hopefully, we'll be able to meet the demand.
On previous occasions, we've often started to run out of supplies by the final day.
We'll have 3,100 pints on tap at the event for the expected 1,000 visitors, some of whom are coming from as far away as Belgium.
Prices will be around the standard pub price and in some instances considerably less.
As all the members of our group are volunteers, we expect to make a couple of hundred pounds profit on the event, which will help support our other activities during the year.
These include printing the Darlington Drinker, contributing to beer guides, and our main aim to campaign to keep real ale in pubs.
We're also hoping to hold our very popular large beer festival in the autumn.
Meanwhile, in May, Darlington Camra will be celebrating its tenth birthday.
Over the years, we've achieved a lot.
When we started, only 17pc of pubs were selling real ale, now that figure is 64pc.
The range of ales has also increased.
Camra is rapidly growing in size too.
We've now got 150 members locally, with membership at 31,000 nationwide.
OLD Ebenezer, Owd Roger and Dizzy Dick are to visit Darlington later this week but rest assured they're only beers.
The three are among more than 30 ales available at the Small Beer Festival from tonight.
Others include Traquair House Bear Ale, Stocks Old Horizontal, Hambleton best bitter and Malton Pickwick Porter.
North-East beers include Federation Buchanan Original from Dunston, Tyne and Wear, Hadrian Centurion from Byker, Newcastle, and North Yorkshire Erimus Dark from Middlesbrough.
The event, which runs until 3pm on Sunday, is part of the seventh annual Spring Thing folk festival, a weekend of music, dance and workshops at the Arts Centre in Vane Terrace, Darlington.
The small beer festival has been organised by Darlington CAMRA, the Campaign for Real Ale.
This year there will be 25 real ales and five Belgian bottled brews.
THE life of a local heroine is to be celebrated in a new book launched against a backdrop of Middlesbrough council's Good Health exhibition.
Freda Gray was a pioneer who spent 40 years teaching and working with mentally handicapped young people, many of whom had been abandoned by society.
As the new book, Deformed Roses tells, Freda became involved in teaching mentally handicapped youngsters when she lived in Surrey Streey, Linthorpe, after seeing so-called ‘ineducables’ sitting listless and dejected outside their homes as she cycled to and from her teaching job in the town's St Hilda's district.
She was born Freda Donaldson on April 16, 1905, and won a free scholarship to the town's Kirby College in 1918.
Two years later she passed the University of Cambridge Examination for Junior Students.
She became a teacher and taught at various schools including the Special School and the Beverley School for the Deaf.
In 1932 she set up a facility at the Settlement Hall in Newport Road, teaching children basic skills, walking, and speech therapy.
Her reputation grew and in 1968, with four regular classes and a group of teenagers who formed the nucleus of an adult training centre, she moved to the Erimus Centre in College Road, Thorntree.
Freda retired at 65 in 1970 and died in 1980.
Her achievements are detailed in a section of the Good Health exhibition at the Dorman Museum which charts 100 years of health care in Middlesbrough.
Deformed Roses has been written by Joan Dalton, a founder member of the Redcar Writers Group, whose son was one of Freda's pupils.
Framed: 200 years of history comes to life in a story of theatrical fantasy
A PAPER fan inherited among a job lot on her marriage led Mrs Lynn Lamport on a trail of historical intrigue unearthing tales of three-in-a-bed and of a Lady whose gambling losses brought her down to the level of street sweeper.
Mrs Lamport, of Harlsey Crescent, Hartburn, Stockton, became obsessed with her researches as she set out to trace 514 notable people named on the fan.
It dates back to 1795 and was issued by the King's Theatre in London's Haymarket, and was designed as a throw-away item for theatre-goers rich enough to book a box for the season at the kingly sum of 2,500 guineas.
The accompanying gift for the gentlemen of the day, described as an aide, was a red leather pocket book containing an identical list of names; and quite by chance during her researches Mrs Lamport visited a museum which had in its archives the partner book to her fan.
Mrs Lamport has unearthed much fascinating information on the theatre-goers named on the fan and now hopes it will be published in book form.
Of the 514, she has managed to research all but two: one has the common name E. Clarke and so could be anyone, she says, but the other, ‘Loten’, is so unusual she hasn't found a single reference to it.
The fan, which was featured on the Antiques Roadshow when it visited Coulby Newham, Cleveland, has been mounted in a glass-fronted case and, although not especially valuable, has now been put into other hands to keep safe for posterity.
It actually belongs to her husband, John, who was orphaned at 12 and brought up by his aunt and uncle, Vin and Doris Miller, at Norton.
They stored the entire contents of his parents' Middlesbrough home in their warehouse, handing everything over on his marriage in 1966.
‘When we bought this house, everything was delivered,’ said Mrs Lamport, a part-time office worker and mother of two.
‘In the course of unpacking tea chests, we found a tatty little thin cardboard box which John was going to throw away.
I opened it and found the fan, which was fascinating.’
She thought one day she would look into it and it was 21 years later, with time on her hands, that she actually got round to it.
Once started, she couldn't stop.
‘I was obsessed,’ admitted Mrs Lamport, whose interest in stately homes and museums married well with the task she undertook so enthusiastically.
Lords, ladies, dukes and duchesses figure prominently among the names as well as more ordinary mortals of obviously substantial means.
Two hundred years ago an eight-seater box for a theatre season cost a staggering 2,000 guineas, she learned.
And even in those pre-inflation days the price two years later was up to 2,500 guineas.
The family link with her treasure, she says, is rather tenuous.
John's great aunt was a lady's maid at Kirkby Fleetham Hall, near Northallerton, in the days of Colonel Courage.
Names on the fan include a Miss Thrail, an extremely wealthy woman whose family owned a brewery which, at a later date, merged to become Courage Barclay.
It is though possible that the fan was among papers held by the Courage family and that John's great aunt came by it while in service to the colonel.
Mrs Lamport could have confirmed this with Great Aunt Gertie herself had she begun her researches two decades earlier for it was soon after their marriage in 1966, that the old lady died, in her late 80s.
Mrs Lamport contacted the theatre museum in London and was delighted when they invited her to look around their archives.
They had two fans, one older and in quite poor condition, the other from the same era as hers; neither contained as much information.
‘The museum curator was really fascinated by mine,’ said Mrs Lamport; it was at his suggestion that she framed the fan to prevent its deterioration.
But what really excited her about the visit was the museum's corresponding red leather book containing all the same names, which enabled both to double-check the information.
From this, Mrs Lamport discovered she had misread one name and her researches into Mrs Piggott were scrapped while she took up the new challenge in the name of Mrs Pigou, a theatre-goer of French origin.
Six seconds of fame after hours of queueing for this fan of a fan THE Lamports had queued for four hours before they were interviewed for the Antiques.
‘It took ten minutes to film and I was actually on TV for about six seconds.
Blink and you would have missed me,’ said Mrs Lamport.
As it turned out, she was able to tell the experts more than they could tell her.
One of the most fascinating characters she researched was Georgiana, Duchess of Devonshire, a beauty who married at 17 and on whom the tales of three-in-a-bed are centred.
The third person in the triangle was her friend, Lady Elizabeth Foster, who married the Duke after Georgiana's death.
Elizabeth had had a baby to the duke and Georgiana bore one to Charles, Earl Gray, a member of the famous tea family.
Another interesting story is that of Lady Elizabeth Luttrell, sister of the Duchess of Cumberland.
‘Lady Elizabeth was a gambler and got into great difficulties,’ said Mrs Lamport.
‘She went to Germany where she was arrested for pick-pocketing and thrown into prison.
She ended up pushing a wheelbarrow and cleaning the streets and finally poisoned herself.’
Mrs Lamport has so far had 26 rejection slips for her book.
‘It would be nice to have it published, but even so, I have got a great sense of  satisfaction from finding out things for myself,’ she says of the volume, which includes 230 illustrations.
It also includes the history of the theatre, which originally housed 3,300 seats in four galleries, including 195 boxes.
It has burned down three times and is today known as Her Majesty's.
She and her husband are members of the National Trust and when visiting stately homes they often come across  portraits of those she refers to as ‘my people’; she has been able to obtain copies some of them.
‘Obviously I have a lot more information on some than others, who may just appear as names and addresses.
But it is an ongoing thing.
I will never finish it,’ added Mrs Lamport.
At one place they visited, Moccas Court, in Herefordshire, home of the Cornwall family, she was able to tell the curator who formerly worked for the Ropner family at Thorp Perrow, near Bedale all about the people whose impressive portraits hung on the walls.
She is full of praise for the invaluable public library system which has come up trumps in most of her researches.
‘I go to many stately homes and museums but the library is what really supplies me with most of the things I get,’ said Mrs Lamport, who started with the Dictionary of National Biography, Burke's Peerage, and other books on notable families.
Up to 1990 she was able to get practically any book she wanted, no matter how old.
But since last year, she says, anything pre-1800 is not available to those living outside London.
This greatly incenses her.
‘Middlesbrough Library came up with a decade of the Annual Register from 1790–1800, which was wonderful,’ she said, adding that they were so dirty it looked as if they hadn't been touched since that date.
‘I went in every day for about two weeks copying details,’ she said.
‘They contained all sorts, from births, marriages and deaths to wars.’
She still goes into Stockton Library every day when she finishes work and says: ‘I come out of there staggering with books.’
— Mrs Lynn Lamport with the fan and her book of research
Serene, beautiful, and home AN air of serenity surrounds the place.
Across the lake is a patchwork quilt of Yorkshire countryside to the hills beyond.
Kelsang Tabkay draws in a breath of the still, fresh air: this is home, where the one-time environmentalist now lives the tranquil life of a Buddhist monk.
Tabkay, as they call him, is one of 35 Buddhists who live at the 30-room Kilnwick Percy Hall, otherwise known as the Madhyamaka Buddhist Centre, just outside Pocklington.
Positive thinking, meditation and discussion is what it is all about, says Tabkay, who holds meetings on Monday evenings at Darlington Arts Centre where today a day-long course is being held.
Tabkay introduced his teachings to the Atisha Mahayana Buddhist Centre in 1988 and hopes soon to find premises to establish a small residential centre in Darlington, which will mean his spending three days a week in Darlington.
Now 33, Tabkay told of his gradual approach to Buddhism from his days as a student at university in Norwich.
He left with a degree in environmental sciences and was employed by the Norfolk Naturalist Trust, a voluntary conservation organisation.
Over the years he visited a number of Buddhist centres around the country and he was about 25 when he made the decision to teach the faith through the then newly-acquired Pocklington centre, a grand Georgian house about 15 miles south of York.
About 40 acres of parkland with lakes, gardens and woodlands, accompany the house.
The spiritual director, who is a Tibetan, lives at the movement's largest centre, in the Lake District.
Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche has been in England since 1975 and most ordained people take either Kelsang or Gyatso in their names.
Tabkay, who became ordained nine months ago, is one of nine monks and six nuns at Pocklington where the main emphasis is on study and meditation.
Much work is being undertaken there, including the renovation of outbuildings to provide  accommodation for another 25 followers, and practical skills are put to good use.
Tabkay, originally from Devon, is a self-taught carpenter.
‘I do some cabinet-making and joinery which produces a small income but most of my work is for the centre.
I mainly make shrine cabinets and meditation tables,’ he said.
He is among those who are also learning Tibetan because most of the teachings haven't been translated into English, he says.
People from all walks of life are joining the Buddhist faith, which, says Tabkay, is no longer seen as an eastern religion.
‘And more and more people are realising you don't have to put on Indian clothes to be a Buddhist.’
Tabkay, who is mid-way through a teacher-training programme lasting between seven and eight years, added: ‘We don't try to go out and preach.
We don't force anything on any one.
‘People are very welcome to come and see what the teachings are about without any obligation.’
Kilnwith Percy Hall regularly opens its doors to visitors for weekend courses and summer schools, said Tabkay, whose Darlington sessions attract an average of about 12 people a week with about 40 interested members overall.
They come, he said, from a wide area: from as far as Newcastle and Durham, Stockton, Middlesbrough and Redcar.
Today's course was expected to draw about 25–30 for a day of comprehensive teachings, meditation and discussion.
Tabkay says he doesn't feel he has given anything up to be a Buddhist monk.
‘I have gained a lot spiritually,’ he said.
He has a brother in Devon and a sister in Manchester and his mother travels from Exeter twice a year to visit him at the centre where she attends the pujas the daily services.
Buddhists, added Tabkay, try to lead a pure life and help others with a compassionate mind; they have a lot in common with other religions.
Priests must remain single but there are many lay people who can marry, says Tabkay, who grows hair on his shaved head ‘for insulation’ in winter.
The house has two meditation rooms the gompa with an assortment of footwear at the door reminding newcomers of traditional courtesy.
‘People come from all over.
Some Californians who visited us are now setting up a centre in San Francisco,’ said Tabkay. — Tabkay seated in one of the gompas in front of a geling, a wind instrument he has mastered.
Behind him can be seen a picture of the Tibetan director.
DEREK ROBINS on the multi-talented Mary Whitehouse Experience the comedians who cause sides to split and tempers to rise THE shocking stars of the BBC2 comedy show The Mary Whitehouse experience have been forced to water down their controversial material for TV viewers.
But fans of the programme can savour the below-the-belt humour of two of its stars David Baddiel and Rob Newman during a 40date British tour which includes Newcastle's New Tyne Theatre on April 21 and Middlesbrough Town Hall on April 28.
The duo, who team up with Canned Carrott regulars Hugh Dennis and Steve Punt for this second series of the Experience, specialise in gags about the darker side of life.
Baddiel and Newman's new video recorded at London's Shaftesbury Theatre last year includes jokes many will find tasteless about gay sex acts, the Royal Family, blind pop star Stevie Wonder, child killer Myra Hindley, legless war hero Douglas Bader, epileptics and famine victims.
They are no strangers to controversy.
Last year The Mary Whitehouse Experience became the first TV programme to be reported to the Broadcasting Standards Council after a derogatory sketch about Going For Gold star Henry Kelly was shown.
Baddiel, 27, says: ‘We were exonerated in that particular case but we have had a few letters saying people didn't like some of the jokes.
‘There's a lot more darkness in this second TV series compared with the last one but darkness is what comedy is all about.
But a lot of our jokes could never be put on TV.’
The quartet were originally brought together for the radio series.
They work as two separate writing teams Baddiel and Newman, Punt and Dennis before they collectively decide the material which goes into each show.
United by their love of comedy they come from diverse backgrounds in London and Surrey.
Baddiel first discovered his talent for humour when the school review he edited was banned and he met Newman, also 27, when they were students at Cambridge.
Punt, 28, and Dennis, 30, also met at university.
The former knew he wanted to be a comedian from an early age while the latter juggled his showbiz work with a full-time career as a marketing manager for Unilever products such as deodorants and shampoos until two years ago.
All four look set for a bright future.
Punt and Dennis have appeared with Jasper Carrott in three series of Carrott Confidential; they've written and star in the new Thames sitcom Letting Go, the story of three schoolfriends with little in common; and they're developing a new sketch show for London's franchise winner Carlton TV for 1993.
Bespectacled Baddiel is to host the new Channel 4 current affairs show Stab in The Dark and in the meantime he's trying to complete a doctorate on Victorian sexuality if he gets any spare time.
On top of that he and Newman will be seen soon in Standing Room Only BBC2's witty series about football.
— The Mary Whitehouse Experience: Monday, BBC2, 9pm.
Shared Earth, City Art Gallery, Exhibition Square, York.
(Until April 5)
THIS exhibition includes not only the work of six Russian painters but also that of eight contributors from Britain.
inevitably the work of some of the Brits and especially that of Carel Weight, with his Armageddon-inspired townscapes, will be known to us, but the work of Andrew Darke, with his openwork Vessel made from nine vertical rods embedded in a tree root, and Robert Devereux, with his incised letter carving in an Hoptonwood Stone bowl for an Olympic flame, comes as something of an interesting surprise.
Across the great divide the hotly coloured landscapes by Evgeni Dybski, from Konsyanza in Romania, and the even larger Fauvist Landscapes by Londonborn Lucy Jones, would seem to have a considerable number of points in common.
While the rich landscapes by Yuri Yegorov, from the recently re-named Volgograd, and the huge figurative diptych by Lewishamborn Terry Setch make an  interestingly contrasted pair.
It is, however, the work of the remaining Russians that intrigues even more and most notably the Surrealist Home and the Sky: the Life of Plants, which is a kind of film-set by the Moscow-born Igor Orlov and the Form and Continuity by Nikolai Ovtchinnikov, who welcomes us to the show and is illustrated on the front page.
We soon realise that we are, effectively, looking up at a red ceiling, where the four walls of the room, seen in perspective below, are all decorated with a brace of fishermen.
Paula Rego: Tales from the National Gallery.
Laing Art Gallery, Higham Place, Newcastle (Until April IT was immediately obvious, when the work of Portuguese painter, Paula Rego came to Middlesbrough Art Gallery, last June, that here was a major talent.
Previously the National Gallery had inaugurated a programme of installing young and, presumably, impecunious painters as year-long Artists in Residence.
Here, though, was a mature artist, in her late fifties, who had been dubbed their first Associate Artist and one who was to be given a free run of the Gallery's Permanent Collection to make transcriptions from the work of the Old Masters.
Here we learn more about Paula's privileged childhood in Estoril, and of her student days at the Slade School of Art, in London.
John Bratby R A A Retrospective, Gray Art Gallery, Clarence Road, Hartlepool (Until April OVER the years they have been more than just good friends the Gray Art Gallery, in Hartlepool, and John Bratby, founder member of the ‘Kitchen Sink School’, and, since 1971, a full member of the Royal Academy.
The Hatton Gallery, in the Department of Fine Art, at Newcastle University, has lent its small, early, definitive Wash Basin with Green Soap, in which, the white water swirls from both taps.
The Elliott School, in London, is also represented by the product-conscious Still life with Kelloggs Cornflakes.
And it was works like these, where the kitchen table was strewn with the un-washed remains of breakfast, that helped to give the movement its name.
The show opens out, however, with a tiny, half length Self Portrait, with hands, painted at Teddington, in 1949.
It continues with a number of other larger framed, and smoke-filled Self Portraits including that with French Horn, of 1956, and another with Sky Rockets, of the same year.
During the late sixties he painted portraits of a number of distinguished folk, and, here, for good measure, are John Betjeman, before he became Poet Laureate, David Jacobs and Harry Secombe.
Meadow Well An English Estate, Photographs by Steve Conlon, Central Library, Prince Consort Road, Gateshead (Until April PHOTOGRAPHER Steve Conlon offers, by way of investigative journalism, an ‘album’ of 54 stark, black framed, black and white prints, which is being toured, throughout the region, by the now virtually defunct Side Gallery, in Newcastle.
This deals with, among other things, a pantomime put on by the Ralph Gardner High School called Thatcherella, children playing in the streets in front of a burn-out shop and around burnt-out cars, as well as those who queued up to help lessen the EC Butter mountain.
Timely cartoon
WITHOUT wishing to cash in on the latest Royal marital rift it seems right to impart the information that some cartoons depicting the unfortunate pair have gone on sale in their adoptive city.
All drawn by the wag Willie Rushton, they are each priced at £75.
One of them, fairly unflattering, shows them side by side.
Perhaps, observed the longtime satirist, he should cut it in half.
Rushton is unbothered by the separation unless presumably it helps to sell a cartoon or two and said waggishly: ‘I view the whole affair with tremendous apathy.
I'm a Royalist and I love the Queen but I couldn't care less about the Yorks.’
The cartoons are to be seen among many others, similarly waggish and satirical, at Jack Duncan Books in Fossgate, York.
Today
BILLINGHAM:
Billingham Gingerbread Group, every Saturday, 4–6pm.
Details, tel 0642–361608.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Craft Fayre, Macmillan College, Stockton Road,(nr Blind School).
Admission free, everyone welcome.
REDCAR:
Craft Fayre, Coatham Memorial Hall, Coatham Road, 10am-3pm.
In aid of the Kirkleatham Parish Restoration Appeal.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
The Nature of Hartlepool, urban wildlife surprises in and around Hartlepool town, meet Mike Pratt outside Grays Art Gallery, Hartlepool, 2pm.
Cleveland Ramblers, seven mile walk, meet at Ingleby Greenhow, GR 583064, 2pm.
Details, tel Redcar 474864.
Farming and Wildlife, see how modern agriculture and wildlife can exist side by side at Low Middlesfield Farm, Norton, meet Howard Ward outside Norton Tavern, off Station Road, Norton, 10am.
Car boot sale, Bowesfield School, Northcote Street, Stockton, 14pm.
Cars to arrive by 12.30pm. £4 per car, no booking needed.
Tea and coffee available.
Humane cards
I APPLAUD the excellent article by Raymond Crisp (Echo March 16) about Dr Robert Sharpe's wonderful idea to stop animals being used for vivisection by issuing Humane Research donor cards — to humans.
I am sure thousands of caring Northern Echo readers would like to get one in order to alleviate the horrific suffering of these innocent animals.
Gwendoline Lamb, 17 Worsley Crescent, Marton, Middlesbrough.
FORMER journalist John Brook has hit the road to pursue his love of folk music.
Guitarist Mr Brook, who was a Redcar reporter for The Northern Echo in 1967, lives in the multi-coloured Leyland wagon in which he travels round the country.
Last year the 52-year-old, whose ‘home’ is by the river in Shrewsbury, went to 32 folk festivals at home and abroad.
Over the weekend he has been at the Spring Thing folk festival at Darlington Arts Centre, where he has been selling home-made ear-rings and Asian crafts.
And students at Darlington College of Technology have volunteered to paint his former British Rail wagon.
‘I come every year to this festival and really enjoy it,’ said Mr Brook, who left journalism about eight years ago when his marriage broke up.
As a reporter on Teesside during the Sixties he was well-known for his Bentley car.
‘I remember I was at a council meeting and they mentioned they were having difficulty letting an old shop on the end of Redcar pier,’ said Mr Brook.
‘I gave them £10 a year for it, and soon had a chain of shops.
By 1970 I left Teesside with £150,000 in my pocket.
‘I made an awful lot of money and I was still a reporter with The Northern ‘I remember I would turn up to journalists’ union meetings wearing a Walls ice cream coat.’
He started out at 15 as a copyboy for the Yorkshire Evening News and became a reporter with the Middlesbrough Evening Gazette before his 16th birthday.
His last job in journalism was as Managing Editor of a glossy business magazine in Wales.
CLEVELAND author Bob Woodhouse officially launched his new book on Saturday about six years late.
His history of Hartburn, now effectively a suburb of Stockton, was completed in the mid-eighties, but publishing problems delayed its release.
The book has now appeared in the shops and is selling well.
After signing copies at the official launch on Saturday, Bob, who lives on the edge of Hartburn, said: ‘The initial print-run was 1,000 and more than 500 have been sold already.’
An Illustrated History of Hartburn Village Through The Passage of Time is the third local history published by Printability Publishing of Lower Church Street, Hartlepool.
The company has already published books on the history of Wolviston Village and the Wynyard Estate.
Bob meanwhile, is working on a pictorial history of Gateshead, following his pictorial histories of Stockton, Middlesbrough and Guisborough.
DARLINGTON comic Vic Reeves won the Bafta award for TV originality last night.
He collected the award at the British Academy of Film and Television Arts ceremony in London with his partner, former Middlesbrough solicitor Bob Mortimer.
There was a surprise appearance at the awards as freed hostage Terry Waite presented the best coverage award for ITN's Gulf War reporting.
Silence of the Lambs star Anthony Hopkins won the Best Actor award for his film role as Hannibal ‘the Cannibal’ Lecter.
His co-star Jodie Foster won Best Actress, while The Commitments, directed by Alan Parker, was voted Best Film.
There was disappointment for Coronation Street fans.
The soap was nominated as Best Drama series but the award went to the murder thriller Prime Suspect.
The Best Drama series award was won by Inspector Morse.
Other TV awards included: Best actor: Robert Lindsay, GBH; best actress: Helen Mirren, Prime Suspect; best light entertainment: Have I Got News For You; best comedy: One Foot in the Grave.
DARLINGTON comic Vic Reeves last night won a Bafta award for TV originality at British Academy Awards for his Big Night Out.
Vic and his partner, former Middlesbrough solicitor Bob Mortimer received the award from fellow comic Tony Slattery at a star-studded presentation staged by the British Academy of Film and Television Arts in London.
After collecting the award Reeves slipped it into a plastic carrier bag and shortly after dropped it.
Other winners in the awards ceremony seen as a pointer to the Hollywood Oscars which are announced next week included Silence of the Lambs star Anthony Hopkins.
And freed hostage Terry Waite was also on hand to present one of the awards for news coverage.
TWICE as much comedy is promised when two of the country's top funny men join forces at Middlesbrough Town Hall as part of a UK tour.
Jasper Carrott and Phil pictured above are the comedians in question.
It's not their first time together.
Earlier this year they broke new ground by ‘rehearsing’ improvised material in front of small audiences at intimate venues across the land.
Both needed to replace material ‘unusable’ after being seen by millions of viewers on their TV shows.
To separate their individual styles they split those evenings into consecutive 1520 minute slots and they retain that format for the tour.
The pair can be seen in Middlesbrough on April 15 and 16 at 7.30pm.
Hexham harmony
IF you think of Vermont and music you think of White Christmas.
That was the movie in which Bing Crosby and Danny Kaye went to Vermont for the holiday to discover it was not snowing when it jolly well should have been.
That's about it with Vermont and music.
This sprang to mind yesterday upon hearing of Vermont Harmony.
This is a choir which sings in a style known as northern harmony and will be in Hexham at the weekend and in Prudhoe for the rest of next week.
The singular style evolved from church singing in New England in the past century.
It is a significant short visit and a pity that Vermont Harmony will not be seen in the southern part of the region.
If only to see whether they sing White Christmas.
Band of old
TALKING of music it is obviously a clear indicator of the ageing process.
This has nothing to do with how policemen look nor even of never having heard of a bunch called James, who are apparently big stars, have their name emblazoned all over a chic t-shirt and of whom one had never heard till yesterday.
It is rather connected with the sort of conversation over the bar the other night.
In talking of groups it soon became abundantly clear that the young lady to whom the remarks were addressed was mystified.
‘Groups of what?’ she wanted to know.
‘Dressmakers?’
‘Well, groups as in groups.’
She was none the wiser.
Groups are not groups any longer.
They have not been for some time except to people who still remember The Beatles and The Animals.
They are bands.
Now as everyone of a decent age knows bands should always have brass in them.
RETIRED sub-postmaster and keen gardener David Cox is set to become an unlikely TV star when he appears in the Tyne-Tees series Earth Movers, which starts a 26-week run on Thursday.
The 69-year-old grows a wide variety of vegetables, fruit and flowers on his allotment in Saltersgill, Middlesbrough including asparagus and grapes.
‘I suppose the unusual thing about the allotment is that I grow just about everything,’ he said.
A £50,000 ‘windfall’ from Northern Arts is helping Cleveland Theatre Company carry out an ambitious plan to link up with Billingham's Forum Theatre.
The plan is for CTC, currently based at Stockton's Dovecot Arts Centre, to make its home at the Forum where it will stage productions before touring small scale venues in the North.
‘It's very exciting and something of which the region can be proud,’ says CTC director Alasdair Ramsay.
This follows his company's successful outdoor production of Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream in Saltburn's Valley Gardens last summer.
Northern Arts is giving the money on top of annual grants from a special Drama Production Fund, money ‘unclaimed’ by Newcastle-based Northern Stage after it ceased production while looking for a new artistic director.
Ramsay feared for CTC's survival without being able to tour more extensively and increase its box office income.
‘We needed money if the company was going to have any future,’ says Ramsay.
The scheme offers the company the chance of a four-fold rise in audiences for a two-fold increase in money.
Stockton Borough Council is expected to give the green light to the Forum move at the end of this week.
Ramsay will be recruiting staff for the bigger company.
At present it's run by just him and one part-timer.
He says: ‘The idea is to start producing high quality, home-grown product because it gives the Forum a much better choice.
Normally they are constrained by what's on the touring market.’
The extra money means he can plan big-scale productions like The Dream.
‘We will be creating a lot more jobs and attracting high quality performers,’ he says.
Productions will play at the Forum for 10–14 days before touring to small scale venues in the North-East.
Hexham, Berwick, Whitley Bay and Newcastle Playhouse are places Ramsay mentions.
‘We are aiming at the Northern area because we feel it is desperately under-served,’ he says, adding that discussions are also under way with Yorkshire Arts about touring in that area.
CTC's first production will be School for Scandal in September, followed by The Importance of Being Earnest early next year.
And Hiawatha, which CTC staged two years ago, is being expanded into a full-length touring show.
‘It will be a varied programme with the  emphasis on quality and wooing people back into the theatre,’ he says.
‘We will also be taking the name of Cleveland out of the area and hopefully changing the image of Cleveland.’
The plan doesn't mean the end of touring productions at Billingham.
They will be programmed alongside CTC offerings.
‘There is no way we are going in to take over and turn it into a repertory theatre.
It's very much a co-operative exercise,’ emphasises Ramsay.
Another summer show in Saltburn is under way too, not necessarily a Shakespeare play but ‘another popular outdoor piece’ as Ramsay puts it.
There's talk too of doing The Tempest at Hartlepool Marina plus shows in Stockton and Middlesbrough in future years.
CTC is one of six drama companies in the region to receive money from the Drama Production Fund.
Newcastle's Live Theatre gets £24,000, mainly for The Durham Story which tells of mining in the county.
Welfare State International gets £12,000 for a project celebrating the centenary of the Bowes Museum in Barnard Castle this summer.
Northumberland Theatre company receives £10,000 for a touring production of Sherlock Holmes and the Tiger of San Pedro.
Sums of up to £10,000 have been earmarked for both Pocket Theatre and Durham Theatre Company pending further discussions.
Boo Radleys/Pale Saints: Middlesbrough Arena TWO bands, sharing seven guitars, one band producing a cathedral of sound, the other an electric wall of noise.
So to speak.
A photo of the Boo Radleys on the sleeve of their debut Ichabod and I album displayed a poster of the Pale Saints as a homage on a bedroom wall.
Two years on and the Boos have the Leeds four-piece opening the show for them.
Depending on your view of typically arty bands on the 4AD label Pale Saints are either heavenly noise experimentalists or utterly pretentious.
A 30minute set seemed to contain only two distinct songs, preferring to veer from one mantra-like rhythm to the next.
The band has already shown it can knock out pop tunes a cover of Nancy Sinatra's Kinky Love, for instance but the audience had to be prepared to indulge them a little.
Extreme but rewarding.
With bands like Nirvana, the Pixies and My Bloody Valentine beyond reproach from the music press and the record-buying public there has never been a better time to play guitars with manic fervour.
The Boo Radleys follow an honourable tradition of feedback and hardcore noise and play with assured control.
Maybe with just too much reserve because there was little sense of danger or excitement about this show.
Solid and worthy but lacking memorable tunes.
Too soon to write them off but the benchmark has been set very high already.
Graham Dunbar
Plans on show:
A public exhibition showing artists' impressions of a pedestrianised Stockton High Street with new shops, car parks and a bus station, waterfront development and a major facelift on two housing estates goes on show in the town's Castle Centre for five days from Tuesday.
Music recalls memories both harsh and happy in Cleveland ENGLAND'S greatest living composer, Sir Michael Tippett, has sent good wishes to the North Yorkshire Chorus, who perform his oratorio A Child of Our in Middlesbrough tonight.
The concert, at the Town Hall, will revive memories for those who remember the young Tippett and his links with Cleveland in the 1930s.
In the days when unemployment in parts of East Cleveland was up to 90 per cent, Tippett was invited to direct musical activities at special work camps set up at Boosbeck, largely to cultivate rough land.
Those times are recalled by Sir Michael in his letter to the 120-strong chorus, which draws members from South Cleveland and Durham as well as North Yorkshire.
‘I encountered at first hand the sufferings of un-dernourished children and out-of-work ironstone miners and their impoverished families,’ he writes.
‘Even though it was the rise of Nazism that eventually prompted me to write A Child of Our, the scapegoats of the North of England and especially the effect on the children remained very much in my mind.’
Sir Michael, now 88, adds that the performance is very appropriate and he wishes it great success.
‘Though circumstances have changed and are constantly changing, I trust its emphasis on hope and compassion will still be found relevant today.’
Among local people who remember the young Tippett organising a performance of The Beggars' and Robin, an opera he wrote himself, is great grandmother Mrs Madge Tansley, who lives in New Skelton.
Mrs Tansley, who will attend the 7.30pm performance with her son, Tony, is looking forward to hearing the music for the first time.
She recalled singing in both operas at Boosback as a 16-year-old and says she was amazed to be given the female lead in The Beggars' and only three weeks in which to learn the words and music!
‘I enjoyed singing for Tippett,’ she said, ‘even though he was quite a perfectionist.’
Mrs Tansley says it is over 58 years since she made her debut in opera and she never did any more, though she is well known in villages in the Guisborough area where her talent has been in demand at concerts.
‘Sometimes I sang with Lingdale Silver Band,’ she says, ‘but it was all a long time ago.’
She remembers the costume provided by Mrs Ruth Pennyman, of Ormesby Hall, who, with her husband, Major Pennyman, was instrumental in arranging the camps.
‘I had a beautiful green crinoline dress and all the ladies wore white mop caps,’ she said of her role as Polly Peacham.
In Robin, she sang in a trio as a bridesmaid at the wedding.
Mrs Margery Teasdale, of Guisborough, remembers the operas put on by Tippett, even though she was only seven or eight at the time.
She got to know the music because her father, Mr Tom Taylor, conducted the male voice choir which formed the basis of the opera chorus.
‘He came to our house at Charltons a lot.
I remember him quite well,’ said Mrs Teasdale, who used to listen to them practising.
She also recalled the time Tippett had ‘flu and stayed at their home where he was nursed back to good health.
‘He was ill for about a week.
It seemed a long time when I was a little girl,’ added Mrs Teasdale.
She also vividly remembers him waving his arms about a lot when con-ducting.
‘He had a lot of wavy black hair on top that flowed about as he conducted,’ she said.
Her father, who died in 1966, was in contact with Tippett until the war years when they lost touch.
Mr Wilfred Franks, who lives in Middlesbrough, also sang in both operas.
The 85-year-old, who will be at tonight's concert, says he has heard the music a number of times.
He spoke about Sir Michael's coming to the area in times when there were many unemployed and many concerned about them.
‘Many simple activities were started to try and make life worth living,’ said Mr Franks, a painter whose career has included five years in theatre in London and two years with BBC TV in its infancy.
Boosbeck, he says, was one of many attempts by middle-class people to help the very poor.
His father, he added, was a musician and helped to provide work for many unemployed musicians through the Morley College in London by creating an orchestra which Tippett later conducted.
Mr Franks added that he and Tippett worked together on things for schoolchildren after Boosbeck.
‘I went round and rehearsed them night after night at the various clubs,’ he recalls.
Sir Michael Tippett.
Play it again:
Accordionist Tommy Edmondson, 58, of Rothbury, Northumberland, has received £100 for the signature tune of the BBC children's cartoon Captain Pugwash, which he recorded 40 years ago and was paid £2.
He said most of the money will go to the local branch of a cancer charity.
THE Americans love the country sound of Tom Russell.
According to the Boston Herald, he is like ‘a long drive down a desert highway: a smooth, fast trip through rugged territory, temperatures that range from bone-chilling cool to blistering heat, a landscape that is monumental, bleak and beautiful’.
The Toronto Sunday Star reached for the superlatives with the release of his 1987 LP Road to Bayamon: ‘A stinky travelogue of carny lust and human sorrow that reveals a literate and keen-eyed songsmith, one who seems inclined to suss out small truths rather than indulge in epic pretensions.’
Others have called him a blend of ‘Merle Haggard filtered through Bruce Springsteen’ or quite simply ‘a hell of a talent’.
The Northern says he is appearing at Middlesbrough Town Hall Crypt on Friday night.
The show starts at 8pm and support is the local group Ability to Swing.
Tom Russell has a compilation LP out now, Beyond St Olav Gate 1979–1992.
Group cancels pop musical
A TOURING company in charge of a new pop musical has cancelled all theatre dates, which will leave hundreds of children disappointed.
Lack of ticket sales have been blamed for the cancellation of Butterfly Children which was to have run at Sunderland's Empire Theatre next week.
VISITORS to Blackpool will be aware of singer Angie, who was resident all summer at ‘Nellie Deans’.
Spennymoor impresario John Wray met Angie last summer and was inspired to book her for several tours of the North-East.
Angie must know every song ever written and includes in her repertoire, material from The Blues Brothers, Connie Francis, Tina Turner and literally hundreds of other songs for young and old.
Judge for yourself at Stanley Central Club on Sunday April 5 or Ayresome Quoits Club, Middlesbrough on Saturday April 11.
JACK Johnson, general secretary of the Club and Institute Union who is to retire in October.
He became general secretary in 1982 after serving 17 years as secretary of the Durham branch.
Jack will be staying on in a consultative position until early next year to help his successor through the opening months of his term.
IN honour of Sunderland's win over Chelsea and the advent of their semi-final cup match, Sunderland entertainer Lloyd Hulme has written ‘The Roker Roar’ which is to be released in cassette form by Bullseye Records.
Lloyd now hopes the handclapping special will help the red and whites to victory in the semi-final and so on to Wembley.
THE official opening ceremony of the Lounge Bar refurbishment at Consett's Number One Central Club will take place on Tuesday.
MORE than 100 years service will be recognised at a ceremony at South Moor Social Club on Wednesday April 8 when five members of the management committee receive long service awards from the CIU.
Secretary Terry Woolcock heads the list with 34 years service, president Ronald Thompson and treasurer and former vice-president George Green each have over 25 years.
Vice-president Joseph Martin and committeeman Bernard Buckley receive certificates of merit for ten years service.
MEANWHILE at Stormont Main Club, sports secretary Colin Hewitt will be presented with his certificate of merit on Thursday April 9.
—SOMETHING Happening at your club?
Tell Neil Harris about it.
Telephone  now.
THROUGHOUT the history of art the nude study has been significant and compelling.
In Yorkshire they know better.
First the painting community rejected the opportunity to draw a female nude, a subject which over the centuries has inspired the great artists.
Perhaps those from the broad acres placed modesty before artistic greatness, as they might very well do.
In the interests of balance they were then offered the chance of painting a male model, a chap in his mid-Twenties.
The Yorkshire folk have kept their brushes obstinately strokeless.
Not one was interested, not in oils, watercolours, pastels, pencils or chalk.
‘It's very, very disappointing,’ said Hugh Waldie, ‘and I can't begin to explain it.
The nude is an integral part of the artist's work.’
Instead the queues have been forming to secure places on the landscape painting holidays Mr Waldie is running at the Esplanade Hotel, Scarborough.
The demand to paint rolling hills is vast compared to the wish to paint flowing curves.
‘I've called off the life drawing break for now,’ said Mr Waldie.
‘I had no choice really.
The chap would have been sitting there motionless with nobody drawing him which is something of a waste of time.’
And a waste of no effort too, of course.
He still intends to expand the breaks at his hotel for the creative community.
He is beginning to accept, however, that it will be done in future outdoors and probably fully clothed.
Battle of minds
ONE of Harold Gale's attributes is that he perpetually thinks of new ideas.
His brain does not stop working.
This is perhaps to be expected of the man who is executive director of Mensa, traditionally know as the brainy people's organisation.
The definition itself is arguable given the peculiar form of intelligence required for membership.
All that logic, all that lateral thought, all those diagrams, what is it all about?
Harold now wants to find the town which he can reward with the title the Mensa Mind trophy as the Easter Eggheads of Great Britain.
Each hamlet, village, town or city in the country has a chance to win and here Harold's devilishly clever thinking emerges.
No matter the size of the place, no matter the number of entries it will be right answers which count.
Harold will simply work out an average of correct answers and then check the population.
From there the Mensa Mind place will come.
‘It could be anywhere really,’ he said.
We've got 37,000 members who are spread all over the country.
The North-East has got as good a chance as anywhere.’
He seeks individual entries which will be then put into places.
Thus, five all-correct entries from somewhere like Bishop Auckland could easily outgun 50 indifferent ones from Middlesbrough.
Belfast has already entered,’ said Harold.
I suppose that means the Irish will win which'll be fun.’
Brainless strike back
THERE has been trouble down at the community centre in Evenwood.
It is matched by an appropriate, not to mention eloquent concern.
Rapport, the community newspaper, describes it as wanton damage and wilful vandalism.
It says: ‘The individuals who vandalise the building are destitute of any sense of knowledge.
‘I will not anthropomorphize these vandals as they are wilfully and ignorantly trying to destroy a building that is there for the use of all the community.
‘They are unsociable to the quality of life we enjoy within our village.
They think themselves truculent but they are very drab and abnormal.’
Quite.
It would be difficult to put better.
Whether the witless yobs breaking into the centre and attempting to destroy a little bit of village life understand a word is of course extremely doubtful.
Ill-defined THE BITER then can consider himself to have been bit, if not torn up and mutilated.
Having joked here about television's inability to tell its expatriots (people who once loved their country) from its expatriates (people who, like my mum and dad, live abroad) on a lunchtime television programme somebody sent a cutting.
It carried the latter, incorrect spelling of the word.
Yes, yes, it was from this newspaper.
THE North-East's favourite layabout Andy Capp joins Batman and Judge Dredd in an intriguing exhibition opening in Middlesbrough today.
Strip Search Two: An exhibition of the new breeds of comics also features characters as diverse as Tintin and Sid the Sexist, Krazy Kat and Biffa Bacon.
More obscure comics and characters are also on show in the extensively-researched exhibition at the Cleveland Gallery, Victoria Road.
‘It's a very accessible introduction to the new brand of comics,’ said exhibitions officer Jane Warrilow.
Strip Search promises to ‘expand your view of comics, comic characters, comic dialogue and situations’.
It sets out to show that there are comics for everyone from political exposes to baroque fantasies, from toilet humour to cartoon confessionals.
The exhibition is open TuesdaySaturday until May 9, from noon to 7pm.
Today
BILLINGHAM:
Billingham Gingerbread Group for single parents and their families, every Saturday, 46pm.
Details, tel .
KIRKLEATHAM:
The Synphonia Male Voice Choir of Billingham, St Cuthbert's Church, nr Redcar, 7pm.
Tickets £2 (£1 concessions) available from members and at the door.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Cleveland Group of the Ramblers, 7 mile walk, meet Post Office, Hilton, 2pm.
Details, tel Redcar 474864.
Leven Antiques Fair, Kings Manor School, Hall Drive, Acklam, Middlesbrough.
Details, tel .
Frog Spotting, meet the creepy crawlies and frogs of Guisborough Branch Walkway's pond, join the countryside wardens at Pinchinthorpe car park off the A173 near Lowcross Farm, 10.30am.
MONDAY:
Hartlepool Writers' Circle, all poets and authors welcome, People's Centre, Raby Hartlepool, 10am.
Redcar Rubber Bridge Club, Durham Road Community Centre, Redcar, 7pm.
New members welcome.
Stockton Hard of Hearing Club, Alma Street Centre, Stockton, 6.30pm.
New members welcome.
MASTER wordsmiths from all over Britain gathered in Durham City at the weekend to pit their wits in the annual Durham Scrabble tournament.
Among the 100 competitors from as far afield as Aberdeen and the Isle of Wight were many of the country's leading players.
One of the seven members of the UK team that took part in last year's World Championships Andrew Fisher from Rochdale emerged as the winner.
The two-day tournament at Trevelyan College is the third most prestigious event in the home Scrabble calendar, after the national and British matchplay championships.
A total of £1,200 worth of prize money was at stake the biggest single amount going to Andrew Fisher for his success in the Division One section of the competition.
The highest placed North-Easterner was Simon Gillam from Newcastle, a previous winner, who was sixth.
Division Two was won by Pauline Johnson from Middlesbrough.
THE parents of zany comedian Vic Reeves yesterday denied they had put their house on the market to stop fans hounding them.
Neill and Audrey Moir said they have put their £50,000 home in Darlington up for sale as they want to move somewhere smaller.
Reports in a newspaper said the couple planned to move as they were being continually hounded by Vic fans.
But Neill said: ‘We are not moving because of people pestering us.
We have not had much trouble like that since we went ex-directory.’
The couple, who live in Hewitson Road, were forced to go ex-directory last year due to their son's success.
Audrey said: ‘We used to get three or four calls a night asking for Vic.’
She said they were often stopped by autograph hunters when they are out with Vic, whose real name is Jim Moir.
‘But Jim is always pleasant with them.
It's all part of his job,’ she said.
The couple plan to move to a smaller house in the area.
‘The house was getting too big for us as both our children have left home now.
We want to stay in the area as we both like walking, especially in the Dales,’ said Audrey.
They hope to sell the house as soon as possible but did not think it would go to a Vic Reeves fan.
A spokeswoman for Dollery Waller, who are handling the sale, said: ‘I doubt the fact they have a famous son would add to the value of the house.
We just sell it on behalf of our clients.’
Vic was born in Leeds but moved to Darlington when he was five.
He went to Eastbourne secondary school before carving out a comic career in London.
He had a number one hit last year with a cover version of Dizzy with The Wonder Stuff.
His Big Night Out programme on Channel Four has built up a cult following.
Last month Vic and his sidekick, former Middlesbrough solicitor Bob Mortimer, were voted the most original performers in the BAFTA awards.
STUDENTS at Marton Sixth Form College, Middlesbrough, have cultivated a show that's out of this world.
The curtain went up last night on The Little Shop of Horrors.
Audrey Two, the monster plant, expands on stage again tonight and tomorrow night at 7.30pm looking for tasty human morsels to eat.
But music director Vivien Winterschladen insists the show is not as frightening as the film.
‘It's a comedy with lots of good songs and is very entertaining,’ she said.
The 14-strong cast got a rousing response from primary schools who were treated to free seats at yesterday's dress rehearsal.
‘We've been working on the show since Christmas and hope the audiences enjoy it as much as we do,’ said Vivien.
London Symphony Orchestra: Middlesbrough Town Hall IT was tremendously encouraging to find a capacity audience assembled in Middlesbrough Town Hall to listen to a programme by the London Symphony Orchestra which featured Prokofiev's 6th Symphony.
Five years ago this would not have been possible, and it is a measure of the success of the Cleveland Classics series of concerts that a mass audience has been gradually persuaded to sample music of a more controversial stamp than the usual ‘pops’.
GLOVE puppet Sooty's future is safe, thanks to a patent and trademark firm with a North-East base.
The TV bear comes of age this year his 40th anniversary and puppeteer Matthew Corbett feared rip-offs in the wake of Sooty-mania.
He called in Urquhart-Dykes and Lord, who have offices in Middlesbrough and Newcastle, to trademark the teddy.
The company was given the task of protecting Sooty and his furry pals Sweep and Soo from counterfeit products.
‘Sooty's name is now used on many diverse products,’ said Dennis Virr, Urquhart-Dykes' North-East partner.
‘This is certainly an unusual project for us.’
Peter Wharton, charged with protecting the magician puppet, said: ‘Sooty bears out the old truism that life begins at 40 1992 will see him gain legs and a new Nineties image.
‘He will be softer, cuddlier and more environmentally and socially aware.’
Sooty, created by Harry Corbett in 1952, holds the world record as the longest-running children's TV series.
A FORMER star pupil is to stage a rock rave for teenagers from his old school.
Andrew Culthord, who was deputy head boy at Ferryhill Comprehensive and achieved four A-levels, is a marketing officer at Sedgefield District Council.
‘The kids said there was no music for them, they can't afford to go to concerts in Newcastle and Middlesbrough,’ said Andrew.
The concert, on April 25 at Mainsforth Community Centre, will be open to anyone over 14 and tickets will cost £2 at the door.
This pair aim to make the after-image a thing of beauty, glamour and pride CREATING a good image comes naturally to Mrs Myra Addison and Mrs Ann Simmons, who last week scooped two top accolades in northern photographic competitions.
Colour analyst/hairdresser Mrs Myra Addison and photographer Mrs Ann Simmons together make up Beautiful Images, a venture set up in Darlington 15 months ago: and they came out tops with stunning portraits in competitions organised by the British Institute of Professional Photography and the Master Photographers' Association.
After the winners were named the pair found it hard to convince some that their glamorous subjects were not professional models but clients who had had new images created for them in Mrs Simmons's Skinnergate studio.
The photograph of Ms Glynis Darlow, of Middlesbrough, who is a lecturer at Teesside College of Art, was the result of a new-look session with Mrs Addison.
And so, too, was that of Glaxo employee Mrs Penny Ebdon, of Barnard Castle.
But what thrilled Mrs Simmons even more than winning with these photographs was the fact that, in an after-dinner speech, top European photographer Hans Schenkel highly praised another of her works.
The black-and-white photograph of Darlington body-builder Mr David Brown had not won any prizes but the current European Portrait Photographer of the Year declared it to be his overall favourite.
‘That made my night,’ said Mrs Simmons, who has several times been successful in the regional awards with portrait, wedding and commercial subjects.
Mrs Addison's new Workshop salon in Grange Road complements Workshop for Men in Haughton Road.
Her daughter, Zoe, is in charge of the hairdressing side of the business while Mrs Addison, a colour analyst of seven years' experience, concentrates on the beauty side.
Creating a new image for a client is a three-hour process, say the pair.
‘The aim is to make you look the best and capture it on film.’
That calls for heavier, photographic make-up, for which Mrs Addison has had London training.
Some people supply their own outfits while others use clothes from the studio wardrobe in a session which aims to project three different images.
Ms Darlow took along her wedding gown for one and her grandmother's hat and muff for another an outfit which lent itself to a sepia finish, said Mrs Simmons.
In the BIP competition, she also achieved one of only two merits awarded in the architectural section with her photograph of the interior of the Darlington Cornmill, which she had been commissioned to take on behalf of the architects.
And in the MPA event, she also got a second place with a shot of copper piping taken for Hydro Polymers at Aycliffe.
The pair are not first-timers to the MPA competition, having won a first prize in the portrait section last year.
Now they are looking forward to next year's event and hoping to make it a hat-trick.
They aim to make you look your best then capture you forever on film CAPTION — Mrs Penny Ebdon before (inset) and after CAPTION 2 — Body-builder Mr David Brown, a portrait which inspired a top cameraman CAPTION 3 — Ms Glynis Darlow before (inset) and after CAPTION — Mrs Addison and Mrs Simmons hold an example of their handiwork a dramatic photograph of Miss Claire Lawson, of Spennymoor, which took a second prize
New breed: from The Blue Lily Strip Search: Cleveland Art Gallery, Middlesbrough COMICS may be for me a closed book.
Though they have a large and growing following, true connoisseurs, according to research, are likely to be white, male, under 30 and working class.
Despite the handicaps of age, gender and origin, I learnt a lot about a medium I had not previously considered.
Not least that comics are serious stuff.
There are even courses on them at colleges and universities.
The comic has travelled far from schoolboy stories of daring-do to sophisticated art form.
It has emerged from the realms of sub-culture into the mainstream, and may yet, via Viz, be modish.
Through a large number of examples, the exhibition traces the history of adult comics and the latest developments which include something called the graphic novel longer and more substantially bound, but essentially the same format.
There are some marvellous graphics among these new breeds but, having never particularly liked comics, I failed to overcome a fundamental irritation with the medium of pictures and words combined.
Either I get hooked on the story or message to the exclusion of the drawings, or am arrested by the designs and cannot be bothered with the balloons.
The catalogue says some people are comic illiterate.
I wonder if most of them are women?
There are few female cartoonists.
Posy Simmonds' whimsical humour comes as a welcome relief in a medium that is surprisingly low on laughs.
Comics are mostly by men with a masculine audience in mind.
They still abound in virile superheroes and violent themes, with women, when they appear, relegated to seductive and helpless stereotypes.
The range of subject matter is enormous, embracing social and political issues alongside adventure and romance.
The boast is that ‘all of culture, all of life, can be in comics’.
Science fiction stories are a rich source of imagery.
Among the most effective for me was ‘The Union’ by Cleveland artists Gordon Fraser and Niel Bushnell which is dramatic and immediate, using dizzying angles, taut perspective, vibrant lines and heavy shading and a minimum of exclamatory text.
Comics cram a great deal of information into a brief space, which makes them a potent force for more than mere storytelling.
Thus I take issue with the claim of a leading exponent, Alan Moore, who maintains that by  comparison with newspapers and television they are ‘one of the only untainted sources of information.’
Comics distort reality just as much as soap operas, and may be open to all sorts of subversive design.
To May 9.
Pru Farrier
NEARLY new designer wear shops for adults are a long established idea.
But what do you do with posh baby clothes?
They're usually outgrown before they're outworn, leaving mothers with cupboard full of perfect clothes.
And having another baby to use the clothes up seems a little extravagant.
Hoppity in Hartlepool is one of the few nearly new shops specialising just in children's clothes.
Opened some years ago, it's now run by Tracy Morris.
‘Most of the clothes we have here have only been worn once or twice.
New babies get so many lovely clothes as presents, that they don't always get a chance to wear them all.’
Although aimed at up to ten-year-olds, most of the clothes are for much younger children.
This is where you'll get baby clothes or rows of pretty dresses for little girls under five.
Prices aren't always cheap.
There are dresses for £2.99, but some go up to £20, but would probably have been two or three times that when new.
Clothes are kept for a month (don't claim them and they go to local charities) so the stock always changes.
Tracy also sells a small range of maternity wear produced by local designer Jill Williams.
She specialises in big baggy shirts in a range of materials from £13 up to around £20, or culotte suits for £21.
She also makes little fancy packs of lacy bib, tiny shoes and a balloon for £10.99, as a totally  impractical but novel Welcome to Baby present.
Price includes delivery in the town.
For the bib, that is, not the baby.
— Hoppity, The Arches, Hartlepool.
Tel.
Hartlepool 222045.
A fairer face for WE'VE tried to find the catch in this but have failed.
RoC, the French hypoallergenic skin care company one of those in the news lately over controversial ingredients in one of its products has launched a national network of RoC Pure Beauty Centres to provide expert advice on skincare.
What's more, you can make an appointment for a free consultation up to an hour long with free facial, analysis and advice.
You'll get written details of the recommended products, and a free bag of at least four samples to take home.
RoC Beauty Centres can be found in Binns in Darlington and Middlesbrough, Metcalf and Proud in Durham, Browns in York, Bainbridges in Newcastle and the Co-op hypermarket at Benton.
B is for Book Shipley Art Gallery, Prince Consort Road, Gateshead (until May 17) HELEN Joseph has done it again.
After the superbly wide-ranging anthology of Glass Work last autumn, she has now pulled out all the stops to arrange a further fabulous survey of all that goes into the making of a book.
The show begins by wondering what paper, where was it invented probably in China in the second century AD and what were its predecessors, namely papyrus from Egypt and tissue from Japan.
Hand-made paper is a skill all its own and in pieces that we are encouraged to touch there are examples by Maureen Richardson, Jan Loxton, Sarah Peart and Gillian Spires.
A group of early printed books includes the Works of Cicero printed in 1569, while even earlier is the tome of 1553 which records the time when Newcastel upon Tine annexed Gateside.
Sections on Calligraphy, Illustration, Typography and Book Design make way for a commercial break which introduces us to 28 first editions of Penguin paperbacks.
And from then on there is superb leather book binding by David Sellers, Angela James, Faith Shannon and John Pearson and in The Book as Art three highly unusual wall-hung creations by Dee Odell-Foster from Bradford on Avon in Wiltshire and referred to as The Trap, Famine and Glimpses of the OK.
Norwich-trained Paul John, now of the Manchester-based Book Art Project, offers his extended pop-up Dance Book to set alongside Dan Harvey's third variation on The Living World, where he has planted grass seeds in an old Bible which is appropriately open at Matthew 13 and which tells the parable of the sowing of the seed.
To further test the old grey matter we are asked ‘What is a Book’ and offered everything from an illustrated guide to Kedleston Hall in Derbyshire to a United Kingdom passport and even a cheque book.
The coup though, out in the main hall, is the set of four of Prospero's 24 Books made for the controversial Peter Greenaway film which revamps Shakespeare's The Tempest.
The Book of Earth, the cornucopia of all the tiny books that go to make up The Book of Languages and even more disconcertingly, The Book of Mirrors, are all locked up in a glass case.
One can, however, walk freely round the well and truly trussed-up Book of Motion which starts to vibrate violently as we walked past it.
As one might expect, a great plethora of events, Saturday schools, demonstrations, lectures and short courses have been compiled to celebrate the event.
Don't miss either it or them.
Annalisa Smith Indian Journey Arts Centre, Vane Terrace, Darlington (until April 25) ANNALISA Smith made her journey across central India between October 1990 and February 1991 with the assistance of a Travel and Training Award from North Arts.
Her score and more of photographs here made me feel quite homesick.
What with the flower sellers and the blind musician, the old man at his sewing machine, the two sisters selling maps of Delhi by the roadside and two others collecting camel dung for fuel the sights and sound if not the actual smell came flooding back, even though it's 40 years since I was last there.
Though there are no shots of such obvious tourist traps as the Taj Mahal, I liked the way in which she equated the Jain temple at Ranakpur with the Hindu temple and its sculpture at Khajuraho.
Most moving of all though was the shot of the Suttee (tomb) Stones at Rajasthan.
For good measure, some of these ideas have been worked up into watercolour paintings.
James Duncan McGairy Watercolours and Drawings Kirkleatham Old Hall Museum, Redcar (until April 26) EACH year Kirkleatham Old Hall Museum in Redcar seeks out an artist who can fill the 12 monthly pages of the annual Langbaurgh calendar.
Though perhaps not quite so avidly sought after as its Pirelli or even Ilford counterpart, these nonetheless prove to be extremely popular with local folk who send them to their far-flung nearest and dearest.
Last year in their search for an artist the Kirk alighted on Amersham-born James D. McGairy, who graduated from Sunderland Polytechnic with an honours degree in communication studies just three years ago.
He is now living and working in Guisborough.
It is, in fact, his original watercolours, including studies of Easington, Ormesby and Upleatham churches, and the 12 smaller companion pen and ink drawings that go with them as illustrations for the 12 months of 1992, which form the central core of this present show.
Calendars, it seems, have almost become McGairy's stock in trade for here as openers there are the original watercolours for Great Ayton and Saltburn Beach both selling at £160 to set alongside the sepia reproduction of Gunnerside and Staithes and Cowbar from the ICI Kennelix Oilfield Calendar, also of 1992.
For the rest and bringing the total score to beyond 40, there are other watercolours in a price range, depending on size, from £45 to £95.
It is, however, the draughtsmanship of the black and white drawings especially of the entrance gateway and the view of Sir William Turner's Hospital on the cover of the Langbaurgh Calendar that is most arresting.
Jimmy Holmes Sunday Market in Kashgar Oriental Museum, Elvet Hill, Durham (until the end of April) JIMMY Holmes, who put us very considerably in his debt with a superlative display of photographs of Japan at the Middlesbrough Art Gallery last September, again hits the jackpot with a further photo-essay that deals with Kashgar on the famous Samarkand silk road and its Sunday market.
Though felt rugs are more likely to be traded these days than silk, a number of other commodities are on offer from wicker baskets and wooden cabinets to horses and, in the food line, even doughnuts and bagels.
To help us get our bearings there are three pages of typewritten text and a couple of maps which show that Kashgar is surrounded by China, Tibet, India, Pakistan, Afghanistan and Russia.
A couple of showcases contain a number of extra goodies such as a variety of hats and caps as well as horse bells and bridles, while another has cooking utensils and an assortment of boots and shoes.
BELEAGUERED South Bank Football Club ‘could fold’ unless it gets a cash injection.
An appeal for a county council grant, however, looks unlikely to succeed.
The club, based on the outskirts of Middlesbrough, has suffered a spate of fires at its Normanby Road home ground in the past year.
The main stand is a gutted shell and home games have been played at Guisborough while club staff try to thrash out the situation with insurers.
In the meantine the Northern League club has approached Cleveland County Council for a grant.
In a letter to the community development committee, secretary and treasurer Les Crossman said: ‘There has been football played at South Bank since 1868 and there is a real danger of the club folding without financial assistance.’
However, in a report for committee members, county librarian and leisure officer Janet Barker said there was no money in the kitty.
Councillors will discuss the application on Monday.
TOP sixties pop group The Searchers are to help a charity raise cash to help people with HIV infections.
Cleveland AIDS Support hopes to raise £15,000 in the extravaganza on April 29, at the Mall, Stockton.
It will share money raised with two other local charities.
A major raffle, for a two-week holiday in Florida and other top prizes, is expected to attract a lot of support.
Many entertainments are planned for the night including a charity auction, games and a tombola.
Local celebrities will also be in attendance.
The charity provides practical help for people with HIV infections, such as transport, shopping, laundry, childminding.
The extravaganza is its main money-raising function of the year.
Tickets can be obtained from CAS, 47 Princes Road, Middlesbrough.
CAPTAIN Cook's birthplace museum in Stewart Park, Middlesbrough, received a £2,500 boost from English Estates yesterday.
English Estates area manager Peter Watson handed over the donation to museum curator Hilary Wade.
The money will be used to buy video equipment and a new painting and to part-fund the conservation of the portrait of Joseph Pease, the founder of Middlesbrough.
‘We are delighted to help the museum extend its collection,’ said Mr Watson.
‘The museum captures the spirit of Captain Cook's adventures around the world.’
Hilary Wade thanked English Estates and said she was particularly pleased the conservation of the Pease portrait ‘an important piece of work for Middlesbrough’ could go ahead.
A REAL ale pub has won a unique award from a hardy band of travelling Plymouth Argyle supporters.
The London-based fans watch almost every Argyle away game and in time-honoured tradition, visit pubs in each port of call.
And the real ale enthusiasts chose The Tap and Barrel in Middlesbrough as their 1990–1 Pub of the Year the eight season that the  supporters' association has presented such an award.
Before their team plays at Ayresome Park on Saturday, they will present a framed certificate to licencee Greg Maloy.
George Tinsley, of the Tap and Barrel's owners the North Yorkshire Brewing Company, said: ‘This came out of the blue, it was a total surprise.’
The Argyle fans chose the Newport Road pub after enjoying a pint or two before their team played Middlesbrough last January.
Tony Scowcroft, press officer for the Plymouth Argyle Supporters Association London Branch, said the pub had been chosen for its good beer, good food and atmosphere.
‘Supporting Plymouth Argyle, our pre-match pint is often more satisfying than the football,’ he said.
This was obviously the case last January, when the teams fought out a goalless draw in grim weather at Ayresome Park.
Mr Scowcroft wasn't predicting a good result for Argyle on Saturday.
‘I think our chances are remote,’ he said.
‘Boro may have lost a couple of home games, but we always seem to be the whipping boys who allow teams to regain their form.’
Today
STOCKTON:
Oxbridge Jazz Club with residents the New Orleans Preservation Band, Oxbridge Hotel, Oxbridge Lane, 8.30pm.
Admission £1.
THORNABY:
Woodland Adventure, discovery games in Bassleton Wood, meet Bassleton Lane entrance to the wood, off Bader Avenue, 2pm.
WOLVISTON:
Folk Club, singaround, Wellington Inn, High Street, 8.30pm.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Aikido International Weekend, Rainbow Leisure Centre, Coulby Newham.
Details, tel M'bro 592800.
John Martyn plus support, The Bowl, Redcar.
Tickets £7.
Details, tel .
Middlesbrough and District CHA and HF Rambling Club, walk to Sandsend from Staithes, 10.30am.
Details, tel M'bro 598232.
SATURDAY:
Rose Marie in concert with special guest, Borough Hall, Middlegate, Hartlepool, 7.30pm.
Tickets from TIC.
Cheryl's Eggs and Baker Roadshow, Town Hall, Middlesbrough, 3pm.
Tickets, tel box office on 242561.
Sugar Craft Guild Exhibition and Demonstration, Ormesby Hall, Ormesby, Middlesbrough, 2–5.30pm.
Normal admission charges.
SUNDAY:
Join Countryside Warden Duncan Stewart for a circular forest walk, meet at Guisborough Branch Walkway Pinchinthorpe car park, 2pm.
Cleveland Group of the Ramblers, 7 mile walk, meet at the Post Office, Guisborough, 2pm.
Details, tel Redcar 474864.
MONDAY:
Easter Egg Painting Competition, a prize for the winner!
Don't forget to bring a hard boiled egg to decorate, Billingham Beck Valley Country Park, 10am.
Fee 20p.
Cleveland Outlook social activities group meet at Kilburn for a 8 mile circular walk, lunch at Abbey Inn, Byland Abbey, 10.20am.
New members 20s-40s welcome.
Details, tel Guis 635898.
Stockton Hard of Hearing Club, Alma Street Centre, Stockton, 6.30pm.
New members will be made welcome.
Today
RICHMOND:
Richmond Bridge Club, Fleece Hotel, 7pm.
Details, tel.86341.
Coming up
TOMORROW:
Aysgarth Choral Society, St Andrew's Church, Aysgarth, 7.30pm.
Charity Swimathon, Swimming Pool, 7am10pm.
Folk Club, singers/musicians night, Black Lion Hotel, Finkle Street, every Friday, 8.15pm.
SATURDAY:
Richmondshire Ramblers meet Nun's Close car park, to catch SettleCarlisle train to Ribblehead for 8 mile walk, 9.45am.
SUNDAY:
Hambleton Ramblers, a testing 14 mile walk starting from Marske, Richmond, 9.45am.
Meet leader Richard Forster at Market 9am.
Leven Antique Fair, Village Details, tel.
. Reeth Brass Band, Village 2.30pm.
Treasures of Operetta, Georgian Theatre 7.30pm.
Craft Fair, Market all day.
North East Club for pre-war Austins Mad March Hare run sets off from Scotch 11am.
MONDAY:
Through the Forgill Gate, slide show and talk by Major FTC Williams, Sunday School, near Reeth, 8pm.
Domino Drive, Village Hall, Gilling 7.30pm.
In aid of Gilling West Royal British Legion.
Emergency dental service for Northallerton with Mr Wilkinson, Malpas House, 11 South Parade, Car boot sale, Earl's Orchard playing from 8am.
Car boot sale, Bolton Park, Wensley.
TUESDAY:
Fundraising event, Children's Playground, 1.30pm.
Northallerton Mowbray Folk Dance Club, Grammar School, 7.30pm.
Details, tel.770439.
WEDNESDAY:
Beside the Arkle Beck, guided walk with Major FTC Williams, meet outside the Burgoyne Hotel, Reeth, 11am.
Whist Drive, Village 7.30pm.
Help Save the Children: Volunteers are needed to help in house to house and street collections in Richmondshire during Save the Children Fund Week at the beginning of May.
Contact Richmond 822631.
Jasper Carrott and Phil Cool: Middlesbrough Town Hall It is always good to see big-name comedy acts reaching the North-East other than in Newcastle, more especially when there are two such acts and both of them can keep a crowd laughing all evening.
Jasper Carrott and Phil Cool are a unique combination in that they have a similar brand of comedy, but two completely individual styles.
This means that the audience can be treated to two different interpretations of similar pieces of observations and the formula works very well indeed.
The show, which lasts a good three hours and does not contain a dull moment, works around an interesting format, whereby neither comedian is supporting the other, but both perform three sets each.
The pecking order was apparently decided on the toss of a coin.
Another interesting twist to the evening was at the end of the show when the audience was invited to put questions to both performers whose answers to even the stupidest of enquiries were quick and funny with some excellent put-downs for those who dared to ask the wrong things.
Luckily for comedy-lovers Middlesbrough Town Hall has added an extra date for these two marvellously funny men tonight.
This new date is selling fast, so if you want to see two fine comedians in one evening, snap up the chance as soon as you can.
Brain train
AND so to the Good Friday question in the Mensa search for the brightest part of Britain.
All that can be said from this direction is that they are not getting any easier.
There are two to go after this:
A high speed train travels from London to Birmingham at 120 mph.
The return journey over exactly the same distance is covered at 80 mph.
What is the average speed for the entire journey?
Answer along with all the others after the contest's closure next week.
Now, fight for that title you lateral thinking North-Eastern people, you.
Today
HARROGATE:
Children's Easter Quiz, Harlow Carr Botanical Gardens, Crag Lane, daily until Monday.
Model Railway Exhibition in Halls A and B, open to the public, Kings Road, Harrogate, Fri 69pm, Sat-Mon 10am-6pm.
Tickets .
KNARESBOROUGH:
Knaresborough and the Civil War, The Courthouse Museum, Castle Grounds, daily 10am-5pm.
Until Sept 20.
Knaresborough Art Society Annual Exhibition, The Little Gallery, Courthouse Museum, Castle Grounds, Knaresborough, daily 10am-5pm.
Until July.
Coming up
SATURDAY:
Easter Treasure Hunt, aimed at families to complete together, Beningbrough Hall, near York, last start time 3.45pm.
Guided Walk, Saints and Sinners of York, meet Museum Gardens Gate, Museum Street, York, 10.15am.
No need to book.
Price £3, under-16s free.
Every Sat.
Guided Walk, Snickleways, meet at Museum Gardens Gate, Museum Street, York, 2.15pm.
No need to book.
Price £3, under-16s free.
Hollywood and Broadway The Musicals in concert featuring Wayne Sleep and Lorna Luft, Barbican Centre,.
Details box office .
Help Save the Children: Volunteers are needed to help in house to house and street collections in Richmondshire during Save the Children Fund Week at the beginning of May.
Contact Richmond 822631.
Art exhibition:
An exhibition of work by local artists is being held at the Shakespeare Hall, North Road, Durham tomorrow from 10am to 4pm.
Today
BLACKHALL:
Sacred Cantata, The Scene on Calvary, performed by choir and friends, Methodist Church, 6.30pm.
Eldon Garden Shopping Centre, Percy Street, open 11am-4pm.
Comedy night with many of the region's best known actors and stand-up comedians, Live Theatre, Quayside, Newcastle, 8pm.
Tickets £4, £3.
Sat also.
Wildfowl and Wetlands Centre, open as usual, District 15, details, tel..
Coming up
Weekly tea dance, Park View Community Association, 1.30–4pm.
Details, tel. 091–388 1043.
Children's ballroom dancing/disco dancing classes, St John's Church Hall, Meadowfield, Details, tel. 091–384 8859.
County Music Show with Band Wagon, Social Club, Children's entertainment, Eldon Garden Shopping Centre, Percy Street, 2–4pm.
Today
AYSGARTH:
Aysgarth Choral Society, St Andrew's Church, 7.30pm.
RICHMOND:
Charity Swimathon, Swimming Pool, 7am-10pm.
Folk Club, singers/musicians night, Black Lion Hotel, Finkle Street, Richmond, every Friday, 8.15pm.
Coming up
SATURDAY:
Sixties night, Comrades Club, Newbiggen, 8pm.
Scanner Appeal coffee morning, Memorial Hall, Reeth, 10am-noon.
Richmond Meet coffee morning, Town Hall, Richmond, 9am-noon.
Richmondshire Ramblers meet Nun's Close car park, Richmond, to catch Settle-Carlisle train to Ribblehead for 8 mile walk, 9.45am.
SUNDAY:
Hambleton Ramblers, a testing 14 mile walk starting from Marske, Richmond, 9.45am, meet leader Richard Forster at Market Cross, Northallerton, 9am.
Leven Antique Fair, Village Hall,.
Details .
Reeth Brass Band, Village Green, Reeth, 2.30pm.
Treasures of Operetta, Georgian Theatre Royal, Richmond, 7.30pm.
Craft Fair, Market Place, Richmond, all day.
North-East Club for pre-war Austins Mad March Hare run sets off from Scotch Corner, 11am.
MONDAY:
Through the Forgill Gate, slide show and talk by Major FTC Williams, Fremington Sunday School, near Reeth, 8pm.
Domino Drive, Village Hall, Gilling West, 7.30pm.
In aid of Gilling West Royal British Legion.
Emergency dental service for Northallerton with Mr Wilkinson, Malpas House, 11 South Parade,.
Car boot sale, Earl's Orchard playing field, Richmond, from 8am.
Car boot sale, Bolton Park,.
TUESDAY:
Fundraising event, Children's Playground, Hawes, 1.30pm.
Northallerton Mowbray Folk Dance Club, Grammar School, Northallerton, 7.30pm.
Details 770439.
WEDNESDAY:
Beside the Arkle Beck, guided walk with Major FTC Williams, meet outside the Burgoyne Hotel, Reeth, 11am.
Whist Drive, Village Hall, Tunstall, 7.30pm.
Help Save the Children: Volunteers are needed to help in house to house and street collections in Richmondshire during Save the Children Fund Week at the beginning of May.
Contact Richmond 822631.
Today
COULBY NEWHAM:
Aikido International Weekend, Rainbow Leisure Centre.
Details, tel.
M'bro 592800.
John Martyn plus support, The Bowl.
Tickets £7.
Details, tel.
. Middlesbrough and District CHA & HF Rambling Club, walk to Sandsend, 10.30am start.
Details, tel.
M'bro 598232.
Coming up
TOMORROW:
Rose Marie in concert with special guest, Borough Hall, Middlegate, 7.30pm.
Tickets from TIC.
Cheryl's Eggs and Baker Roadshow, Town Hall, 3pm.
Tickets, tel. box office on 242561.
Sugar Craft Guild Exhibition and Demonstration, Ormesby Hall, Middlesbrough, 2–5.30pm.
Normal admission charges.
Join countryside warden Duncan Stewart for a circular forest walk, meet at Guisborough Branch Walkway car park, 2pm.
Cleveland Group of the Ramblers, seven mile walk, meet at the Post Office, 2pm.
Details, tel.
Redcar 474864.
MONDAY:
Easter Egg Painting Competition, a prize for the winner.
Don't forget to bring a hard boiled egg to decorate, Billingham Beck Country Park, 10am.
Fee 20p.
Cleveland Outlook social activities group meet at for an eight mile circular walk, lunch at Abbey Inn, Byland Abbey, 10.20am.
New members 20s-40s welcome.
Details, tel.
Guis 635898.
Stockton Hard of Hearing Club, Alma Street Centre, 6.30pm.
New members will be made welcome.
Middlesbrough Barbershop Singers, new members welcome, Methodist Church Hall, The Grove, Marton, Details, tel. 821908.
Norman Wisdom Live, Town 7.30pm.
Box office, tel. 242561.
Tuesday's Folk, singaround, Tap n Barrel, Newport Road, 8.30pm.
Stockton Folk Group dance display section meets Elmwood Community Centre, Stockton, 8pm.
Animal Masks, make your own animal mask, Castle Eden Walkway Country, 2pm.
Fee 20p.
New Orleans Ragtime Band, Travellers Rest,, 8.30pm.
Free admission.
Hartlepool Jazz Club presents The Dave Allenby Sextet — a most sophisticated group from Darlington with Ray Chester on piano, Images Bar, The Grand Hotel, Admission £1.50.
Cleveland Esperanto Association, Friends' Meeting House, Cambridge Road, 8pm.
Details, tel. 827679.
Social Badminton, Badminton Club, Highfield Road, 10am-12noon.
Details, tel.Redcar 483024.
New members welcome.
Bon Ami Club for people on their own over 25, meet Function Room, Swan Hotel, 8.30pm.
Details, tel.
Jack on Guis 643657.
THE beer was good, the food was good, but the result of the match well, obviously disappointing Brian.
Plymouth Argyle's devoted travelling supporters turn every away trip into a real day out and Saturday's visit to Ayresome Park in Middlesbrough was no exception.
The club's supporters' association London branch combined their pre-match pint with the presentation of their Pub Of The Year award to the Tap ‘n’ Barrel in Middlesbrough.
The travelling fans voted the Newport Road hostelry as the best pub of the 50-plus they visited last season.
The framed certificate said: ‘In recognition of the welcome and the excellence of the facilities provided for us.’
Secretary John Coker said the fans had not been disappointed on their return, despite Aryle's 2–1 defeat at Ayresome Park.
‘What can you say?
The beer's good, the food's good, the welcome's good,’ said John, who lives near Crystal Palace, London.
He admitted the award now in its eighth year tended to be dominated by pubs in the North.
‘There is a bias against the South,’ he said.
‘Southerners just can't brew good beer.’
With their team on the verge of relegation and Boro pushing for promotion, the Argyle fans savoured their beer, contemplating the prospect that it may be some time before they drink in the Tap ‘n’ Barrel again.
A TASTE of the Alps came to Cleveland on Saturday with the eighth Alpine Garden Society Cleveland show.
The national show of alpine and rock garden plants attracted 60-plus exhibitors and more than 600 guests from all over the country to the James Finegan Hall in Eston, Middlesbrough.
Top prize of the Farrer medal went to John Saxton of Nottingham for his cassiope.
‘We were pleased with the turn-out, although the number of exhibitors was down on last year,’ said show secretary Ernie Ruddick.
‘That's because it's not been a good year, due to fluctuating temperatures.’
Mr Ruddick said more plants had been exhibited than ever before from former Eastern bloc countries, including the Commonwealth of Independent States and Czechoslovakia.
Young artist:
Eleven-year-old Lisa Barker's art work goes on display at Hartlepool's Gray Art Gallery and Museum from May 1 as artist of the month.
The Brougham School pupil is receiving lessons from John Hall, of the Brush and Palette Studio in Tower Street, Hartlepool, in the technique of pastel drawing.
Today
BILLINGHAM BECK:
Easter Egg Painting Competition, a prize for the winner!
Don't forget to bring a hard boiled egg to decorate, Valley Country Park, 10am.
Fee 20p.
KILBURN:
Cleveland Outlook social activities group meet at Kilburn for an 8-mile circular walk, lunch at Abbey Inn, Byland Abbey, 10.20am.
New members 20s-40s welcome.
Details, tel Guis 635898.
STOCKTON:
Stockton Hard of Hearing Club, Alma Street Centre, 6.30pm.
New members will be made welcome.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Middlesbrough Barbershop Singers, new members welcome, Methodist Church Hall, The Grove, Marton, Middlesbrough.
Details, tel 821908.
Norman Wisdom Live, Town Hall, Middlesbrough, 7.30pm.
Box office, tel 242561.
Tuesday's Folk, singaround, Tap n Barrel, Newport Road, Middlesbrough, 8.30pm.
Stockton Folk Group dance display section meets Elmwood Community Centre, Hartburn, Stockton, 8pm.
WEDNESDAY:
Animal Masks, make your own animal mask, Castle Eden Walkway Country Park, 2pm.
Fee 20p.
New Orleans Ragtime Band, Travellers Rest, Hartlepool, 8.30pm.
Free admission.
Hartlepool Jazz Club presents The Dave Allenby Sextet a most sophisticated group from Darlington with Ray Chester on piano, Images Bar, The Grand Hotel, Hartlepool.
Admission £1.50.
Cleveland Esperanto Association, Friends' Meeting House, Cambridge Road, Middlesbrough, 8pm.
Details, tel 827679.
Social Badminton, Badminton Club, Highfield Road, Middlesbrough, 10am-12noon.
Details, tel Redcar 483024.
New members welcome.
Bon Ami Club for people on their own over 25, meet Function Room, Swan Hotel, Redcar, 8.30pm.
Details, tel Jack on Guis 643657.
Today
CHESTER LE STREET:
Weekly sequence dance, Park View Community Association, North Lodge Site, 7.30–10pm.
Admission 50p.
CONSETT:
Coach to Consett Swimming Baths, every Monday, normally spare seats available for anyone interested.
Details J Wilson, 091–373 4501.
NEWCASTLE:
Sandgate Women's Morris practice, Bainbridge Methodist Church, Heaton Place, off Heaton Road, 7.30–9.15pm.
Beginners welcome.
Details 091–281 1412.
Coming up
TUESDAY:
Durham Jazz Club, WMC, Crossgate, Durham, 7.30pm.
Every Tues.
Friends of Washington Wildfowl and Wetlands Centre AGM, come along and see how you can raise funds for the centre, District 15, Washington, 7.30pm.
PMT and Post Natal Depression Support Group, every Tuesday, Washington, 6–8pm.
Details 091–415 7794.
Ballroom dancing classes, Arts Centre, Biddick Lane, Fatfield, Washington, 1.30–3pm.
Details 091–416 6440.
New exhibit:
History staff at Tyne and Wear Museums have taken delivery of a large addition to their collection of medical instruments a 10ft-long Kehheler Rotating Respirator, also known as an iron lung.
It will be displayed at the Museum of Science and Engineering in Newcastle.
Model show:
The Northern Model Show will take place in The Guildhall on Newcastle's Quayside on Saturday May 9 and Sunday May 10.
The show aims to promote modelling in the region and inform people what local clubs are available.
Hannah Hauxwell, left and the carving of poet Richard Watson Hannah unveils plaque to poet HANNAH Hauxwell, the famous daughter of the Dales yesterday paid tribute to a famous son of Middleton-in-Teesdale.
She officially unveiled a carved plaque to commemorate the centenary last year of the death of poet Richard Watson.
Teesdale Heritage Group commissioned artist Phil Townsend to carve the plaque which forms part of a wider display of panels describing the poet's life, quoting his work and depicting Teesdale scenery.
Mr Watson worked as a lead miner and was inspired to write by his upper Teesdale surroundings.
Today
DARLINGTON:
Phoenix Club for people on their own over 25, Tap and Spile, Bondgate, 8pm.
Details, tel 481813.
Volunteers wanted to carry out nature conservation tasks in the Darlington area, please meet with waterproofs and packed lunch at United Bus Station, Darlington, 9.15am.
Tommorrow also.
Details, tel 381421.
Old time and modern sequence dancing, new and old dances taught, Arts Centre, Darlington, 7.30–10.30pm.
NEWTON AYCLIFFE:
Bereavement Support Group, British Legion Club, Sun Lounge, Macmillan Road, 7.30pm.
Details, tel 320365.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Rainbow Over 25s Singles Club meet every Wed at The George Hotel, Piercebridge, 8.30pm-midnight.
Details, tel Anne on .
Sequence dancing, Village Hall, Sadberge, 8–10pm.
Tuition 7–8pm.
TRAINEE photographers at a centre for people with learning difficulties will get a £976 boost today.
Middlesbrough Mayor Coun Eddie Bolland will hand over a cheque from Middlesbrough Council's community chest to help the photography project.
The project has its own equipment, dark room and professional photographer-in-residence and attracts people from all over the town to its daily classes.
Trainees at the centre at Menro House, Colmore Avenue, won a commission from City Challenge to produce a portfolio of 400 photographs of the eastern area of Middlesbrough some of which were used in the documents and information backing up the successful bid.
Like father, like daughter in a family linked by art MAKING an exhibition of themselves is an art as far as Mr Roy Hildon and his daughter, Jane, are concerned.
Their skills are currently on show at Stockton Central Library under the title A Family Alongside a selection of 38 etchings by Mr Hildon are ceramics created by 34-year-old Jane.
The former, whose work is well known throughout the North-East, has also toured nationally and as far as Poland.
‘We enjoy each other 's work and feel it is complementary,’ he said.
The Hildons live in Yearby Road, Yearby, Redcar.
While Jane makes a living from her pottery skills using a workshop set up in the garage, her father regards art more as pleasure than  source of income.
He disciplines himself to at least two hours a day in his upstairs studio where he also produces screen printing, water colours and acrylics.
The one-time art teacher retired about two years ago from St Mary's Sixth Form College in Middlesbrough where he taught for about 20 years.
He loved teaching and talks enthusiastically about it, but felt it was time to enjoy doing his own work.
He and Jane have exhibited together twice before: as part of Cleveland Visual Arts Festival at Kirkleatham Museum in October, 1989, and on home ground when they opened their studios to the public last October as part of Cleveland Arts Festival.
Because they show different forms of art, between them they draw on a wide range of interests.
Mr Hildon grew up in the area and was a pupil at William Turner's Grammar School, Coatham.
‘I have distanced myself for long periods,’ he said, perhaps with a tinge of regret about teaching posts in Cumberland and Scarborough which took him away from Cleveland.
His wife, Bessie, also a retired teacher, says both he and Jane draw on the area for inspiration in their work.
‘Jane is very keen to be a good potter,’ he said proudly of the daughter who trained in ceramics at Harrogate College of Arts and Technology.
Her ceramics are sought after at craft fairs in Northallerton, Harrogate and York.
Jane's work is decorative with a functional aspect, such as flasks and bottles; his own, which includes glimpses of Cleveland, is symbolic and interpretive.
‘I do a lot of drawing outside,’ he added, and love of gardening is shared with his daughter.
His attractive, well-stocked garden overlooks open country towards Guisborough and often becomes an extension of his studio.
Jane collects her images from the cliffs, the hills, the water, the woods and valleys of this area and interprets through rock forms and natural forms like bark, shells and stones which she finds around.
Her father is currently working on a collection for exhibition at Kirkleatham in October, probably again sharing the slot with her.
— A Family is staged at Stockton until May 1 from 9.30am-7pm weekdays except Thursdays when it closes at 5pm and similarly on Saturdays.
Mr Hildon and his daughter, Jane, with examples of their work.
Tough and tender Kathryn takes gold IMAGINE being lost in the wild stretches of the Scottish Highlands, icy northern wind beating heavily against your face and sheets of splintering rain biting deep into your face.
This was one of the challenges Yarm teenager Kathryn Clapham had to overcome to achieve the Duke of Edinburgh Gold Award.
Her outstanding efforts will be rewarded on May 5 when HRH Prince Philip presents her with a certificate at a special ceremony in St.
James's Palace, London.
Kathryn, aged 19, of Tofts Close, Low Worsall, near Yarm began the scheme four years ago while attending Conyers School, passing bronze and silver, then advancing to gold status.
She had to cover five areas: expedition, residential, physical recreation, service and skills.
For each section, she kept a diary, stating what she had achieved and the number of hours worked.
A gruelling 50-mile expedition with three other girls took her from Torridon to Gairloch, Scotland, in four days.
‘This was the hardest part,’ she said.
‘We got severely lost and it took us all day to get back.
It never stopped raining and our clothes were wet through.
We were actually quite worried, but there was an assessor who made sure we didn't get into any difficulties.
It was a real experience.’
For the residential section, she travelled to Cumbria and learnt how to sail her first time on a boat.
She also studied badminton as part of physical recreation.
Kathryn said the most interesting part was keeping busy youngsters occupied in the waiting room of North Tees General Hospital.
The service section also involved her in caring for the elderly and paediatrics.
She studied car maintenance for the skills task.
‘I didn't want to be a helpless female.
I had to do weekly checks on a car.
I learnt how to change the break pads and a wheel.
I loved going under the car and getting greasy!’ she said.
She is one of 700 young people who will attend the presentation.
Kathryn, a pupil at Kirby College, Middlesbrough, recommends the scheme.
‘It's definitely the best thing I've ever done.
I've met new friends and I feel a lot more confident and physically active.’
Cap Millet rides again and passion surges on rugged cliffs at Whitby A WRITER who has turned his hand to westerns, historical romance and local history books has achieved a hard-back hat-trick.
Three novels by Mr Bill Spence, a sub-postmaster at Ampleforth College post office, have been accepted by publishers in the last three weeks.
They should be in print by the end of the year.
The books cover the three main areas of literature that he has come to favour since his debut into the world of writing after the 1939–45 War.
‘I was a bomb aimer with the RAF during the war and I just got the urge to start writing,’ he says.
‘When I came out of the Air Force I did articles and pieces for various magazines as well as reviews for newspapers, including the Yorkshire Gazette and Herald and the Northern Echo.
‘But I knew there was a book in me somewhere and so I decided to put my personal experiences of the war down on paper.’
The result was Dark and Mr Spence, the son of a Middlesbrough teacher, never looked back.
He kept writing while holding a job as store's manager at Ampleforth and still finds time to sit down at his word processor.
He also reviews books for The Northern.
After two more war novels he turned to westerns.
One novel soon to be published, Robbery at, under his pseudonym Jim Bowden, is his36th in that vein.
Regular readers will recognise his hero Cap Millet.
The people of Whitby may be familiar with some of the landmarks in his historical romance The Red which is set there in the 1600s.
That is written under his female alter ego, Jessica Blair.
‘I enjoy writing historical romances because they are usually longer and so you get more chance to work on character development and detail,’ he says.
‘I've also got to know Whitby very well and it's nice to be able to put that knowledge to good use.’
The third book, From Cloistered, to be published under his real name, takes a totally different tack to examine folk stories about Yorkshire  monasteries , another of his interests.
Romantic novelist Mrs Betty Grass, of Leyburn, is also celebrating after the publication of her second work, Love on a.
Unlike Mr Spence she turned to creative writing later in life, after retiring from her job as a journalist on Chartered Surveyor magazine.
She came to North Yorkshire from London with her husband and was moved to write after his death.
‘I thought I would never be another Thomas Hardy so I'd write romance, using places I know in real life for inspiration,’ she says.
Her third novel, Another Sort of is due on the shelves by September and she has plenty more ideas in the offing.
— A new award scheme has been launched to to encourage and support budding writers in the north.
The Northern Arts' Writers Awards 1992 will give two writers the chance to take off to Ireland and work on a literary project free from the distractions of everyday life.
The winners will spend a month at the Tyrone Guthrie Centre in County Monaghan, Ireland.
Several grants for research or work-related travel are also available.
The closing date for entries is May 29.
Application forms are available from the Published Broadcast Arts Department, Northern Arts, 9–10 Osborne Terrace, Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
Author Mr Bill Spence with one of his earlier westerns written under his pen-name Jim Bowden.
SHORT STORY COMPETITION:
Durham LitFest has organised a short story competition.
With a first prize of £250 plus a free place on a weekend writers' course and a second prize of £150, plus free place, the competition is open to all.
There is a £3.50 entry fee per manuscript and a maximum length of 2,500 words.
Further details from Durham City Library, South Street.
Entries must be in by May 2.
WRITEAROUND ‘92: The competitions for Cleveland's fourth annual Writearound Festival have been launched.
There are three categories with three prizes in each one of £100 or a free place on the Arvon Foundation writing course of your choice, £50 and £25.
In the poetry category, writers are allowed as many lines as they like.
For short stories, there is a maximum length of 2,500 words.
For a magazine-style non-fiction article the maximum length is 1,000 words.
Get hold of details before entering any of the competitions, from Alyson Perry, Berwick Hills Library, Ormesby Road, Middlesbrough ().
Closing date is May 31.
CREATIVE WRITING IN CLEVELAND:
A number of free creative writing courses are to be launched in Cleveland by Leeds University Adult Education Centre in Middlesbrough.
Taking place at the Robert Atkinson Community Centre, Thornaby (Monday afts.),
Brambles Farm School (Tuesday afts.),
Yarm Library (Tuesday eves.),
Berwick Hills Library (Wednesday afts.) and Saltburn Community Centre (Wednesday afts.), the courses run from the last week of April for ten weeks.
Tutors include Trevor Teasdel, Andy Croft, Norah Hill, and Mark Watkins.
READERS’ PAGE: Entries for the next Readers' Page must be in by June 1.
We welcome poetry (no more than three poems) and prose (no more than 1,000 words).
The best will be published in our June issue.
Please don't send originals as we can't send material back.
Send work, marked Readers' Page, to The Page, Victoria House, Victoria Garesfield, Rowlands Gill, Tyne & Wear NE39 1LX.
Brendan Neiland Paintings.
Northern Centre for Contemporary Art, Sunderland (Until May 9).
FOLLOWING in the footsteps of many avant-garde photographers, the hard-edge painter Brendan Neiland is much interested in observing and painting reflections, very often on a curved or waving surface.
Artistically, Neiland is aligned to Monet and the French Impressionists in being interested in the reflection and refraction of light.
His, though, is a concern with modern city life rather than with the truly rural, and it is in the sheer acreage of glass in the walls of the towering skyscraper blocks that he devotes himself to a series of studies on the diagonal.
Among the many prints here is Triangular, of 1986, which belongs to the Cleveland Permanent Collection.
Much of the artist's inspiration comes from London, from Hampton Court, from Mill Bank and, most impressively of all, Tower Bridge Reflections.
In 1990 he was given a commission by British Rail to mark the introduction of their electrified 225 East Coast Inter-City service.
There is a sequence of hard-edge air-brush paintings which tick off the various stops on the way such as York and Newcastle.
More recently Neiland has achieved a quartet of Cloudscapes.
Where the future will take him is any-one's guess.
Seascape Revisited, Cleveland Craft Centre, Gilkes Street, Middlesbrough (Until May 2).
TAKING as their jumping off point Steve Geliot's previous installation/exhibition devoted to the theme of the ocean and the sea, a number of first-year students on the BA Interior Design course at Teesside Polytechnic have been encouraged to come up with the son or is it daughter? of Seascape.
Seven of their 1:20 scale models have been chosen for exhibition and two have been combined to provide the full-scale installation.
We have M W Herd's pebbles and curving Jawbone walks; Stuart Harper's curving screens and a pair of companionable deckchairs; and Steve C Prosser's cut-out paper waveforms.
The ceiling-hung, lint-bandage fronds by Stephanie Ireland provide a light airy, wind-blown introduction to Liam Hearne's much darker, menacing subterranean rock cave.
The experience is like entering the catacombs and I wouldn't have been the least surprised to have come across the odd skull or two in this formidable kind of Davey Jones' locker.
John Muafangejo (1943–1987)— Linocuts.
City Art Gallery, Exhibition Square, York (Until May 4).
WINDHOEK in South Africa, where John Muafangejo died at the tragically early age of 44 in 1987, rings an immediate bell.
Shortly after John was born I was night-flying overhead, gaining astro-navigational experience in a battered Avro Anson.
For this reason, if for no other, I have a strong feeling of identity when looking at these huge black and white prints of his African life.
His schematic map of South West Africa, with elephant, from 1976, is particularly revealing.
When his father died in 1955, young John was only 12-years-old.
His mother trekked North to the St Mary's Anglican Mission station, where he received his education before going on to study at the Rorke's Drift Art and Craft Centre in Natal.
With a compulsion to work that must have been almost the equal of that of Van Gogh, he plunged into print-making and in too short a time had effectively burnt himself out.
His attitude to life is brought out in both the mutual greeting of friends who agree that Life Is Very Interesting (1980) as well as the personal philosophy of the Lonely Man Who Is Very Happy And Enjoying His Art Work (1974).
Other prints, huge and complex, show his immediate concern for tribal life, as can be seen not only in the The Value of Water but also in the six-part Men are Working in Town.
His religious up-bringing also shines forth in Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, of 1981, and in his sense of outrage at The Anglican Seminary Blown Up by Mister Nobody.
The political situation is perhaps best summed up in Elephant is killing Lion in funny way (1975) where the lion is South Africa and Namibia, itself, is the elephant.
The show is a tribute as well as a memorial to a very considerable talent.
Jazz date:
The Tees Valley Jazz Men will play at a jazz evening at Middlesbrough Council's Municipal Golf Centre in Ladgate Lane, Middlesbrough, on Thursday at 8.30pm.
Admission free.
A CONCERT in memory of Darlington choir singer Bill Askew is to be held next month.
The concert will raise funds for a new holistic centre planned for South Cleveland Hospital, Middlesbrough, where Bill, 66, received treatment for cancer.
The Carol Andrew Singers will be supported by the Cleveland Constabulary Band at the concert on Sunday, May 10 in Middlesbrough Little Theatre.
And if every ticket is sold the event should raise £1,900 for the fund.
Bill, Carol Andrew's husband, died earlier this month but had helped organise the concert.
Choir member Margaret Candler said: ‘We have already done a sponsored sing to pay for the theatre so everything made on the night will go to the charity.
‘Bill was being treated at South Cleveland Hospital and he saw notices that they were looking for donations for the holistic centre in the new hospital building.
An anniversary quartet Brodsky String Quartet: Stockton Parish Church
IT seems almost unbelievable that it is 20 years since the Brodsky String Quartet's public concert in the Teesside Polytechnic while still at school in Middlesbrough.
This year they celebrate 20 years together during which time they have flowered as one of the top dozen or so string quartets world wide.
On Saturday evening they provided, in Stockton Parish Church, the final concert of the Dovecot Arts Centre's music series.
Their programme opened with a performance of Beethoven's Opus 18 no. 6 Quartet in which, with impeccable balance, they delicately explored all the works' subtle nuances.
In the Janacek second string quartet Intimate Letters that followed they really cracked the idiom, playing with a perceptive feel for the uniquely arhythmic phrasing that echoes that of the Czech language.
From the magically perfect opening harmonics this was a performance of impact, precision and style that reminds us what a marvellous work this is when performed with such burning intensity.
By comparison, the folk idiom and long melodic phrases of Dvorak's American String Quartet seem gentle and homely, yet they too conveyed their own form of passionate yearning for homeland rather than, as in the Janacek, for things that might have been.
The American Quartet also supplied a direct link with that first concert in 1972 in which it was part of the programme.
Now, 20 years later, it was given a performance worthy of the anniversary occasion.
And what a cracking evening, all rounded off with one of Mike Thomas's encore arrangements of Elgar's Chanson de Matin.
Dave Robson
Picture power:
Pupils at Woodham comprehensive in Newton Aycliffe have been demonstrating their picture power with local photographer Beth Davidson.
The picture project was part of a district wide experiment to involve children with professional artists.
Alf's grand-daughter, Ann Parker, still lives in Darlington and kindly helped us with these illustrations from her collection of footballing photographs, medals and newspaper cuttings.
The numbered vouchers were given to fans who attended Sunderland's games against Ipswich, Plymouth and Middlesbrough.
For many fans their only chance of getting a coveted Wembley ticket was to collect all three vouchers and hope their numbers came out in a draw.
Now frantic supporters who lost out are willing to pay up to £75 for a voucher they need to buy a ticket for the cup final on May 9.
The Northern responded to three newspaper advertisements placed by people selling the sought-after vouchers and asked the selling price.
One man, who would not give his name, said he had been offered £75 for a voucher and was ‘open to further offers’.
Another person had been offered £50 for a voucher and the other £30.
All said they had been inundated with telephone calls from eager fans.
The arrangements for the sale of cup final tickets were introduced after a furore over the ticket sales for the semi-final.
People living near Roker Park said the arrangements then were a shambles.
The new arrangements were supposed to ensure that true fans got a fair chance, but a Sunderland Supporters Association spokeswoman said yesterday that was not the case.
Maureen Emmerson said the rules for the sale of the 17,800 cup final tickets would make the club extra money but not help the genuine fans.
She said the people selling the vouchers could not be described as real fans.
‘The club should have issued vouchers without publicising them.
That way true supporters would have got the vouchers and would not have lost out in the draw.’
The voucher holders, who also hold a gold card, will be queueing up at Roker Park for their tickets throughout this week.
No one from Roker Park was available for comment yesterday.
THE BBC yesterday clinched a deal to poach top comedian Vic Reeves from Channel 4 in a move which could seal his stardom.
Vic, raised in Darlington, and partner Bob Mortimer, a former solicitor from Middlesbrough, are already being hailed as the new Morecambe and Wise, and a BBC2 series would give them wider exposure.
The move came just 24 hours after the BBC announced it was axing Russ Abbot after audience ratings fell.
The BBC said: ‘Vic and Bob's inimitable brand of humour is very much at the cutting edge of contemporary comedy and I am delighted to welcome two such original talents to BBC 2.’
The move was announced in Montreux at the international television festival, where Vic, 32, real name is Jim Moir, said: ‘We are are honoured and delighted to be joining the BBC.’
Reeves and Mortimer, a six-part 30-minute series, is to be made by the independent production company Channel X for broadcast early next year.
The pair have won a host of awards for the Vic Reeves Big Night Out television show.
TALENTED North-East writers were honoured at a special ceremony last night.
The winners of the Sid Chaplin short story competition named after the Shildon-born writer were announced at the town's civic centre.
Middlesbrough author Derek Gregory, editor of the Tees Valley Writer, scooped the top adult section prize for his tale of a team of labourers demolishing a gas holder.
The joint junior winners were Catherine Daniels, 12, from Maltby in Cleveland, with a fantasy tale about cats, and 15-year-old Sagarika Chattergee, of Leith Road, Darlington, who wrote a story about a troubled marriage.
There were a record 220 entries, 53 of them in the under-seventeen section, with the youngest entrant aged just ten.
The competition was started five years ago by Shildon Town Council, supported by Durham County Council and Northern Arts, to honour the memory of Sid Chaplin, the pitman who went on to become one of the North-East's most respected authors and playwrights.
ANGELIC UPSTARTS South Shields punk band fronted by a man called Thomas Mensforth who kicked a pig's head around the stage.
Now said to be hanging out with the totally lovable Morrissey.
DAVID COVERDALE Saltburn-born rock vocalist who shot to fame in Deep Purple and went on to front Whitesnake, notching up such hits as Fool For Your Lovin' and Here I Go Again.
BRYAN FERRY Made Bryan an almost acceptable name for a rock star (with a ‘y’ anyway).
Born in Washington, County Durham, formed his first band, The Banshees, in Sunderland, studied fine arts at Newcastle University before joining The Gas Board — a pop group, that is.
Fronted Roxy Music from 1971 to 1982 and in the meantime got chucked by Jerry Hall for Mick Jagger.
You see, it can even happen to the  coolest of dudes.
GEORDIE Glam-rock band who had four Top 40 hits in the early Seventies, Brian Johnson went on to sing with AC/DC.
MARK KNOPFLER Singer/guitarist with mega-band Dire Straits.
Educated in Newcastle, young Mark went to university in Leeds, played in bands Cafe Racers and Brewers Droop before forming Dire Straits in Deptford, with brother David.
Their album, Brothers in Arms, sold 3.2m copies in the UK, which means that somebody in your street is bound to have a copy, unless you live in a small cul-de-sac.
LINDISFARNE In 1972, when people from outside the region thought of the North-East, Lindisfarne sprang to mind.
Unfortunately, in 1992, they still do.
Fronted by Alan Hull, Lindisfarne had some memorable hits like Meet Me on The Corner and Lady Eleanor but Fog on the Tyne wasn't a hit until Gazza got his tonsils around it.
HANK MARVIN Born Brian Rankin in Newcastle, young Hank came third in a talent competition in 1958 with his band the Railroaders and later that year he teamed up with Cliff Richard and formed the Shadows.
Livin' Lovin' Doll and a string of hits followed.
Loved for his big glasses and silly grin, he mastered the art of playing guitar while walking in circles.
JOHN MILES Singer/songwriter from Jarrow whose biggest hit was Music (’ Music was my first love, etc') in 1976.
Unsuccessfully entered the Eurovision Song Contest in 1990.
PENETRATION
Ferryhill's Pauline Murray fronted this punk outfit which managed no hits but two albums before disappearing into obscurity in 1979.
PREFAB SPROUT
The greatest ever North-East band?
Discuss.
Formed by Paddy McAloon from Langley Park, County Durham, and signed to Newcastle record label Kitchenware in 1983.
Don't Sing was the first single to chart, though it wasn't until When Love Breaks Down was released for the second time in 1985 that things really started to happen.
The album Steve McQueen was a classic and their latest offering, Jordan: The Comeback, wasn't half bad either, but Prefab Sprout remain too wordy and off-beat for some.
CHRIS REA
Son of a Middlesbrough ice-cream man, now a top-selling rock star, he joined local band Magdelene in 1973.
His next band, The Beautiful Losers, were voted Melody Maker's best newcomers of 1975 but little else followed.
Went solo in 1977 and had his first hit a year later with Fool If You Think It's Over.
His more recent hits have included On The Beach and Road to Hell, as opposed to the Road to Hull, which is the M62.
Now lives in a mansion down South.
PAUL RODGERS
Born in Middlesbrough in 1949, Rodgers became the vocalist in Free in 1968.
Their third single, All Right Now, has become a classic for people with long hair and tight jeans.
When Free split, Rodgers formed Bad Company.
DAVE STEWART
Born in Sunderland and left for London, aged 17, Stewart met Annie Lennox in 1977 where she was working as a waitress in a cocktail bar.
(Hey, sounds like a good line for a song).
Formed The Tourists and had two hits before The Eurythmics came up with classics like Sweet Dreams and There Must Be An Angel.
In his spare time, he was part of the  Travelling Wilburys and still found time to produce countless records and tour with his Spiritual Cowboys.
Does he ever get time to put up shelves?
STING
The son of a Wallsend milkman, Sting joined local band Last Exit in 1975.
But the hits didn't start coming until he teamed up with Andy Summers and Stuart Copeland in The Police (first Top 30 hit Roxanne).
When the band split up in 1985 Sting started out on a solo career which has seen hits like Spread A Little Happiness and If You Love Somebody, but he has yet to get near the success, in the singles chart at least, of one of the biggest-selling pop groups in history.
NEIL TENNANT
Lead singer of the Pet Shop Boys and born in Gosforth.
Tennant was editor of pop magazine Smash Hits and met keyboardist Chris Lowe in a hi-fi shop in London.
In 1986 West End Girls topped the charts for two weeks and other hits quickly followed.
Criticised for looking miserable all the time, but others say his seriousness is a pretence and really he's just taking the mickey out of himself.
Who cares — he's raking in the dosh.
TYGERS OF PAN TANG
North-East heavy metal band who scored four minor hits in the early Eighties and built up a following on the live circuit.
Their album, Wild Cat, reached No 18 in 1980.
The Fifties meant sand shoes, bobby socks and net skirts for Muriel Knowles on the nights — and afternoons — she spent out dancing.
‘There were dances every afternoon and Wednesday and Saturday evenings,’ she recalls.
Many of the halls where Muriel and her generation danced 40 years ago are still open for business, but today they are very different places.
Today's teenagers go to nightclubs where mega-watt public address systems pump out the latest chart-toppers to a dark and sweaty throng.
‘We used to go to The Mayfair and Oxford Galleries in Newcastle and The Brighton in Gateshead,’ recalls Muriel, now ‘fiftysomething’.
‘We wore skirts with as many layers as possible with a plain dress on top showing off our shoulders.
‘We listened to Joe Lewis, In The Mood, that sort of thing and took up the whole floor for dancing — they hardly move around now.
And there was no booze at all, just pop.’
The Oxford Galleries has undergone several name changes since then.
In the Seventies it became Tiffany's, The Studio in the late Eighties, and now is known as The Ritzy.
Jim Blackie, 41, remembers catching the bus from his home in Gateshead every Friday night to go to the Oxford in the Sixties ‘Everybody used to walk around in circles looking for a girl.
When you found one you wanted you'd take her into the centre for a dance,’ he says.
‘Upstairs there would be little cubicles where you could sit with your girl and have a drink.
‘In those days you had a proper band with a brass section and a couple of girl backing singers,’ says Jim, who met his wife Eileen at the club.
In the Sixties the demand for live music was so great, all sorts of venues were converted.
The Empire Theatre in Middlesbrough, which had been a cabaret venue in the Fifties for acts like Morecambe and Wise, Des O'Conner and Ken Dodd, became the Empire Continental dance hall.
The Imperial Hotel in Darlington booked acts like the Jimi Hendrix Experience and Club A'Gogo on the site of the old Handyside Arcade in Percy Street, Newcastle was home to Geordie heroes The Animals.
The Rolling Stones and The Who also played there.
Jennifer Stewart, who was manageress in 1966, says it was unique: ‘It was very big and very popular.
People used to bash on the closed doors if they couldn't get in.’
Crowds of more than 700 filled the club at the weekends and under-eighteens had their own room, so bands usually played two sets a night.
‘All the walls were black on the inside with fluorescent pink skylines of places like New York painted on.
When lights shone on them they just jumped right out at you,’ recalls Mrs Stewart, 53.
The club closed in the late Sixties and was later demolished to make way for the shopping centre Eldon Gardens.
Many other venues suffered as the Sixties drew to a close.
The Empire in Middlesbrough was turned into a bingo hall; the Imperial in Darlington was turned into an office and restaurant complex.
Meanwhile, down the road in Skinnergate, Darlington the cellar bar at The Bowes was a popular venue for rock acts in the Seventies.
Both Chris Rea and David Coverdale, of Whitesnake fame, entertained regulars in the days before they could command huge audiences at concert halls throughout the world.
It remained a thriving rock disco during the Eighties but closed down two years ago.
Today Riverside in Newcastle, converted from an old warehouse in 1985, is one of the premier music venues for new bands in the country.
And in the last two years many up-and-coming bands have played at Darlington wine bars Perry's and Harvey's.
Maybe in forty years time, people will be looking back at the good old days of the Nineties to see which rising stars started their careers playing North-East venues.
THE Captain Cook Birthplace Museum in Middlesbrough is open again thanks to the speedy completion of major improvement work.
The museum, in Stewart Park, closed temporarily while new temperature and humidity controls were installed.
It was scheduled to re-open on May 1 but tremendous effort from all the staff has led to the museum opening ahead of time.
Curator Hilary Wade said: ‘Everyone has worked flat out to get things going again, it has been a marvellous effort.’
EIGHT North-East comedians and the clubs they entertain in, are about to achieve international stardom with the introduction of a new television series.
The programme, Today's Comedians, is the brain-child of Beverley Artistes director Bill Reeve, who will be producing the show for CBP Productions from their purpose-built Stonehills Studios in Pelaw.
Each comedian's show will be recorded by the studio's outside broadcast unit at a variety of social clubs from Redcar to Newcastle and each show in the twelve week series will feature snippets from each of the acts.
‘It will be similar to the old Granada TV's The Comedians.
Bill explained.
‘Except the comedians will be working to a live club audience instead of in the studio.’
The show has already been sold to Sky Television, a couple of cable networks and a European Satellite channel.
And a representative of CBP, selling the idea at the Cannes Film Festival, has already reported much interest from TV companies in Australia, New Zealand and the United States of America.
The comedians from the NorthEast are Rudi West, Oliver, Bobby Knoxall, Scarlet O'Hara, Walter Gee, Mickey Gunn, Bob Ritchie and Malcolmm J White.
They will be joined by Mike Cash from Ireland, Danny Downing from the Midlands, Johnny Carson from Yorkshire and Billy Bean from Lancashire.
Clubs which will be featured include Redcar, Lakes Estate, Pennywell Comrades, Sunderland, Langley Park WMC, Dawdon WMC, Seaham, Burnside Social, Durham, Low Spennymoor and Merrington Lane, Ionopolis, Middlesbrough and The Quarry, Kenton.
‘This is a terrific boost to the region's entertainment scene,’ said Bill.
‘Television viewers all over the world will now see the quality of the entertainment we provide and also northerners doing what they like best enjoying themselves.
‘The launch of the television programme will also be accompanied by a video compilation of the programmes which will be sold in all local shops.
This will give people who haven't got Sky TV a chance to see all their favourites in action,’ he added.
—DEERNESS Valley Pool League held their first annual presentation night at Esh Winning Football Club and reported a successful season by the six teams taking part.
League winners were Esh and Waterhouses WMC with Deerness Valley Hotel in second place.
The other teams taking part were placed as follows: Esh Football Club (3rd), Hamsteels Inn (4th) Royal Oak (5th) and Hamilton and District WMC (6th).
Team Knockout winners were Hamsteels Inn; Singles Knockout winner, Karl Bushby (Deerness Valley Hotel); Doubles Knockout winners: Brian Trainor and his brother Anthony (Esh and Waterhouses); most singles winner Brian Trainor.
—A NEW weekly talent competition is starting at South Bank St Peters Club on Sunday May 3.
Anyone wishing to enter should telephone .
—MEMBERS and staff of the Riverside Club in Durham recently celebrated another win by their restaurant manager Michael Hopper the North-East Counties Boxing Champion.
Michael, who stands six feet four inches and weighs in at 15 7 stone, beat Scotland's Colin Brown in the semi-finals of the Amateur Boxing Association Championship at Gateshead Leisure Centre and now goes on to the finals in the Albert Hall, London on May 6.
When he's not boxing, Michael of Sherburn Road, Durham looks after the needs of customers in the Riverside Club Restaurant and is a popular figure at the club.
He is a member of the Spennymoor Boxing Academy and is trained by Robert Ellis.
—DURHAM CIU branch is hoping to add another competition to the annual list with the introduction of a dominoes five and threes championship.
At present there is no contest for the five and threes enthusiasts in the county although there is a national competition.
Branch secretary Jack Amos explained: ‘We are writing to all clubs in the branch to see if there is sufficient interest in such a competition and if there is we will get things moving as soon as possible.’
The branch already provides almost 300 trophies for other competitions, including the country's only half marathon race which is run at Buenhope every year.
—SOMETHING happening  at your club?
Tell Neil Harris about it ().
The Box of Delights Central Library, Gateshead
IT IS extremely appropriate that this superlative exhibition of the work of 21 British book illustrators should come to Gateshead Library since they are able to display many of the books themselves ex-stock.
The show is on an extended nine point, nation-wide tour with Angela Barrett's atmospheric pencil and watercolour studies for five stories by Hans Christian Anderson.
It also includes the work of such luminaries as Quentin Blake, who made the selection and penned the fine Box of Delights drawing for the poster.
C Walter Hodges offers the dust jacket and a few very powerful illustrations for Coleridge's The Rime of the Ancient Mariner and we have to thank John Lawrence for some powerful black and white plates for Oxford University Press's A New Treasury of Poetry.
This is an exhibition which will as it's title suggests delight visitors of all ages.
Alison Dalwood Paintings 1991–1992 Bede Gallery, Jarrow (Until May 15) ALISON Dalwood uses her trademark whorls of paint to good effect in a brace of vertical compositions on the end wall here that are based on reflections in a River.
She seems happiest in the country with her powerfully romantic interpretations of a Path through the Trees Down a Lane in Winter which she regards as very much a Traveller's Joy.
The thumb print whorls come even more noticeably into play, however, in the sequence of four Rose Garden paintings where the garlands of blooms are Red, and Pink, and Yellow, and a mixture of Pink and White.
Even more covetable are the two Seagull Reflections (26 and 7) which, at £800, are, alas, well beyond my purse.
Would-be collectors can, however, take heart in the fact that half of the show is made up of smaller works done in oil on paper, priced at £250 each.
Andrew Burton Sculptures Open Air Sculpture Court, Municipal Art Gallery, Middlesbrough (Until May 16) THERE was a time when I thought that Chris Sell, from Sunderland, had achieved the ultimate distinction, by taking the elephant as a kind of second signature and making it strictly his own.
Now, though, Andrew Burton (born Bromley 1961 and a Master of Fine Art at Newcastle University from 1984 to 1986) has also adopted this docile beast of burden as his own particular symbol.
Thus, cast in bronze, we have an Industrial Elephant, with a factory chimney, belching smoke, on its back, which would seem to be more to do with the advent of the Industrial Revolution than a comment on the British Raj.
A further Running Elephant just does that and at speed while an elephant with a  ziggurat on his back is Unburdening his trunk into what seems to be a much too tiny pot.
Perhaps the most impressive beast of all, is the Current Trends Lion with a heavy duty bicycle chain for its mane.
Richard Deehan Old Work New Work.
Dovecot Art Centre, Stockton.
(Until May 29) THESE works are mainly concerned with ‘exploring imagery associated with domesticity and childhood’.
Thus we have, in a sequence of six, raw, Untitled Drawings, a curious mixture of such things as a blue wooden spoon, a baby doll in a green sentry box, the gable end of a house, a triumphal arch and the torn-off, silver wing of a bird.
All of these turn up, in various guises, in floor-strewn, three-dimensional work, carved from York, Springwell or sandstone or modelled in clay and then cast in bronze.
Occasionally two individual pieces are brought together to make a new complex whole as in the bronze cast Doll and Bow which now stands on the top of the Toybox where the toys, including a ball, are again in bronze and the box itself is the broken-off end of a stone carved sarcophagus.
Individual pieces include a writhing Snake (13) carved on a stone lintel that bears the word BALANCE upside down, and a smoking Lobster (22) cast in bronze with its own highly personal, smoke-stack on its back.
All highly inventive stuff and this latter, somewhat typical of the smaller pieces here, can be had for a modest £140.
Oscar winners:
The winners of our Hallmark Easter competition to win a cuddly Oscar chick are: Mrs M Moyes, North Road, Darlington; Miss P.A. Horan, The Meadows, Middridge; Mrs C Bell, Drake Street, Spennymoor; Mrs N Wearmouth, Hill Crescent, Middleton in Teesdale; Mrs Hazel Forster, Killerby Farm, Killerby; J E Pass, Kildale Grove, Fairfield, Stockton; Mrs P Saunby, Skelton Road, Brotton; T K Hiscock, West Terrace, Billy Row; E M Warwick, Carlton Court, Darlington; Mrs Ann Hall, Burn Brae, Hawes; Mrs P Watt, Greystones, West Layton; M I Marsden, Vane Terrace, Darlington.
The answers were: Resurrection of Jesus Christ; £2.99; Hot Cross Buns; Simnel cake; Pomme D'Or.
Prizes will be despatched shortly.
THE American film maker Woody Allen once said his one regret in life was that he wasn't somebody else.
He's not alone, judging by the contents of this week's postbag which has been bursting with all the replies from our whose-tum-bum-or-thighs-would-you-rather-have competition.
Thanks for sending them in and this time everyone's a winner (phew!
I don't have to feel guilty about a pile of unfulfilled hopes) so look forward to getting your prize in the post.
Here's a selection: Mrs F. from near Darlington writes: ‘I would like to have Jane Fonda's thighs and tum because she's done all the hard work.
And Tom Cruise's bum I've always wanted to get my hands on it!’
Ms W from Hartlepool wants Sharron Davies' thighs, hips and bum because: ‘They are firm, solid and of perfect shape,’ while Wendy S. from Middlesbrough chose Jamie Lee Curtis ‘because she has the shape that she has by dedication and hard work.’
Susan Snaith from Stanley selected TVam weather girl Ulrika as her body model ‘I envy her for being voted best bum.
I would love to have an excellent shape and to get a vote for my body’ along with Jane Seymour ‘She looks excellent for her age.
Her shape gives her style.
I have a very large frame and would love to look so petite and sophisticated.’
Mrs I. from Bishop Auckland says she would like Goldie Hawn's thighs ‘My ideal woman’ Martica Heaner's tum ‘your photo gives the obvious reasons’and Raquel Welch's bum ‘she's about my age.’
But thank-you especially to Mrs B from Durham who expresses an opinion close to my own hobbyhorse when she writes: ‘Although I am almost two stone overweight, I am perfectly content with my body the way it is.
I may not look like one of these stick insects you see in magazines but at least I'm happy.
Isn't there enough guilt around without having to slave like a martyr to lose weight?’
You probably wouldn't appreciate a shape up exercise video Mrs B, so I'm sending you a spare copy of Donald Norfolk's book, Think Well, Feel Great.
Battling with the elements for the sake of art in Teesside HE'S been picture framer, builder's labourer and motor mechanic but always an artist.
Now the man who once had to supplement a lean living as an artist with part-time work is being paid to draw life on and around the River Tees.
Mr Graham Crowley says the North-East stands out as an area that is creating opportunities for artists and many craft people encouraged to move to the region in readiness for Arts ‘96.
This major prestigious event is currently being coordinated by Northern Arts.
After his residency with Cleveland Arts finishes, Mr Crowley plans to remain in the area for a time.
Currently based at Billingham Arts Centre, he is one of four international artists with drawing residencies which are part of the Riverscape project, an international initiative jointly developed by Cleveland Arts and Teesside Tomorrow Ltd.
The artists the others are from India, Poland and Japan are studying the river and its relationships with industry, the community and leisure, each working in the boroughs of Langbaurgh, Middlesbrough, Stockton and Hartlepool.
Mr Crowley has already spent his allotted time in Hartlepool where he was amazed to find hundreds of yachts moored in the marina.
In Langbaurgh, he spent much of the bleak winter at South Gare, a blustery headland that juts into the North Sea not far from the resort of Redcar.
The result is lots of drawings, pen-and-wash and pastels, some of which are on show at Kirkleatham Museum in an exhibition which ends on Monday.
Mr Crowley was amazed to find industry and leisure cheek-by-jowl in Langbaurgh without buffer zones as exist in the south.
‘The caravan site at Coatham was all boarded up, waiting for Easter and the sunshine, nearby the steel works were going seven days a week while people walked their dogs and others rode ponies along the sand.
The proximity of all these things amazed me,’ he said.
Nearby salt marshes, result of waste dumping from the steel works, produce a greeny-yellow steam and a warmth which encourages remarkable growth for the flora of the area and is a haven for birdwatchers.
Mr Crowley, whose brief is to spend 40 days in each of the boroughs, says the Stockton area covers most aspects of the river with two entirely different environments to be found within a stone's throw of each other.
Much of his time is spent walking and besides the drawing, he has taken dozens of photographs of the area.
One aim is to make the familiar look unfamiliar and he says it was only when he referred back to his photographs after completing many of his drawings that he realised what he had missed.
He had looked beyond the barriers which play a large part in the landscape of the area, fences and ‘keep out’ signs often barring the public from discovery.
‘What I have tried not to do is big black drawings of steel works,’ said Mr Crowley, who was pleasantly surprised that his pre-conceived image of lots of chemical plants and an over-used river did not do justice to the scene.
‘Unemployment is something that personally concerns me because I have been at the edge of unemployment all my life,’ added the 42-year-old who speaks highly of the quality of the environment on Teesside, a much richer and more vibrant and pleasant place in which to live than he had imagined.
While working from the Billingham gallery, some of his work, such as those items exhibited at Kirkleatham, may be found at venues in the area.
But the main aim of the residencies is one big show of all four artists at the Cleveland Gallery in May of next year.
Mr Crowley's final stint from June to August will be at the Middlesbrough Gallery after which, in his own time, he says: ‘I will carry on doing drawings and probably end up making paintings next winter.’
Besides exhibiting worldwide, the one-time teacher at the Royal College of Art has a large painting on show in the National Museum of Wales and his work can be seen in the Victoria and Albert Museum in London.
The British Council and the Arts Council have also bought his works and one of his larger studies, Chain measuring 100inches x 80inches, is owned by Cleveland county council which, he says, has one of the best collections of contemporary British art in the country.
His paintings are also found in museums in Australia and New Zealand, though one show in New York failed to sell a single item because, at the time, his work was considered too English.
Today they would probably be snapped up but sadly the collection, bought by a London gallery, was lost last year in a warehouse fire at Heathrow.
Mr Crowley and his wife, Sally, recently moved from a picturesque 300-year-old home near Coleford in the Forest of Dean to live in London with their children, Robin, ten, and Pearce, seven.
Mr Graham Crowley pictured working at windswept South Gare.
Photo: Keith Pattison.
ALAN Ball piped up at Richmond Town FC's annual extravaganza on Friday evening, standing on a chair so as to be both seen and heard.
Now manager of Exeter City (a position likely to continue after Saturday's vicarious salvation), his agreeable patter contained just one four letter word, and that from the third division of such rudery.
(Brian London, he observed, was the only boxer he ever knew with a cauliflower ae.)
Even the World Cup  was upstaged, however, by the second speaker Fr Michael McKenna, Roman Catholic priest at Leam Lane, Gateshead.
Darlington born Fr McKenna (his father taught at St Mary's Grammar School) was quite outstanding, a natural raconteur and a master of timing.
‘I don't know about saving souls,’ said Richmond Town chairman Eddie Roberts, ‘but I once heard him save a sportsman's dinner at which Emlyn Hughes spoke first.’
Fr McKenna gives his fee (less than half Alan Ball's, and a sixth of Emlyn Hughes's) to charity.
He asks us not to include his telephone number, however.
‘Just think about the Bishop.’
THE brighter side of the war years is being revived by the Middlesbrough Little Theatre Company.
Happy as a Sandbag, A musical review of the 1940s, which opens tonight, features songs, dances and acts from the Second World War.
The 12-strong cast will rekindle memories of the Andrews Sisters, Tommy Handley, Rita Hayworth and comedian Max Miller, among others.
The production, by Ken Lee and directed by Margaret Umpleby, starts at 7.30pm each evening until Saturday at the Middlesbrough Little Theatre, The Avenue, Middlesbrough.
John Martin (1789–1854) Visionary Printmaker.
City Art Gallery, Exhibition Square, York (Until May 31)
THIS IS a block-buster of a show of the works of Tyneside-born visionary John Martin (1789–1854) from Haydon Bridge.
One of the few works in colour is York's very own Christ Stilleth the Tempest (1852), while the rest of the show is a selection of some 104 out of 156 etchings and mezzotints.
After a brace of Classical Landscapes, there is a sequence of etchings done for Martin's first commercial publication The Character of Trees (1817) and a portrait of Sezincot House in the Stour Valley.
The huge and justifiably famous Belshazzar's Feast seen in all its various states from 1821 through 1824 and 1826 and beyond together with Joshua Commanding the Sun to Stand Still (1826/7), The Fall of Nineveh (1829/30), and The Fall of Babylon (1831) are powerful enough to take the wind out of anybody's sails.
All these fit neatly within Richard Green's telling description of ‘Old Testament scenes of cataclysmic destruction, with their fantastic architectural settings and tiny figures pitted against the elements’.
Whether Martin ever went to the lengths of Turner in inviting a practising architect to check his buildings for stylistic accuracy is not recorded.
But it does seem that he had some hint of the future: not only does his idea of the arena in which Pandemonium (1831) took place look like Wembley Stadium but his high-rise Tower of Babel in Belshazzar's Feast might almost have been modelled on the General Accident Life building now going up at the side of Lendal Bridge on the way to York's Railway Station.
Paintings on Paper Polytechnic Gallery, Library Building, Sandyford Road, Newcastle (Until May 29)
THERE are 27 works on view from seven contributors.
We start with four, rather depressingly drab, and heavily outlined, works of ‘still life objects’ seen by Markus Lupetz, either in, or through, New York Windows in 1984.
Beyond are another four, much more boldly coloured works painted in 1982 by Rolf Winkler who exhibits here under the nom-de-peintre A R Penck, as a tribute to the geologist Albrecht Penck.
From there on, Imi Knoebel shows equally colourful gesticulatory works on brown paper (c1985), while Walter Stohner works equally vigorously in broad swingeing brush strokes of ‘rainbow’ paint.
Next door to him Sigmar Polke works in ink, wash and lacquer to provide an untidily wrapped brown paper parcel with a profusion of Ben Day dots and the cut-out metal remains of a Max Ernst frottage.
Fred Thieler, born 1916, fills the far wall with rust-coloured collages and last, but not least, and now in his 80th year, Emil Schumacher brings the show to a close with some equally vigorous work in the more subdued palette of brown and black.
Irene Winsby Raku Pots Municipal Art Gallery, Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough (Until May 16)
ONCE upon a time, whether you produced pots that were thrown on a wheel or hand-made and slab-sided, there were only a limited number of variables.
Changes in methods of firing and the growing popularity of Raku have altered all this, and whether you immerse the object in sawdust, and then set fire to the lot, or just sprinkle sawdust on the newlyfired and still hot piece, the subtleties in surface texture can be extremely rewarding.
In recent months Christine Constant has re-introduced us to this idea, and it is this same Boy Scout, Camp-fire type of method that is used here by London-based potter Irene Winsby.
The range in size from the huge Green Jug with handle (4) to the Small Bowl (17) is quite incredible, but even more intriguing are the couple of (hip?)
Bones (23/24) and the repeat of the same idea where the bone is the Pestle in the Pestle and Mortar (10).
Philippa Russell Along Classical Lines.
Arts Centre, Vane Terrace, Darlington (Until June 6)
PHILIPPA Russell's huge water jug and wash basin in the craft window showcase here, would be well received by seaside boarding house landladies up and down the country.
And since it, and the equally giant-size flower platter, are decorated with green-stemmed red roses on a white ground, they would go down a bomb in Blackpool.
Taken together they immediately conjure up Edwardian visions of marble-topped washstands and non-running cold and cold water in every room.
As the title of Philippa's selection of ceramic pieces suggests, many of them hark back even further in time to emulate two-handled, terracotta, Greek amphorae or wine jars with their cone-pointed bases.
A FEW days ago, J.M.Richards died.
The news should have brought a touch of sadness to Chez Nous, Mon Repos, and their gabled, bargeboarded neighbours along Acacia Avenue.
For Richards was a pioneering apostle of the English suburb, the place where most of us live.
Very often it is despised.
But hear Richards: ‘Ewbank'd inside and Atco'd outside, the English suburban residence, and the garden which is an integral part of it, stand trim and lovingly cared for in the mild sunshine.
Everything is in its place.
There is not much sound, except perhaps the musical whirr and clack of a mowing machine being pushed back and forth over a neighbouring lawn, and the clink of cups and saucers and a soft footfall as tea is prepared indoors.’
Written by Richards while he was working in Cairo shortly after the Second World War, these sentences form one of the most delightful, and distinctive, opening passages to any book published this century.
The Castles on the Ground, as Richards called his slim (96-page) volume is a gentle hymn to a kind of landscape, and way of life, virtually unique to England.
Of course the ‘suburb’ can be many things.
It can be the dreary horror of ribbon development.
It can be overblown ‘estates’, with little identity.
Richards observed: ‘Uncontrolled building of the suburban kind may and does add to the general chaos of our time, but the suburb at its best has virtues peculiarly designed to bring comfort and fulfilment to many.’
The suburbs he especially had in mind were the opulent, tree-lined jobs of Victorian England.
Most big town have at least one: Jesmond in Newcastle, Ashbrook in Sunderland, Linthorpe in Middlesbrough, Roundhay in Leeds.
Richards draws a seductive picture of what he calls ‘this secluded romantic environment’.
He guides us among its ‘toy-like villas, each different in design and each set against a background of trees A curling road winds through, but not everything is revealed at once: a chimney for but a moment here, a turret window through a gap between two acacia trees, a gable partly concealed by the fretted roof of a conservatory, an almond tree in blossom branching over the pavement, a spot of scarlet colour made by a distant pillar box.’
Knighted ten years ago for services to architecture Richards edited The Architectural Review for almost 40 years.
But that didn't stop him from noting that chance played the biggest part in the suburb's rich visual appeal.
‘The mere suggestion of a silhouette of chimneys, hidden behind a sycamore tree in the next door garden, may prove of more value than the carefully-studied roof lines in the architect's perspective,’ he wrote in ‘Castles.’
Richards argued that the suburb's slow accretion of detail made it a contemporary form of vernacular architecture, in the picturesque tradition.
And he hailed it for providing an ideal environment in which individualism can flourish.
But not until the 1970s did planners recognise precious qualities in the mature suburb, the best of which are now conservation areas.
But a quarter of a century earlier Richards pinpointed the inner secret of its appeal.
‘In a world made unsafe the suburb is a kind of oasis,’ he wrote.
‘It provides a sense of belonging to a fairly sympathetic world, and an opportunity for its occupants to make out of that world something personal to themselves.’
Richards admits he found newly-built suburbs harder to admire.
But he anticipated, correctly in many cases, that these too would evolve into a satisfying environment.
An outstanding passage in his book deals with the cycle of taste.
Taking the example of an art nouveau dairy part of a Parade of shops in his idealised suburb he says: ‘First it was new-fangled, then fashionable, then merely commonplace, then out-of-date, then (to the sophisticated) attractively ‘period’.’
Only if a building reaches the next stage commonly regarded as romantically old-world is its survival reasonably assured.
Today, of course, the suburb isn't quite as Richards found it.
The din of a power mower has replaced the soothing whirr of the hand-mower.
And the clink of teacups is perhaps heard less than the sizzling of  barbecue sausages.
But we can surely still find ‘some leisurely individual in a deck chair’(well, moulded plastic anyway)
‘turning and refolding the pages of a newspaper.’
Reissued 19 years ago with drawings by John Piper, Castles on the Ground is a gem.
Everyone with a taste for things English should buy, beg or borrow a copy.
And anyone who lives in a suburb should steal one if  necessary .
A NEW TV series by Jonathon Porritt, former director of Friends of the Earth, is modestly titled How To Save The Earth.
As a lesson in How to Laugh At Oneself, I'm thinking of sending him a postcard I have long cherished.
It shows an earnest-looking individual gazing at a sunset vista of sea and mountains.
‘Who will look after all this when I am gone?’ he asks.
JOHN Major keeps banging on about open government.
Perhaps he will soon lift the veils on the Westland Saga and the sinking of the Belgrano.
WEEKEND VERSE
The swallows are here.
But the swifts have yet to come.
For me their arrival marks the start of summer.
The poet Alan Dixon evidently thinks the same.
He salutes the swifts in a new, pocketsize collection of his poems.
How we would miss them if they never came!
Happy as hikers who fling off their shorts.
Worse than no cricket!
A season of noughts!
Mopes would be deeper in limbos of shame.
Summers, enjoyed in a quick bracketing, Stretch from us here in the slip of a scream.
Stillnesses suddenly Look!
They have come!
Bright roofs are ready for their billeting.
The Hogweed Lass.
Available from Alan at 30, Grimsdyke Road, Hatch End, Middlesex, £3.
MOVES to demolish a historic former engine shed near Whitby railway station and to build two blocks of flats and a house on the site have been given the thumbs down by the Department of the Environment.
Combined Concerns had appealed against Scarborough Council's refusal of permission for the scheme at Bog Hall.
Now the company has been told by the DoE inspector, John Steers, that he had considered the possible unreasonable noise levels from trains on the Whitby to Middlesbrough railway line.
In his decision notice yesterday Mr Steers said that while the site was overgrown and unattractive he did not believe the engine shed, a Grade 2 listed building, should be demolished.
Combined Concerns had said that after the shed ceased to be used by the railway, it had several business uses, but none proved viable.
Also turned down is a plan to carry out alterations at 135 Church Street, Whitby because it is also a listed building.
A SCHEME to conserve hundreds of ancient churchyards in villages in the York Diocese has proved so successful that it is now being extended.
Church leaders and the Yorkshire Wildlife Trust have set up the Yorkshire Living Churchyard project which has seen extensive environmental and conservation work.
Now churchyards in the neighbouring Dioceses of Ripon, Wakefield and Bradford are to be included in the scheme because, says the trust, many churchyards are at risk.
They are seen as the last surviving areas of untouched wildlife.
Conferences on how to manage churchyards are being held at Hessay, near York, on Tuesday, May 19; Acklam, Middlesbrough, on Wednesday, June 10; and at Stanningley on Saturday, June 13.
In addition, at Sheriff Hutton near Malton, experts on wildlife are to give tours of the churchyard on May 27, June 17, and July 9.
Today
GUISBOROUGH:
Cleveland Classical Guitar Society concert given by Hill/Wiltschinsky Guitar Duo, Sunnyfield House, 7.30pm.
Ticket prices and programme details from Steven Munro on Guis 624672.
LOFTUS:
Guided Walk, Mining at Skinningrove, looking at mining sites in the valley and Liverton mines, meet outside Maynard Arms public house, Carlin How, nr Loftus, leader Simon Chapman.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Guided Walk, remains and sites of recent archaeological excavations, meet Boulby Barns Cottage, on old road from Skinningrove to Boulby, grid ref NZ 192755, leader Keith Chapman.
Cleveland Group of The Ramblers, 7–8 mile walk, Castleton-Esk Bridge, 2pm.
Details, tel.
Redcar 474864.
Leven Antiques Fairs, Social Centre Church Hall, Yarm.
Details, tel..
MONDAY:
Paintings, Etchings and Drawings by David Stubbs, Cleveland College of Art and Design, Green Lane, Linthorpe, Middlesbrough, 10am8pm.
Until 22nd May.
Cleveland Outlook social activities group, meet at the Treebridge for a bar meal, 8pm.
Details, tel.
Guis 635898.
Entertainment from Brocade, a Guisborough harmony group, The Victoria, Dundas Street, Saltburn, 8.30pm.
All welcome.
History alive:
The York Waits, a six-strong group of entertainers, is to receive a coveted international honour for their contribution to keeping old traditions alive by reconstructing music from the last five centuries.
Good company:
The Royal Shakespeare Company is paying a first visit to Durham City but not to tread the boards.
The  renowned company is staging an exhibition, ‘Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars’, which illustrates its history.
The exhibition opens on Wednesday for three weeks in Durham Town Hall.
Exhibition date:
Binchester's annual exhibition will be held on June 27 and 28.
Visitors will be able to learn about Wear Valley's Roman heritage between 9am and 5pm.
TELEVISION personality Paul Frost hosted a special live show in Middlesbrough when he opened a new postshop in the town.
The Tyne Tees presenter cut the tape inside the main post office in Grange Road.
The store is a further boost to the Post Office's network of shops across the country which is expected to total 300 within five years.
Bruce McNiven, Post Officer counters district manager, said: ‘We are changing the shape of high street services in line with the needs of our customers while at the same time retaining the traditional services on which the community depends.’
CAPTAIN Chiropodist put his best foot forward in Cleveland yesterday.
Accompanied by his pals Vera Verruca and Betty Bunion, the captain strode out to promote National Foot Health Week.
The trio were treading the boards at Linthorpe Road Junior School, Middlesbrough, in a short play devised and performed by South Tees Community and Mental Health chiropody department.
Twinkle Toe's New Shoes aims to show children the importance of having their feet measured when choosing new shoes.
‘By injecting humour into foot education, we hope children will enjoy themselves and remember the important messages,’ said acting district chiropodist Paul Thurland.
‘No other part of the body can be so easily damaged by ill-fitting clothing as young feet.
Bones in a baby's foot are very soft and malleable and take some 18 years to harden completely.’
Old ‘n’ new mix just right Del Amitri: Middlesbrough Town Hall IT'S been a while since Del Amitri toured and with current single Always The Last To Know nudging it's way up the charts, I was pleased to see that the band haven't lost either their raw edge or their well developed sense of humour.
With an album due out in a couple of weeks, the mixture of old and new material was just right.
The 18 months that Del Amitri have been away from the spotlight haven't been wasted and they've come up with some belting songs to prove it.
Just Like A Man, As Soon As The Tide Comes and Surface Of The Moon all received favourable receptions from the polite audience but it was left to Spit In The Rain, Stone Cold Sober and the band's ode to suburbia Nothing Ever Happens, to set Middlesbrough Town Hall alight.
The audience wasn't going to let Del Amitri get away and after a couple of minutes to catch their breath back, Justin and company returned to give us some more.
The  thunderous applause after Be My Downfall, a cover of Free's A Little Bit Of Love and the much shouted for Move Away Jimmy Blue was well deserved.
I hope that Del Amitri pay a return visit to the region, once the album Change Everything is out, because there aren't too many bands around that can come up with interesting material and do such a great job in putting it across in concert halls.
Keith Rickaby
Today
RIPON:
Ripon City Bridge Club Duplicate Bridge Tournaments, Hugh Ripley Hall, Skellbank, 7.15pm.
Visitors welcome.
HARROGATE:
Harrogate Country Music Club live show, Town Football Clubhouse, Wetherby Road, 8.15pm.
Woodlands Drama Group present Pardon the Prime Minister, Woodlands Junior School, Wetherby Road, Harrogate, 7.30pm.
KNARESBOROUGH:
Harrogate Road Safety Dog Training Club, Knaresborough House, 7pm.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Knaresborough Christian Coffee Club, Knaresborough House, High Street, Knaresborough, 10am to 11.30am.
Knaresborough Country Dance Club, informal country dancing, Scout HQ, nr York Road junction, Wetherby Road, Knaresborough, 8.15pm.
CHILDREN of today come face to face with images of the past at an exhibition in a Middlesbrough museum.
Barbarians, at the Dorman Museum until August 22, takes visitors back to the days of woad, wonders and warrior queens.
Displays are from some of the country's leading museums, including the British Museum, Oxford's Ashmolean Museum and the National Museum of Scotland.
They include gold and bronze ornaments and jewellery, proving artistry and craftwork existed beside the warlike side of life.
Hilary Wade, town museums curator, said: ‘There's a glimpse of what life was like in the typical Celtic roundhouse, the harsh realities of life on the land in a farming community, as well as the facts behind the Celts’ grisly reputation for human sacrifice.’
Today
HARTLEPOOL:
New Orleans Rag Time Band, Travellers Rest, 8.30pm.
Free admission.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Teesside Branch of the British Cactus and Succulent Society branch meeting and bring and buy sale, Settlement Community Centre, St Paul's Road, off Union Street, 7pm.
Admission free.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Cleveland Art Society meets Middlesbrough Art Gallery, Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough, 7pm.
Art exhibition:
Priory Art Society of Guisborough is staging an exhibition sponsored by Saltburn and Marske Rotary Club at Marske Institute from May 21–23.
Song writing:
Keith Gregson, a history teacher at Brierton Comprehensive School in Hartlepool, has produced a book containing songs he has penned over 25 years.
Copies are to be made available to all local primary schools.
Cobbling craft:
Visitors to a Cleveland museum can watch cobblers at work on Monday.
Shoemender Brian Webb is setting up shop at Preston Park Museum, Eaglescliffe, for the day, to demonstrate the traditional and fast dying out craft of cobbling.
Today
STOCKTON:
Oxbridge Jazz Club with residents the New Orleans Preservation Band, Oxbridge Hotel, Oxbridge Lane, 8.30pm.
Admission £1.
Coming up
TOMORROW:
Prize Bingo and Tombola, St Margaret's Church Hall, Brookfield, Middlesbrough, 7.30pm.
Admission £1.
SATURDAY: Teesside Branch of the British Cactus and Succulent Society, plant sale and display, Castle Shopping Centre, Stockton.
Today
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Prize Bingo and Tombola, St Margaret's Church Hall, Brookfield, 7.30pm.
Admission £1.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Guided Walk, History All Around Us, Marske Town Trail, meet Town Square, Town Centre, Marske, 2pm.
Leader Miriam Flint.
Teesside Branch of the British Cactus and Succulent Society, plant sale and display, Castle Shopping Centre, Stockton.
Coming up
TOMORROW:
The Fell & Dale Club ramble of 12 miles, meet outside Library, Harrogate, 9.15am.
Harrogate & District Naturalists' Society, juniors Riverwatch 2, meet at Granby Hotel, Harrogate, 10am-12.30pm.
Details, tel.504186.
Ripon & District Radio Society Radio Rally, Great Yorkshire Showground, Harrogate, 10.30am.
Garden open to the public, Norton Conyers, Wath, Ripon, 26pm.
Dogs on leads please.
Plant sale and refreshments.
In aid of Northern Horticultural Society.
Needlecraft Exhibition, many facets of needlework skillfully demonstrated, Treasurer's House, York.
MONDAY:
The Nidderdale Society AGM followed by Trinity Hand Bell Ringers from Ripon, Memorial Hall, Pateley Bridge, 7.30pm.
Guided walk, Medieval York, meet Museum Gardens Gates, Museum Street, York, 2.15pm.
Details of this and many other walks around York, tel.
. Dinosaurs from China exhibition, Yorkshire Museum, Museum Gardens, York, until Oct 31.
TUESDAY:
Mayor-making Ceremony, Market Place, Ripon, 10am-3pm.
WEDNESDAY: AGM, Study Centre, Harlow Carr Botanical Gardens, Crag Lane, Harrogate, 3.30pm.
Col Grey Memorial Lecture, Restaurant, Harlow Carr Botanical Gardens, Crag Lane, Harrogate, 7.30pm.
Flower Club, Hugh Ripley Hall, Skellbank, Ripon, 7–10pm.
Details, tel..
Today
MARSKE:
Guided Walk, History All Around Us, Marske Town Trail, meet Town Square, Town Centre, 2pm.
Leader Miriam Flint.
STOCKTON:
Teesside Branch of the British Cactus and Succulent Society, plant sale and display, Castle Shopping Centre.
Coming up
TOMORROW:
Antiques Fair, St Clares School, Trimdon Avenue, Acklam, Middlesbrough.
10am4.30pm.
Details, tel.Leven Fairs on .
Cleveland Group of the Ramblers, 7–8 mile walk, meet at Church in Kirby in Cleveland, 2pm.
Also Coach Rambles to Wooler & Cheviots, tel.473631 or 672480.
COMIC Mike Harding saw how Middlesbrough has turned over a new leaf at the weekend.
The keen environmentalist, whose tour stopped off at Middlesbrough last week, visited a rejuvenated copse in Southwood, Coulby Newham.
The council work is one of the projects going ahead as part of Middlesbrough new title of BT Environment City.
He also found time to help five-year-old Steven Beverley, above, build a bird bath.
He who can, does.
He who cannot, teaches, wrote George Bernard Shaw.
A fetching observation, but untrue — in the case of the Irish dancer, at least.
For, when the days of competition are over, teaching is about the only option open to the really committed dancer, complete retirement from the lists being an impossibility at that stage.
They're hooked you see.
So it is with a good few of the faithful with whom I trod the boards in my schooldays.
While I grabbed the excuse of starting senior school to wriggle out of reeling, jigs and hornpipes, some of my peers are still at it, 20 years on.
‘It's like a drug,’ says Susan Stokes, 32, who has run her own dance school for ten years — two-hour classes at St Bede's Parish Church Centre, Jarrow, every Wednesday, and all day Saturday.
When she started dancing, eight-year-old Susan Stokes was something of a phenomenon — not a drop of Irish blood in her.
Unsurprisingly, an Irish Catholic background remains the norm in this pastime, but it's a tradition in decline.
Just how traditional the dances are is a matter for debate.
The destruction of the monasteries meant any early records were lost.
On the North-East circuit today, which stretches from Middlesbrough to Ashington, boys make up only about three per cent of the dancing community.
Another dancer of my era, who teaches Irish dancing in an Ashington school, once told me she despaired of attracting boys to her dance classes.
They could see the girls having fun and they wanted to join in — but it wasn't macho.
Susan says: ‘If you get one boy, more will follow, but if you lose one…
A year ago I had six boys in my school, now there are none, they get to 11 and think it's cissy.’
They'll regret it when they are older.
To be one of only a handful of boys among hundreds of girls at a feis (a competition) was the surest way of pulling girls I ever saw.
‘You have to be competitive to keep on competing but I try to instil the value of the social side of it in my dancers.
I had such a good time myself,’ says Susan.
‘I went to class to meet friends, dancing was secondary and the social side was as much if not more important to me as competition.’
As a young dancer, Susan followed the same teacher through changes of class venue in church and school halls throughout Newcastle, Consett, Hebburn and finally Jarrow.
She won hundreds of medals and trophies in competitions throughout Britain and Ireland.
After she gave up competing to teach — you can't do both in Irish dancing — she joined Newcastle-based Clann na Gael (Children of the Irish), a demonstration troupe with whom she danced until a year ago.
‘We went round folk festivals in England, Europe and America.
It was non-competitive and I loved meeting people from all over the world, listening to their music and watching their dancing.
It was great socially, too, I made a lot of friends.
‘I did it for eight years.
But when it stopped being a thrill, I gave it up.’
I remember feis as being the best part of Irish dancing because I got to be the centre of attention, albeit fleetingly.
Perhaps success gets boring for the really talented because that's not how Susan Stokes remembers it.
‘I loved dancing but as I got older I loved teaching the little ones more,’ says Susan, a nursery nurse at Kenton Bar Primary School in Newcastle.
At 18 she gave up competing to teach, setting up a class in South Shields which she amalgamated with her old school in Jarrow when her own teacher retired.
‘Teaching is great, though it's hard work.
You have to be continuously on the look-out for new steps, learning from others and creating your own.
Some people think Irish dancing is stiff.
But it's very intricate and complicated and you have to be very talented to move your feet at the speed some of these dancers reach.
‘And when you see a child of six or seven doing your steps, you feel such a sense of achievement.
I get more excited seeing my girls winning medals than I felt winning my own.’
The number of feis has mushroomed from four a year to virtually one a month in the North-East.
And it can be costly.
Quite apart from the entrance fees, competition dresses — satin-lined velvet creations encrusted with rhinestones, with seam-to-seam embroidery and hand-crocheted collars and cuffs — can knock a doting parent back £400.
Regretting the commercialism, Susan provides a dress bank for newcomers and stresses the amateur nature of her hobby: ‘When you worry about not winning a medal, it's time to give up.
I just want my dancers to have a great time.’
CHASING the demons is a favourite pastime for grunge rockers Levitation.
Music is a means of catharsis for them and they say they like to do things in extreme.
Drummer Dave Francolini explained: ‘We have all sorts of influences in the extreme from Ella Fitzgerald to Killing Joke and Einsturzende Neubauten.
‘Music seems to be getting more expressive now and a bit more rocky.
The Eighties were a real musical void, it was disgusting.
Our music is more insolent and a free form of thinking.’
It may all sound like some vague hippy philosophy but Levitation really believe what they say.
The band formed a year and a half ago with Terry Bickers, ex-House of Love.
And all of them had various music jobs before meeting up.
They have just released their debut album Need For Not, which Dave says is a critique of the capitalist way of life today.
All very heavy stuff.
‘I'm quite pleased with the way it turned out,’ said Dave.
‘Although we're already writing material for the new album.
‘We've been rehearsing steadily for the tour and live we are very confrontational.
It's very much in your face.
‘We have a lot of demons to nail as part of our creative process.’
These demons can be viewed at Middlesbrough Arena on Friday, May 22 and Newcastle Riverside on Tuesday, May 26.
Box office details on  or .
Margaret Hussey
THE BBC can expect a cool reception when it visits Stockton next week.
The town's traders agreed to move their stalls off the High Street, and the mayor agreed to give up his parking space, so the BBC could set up an exhibition marquee.
However, the town, which welcomed news of the five-day Radio Goes to Town project, has changed its tune.
The Mayor, Coun Stephen Smailes, claimed that the pick of the programmes, to be broadcast on five channels, will be presented from Middlesbrough.
‘I am not prepared for us to be a satellite of Middlesbrough and it appears the majority of Radio One programmes will be coming from Middlesbrough,’ he said.
‘All I want is an even spread, after all we are disrupting community life for these people,’ said Coun Smailes, who is writing a formal letter of complaint to the BBC.
Coun Joan Wade said: ‘I am absolutely fuming that our young people are missing out again,’ referring to the Radio One Roadshow, with Jakki Brambles and special guests, that will be broadcast from Stewart Park, and broadcasts from Middlesbrough Arena.
‘At the end of the day all the market traders are being put out of their place to accommodate what will be a glorified Radio Cleveland presentation.’
The BBC said it regarded the criticisms as ‘unfair,’ and said the majority of shows would be coming from Stockton.
A spokeswoman said: ‘The reason we chose Stewart Park for the roadshow was because car parking was far easier for the numbers of people we would expect.
‘There will be 26 programmes over the week with two major shows from Middlesbrough because Middlesbrough's town hall can take large numbers, something Stockton does not have.
‘I think these are unfair comments across the board, for all the shows.’
The spokeswoman said: ‘It it Radio Goes to Cleveland.
We have tried to spread the shows out and the majority are coming from Stockton.’
Steve Luck, publicity manager at Darlington Civic Theatre.
Many people think that working in showbusiness is an easy glamourous job.
It's true that in my job I get to meet many celebrities, but there is an enormous amount of work that has to be done as well.
I usually begin the week by starting all the publicity material for the latest performances.
This can mean meeting the Press on a Monday or Tuesday night to explain about the performance, answer any questions and arrange interviews.
First of all, I usually have a discussion with the company manager.
I'll tell him what we've already arranged for the week and find out if there are any special requests or queries.
Then I'll go and meet the cast, tell them what's available at the theatre and again see if they have any requests or queries.
I try any watch the production at some time during the week in order to be able to talk about it to the Press.
There was some controversy surrounding a production of Swan Lake recently.
I was invited to the Royal Premiere in London to view the production before it came to our theatre.
That was a really exciting moment, I felt as though I'd come from nowhere to a big event.
My week continues with the organisation of posters and leaflets for the forthcoming performance.
The material for printing usually goes off to the printer on the Tuesday, when the noticeboards are changed.
Tuesday is also usually the interview day.
Often, I'll pick up an artist from their accommodation and take them to Middlesbrough where they are interviewed by Radio Cleveland.
I've had some big names in my car, I can tell you.
While the stars are at the theatre it is my responsibility to look after them and make sure they have everything they need.
I'm also responsible for arranging the celebrities' schedule for the week.
For example, they might have been asked to meet someone or open something.
By the time we get back, the printer usually has the proof copies ready to be checked.
Then, I've got the press releases and press tickets to send out.
At the moment, I'm working on our Autumn brochure so I've got a lot of work to do with our theatre manager, Brian Goddard.
There are also occasions when I take over as duty manager for the night.
For example the other week, I was looking after Sir Harry Secombe when he came to the theatre.
The duty manager is responsible for the general running of the theatre on a particular night.
I really liked meeting Albert Finney.It was nice to sit there and have a chat for a while with someone like him.
I'm quite friendly with a lot of stars but I don't really think of them as celebrities, more as friends.
Sometimes, we can be sitting having a quiet drink when someone will come across for an autograph and I remember who I'm with.
I've been working here for seven years now and I really enjoy my job.
As for the future, well, I suppose I'll have to move on at some time but for the moment I'm quite happy at the theatre.
ON Monday night in London four of Darlington's brightest bands appear at the highly trendy Orange Club in West Kensington, hoping to impress a crowd of business executives.
The bands are Steed, Brick Supply, Watersnakes, and Mojo, all of whom are signed to Graeme Robinson's new label, Circulation.
Kindly, Graeme has given Bandcall four £6 tickets to give away phoning Chris Lloyd  after 11am today.
If you can't make the Orange, the bands will be performing in Darlington early next month.
Watch this space.
RUMOURS have abounded about the fate of The Ritz in Hartlepool, but matters seem to have resolved themselves and The Rye will definitely be playing there on Bank Holiday Monday to launch Northern Electric's Culture Shock project.
Run by Durham Street Studios, this is to find the best 12 Nort-East bands to take part in an intensive ten-date tour of schools and colleges.
The Rye are proof that this idea works: they were on the first tour two years ago and are now probably the hottest property in the region.
Details of the concert and Culture Show can be obtained from the Studios, currently celebrating their tenth anniversary.
Telephone .
The Faraway Tree are another new band coming onto the burgeoning regional scene.
Formed only in January be well-known songwriters David Llewellyn and Ian Sutherland, they play ‘powerful, energetic dance rock’.
Fronted by art student Becky Crawford they have already managed to lineup an extensive list of dates in the region, which is the surest sign that they are pretty good.
Those dates are Route 66, Darlington, tonight; on Monday at Doc's Orders, Darlington; on May 29 at The Garden Farm, Chester-le-Street; June 10, The Empire, Middlesbrough; June 11, The Rose Tree, Durham.
Details on .
Headland are Liz Carter's new outfit.
After a year out from the trials of the world of music on the Inner Hebrides, she has returned to rejoin John Casey aided by bassist Tony Waite.
In the past her songwriting and spiritual voice has led her be compared to Suzanne Vega, Joni Mitchell and Judie Tzuke, and Headland gained impressive reviews at the New Generation showcase at the Riverside earlier this year.
As well as joining McCallum and Troubleshooters at Visions, Billingham on June 4, Headland play at Humphrey's in Darlington on May 31.
On Saturday at Darlington Arts Centre, Active Music presents a double bill of ‘grunge’, Exit Condition and.
Doors 7.30pm, tickets £2.50.
Details on .
As a reflection of the extremely healthy North-East music scene, Bandcall will return on Wednesday with reviews of the new 1–2–1 Nation tape plus Jade and Upside Down, and more…
SACRISTON entertainer Brenda Collins is often billed as Little Miss Dynamite for her role as singer-comediennne, a description which could also apply to her everyday life.
She is a human whirlwind, especially at home in Sacriston where under her own name of Brenda Woods she combines her role as mother-of-two with being chairman of the governors of two schools in the village, organising charity events and entertaining in the clubs.
Pint-sized Brenda appears with husband John as the Krack and Dorn duo, does a children's magic act, and is fast becoming one of the stars of the  after-dinner speaking circuit.
She was honoured by Durham Concert Secretaries at the 1991 awards show, taking the title of Comedy Act of the Year.
She has raised many thousands of pounds for good causes throughout the North-East, and at present is helping to organise the Sacriston Carnival, which takes place on Saturday July 4.
‘This year's Carnival will be bigger and better than ever,’ she says.
‘We have loads of attractions during the day and in the evening Clive Webb and I will be providing the cabaret at a special show.’
—TEN of the region's top acts will be appearing at Low Spennymoor and Merrington Lane WMC on Friday May 28.
The event is a Wansbeck Agency Showcase and concert secretaries and bookers from other clubs are invited.
Admission is 50p with all proceeds going to the Aged Members' Treat.
—HARTLEPOOL Carpet Bowls League presentation night is to be held at Hartlepool Workingmen's Club on Thursday June 18.
Comedy duo The Chimes and singer Dave Alexander provide the entertainment.
Tickets, including plate buffet, are £1.25.
—EVENWOOD WMC has donated £50 to the local St Paul's Parish Church to help with the church's rewiring.
—BLACKHALL Royal British Legion's 100 Club is putting on a special show on Monday May 25, featuring comedy hypnotist Tony Sands and singer Suzanne Preston.
Tickets £1.
—THE organisers of National Music Day are looking for clubs to help make the occasion a big success.
Brainchild of Rolling Stone Mick Jagger and arts minister Tim Renton, it is a  opportunity to involve as many people as possible, particularly children, in all aspects of music making.
Further information is available from the Controller of Public Affairs, Performing Rights Society, Berners Street, London.
—COXHOE WMC snooker aces, Paul Davison, Eddie Rhodes and Neil Moseley, continue their success in the National CIU Snooker Team Championships with a visit to the semi-final in Leeds on Saturday June 6.
A coach-load of supporters will be travelling with the lads for their match against Morecambe ex-Servicvemen's A team.
—VANE Tempest Social Club, Seaham, has scooped the whole of North-East clubland by fixing the only appearance in the region this year of the world famous Gary Gutter and the Gutter Band on Friday May 22.
—THE stars continue to shine at The Mall, Stockton in the vein of TV's Stars In Their Eyes.
Tonight is the turn of Barbra Streisand; next weekend it's Shirley Bassey and June 1–5 Diana Ross.
The Mall is also starting a series of Monday Night Fever in June featuring top live bands from 70s and 80s including Rose Royce, Odyssey and Sweet Sensation.
—DURHAM CIU branch has organised a lecture on club management on June 10 at the Miners Hall in Durham.
John Tobin will speak on cash flow.
—DURHAM City Workmen's Club secretary Colin Wold received the CIU Long Service Certificate at a ceremony at the club.
—CONSETT Number One Central Club's chairman Jim Harris has headed the management team for 21 of his 26 years in the boardroom and treasurer Jimmy Hope has been treasurer for eight of the 11 years he has been on the committee.
Branch Secretary Jack Amos presented Jim with his long service certificate and the certificate of merit to Jimmy.
—WINNER of the CIU National Billiards Championship was the holder, Martin Goodwill (Newport and District WMC, Middlesbrough).
He beat Nick Hayward (North Ormesby Institute) in the final.
—STARS of the Sixties, The Swinging Blues Jeans are appearing at The Mayfair Centre, Seaton Carew tonight.
Admission is £5, inclusive of pie and pea supper ().
—A NEW snooker tournament at North Ormesby Institute has been organised in memory of the late Fred Riley, the club's popular games captain, who died two years ago.
Sponsored by Bass North, The Fred Riley Memorial Snooker Tournament is being held every Tuesday.
Top cash are on offer to professional and amateur players with £150 added for the highest break in the competition by bookmaker Joe Suckling.
—NEWS from your club is always welcome.
Telephone Neil Harris on  now.
An earful
IF you avoided Radio 2 last night to miss Derek Jameson's nightly elocution lesson, this one from Stockton Parish Church, bad luck.
You will have to avoid it again next week.
Del Boy, despite the information printed here, was not there.
He will be in attendance next Thursday at 7.30pm, doubtless hoping the superb acoustics can lend a still sharper edge to his silky tones.
The show he presents with his wife Ellen will form part of Radio Goes To Town, the town in question next week being Stockton.
To get all the silly voices over in the same day Johnnie Walker will be presenting his morning programme on Radio 5 from there on Thursday.
Johnnie does not sound like Del.
He sounds like the last playboy of the western world, who might have been born in London or New York but fell overboard from a boat between the two.
Del, and this takes some saying, is easier on the ear.
This paper's radio critic can hardly wait.
Small praise
FOR some reason the somewhat unprepossessing Darlington Museum has begun advertising itself as A Great Little Family Museum.
Should a great little family bother to visit there will probably not be room for another one.
The thought occurs that if Darlington Museum, free to enter and in the town centre to name its two advantages, can so describe itself then Bowes and Beamish will be running out of superlatives.
Eastern promise
JUST when you thought the English palate was becoming more sophisticated than fish and chips (a great, great meal, mark you) the office restaurant has a Chinese Day.
Its two delicacies?
Karate Chop and Bonsai Bake.
Apart from what might constitute these culinary delights it has not gone unremarked that karate and bonsai are both parts of the culture of Japan.
Today
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Record Fair, The Crypt, Town Hall, 11.30am-4.30pm.
Final night of Anything Goes performed by Redcar Amateur Operatic Society, Little Theatre, 7.30pm.
British Cactus & Succulent Society, Plant Sale, Hill Street Shopping Centre.
Guided walk, the Industrial Origins of Middlesbrough in St Hilda's area.
Meet by Henry Bolckow statue, Exchange Square, nr Middlesbrough Station, 2pm.
Leader Norman Moorsom.
OLD PINCHINTHORPE STATION:
Countryside Event, Flower Power wild flower planting.
Car park, off A173, nr Guisborough, 2pm.
Details, tel.Mbro 248155 ext 2427.
Coming up
TOMORROW:
Guided walk, Kilton Castle Remains, meet outside Green Tree pub, Brotton, 2pm.
Leader Keith Chapman.
Details, tel.M'bro 327583 ext 216.
Rhododendron Sunday, an afternoon of Brass Band Music in the grounds of Grinkle Park Hotel, Grinkle Lane, Easington, 2.304.30pm.
Details, tel.
. Leven Antiques Fair, Village Hall, Great.
Details, tel. (0642) 819439.
Guisborough Folk Club, guest Phil Griegson, Rugby Club, Belmangate, Guisborough, 8pm.
Hartlepool Folk Song Club, singers, musicians, and listeners all welcome, Tap and Spile, Stranton Green, Hartlepool, 8.30pm.
Cleveland Group of the Ramblers, 7–8 mile walk, meet Hinderwell (GR 787174), 2pm.
Details, tel.Redcar 474864.
VISITORS will be able to have a go at being a Radio 1 DJ or a Radio 4 newsreader when BBC Radio Goes to Town in the North-East today.
They're among the ‘hands on’ part of a week-long stay in Cleveland.
The travelling radio show, taking BBC people and shows to meet listeners around Britain, makes Cleveland its third stop this season.
The activity centres around the big top in Stockton High Street offering free all day entertainment with live broadcasts and personal appearances.
Visitors will also be able to singalong with Radio 2, mix a symphony with Radio 3, and be a sports commentator with Radio 5.
‘Although we're out to entertain, there is a serious side to the exhibition,’ explains director Michael Barton.
‘We'll be providing direct contact between programmes and the public, and demonstrating the diversity and range of BBC Radio Services.’
Gary Davies and Jakki Brambles launch the week with the Radio 1 Roadshow live from Stewart Park, Middlesbrough, today between 12.35pm and 2pm.
In the big top, Radio Cleveland entertain in the morning followed at 2pm by Radio 2's John Sachs who will be inviting listeners to take part in the Bank Holiday Quiz and It's Your Radio 2.
Radio 1 takes over Middlesbrough Arena on Wednesday when Mark Goodier presents a live edition of Mega Hits.
Radio 2 highlights include music, comedy and controversy with The Jamesons on Thursday in Stockton Parish Church.
That is also the venue for foot-tapping Folk on 2 on Monday.
Ivory and Brass brings Peter Skellern and the Grimethorpe Colliery Band together at Middlesbrough Town Hall on Thursday evening.
The BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra at Middlesbrough Town Hall heads the Radio 3 lineup and features award-winning pianist Michael Roll in concert on May 27.
The concert will be recorded for future broadcast on Radio 3.
Radio 4 offerings include The Year in Question, chaired by John Humphrys, recorded on Tuesday in Stockton Parish Church and the weekly live edition of Any Questions presented by Jonathan Dimbleby on Friday.
A special edition of With Great Pleasure invites locally-born writer Wally K Daly, currently working on the children's TV drama series Byker Grove, with his own selection of poetry and prose, on Wednesday at Stockton Parish Church.
The controversial storyline in The Archers, radio's longest running soap, gets an airing when two cast members visit the big top on Friday at noon to talk to visitors.
Radio 5's On Your Marks with TV presenter Ross King is on May 30 from 11am to 12noon, handing over to Jive Bunny at 12.15pm.
And AM Alternative presented by Johnnie Walker on Thursday at 10.40am completes Radio 5's trip to Stockton in the week-long exhibition.
BBC Radio Cleveland contributes to the week with a daily mix of live programmes from the big top.
— Admission to the big top is free.
Tickets, also free for most of the programmes, are available from the Tourist Information Centre, Green Dragon Yard, Stockton, and The Booking Office, Middlesbrough Town Hall.
Tickets are on sale for the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra and Ivory and Brass concerts at the Town Hall ().
THE band Disraeli Gears are to appear on Radio One when the show comes to the North-East this week.
The Teesside band are delighted to be on the Mark Goodier show on Wednesday night at the Middlesbrough Arena.
Dave Thomas, spokesman for the band, said it was a good opportunity for the band to reach a wider audience.
Their R'n'B style music is already well known around the region.
Goodier will be playing a Disraeli Gears record tomorrow and then doing a special session with the band on Wednesday night.
‘The producer listened to a lot of bands from around the North-East and he was very impressed with our music,’ said Dave.
Immediately after the show a panel from Radio One will be answering questions at The Arena from North-East listeners.
A spokesman for Radio One said the programme was a part of the station's commitment to music outside London and the SouthEast.
Anyone for croquet…it's the latest popular sport ORMSEBY Hall, on Teesside, is among croquet clubs nationwide which open their doors and lawns to the public this weekend in a bid to put over the message that this is a sport for all.
Visitors will be encouraged to have-a-go themselves as the club, now in its fourth season, dispels the myth that croquet is a genteel Sunday afternoon past-time.
Mr Charles Waterfield, secretary, says the game attracts people from all walks of life.
‘Vicars and old ladies are beginning to be in a minority.
The best players tend to be very young, students in their early 20s, he said.
Ormesby has a membership of just over 30 in ages ranging up to 84.
Although there are many good young players, the club hopes to attract more through schools.
Association croquet is not a game that can be taught in half-an-hour, says Mr Waterfield.
‘It is a tactical game, a friendly form of warfare.
And the game is never won till the last shot.’
The outcome could swing dramatically at the last stage.
‘And that is something people find very appealing.’
While this weekend's open afternoons (2–5pm today and tomorrow) are aimed at spreading the word about croquet and encouraging people to join in and have fun, potential members, including families, will be welcomed whether they want to simply play for singular enjoyment or to national or international standard.
Mr Waterfield, who lives at Great Broughton, is also well known throughout Cleveland for his musical talents.
He is chairman of Cleveland Philharmonic with whom he plays oboe and also with Teesside Synphonia and Stokesley and District Choral Society and Orchestra.
He has also played for others, including Darlington Choral Society.
Aged 51, he is ‘on the technical side’ with Tioxide, a subsidiary of ICI, at Billingham, and has been hooked on croquet for almost 20 years.
He was introduced to it as a game played in the garden before coming north from Devon in 1970.
Working for ICI enabled him to join their club at Norton Hall where a single croquet lawn has been in existence and played on at least since the end of the 1939–45 War.
Mr Waterfield likens a game of croquet to a game of snooker and personally believes that the outdoor game preceded the indoor, with both based on similar objectives.
‘It isn't unlike golf in that it has a handicap system so that the better player can play against a less experienced person,’ said the father-of-two.
A founder at Ormesby, where a year's membership is £35 with all games free thereafter, he says their's and Norton are the only croquet lawns in the Teesside area.
Since Ormesby was formed, thanks to a handful of enthusiasts, he has competed in tournaments all over the country.
Teams of four travel many miles for matches and visiting other clubs is one of the pleasures of playing the game, said Mr Waterfield, whose wife, Hattie, is a teacher at Conyers School, Yarm.
The club proposes to stick at around 50 members who represent a manageable size.
So far it has not managed to find suitable grounds big enough to take four lawns which would make it eligible to become a competition centre.
The sport is cheap because the club provides the bowls, hoops and mallets.
Mr Waterfield has his own mallet which came from New Zealand and cost £50.
‘This country is still top dog but croquet is played very actively in Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and, in recent years, has got bigger in the USA.
Mr Waterfield regrets not taking more of an interest in the then-popular sport in his student days at Oxford.
He derives much satisfaction from introducing someone to the sport and says: ‘You don't need to be strong to play it.
It is a touch game.’
Fellow enthusiast Mr John Morgan, an ICI accountant who lives in the village and is secretary of the Norton club, added: ‘Some of the best players are women.’
The clubs have their own singles, doubles and knockout competitions after which tournaments are held at regional, national and international level.
The current world champion is an accountant from Ipswich and the year before, Durham University maths student Robert Fulford won the title, which he wrested from someone in New Zealand.
Croquet is not new to Teesside where the game is known to have been played round about the turn of the century on six lawns in Albert Park, Middlesbrough.
‘Croquet was pushed out by tennis.
Until then it was the No. 1 game even though it wasn't played by the masses.
It was certainly enormously popular.’
Visitors are welcome at Ormesby Hall's Tuesday evening and Sunday afternoon sessions if anyone wants more information.
Meanwhile he hopes this weekend's event, Giardini National Croquet Day, will attract lots of visitors to the club, which is a member of the Croquet North Federation.
Armchair enthusiasts can  watch Yorkshire Television's screening this afternoon of indoor speed croquet (1.10–2.05pm).
Readers wanting further information can write direct to the Croquet Association at the Hurlingham Club, Ranelagh Gardens, London SW6 3PR.
Mr Charles Waterfield taking a shot on the croquet lawn.
MUSIC man Jools Holland is getting on his bike, a Vincent Rapide motorcycle, to go in search of the lost chord.
The result is the Channel 4 music documentary Mister Roadrunner the follow-up to Holland's Walking to New Orleans five years ago in which the jazz and blues fan travelled to New Orleans.
For Mister Roadrunner he spent three weeks on the road in America in difficult conditions.
‘The weather was really hot and we had to get up at six in the morning to do the filming,’ he recalls.
Charlie Rich, New Rhythm and Blues Quartet, Betty Wright, Rufus Thomas, Billy Swann, George Harrison and Mica Paris are among those he meets on his travels.
‘The purpose is to introduce people to rhythm and blues,’ says the musical crusader who appears at Middlesbrough Arena on June 4.
‘To give them an enthusiasm and understanding of where contemporary pop comes from.
It will bend your ears and explain what you are listening to.’
The ex-Squeeze member is currently working on a new album but is unlikely to return with another series of BBCTV's Juke Box Jury, revived with Holland in the David Jacobs presenter role a couple of years back.
‘The music that will be put into the Mister Roadrunner show is the best music of the past 40 years whereas Juke Box Jury was the records that came out that week.
If you look back at any year you only get ten or 20 good records and they're not likely to be all in one week.’
Holland's own interest in music was aroused when he learned to play the piano as a boy.
‘They’ tried to send him to music lessons but he preferred to sit and copy an uncle who played boogie-woogie.
He points out that the best people, like Ray Charles and Aretha Franklin, started singing in gospel choirs not at music lessons.
So keen is he on that approach that his six-year-old daughter Rosie studies with a female gospel singer.
‘If you are enjoying something it's not hard work.
If you can enjoy the beginnings you can look into the hard story later.’
He thinks people's musical perceptions are wider than they are given credit for.
‘In your record collection you don't just have heavy metal or Charlie Parker or Beatles records.
People's musical tastes are broad.’
— Walking to New Orleans: June 5, C4, 11.40pm.
Mister Roadrunner: June 6, C4, 9pm.
The Sound of Music: Newcastle Theatre Royal ANY production of this popular classic has its work cut out as far as most critics are concerned.
Faced with one of Rodgers and Hammerstein's most saccharine scores, a hearty endorsement of family values and a cast of nuns and winsome children, cynics would be well advised to take a bucket in with them.
But approach it on its own terms and the show has a lot to offer, especially when presented as well as it is here, under the direction of Wendy Toye.
The evening gets off to a wobbly start, with Liz Robertson's Maria belting out the title song on an artificial hillside which is anything but alive.
Yet most of Terry Parsons' generally handsome sets are impressively solid-looking, and are moved into place with machine-like efficiency by the stage crew.
In her early scenes, Ms Robertson's vocalising is so strident that at times I felt like strapping her to a chair and stuffing a wad of cotton in her mouth.
But she tones down her performance as the show progresses and one is eventually won over.
Co-stars Christopher Cazenove and Robin Nedwell lack musical training and tend to struggle through their numbers.
But they are ideally cast as Captain von Trapp and Max Detweiler respectively, and their imposing stage personalities more than compensate for their limitations as singers.
Lottie Mayor is charming as Liesl and I have no reservations about the local children recruited to play the younger von Trapps, as they perform some complicated routines with great enthusiasm and aplomb.
But the biggest first night applause deservedly went to Linda Hibberd's Mother Abbess, whose rendition of Climb Ev'ry Mountain sent tingles through the hairs on everyone's neck.
Call me a weak-willed sentimentalist, but I liked it damn it, I liked it!
Sheldon Hall Shakespear's Sister/Soft Parade: Newcastle City Hall DUTCH band Soft Parade had the job of warming up the City Hall crowd.
There's a few obvious influences from The Doors and Velvet Underground but with new single When Violets Meet and album tracks Evy Waters and Purple Psyche Celebration showing so much promise, methinks we could be hearing a bit more about the band.
Shakespear's Sister took to the stage to what must be the worst intro tape I've ever heard.
Thankfully their performance was much better, yet it took a pointed comment from Michelle Detroit to get the crowd onto their feet and drum up some atmosphere.
Highlights had to be You're History, I Don't Care, a passable cover of T Rex's Hot Love, Stay, the musicianship and Detroit's voice.
Although the radio monitoring system used by Siobhan Fahey allowed her to indulge in some frenzied dancing during the songs, it did her no favours in the vocal projection stakes.
Did I like what I saw and heard?
Yes, but it could have worked much, much better in a standing room only venue such as Newcastle Polytechnic or The Mayfair.
Keith Rickaby BBC Scottish Orchestra: Middlesbrough Town Hall THE programme deserved a much bigger audience than actually attended.
They are a splendid orchestra, disciplined and committed in their playing, and firmly directed by conductor Takuo Yuasa.
The programme was an apt one for a summer evening, never demanding yet full of delightful sounds.
The opening item, Berlioz's King Lear overture, one of that composer's earliest works, is not often performed.
It shows his remarkable powers of orchestration and his unique gift for melody and was played with fire and fervency; a fine foretaste of the delights of Mozart's G major piano concerto No 17 K453.
Here the excellent soloist was Michael Roll.
This is a cheerful work with a delectable slow movement and a finale which presages Papageno's music.
It sparkled throughout with some graceful playing by the soloist plus great elegance and finesse from the woodwind.
Dvorak's 7th Symphony completed the evening.
Not so well known as the New World, it is a thoroughly enjoyable work.
Here the outer movements had a sense of commendable urgency and there was a nobility about the slow movement which was memorable.
The approval of the audience was manifest.
Denis Weatherley
Today
HARROGATE:
National Croquet Day, details, tel 0423–564881.
Ladies Barbershop Singers, Lounge Hall, Royal Baths Assembly Rooms, Crescent Road.
PATELEY BRIDGE:
Garden open to the public, Fosse Beck, Bewerley, 2.30–5.30pm.
Dogs on lead, plant sales, refreshments.
RIPON:
Ripon Festival, Edwardian Shopping Day, Old Time Music Hall, details, tel .
YORK:
Dinosaurs From China Exhibition, Yorkshire Museum.
Details, tel 0904–629745.
Coming up
TOMORROW:
Top Priority ladies barbershop choir Beningbrough Hall, nr 2.30pm, 4pm.
Antiquarian and second hand book fair, Leisure Centre, Beech Avenue, off Leeds Road, 10am.
Ripon Festival, Edwardian sports day, inter-pub soccer finals, details, tel .
Garden open to the public, Upsall Castle, 2–6pm.
Museum fun:
Today is a fun day at Gray Art Gallery and Museum in Hartlepool.
Activities include a treasure hunt, country dancing, a bouncy castle, kite-making and painting.
Today
BILLINGHAM:
Billingham Gingerbread Group for single parents and their children, meetings every Saturday, 4–6pm.
Details, tel (0642) 361608.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Botanic Centre open every Sat/Sun, visitor centre, tearooms, shop, gardens and bouncy castle, Ladgate Lane, Acklam,(near Bluebell Hotel), 11am-6pm.
Admission £1.20 adults, 40p children over five.
Tel (0642) 594895.
THORNABY:
A guided botanical walk in Bassleton Woods, meet at Thorn Tree Farm, west end of Bader Avenue, 2pm.
Leader Ian Lawrence.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Cleveland Group of the Ramblers, 7–8 mile walk, meet Carlton Bank Top, 2pm.
Details, tel Redcar 474864.
Leven Antiques Fair, Village Hall, Hutton Rudby.
Details, tel (0642) 819439.
Middlesbrough Jazz Society presents John Brown's Bodies, Inn Off The Park, Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough, 8pm.
Admission £5, tickets tel 823322 or at the door.
Guided walk, The Buildings of Stockton, Victoria Bridge to Town House, meet outside JT Doves, Bridge Road, Stockton, 2pm.
Leader Alan Betteney.
MONDAY:
Cleveland Outlook meet, Highfield Hotel, Marton Road, Middlesbrough, 8.30pm.
Details, tel Guis 635898.
Guided walk, Eston Hills and Eston Nab, examine the history and archaeology of the Eston Hills, meet outside Cross Keys public house, on A171 Nunthorpe to Guisborough Road.
Leader Steve Sherlock.
Stockton Hard of Hearing Club, Alma Street Centre, Stockton, 6.30pm.
New members welcome.
Today
BRAFFERTON:
Old time and modern sequence dancing, Village Hall, 7.30–10.30pm.
DARLINGTON:
Jumble sale for the RSPCA, Cockerton Methodist Church Hall, 2pm.
Entry 10p.
Darlington Rambling Club, 9–12 mile walk, meet at ED Walker Homes, Coniscliffe Road, 10.30am.
Please bring packed lunch.
Details, tel Jennifer Hillcoat on 312245.
HURWORTH:
Table top sale, Village Hall, 10am.
Last Saturday in month.
Details, tel 721583.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Dolphin Sunday Dance Club, 50/50 dancing, Dolphin Centre, Darlington, 7.30pm.
MONDAY:
Tea dance, Arts Centre, Darlington, 1.30–4pm.
Sedgefield Local History Society, talk by Raymond Selkirk on New Evidence of the Roman Occupation of Northern England, Ceddesfield Hall, Sedgefield, 7.45pm.
All welcome.
TV MAGICIAN Paul Daniels has shocked his fans by claiming Jesus's miracles were just magic tricks which he himself can perform.
The Teesside-born star trained as a Methodist local preacher when he was a teenager in Middlesbrough, but is now an atheist.
In an outspoken attack in the News of the World, the 54-year-old condemned his religious upbringing as ‘brainwashing’ and claimed: ‘Jesus was nothing more than a magician just like me.’
Veteran South Bank Methodist Harry Hickman condemned the conjurer's comment.
‘I don't know where, why or how he got that idea,’ said 77-year-old Mr Hickman, recently honoured for 60 years of preaching.
‘Paul accompanied me at some services.
He would do readings and sermons and he was very interested in bible study.’
There were few signs that the teenage devotee would turn to atheism even in 1978, long after Paul had left South Bank.
‘He came back for the church's centenary,’ Mr Hickman recalled.
‘He seemed quite happy to take part in the celebrations.’
The millionaire entertainer was unavailable for comment yesterday, but in the interview he claimed Jesus's miracles were all magic tricks, which he himself can perform.
‘I can walk on water or turn water into wine,’ he said.
Paul claimed he only joined the Normanby Road Methodist Church for the youth club where he began his entertainment career.
But good pal Doug Moore a former Mayor of Langbaurgh and a guest when Paul appeared on This Is Your Life in 1989, said: ‘He was interested in the youth club, yes,’ said Doug, a lifelong member of the Methodist Church.
‘But he was also keen on the religion.’
Paul began training as a local preacher and conducted services under supervision, but never completed the tough programme.
The Rev Trevor Haigh, current minister of the North Ormesby and South Bank Methodist Church, said: ‘He is entitled to say what he likes, but I think he is attacking religion.
Christianity is a religion, but it is also a faith and magic is not at the root of faith.’
TELEVISION'S battle of the kitchen features three contestants from the North this weekend chasing the title of Masterchef.
Former ICI chief Sir John Harvey-Jones will be among the judges in the heat featuring Michelle Hattee, of Stamford Bridge, near York; the Rev Timothy Robinson, of Acklam, Middlesbrough; and Linda Yewdall, of Melbourne, near York.
The three won a place following a regional ‘cook-off’ and now face the task of preparing a three-course meal for four within two and a half hours and within a budget of £30.
Catering and hotel management student Ms Hattee's menu includes poached cod with fresh spinach and fillet of venison.
Mr Robinson, curate at St Mary's Church, Acklam, will serve up pressed prawns with cumin served with asparagus followed by piquant chicken while dairy farmer Mrs Yewdall aims for success with hot smoked wild salmon sauce on a green salad with a main course of oxtail in port.
Sweets range from white chocolate and praline cheesecake to baked Bramleys with cobnut stuffing.
The programme will be broadcast on BBC1 at 5.40pm on Sunday.
Bowes Museum is an art museum not a theme park, exercising children's eyes and minds — their curiosity, powers of observation and fledgling intelligence — rather than taking them on a rollercoaster ride.
But it's still a lot of fun hunting out the highlights, which include a special room with toys and dolls.
This is a guide to just some of the attractions.
Get there on time to see the Silver Swan move.
Youngsters love it but the 220-year-old automaton is only operated for a minute, once or twice a day.
Down the steps in the lower level rooms 1–8 are displays of natural history and archaeology…and skeletons.
One is of a man from a Bronze Age burial site at Kellow Law near Trimdon, the other of a woman from Binchester fort near Bishop Auckland.
Simply from examining the bones the experts can tell us that she suffered from childhood illness and spent a lot of her life sitting on her heels using her left hand, perhaps grinding corn.
The museum's weirdest exhibit, hailed in its time as a ‘Marvel of the age’ and a ‘Wonderful freak of nature’, is a must for children and can be found just along the corridor.
A calf, it came from High Force, Teesdale, and has two heads, seven legs, two tails, four ears and four eyes.
Around the corner are exhibits illustrating 18th and 19th century life in Teesdale, including a re-creation of a kitchen of the time.
Some of the clocks and mechanical toys that delighted Josephine Bowes, whose father was a clock-maker, can be found on the first floor.
The undoubted star for children is the gold mechanical mouse of c1810 in the ‘Cabinet of Curiosities’ in room 15 (although some will need lifting up to see it).
On the second floor, room 30 is the favourite: devoted to dolls, toys and other mementos of bygone childhood.
Two fine 18th century dolls are at the centre of the notable doll collection, and there are also dolls' houses from the 19th century and the 1920s and a model of a German kitchen.
Toys from the past range from speedboats to fire engines, farm animals to steam engines, with a nearby display of prams and pushchairs for dolls and their owners.
Large gleaming traction engines and larger gleaming steam engines are on show, and toy sailing boats: a miniature world of barques, brigantines and schooners.
There is also a working model of a fairground, based on Northallerton-based Crows fair and made by Robert Middleton of Middlesbrough.
Steps lead up to a higher level platform where surprises are found above the cases down below: the head of a moose and whole of an alligator, to name two.
There are also two cardboard peepshows from c1850, which seem to show a tunnel going on for ever.
Which is probably how long children will want to stay…
Jinx links
FLY Me To The Moon, one of Middlesbrough FC's fanzines, has a somewhat chequered T-shirt history.
The ‘Boro's London fan club newsletter points out that when FMTTM produced a Bruce Rioch shirt, the manager was sacked shortly afterwards.
A ‘Slaven for Scotland’ number was followed immediately by the striker's selection for Ireland; the ‘Pears for Sweden’shirt led inevitably to the goalie missing his England B call up with a fractured cheek bone.
Word now is that the fanzine is trying to get something about Lennie Lawrence off its chest (or rather, onto it.)
The manager is probably consulting his solicitor.
Forging Links, Municipal Art Gallery, Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough.
(Until July 4).
THIS wide ranging exhibition of metal work in all its many forms first saw the light of day in Lincoln.
The Usher Art Gallery decided that it needed to replace its imposing main entrance gates which were taken away in the war.
The Museum of Lincolnshire Life also had a yen for the new security grills to cover its windows; and the City of County Museum thought it would be a good idea to invest in three differently designed Tree Seats as well as commissioning a spadehandle-back seat for The Gardeners Rest.
Both the original drawn designs and small models of the end products are shown here.
Members of the British Art Blacksmith Association founded 13 years ago also offer typical examples of their work such as Alan Evan's intriguing, six round-keyed Typewriter Sculpture for the Daily Express Building in London.
The show really opens out in the preceding room where an historical selection of Cold Steel includes a facsimile of Roman sword and even more deadly weapons ranging in date from the Iron Age to the middle of the 17th century.
As further evidence of diversity Room Three is given over to work by students from Colleges of Art and Polytechnics and in Room Four with the fully engaged professionals, there is Alan Dawson's hugely impressive floor to ceiling Ball and Pin sculpture, Terence Clark's open wall sculpture, and a spiky gate by Brian Russell, who did his training in Sunderland and now has a forge at Little Newsham, just outside Darlington.
A very real case of local boy makes good.
Jason Ennis: Drawings, Arts Centre, Vane Terrace, Darlington.
(Until July 4).
YOUNG Jason Ennis is a superb illustrator and one who has a considerable number of strings to his artistic bow.
His twin themes, he tells us are intuition and evaluation.
While his inspiration can be evoked in a variety of ways from music and film to literature and mythology, history and experience.
He would doubtless provide if a commission was to come his way a superb set of illustrations to Dante Alighieri's The Divine Comedy.
Elsewhere there is a touch of the Tolkien's in Ennis' The Fey Dagger, with its collection of green globes.
Indeed it is this science fiction/space fantasy motif that runs through his show.
All in all a most intriguing debut and one that will stay long in the mind.
OPENED a century ago next week the Bowes Museum is obviously a North-East and National tour de force.
A French chateau in a Pennine market town, stuffed to its tripled-towered roof with fabulous treasures.
What could be more amazing?
Very little.
But this mind-and-eye-boggling extravaganza has its dark side.
One on which the spotlight rarely falls.
And it certainly won't shine during the four-month long centenary junketings.
How was John Bowes' great treasure house financed?
Essentially its cost was the ravaging of the coal-bearing district of County Durham.
And of course this was far from the setting that coal-owner Bowes choose for his improbable museum.
Its vast opulence contrasts with the wretched living and working conditions endured by Durham miners and their families.
What they thought of his gross display of wealth is easily imagined.
Of course his museum, giving people the chance to see magnificent collections of textiles, silver, ceramics, furniture and paintings, is an outstanding public asset.
But it is sobering to reflect that Bowes could devote so much time and energy to assembling his huge collections, a task that preoccupied him for many years, without apparently caring that a main source of his wealth, coal, was blighting lives and blighting the countryside.
Just as it is possible to have perfect manners and yet not be a true ‘gentleman’, so it is possible to be connoisseur of fine art and yet be a vandal.
John Bowes perfectly fits that bill.
For he saw no contradiction between buying, say, an expensive painting of a beautiful landscape, and bashing the living daylights out of another beautiful landscape.
Some years ago the Bowes Museum augmented its Bowes collections with the Teesdale Rooms local social history.
As a centenary project perhaps it will consider mounting a major display on the flip side of the Bowes legacy the despoiled Durham countryside, and the heroic efforts still being made to repair the damage.
If all the King's horses and all the King's men couldn't put Humpty Dumpty together again it's doubtful if all the riches in the Bowes Museum could heal the scars imposed on Durham by Bowes and his fellow coal owners.
Pit heaps and mean back to backs are as much his ‘monument’ as the wondrous, bloated showcase he erected at Barnard Castle.
But it is by no means certain that most visitors make this vital connection.
MY FIRST remembered visit to Bilsdale, in the North York Moors, was on a junior school bus trip circa 1947.
The headmaster pointed out the green telephone box at Fangdale Beck a tourist attraction even then.
At nearby Newgate Bank we disembarked to inspect a gallows' stone.
That's still there.
And if the residents of Bilsdale had their way the gallows would re-erected to hang the BT officials who ordered the uprooting their famous green box, now replaced with a ‘shower cubicle’.
Of course this high-handed action, defying the box's ‘listed’ status, is outrageous.
But so is the removal of any traditional phone box.
Some survive, of course.
But either all traditional boxes are suitable for modern use or none is.
Flimsy-looking in its open-country setting, the new Fangdale Beck box is by no means alone in looking miserably incongruous.
The box at Marske-in-Swaledale, which turns its blank stainless steel back to the main road, is a particularly sore thumb.
But even worse is the box in the moorland village of Lealholm. where it mars a sheep-cropped with trees and a Victorian drinking fountain.
With profits running at £97 per second, BT could easily afford to reinstate all the traditional boxes.
Instead, it perhaps sees its bulging coffers as sufficient reason to risk the wrath of the law, as it must have done at Fangdale Beck.
If BT ends up in court, it would be pleasing to see the magistrates urge that a traditional box, painted green, be put back at Fangdale Beck.
Whether guilty of an offence or not, could BT lightly sweep aside a from the bench.
WEEKEND TV HIGHLIGHTS by Graham Keal TV music shows fronted by established entertainers tend to be predictable affairs.
The bit where the singing host reaches for the mike and does an ‘impromptu’ duet with his or her guest always merits a quick lurch for the off button.
Saturday's new series of Tom Jones: The Right Time (10.20pm, ITV) promises to be altogether more challenging.
Makers Central have given Tom a chance to virtually write his own ticket.
They wanted a show with a contemporary feel, but the framework, the guest list and the style were down to Tom and his management team.
The result is to go back to roots of pop music, mixing documentary, fly-on-the-wall conversations and live sets from an interesting assortment of guests, often tackling numbers you wouldn't normally see them perform on TV.
Show one sees Tom joining Shakespear's Sister on the old T. Rex hit Hot Love, and EMF on their rock anthem Unbelievable.
Pop duo Erasure come up with an unexpected choice of songs Abba's S.O.S. and The Ballad of Lucy Jordan, originally by Marianne Faithfull.
Black American acappella band True Image, who appear on all six shows, join Tom on Springsteen's Dancing in the Dark and the Beatles' Come Together.
Future guests include The Chieftains, Joe Cocker and Al Jarreau.
It could be fun.
IF there's one programme the Catholic clergy will not want their parishioners to watch this weekend it's Saturday documentary Daughters of Eve (8pm, C4) profiling four women who have had relationships with priests.
Three of the relationships are particularly scandalous (even to those of us who do not espouse religion, let alone a commitment to celibacy) simply because the priests involved and the Catholic Church too in some cases behaved in such an uncaring, un-Christian way.
Woman A (all interviewees are anonymous) is married and has been having a long-term affair with her parish priest.
Her anguish has made her stay away from communion for months, yet the priest seems happy to keep saying Mass.
She recently found out that he has been involved in at least five other relationships, three concurrent to hers.
He also has a grown-up son.
There has been a call for priests around the world to declare their liaisons on Pentecost Sunday tomorrow marking the day the Holy Spirit enlightened the Church.
Don't expect to be caught in the rush.
Jools Holland offers an alternative musical excursion on Saturday in Mister Roadrunner (9pm, C4), with Stephen Fry narrating as Jools rides around Tennessee and Mississippi on his Vincent Rapide in search of musical adventures.
The ‘plot’ has him searching for the lost chord, which is about as banal as you can get, but the contributors look interesting George Harrison, Charlie Rich, Betty Wright, John Sebastian, Rufus Thomas and Billy Swan are among them.
— Peter Greenfield still has nightmares every time he visits a hospital, reliving the moments when he and his twin sister Miriam were used in the unspeakable experiments of Dr Mengele in Auschwitz.
Mengele was obsessed with twins, and five of the twins who had the terrible misfortune to figure in his ‘studies’ talk about what they went through and how they have coped with the memories in Sunday's Everyman: My Brother, My Sister (10.20pm,— Gazza ‘azza gonna to Italy at last, but the ups and downs of a year when his comeback looked anything but certain are charted in Sunday's hour-long documentary Gazza The Fight Back (4pm, Tyne Tees, 5.30pm Yorks).
Paul Gascoigne's career and his hugely expensive transfer to Lazio had been in doubt ever since his disastrous knee injury in last year's FA Cup Final, but the night club fracas which brought about a further fracture made a successful recovery look still less likely.
The programme charts Paul's rehabilitation, including footage from a holiday in Portugal, the making of a fishing video and the first frantic visit to the Lazio club in Rome.
Meanwhile viewer reaction slot Biteback (4.30pm, BBC1) does something for the country's frustrated football commentators.
Last month's edition challenged critics of John Motson to put their money where their mouth is and try to do better.
Three would-be commentators were selected Belfast 12-year-old Richard McConkey, Liverpool computer consultant Sally Ledger, and London solicitor Simon Johnson.
After a briefing session from Motson, they all go solo for 30 minutes of commentary on England v Brazil at Wembley.
Fortunately for us perhaps, we see only edited highlights.
Sunday evening's Masterchef (5.40pm, BBC1) brings together three North-East cooks to meet the challenge of making a three course meal for four for under £30 in two-and-a-half hours.
Curate Tim Robinson, from Acklam, Middlesbrough, whose culinary pastimes offer a rich compliment to his clerical vocation, is joined by catering student Michelle Hattee, from Stamford Bridge, and farmer's wife Linda Yewdall, from Melbourne, both near York.
The recipes of each sound temptingly exotic and very  original .
And judges Sir John Harvey-Jones and foot writer Jocelyn Dimbleby with presenter Loyd Grossman have to choose the winner who goes through to the final ‘cook-off’ in July.
TV club:
County Durham Training and Enterprise Council has become an area franchisee for the Executive Business Club.
The Club is the first television channel dedicated to management training and business information and its programmes are  transmitted directly into the home or business by the BBC.
ONE of India's leading artist is turning his attention to the Tees and has set up studio in Middlesbrough art gallery.
Vivan Sundaram is teaching local artists at a workshop using charcoal and engine oil as his media.
Today
HARROGATE:
The Cats Protection League Bazaar, Parliament Room, Royal Baths Assembly Rooms, Crescent Road.
Gibson Art Market, Crescent Room, Royal Baths Assembly Rooms, Crescent Road, Harrogate.
RIPON:
Blair Dances, modern and sequence dancing, Hugh Ripley Hall, Skellbank, 7–11pm.
Details, tel .
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Rotary Fun Run, Harewood House, Harewood, nr Leeds, details, tel .
Open Air Classical Concert,(Handel with fireworks), Harewood House, Harewood, nr Leeds, details, tel .
Connoisseurs Choice, works of art exhibition, Mercer Art Gallery, Swan Road, Harrogate, 10am-5pm Tues-Sat, 25pm Sun.
Admission free.
Until 5th July.
Harrogate Model Car Club competitive racing of 1/10th scale, electric off-road cars, outdoors at the Great Yorkshire Showground, Railway Road, off Wetherby Road, Harrogate, 12noon.
Details, tel .
Garden open to the public, Nawton Tower, nr Helmsley, two miles east of Helmsley off A170, 2–6pm.
Garden open to the public, Ryedale House, third house on right after the Bridge as you enter the town from York/Thirsk, Helmsley, 2–6pm.
Sion Hill Hall open to the public, a beautiful Edwardian Country House with superb collection of antiques, also tea room, Kirby Wiske, Thirsk (off A167), 2–5pm.
Adults £3, children free is accompanied.
Piano Recital by Young-Choon Park, Beningborough Hall, nr York, 7pm.
Tickets £6.
TODAY
BILLINGHAM:
Billingham Gingerbread Group, for single parents and their children, 4–6pm.
Details, tel..
BROTTON:
Warsett School Reunion Night, Leavers of 1980, disco & licensed bar for past pupils and teachers, Main Hall, Warsett School, 7.30pm–midnight.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Botanic Centre open to the public, Ladgate Lane, nr Bluebell Hotel, Acklam, Sat & Sun 11am-6pm.
Details, tel.M'bro 594895.
Workshop, Healing Attitudes by Geoff Freed, Whinney Banks Community Centre, Harehills Road, Middlesbrough, 10.15am-4.30pm.
Sun also, £5 each day.
All welcome.
Details, tel.Mavis Fielding on .
SKELTON:
Guided walk, Skelton Park Pit, visit the extensive remains of an important Cleveland ironstone mine not usually accessible to the public, meet  outside The Duke William pub, 2pm.
STOCKTON:
Garden Fete, Elmwood Community Centre, Green Lane, Hartburn, 1.30pm.
To be opened by Alistair Brownlee.
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Leven Antiques Fairs, Tall Trees Hotel and Village Hall, Low Worsall, details, tel..
Teesside Symphony Orchestra, Easy Listening music, Parish Church, Stockton, 7.30pm.
Tickets £2.50, concessions £1.50 at the door.
The new circus company Ra Ra Zoo bring not one but two shows to the region this month.
Angels and Amazons at York Arts Centre on June 17 and 18 is a celebration of eccentric women throughout the ages.
The performers are Brazilian Angela De Castro, Australian Sue Broadway and English juggler-comedienne Debbie Woolley.
Also billed to appear as a special mystery guest is Vivacious Val.
Ra-Ra Zoo's other show The Gravity Swing, described as ‘circus theatre imagineering’, plays three venues York Barbican (June 21), Newcastle Playhouse (June 23–24) and Middlesbrough Little Theatre (June 26–27).
Live music and comedy will be used as the audience enters an absurdist world of fish-throwing bicyclists, insensible domestic appliances and spellbinding aerial seriousness.
Today
REDCAR:
Redcar Writers, District Library, Coatham Road, 7.30pm.
New members welcome.
Details, tel Sarah on Redcar 481441.
KIRKLEATHAM:
The Art of Music, talk and demonstration by Herbert Wilkinson, Kirkleatham Old Hall and Museum, near Redcar, 2pm.
Admission free, booking advisable on Redcar 479500.
STAITHES:
Staithes Circular, guided walk across beach/rocks at Staithes to Port Mulgrave returning via the Cleveland Way, some climbing, trainer type shoes more appropriate, meet Bank Top car park, 7pm. (2 hours).
Coming Up
TOMORROW:
Concert by Redcar Male Voice Choir, Cheshire Home, Marske, 7.30pm.
Silverfish in concert plus support, Town Hall, Middlesbrough, 7.30pm.
Tickets £4.50.
Stephenson Locomotive Society, Newport Settlement, St Paul's Road, Middlesbrough, 7.15pm.
Tickets £1.
Brookfield Townswomen's Guild, talk by Autocall, Help Call for Women Drivers, St Margaret's Church Hall, Brookfield, Middlesbrough, 7.30pm.
 blood magic
CUTTING a person in half by the usual slicing-across-the-stomach method is interesting, says Simon Drake.But sawing a person in up the is so much more so.
His press cuttings testify to this with a vivid, blood-splattered description of a white-gowned Drake brandishing a huge saw, placing the blade between the victim's legs and sawing upwards amid spurting blood and gore.
No wonder he's been dubbed ‘the Ben Elton of magic’ by Radio 1's Steve Wright while a magazine writer said he ‘makes Paul Daniels look like Gordon the Gopher’.
Viewers of Channel 4's series The Secret Cabaret had a taste of Drake's brand of gory trickery.
Now he's taking his gruesome illusions on tour with The Secret Cabaret Live playing in Newcastle and Middlesbrough this month.
Drake has performed illusions on stage before.
He first became noticed when he appeared on tours with the rock star likes of Kate Bush, Eric Clapton, Julian Lennon and Madness.
Now the former record plugger is keen to dispel any impression that his illusions are achieved using TV trickery ‘which they are not’.
He maintains he's doing ‘a lot less blood and guts’ although that's difficult to believe as he chats of chopping off an arm of a ‘volunteer’from the audience, although theatregoers may escape being sawn in half: ‘I am not decided whether to saw a young lady from the audience or myself.
It depends how the mood grabs me.’
That's the good news, now for the bad: ‘I am almost certain to ask a member of the audience to come up and be burnt alive.’
Drake's interest in magic and illusion began at the age of nine when his parents took him to Indonesia.
During a trip with his amateur mountaineering father the rains came and young Simon spent four days being looked after in a Buddhist teaching monastery.
‘I was really impressed by what I saw and as a result started learning about magic when I got back to London,’ he recalls.
‘It was more a mental impression that anything.
There were certain rituals which to my young mind looked like magic.
I can't be more specific than that.’
He began as an amateur, performing tricks at parties for friends.
While working as a record plugger for EMI he met lots of chart artists which led to his first stage appearances.
He reckons he's more of an illusionist than a magician.
‘I suppose I like to shock people with the power of illusion’.
When your act involves impaling, dismembering and other gory goings-on (and choppings-off), then shocking is the appropriate word.
‘I do take risks but very calculated risks,’ he says.
‘The things I do are not recommended for children or anyone to do at home.
I would not do something if I was not 100pc comfortable in what I was doing.’
Not everything goes exactly as planned.
He did a hanging routine on his TV show that went wrong.
Fortunately the people he was working with noticed and cut the rope before he choked.
Drake is cagey about the precise content of Secret Cabaret Live, pleading that he doesn't want to give too much away in advance.
‘It's going to be a lot of fun and there will be a few surprises in the interval,’ he says.
— Simon Drake's Secret Cabaret Live: Newcastle Playhouse, June 21 and 22 () and Middlesbrough Town Hall, June 23 ().
Steve Pratt
A love of landscapes Virginia Bodman From Heart, Head and Belly, Polytechnic Gallery, Library Buildings, Sandyford Road, Newcastle (until July 10).
IT seems incredible that it is almost a decade since Virginia Bodman was selected to become one of Durham Cathedral's earliest artists in residence.
Here for openers are two highly charged paintings from that era one a vertical composition of the Gothic arched interior of Escomb Church and the other a horizontal representation of the Emotional Debris in the Romanesque arcade of the cathedral itself.
In the larger of the two rooms here, there is a whole sequence of a dozen, undated, mostly oil on cotton duck paintings that end with both a large and a small version of Birch Trees.
In the frightening interpretation of The Glutton, Ms Bodman has gradually introduced the human figure either alone, paired or sometimes as a threesome.
In the absence of our little lepidopterous friends in the Butterflies on a Burning Night it is presumably the two standing figures who are themselves the (social) butterflies.
Having dealt with the Heart and the Head, Virginia goes on to consider the fuller implications of the third part of her exhibition.
In a dozen more highly gesticulatory paintings where angry reds again predominate, she paints both the agony and the ecstasy of childbirth and pregnancy.
And at the end of it all, realising how much she has contributed to and gained from this greatest of all creative acts, she proclaims that she is Myself, Myself.
Tears-away, Cleveland Craft Centre, Gilkes Street, Middlesbrough (until June 19)
ACCORDING to the Press release you can Tear it, Cut it, Fold it, Roll it, Crumple it in fact do whatever you like with it for here in this Craftspace exhibition, organised from Birmingham and the West Midlands, ten artists have had their wicked way with that most basic ingredient paper.
Philip Cox's famous lifesize ‘read all about it’ newspaper seller opens the show.
Maureen Ruchardson, who made a similar appearance in the B is for Book exhibition at the Shipley Art Gallery in Gateshead, continues to cook and beat the fibres of local plants to provide us with hand-made paper.
Julia Mannheim fills wire cages with crumpled up old newspapers and Sue Black fashions three dockyard coats.
Both Anastasia Chao, with a turquoise pebble necklace among other things and Talia Lehave, with circular forms made from laminated paper, offer very distinctive jewellery.
Elizabeth Couzins offers wet pulp, textured Icons; Dionne Inglis provides a complex wall relief that contrasts Modern versus Classical and Jack Lever impresses rope into the wet paper pulp to produce both the corrugated orange Beyond and the turquoise circle Whole.
Most inventive is Michael Wood.
who turns pulped newspaper into seven pale papier mache caricatured Heads.
Richard Parker Landscapes Colour Around Us, The Art Gallery, Queensway, Billingham (until June 27) IN what is effectively a full-scale retrospective with work that goes back to 1958, Richard Parker shares with us his great love of landscape.
The main body of these superb watercolours is of more recent vintage and runs the whole gamut of the seasons it is refreshing to come across a trio of such shivery snowscapes as Deep Snow, Upleatham (28), Road into Guisborough (78) and Tocketts Farm in Snow Guisborough (22).
Subsequent groupings provide us with Tree-scapes, more Snowscenes, Lakes and Rivers.
More experimental work in oils runs down the central spine of the exhibition including as it does both the ring form Sea and Rocks (534) and the hessian Collage in Brown of Trees (34).
Also at the four principal vantage points are pieces of Landform ceramic sculpture that range in size and price from £800 to a mere £70.
Prices elsewhere among the watercolours are in the £250/£350 bracket, but still a very worthwhile investment.
Richard Parker last exhibited his work in public alongside that of Ken Cozens back in 1961.
It is to be hoped that he does not leave it so long next time.
Fraser Brocklehurst Collective Drawings, Dovecot Arts Centre, Stockton (until June 26)
HAVING completed a one-year foundation course at York College of Art in 1989, Fraser Brocklehurst went on to Manchester Polytechnic to take a further two-year degree course in painting and print making.
He thus belongs to that school of thought that believes in the importance of the ‘mark.’
In his case the mark is made by scratching into his black, almost bitumenised, paint surface with the blunt wooden end of his brush.
In so doing he often exposes the different colour of the priming ground underneath.
Certain of these works and particularly the ‘plaster cast’ of green painted Lime Leaf (3) are easy to read.
There are times, however, when one might well feel that some of the other contributions have been deliberately placed on their side.
VISITORS to Middlesbrough art gallery yesterday observed a new insight into the River Tees when Indian artist Vivan Sundaram held an open studio.
The artist is highly regarded internationally and has exhibited in many countries.
He is in Middlesbrough commissioned by Cleveland Arts and Teesside Tomorrow, along with two other artists, to present their views of the river and its surrounding environment.
Steve Chettle, Cleveland Arts visual arts officer, said: ‘He brings a new insight about the river and the way it relates to Cleveland.’
Vivan moves on to Kirkleatham Old Hall Museum today.
Coming up
TOMORROW:
Family fun day, Seaton Carew, 11am-5pm.
Antiques Fair, Social Centre, Yarm.
MONDAY:
Cleveland Outlook social activities group meet for a talk on Victim Support, the Settlement, Union Street, Middlesbrough, 8pm.
Details, tel Guis 635898.
Hard of Hearing Club, Alma Street Centre, Stockton, 6.30pm.
New members welcome.
TUESDAY:
Middlesbrough Barbershop Singers, Methodist Church Hall, The Grove, Marton, Middlesbrough.
Details, tel 821908.
New members welcome.
Guided botanical walk, meet at picnic site off Ladgate Lane, Middlesbrough,(near Police HQ), 7pm.
Leader Ian Lawrence.
Live music helps hospital patients
THE charity Live Music Now, inspired by famous violinist Yehudi Menuhin, sent a young musician to play the harp to patients at two Darlington hospitals.
Mary Ann Kennedy, 18, from Manchester, played at Greenbank and Memorial hospitals on Tuesday, entertaining patients in the children's, psychiatric and elderly care wards.
Driver fled after causing crash
A FORESTER drove the wrong way along a dual carriageway to escape police after hitting another car, Thirsk magistrates heard yesterday.
Christopher Todd, 19, of Boltby, near Thirsk, drove his Land Rover into the path of a car on the A168 near Thirsk, injuring two people.
Then he drove off, the wrong way down the dual carriageway, said Jane Cockburn, prosecuting.
Blood tests revealed he was almost twice the legal alcohol limit.
Todd yesterday admitted driving with excess alcohol and failing to stop and report an accident.
The case was adjourned for reports Hens raid: Thieves raided a hen house in Ripon.
They made off with nine birds worth a total of £180 from a house in Studley Road.
LAST week the column was 400 miles away: no telephone, no forwarding address, and for The Northern Echo read the Western Mail.
Several items have subsequently been drawn to our notice by the Liquid Luncheon Club's welcome back committee, notably the picture in Saturday's paper of the defeated Michael Fallon's first public reappearance in Darlington.
Wounds temporarily licked, Michael and the winsomely wondrous Mrs Fallon were photographed at a Tory bash with other black-tied pall-bearers of the local Conservative Association.
But who was the chap directly alongside them, cat-cream grinning all over his Armani smooth chops?
Step forward (eagerly) Middlesbrough born and raised Graham Robb radio presenter, public relations wallah and defeated Tory candidate in Hartlepool.
In April, Robb who would be roi was anxious to prove himself a fully paid-up Hartlepudlian, a member of everything from West Hartlepool Rugby Club to the governors of Fens School.
In July, we hear, he's moving to Darlington.
Darlington Tory association chairman Bill Smith said in Saturday's story that Fallon could have the constituency nomination so long as he wanted it.
Doubtless it is the case.
But the next Conservative candidate for Darlington (you read it here first) was almost certainly not the chap on Wendy Fallon's right.
It was the bloke on her left, the one with the Brasso beam.
(PS This report does not constitute a reference.)
The other curious thing about Saturday's picture was that, alone among the Darlington mourners, Jonesey wasn't in formal dress.
Could it be that someone took him up on the extravagant wagers he offered constantly during the election and that he's been forced to three ball his monkey suit to meet his gambling debts? and then there was the letter in Saturday's Darlington and Stockton Times from stop-at-home Nick ThorneWallis, Labour chairman of Darlington council's transport committee.
What galled local Tories, wrote the Nappy Happy Househusband, was that ‘Labour's blueprint for the town centre is proving so popular with shoppers and traders’.
Then turn to the D&S Times back page: ‘Traders claim the new Darlington pedestrianisation scheme has cost them thousands in lost earnings,’ says a splash report.
Forty business people, the story added, had signed a protest petition.
All thought the blueprint hadn't worked; at least one was contemplating legal action.
Perhaps Coun Thorne-Wallis should get out and about with the pushchair a little more.
The space upon which last week's column would otherwise have encroached was occupied, coincidentally, by a feature on a very old friend from Shildon.
Gadfly knew George Reynolds when he had nowt, or nowt (at any rate) to which he'd care to admit.
Now he's a highly successful industrialist, and beyond doubt the most talked about man in town.
George makes no secret of his chequered past.
The column makes no secret of the fact that ten years ago we were his best man.
And still chuffed to bits to have been asked.
The Northern Echo having failed to penetrate Pembrokeshire, we noticed in The Guardian a faintly familiar report.
On April 29 Gadfly drew awestruck attention to the ‘rather gymnastic’ advertising for the Royal Shakespeare Company's new production of Macbeth.
The poster, based on a fifteenth century drawing of three naked women, depicted the play's triumvirate of witches meeting again at every conceivable juncture.
Now it's been noticed by London Transport Advertising too and banned from 600 sites on the District Line.
LTA sales director Brian Robinson says they're not trying to impose censorship but fear graffiti; RSC director Michael Bogdanov argues that the drawing is a great European classic and that Britain is a small minded and prudish nation.
Sally Homer, in charge of the RSC's advertising, clearly (according to The Guardian) agrees with Mr Bogdanov.
‘They object to the tits,’ she says.
The Financial Times, meanwhile, carried a profile of Darlington lad made good Derek Hunt.
A pupil of Dodmire Juniors and Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, he was a policeman before rising to become chairman of the MFI furniture group.
His wife still runs a sweet shop in Buckinghamshire.
Now he's leading the company's stock market flotation, an exercise which brings a personal bonus of £1.3m.
The FT also claims that Hunt has lost three of his 18 stones, a loss not evidenced by last week's photographs.
If anyone's suited to a flotation, it's big Derek Hunt.
Sedgefield District Council, we hear, has given permission for a clairvoyancy evening at Spennymoor leisure centre.
The decision came after advice from recreation officer Phil Ball.
‘It was a success,’ he said.
Sedgefield constituency Labour Party, meanwhile, has replied gently to our suggestion (Gadfly, June 3) that its meetings are strictly for the blokes.
A report in The Independent had earlier praised the Party's progressiveness but pictured a meeting in Fishburn workmen's club where women seemed to have fallen foul of clubland's oldest rule.
Constituency secretary Rita Taylor insists it is otherwise.
There's even a creche, she says ‘so that men, as well as women, can attend’.
Ms Taylor, a woman, was also ‘slightly offended’ by our notion that women might have been there to sell the bingo books.
‘There is more to being a woman and a Labour Party member than just that,’ she says.
The corner of Darlington Town Hall known affectionately as the Rogues Gallery where photographs of former civic dignitaries are displayed has long lacked just one mug shot to make its collection complete.
The missing face is that of the late Cecil Spence, Mayor in 1977–78 and as principled as he was pugnacious.
The reason, apparently, is that mayors were themselves expected to stump up to have their picture taken and Cec flat refused.
On the column's first morning back, however, a chap from the Town Hall sought our help to rectify the omission.
Cecil would not be best pleased to learn that we have agreed.
Sorry old boy, but you deserve to hang.
and finally, among the many good reasons to be home is that Durham XI play cricket against Lancashire XI at Shildon next Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday.
Doubtless there will be more of this in the Backtrack column, but in the meantime here are the directions to the Shildon Railway ground as given in the Durham County handbook.
‘A1(M), take A68 (?) to Shildon, ground in town centre along road next to pub.’
Got that?
See you there.
The Watering Places of Cleveland by Samuel Gordon (M.T.D. Rigg Publication, paperback £4.95, hardback £9.95, quarter-leather £16.)
‘LET us now ascend the tower.
Here we have an uninterrupted view of the prospect, and what a glorious prospect it is, stretching far away for many miles on every hand.
‘The plain of Cleveland seems like a coloured map rolled out.
Running our eye along the foot of the hill we mark Eston, Lackenby, Lazenby, and the delightful grounds of Wilton Castle.’
A bewitching Arcadia when Samuel Gordon scanned it in 1869, the sweeping panorama, spreading out from Eston Nab, is now a discordant jumble of industry, housing, dual-carriage roads and pylons.
Only the still ‘delightful’ grounds of Wilton Castle, ironically preserved as an ICI golf course, tell of the former beauty.
Gordon's homage to it appears in a little known nineteenth century Cleveland guidebook.
Not only is its reappearance welcome, but its author deserves a special salute from The Northern Echo.
For Gordon might well have been one of this newspaper's very first journalists.
Born in Staffordshire, the son of an impoverished clockmaker, Gordon embarked on a newspaper career when he became a reporter with the Hanleybased Staffordshire Sentinel in 1859.
But two years later, aged 29, he joined the Stockton Gazette and Middlesbrough Times, for which he worked, as sub-editor and reporter, for five years.
The exact details of Gordon's further service with other Cleveland and South Durham newspapers aren't clear.
But by 1872 he was working with The Northern Echo.
Since the paper was then just two-years-old, Gordon might have helped to launch it.
The Midlander was certainly in love with Cleveland.
For Watering Places was his third book on the district, following Rambles Along the Cliffs, and a guide to Whitby and Saltburn.
‘The more we have wandered over this interesting district,’ Gordon enthuses, ‘the more we have felt and appreciated its numerous charms.
As we have stood enraptured on the mountain peaks, threaded our way through the bosky dells and trod for many a mile the vast moorlands, we have often felt it to be indeed a land of glory and beauty.’
Particularly valuable are Gordon's accounts of Saltburn, recently transformed from ‘wilderness’ to ‘smiling garden’, and the active Upleatham Ironstone Mines, into which (with the true journalist's curiosity) he boldly ventured.
But what stands out is the price of progress.
What wouldn't the residents of, say Ormesby, a once lovely village now totally swamped by Teesside, give to recapture the tranquillity portrayed in Gordon's appealing pages?
From Eston Nab Gordon spotted far-off Middlesbrough, ‘flinging abroad the black banner of science.’
And he noted: ‘Even at this distance we seem to hear, borne upon the breeze, the low mur-muring hum of its ceaseless activity.’
Would he have gone on to hail Middlesbrough as ‘that marvellous town of iron’ if he had foreseen how it would crush so much of the beauty he cherished?
Peter Holland Tyne Tees reporter: ‘I've been with TTTV in Middlesbrough for 18 years so my feelings are the merger should sort out the wasteful nonsense we've had there doubling up on news stories.’
Pam Royle, Tyne Tees presenter: ‘My first reaction is that the two companies merged is good news in terms of what will be seen on the screen.
But as to whether jobs will be affected it is too early to say.’
Richard Whiteley, presenter of Yorkshire's Calendar news programme, said: ‘I've seen YTV grow into a very strong business.
This will make it stronger and is good for the North.
After all we're all Northerners aren't we?’
KEITH Pattinson, one of the largest independent estate agents in the North-East, has embarked on an expansion programme.
The Tyneside-based company plans to expand into South Durham and Teesside in a bid to win market share ahead of the promised upturn in the housing market.
The company plans to open seven branches over the coming months.
The first of these new offices has already opened in Jesmond and a further branch is expected to open at Bedlington.
Both offices are in areas where Keith Pattinson is already strongly represented and the openings mark a consolidation of the company's presence in Tyne and Wear and Northumberland.
The next phase of expansion will focus on South Durham and Teesside, where the company already has a  presence following the acquisition of Wharton Carpenter at Norton.
New branches are now expected to open in Stockton and Peterlee, with further openings scheduled shortly for Middlesbrough, Newton Aycliffe and Darlington.
Keith Pattinson said: ‘In opening these new branches, we are concentrating on our core business namely providing a personal service at a local level.’
When the new offices open Pattinson will have a 35-strong branch network.
THE Yorkshire take over of Tyne Tees has all the ingredients of a good television soap opera.
The two stations, once joined under the Trident banner, were divorced from each other more than 10 years ago.
But in recent years commercial logic has forced them closer together, and the romance started up again.
The courtship has had its ups and downs, and rival suitors have ensured the course of true love did not run smooth.
But yesterday the two firms announced that the marriage was back on again, and a greater North TV station back on the agenda.
Very few people are  surprised by the merger, but many were taken aback that it happened so soon after last year's franchise battle.
But it was this battle, won at huge cost by both Tyne Tees and Yorkshire, which finally propelled the companies into each others arms.
Yorkshire, which last year made £13.1m profits must pay £37.7m to the Government for the privilege of broadcasting.
Tyne Tees, after profits of just £200,000, will pay £15m and both will have to pay a percentage of their advertising revenue on top of that.
Commercially the deal makes sense and the merged operation may be able to save up to £3.5m a year by cutting out any duplication.
Job losses are  inevitable , although the two companies, between them employing about 1,100 won't be drawn on numbers.
Shared services like engineering, transmission, accounting, and publicity will bear the brunt of the cuts.
Yorkshire managing director Clive Leach, who will be chief executive of the group, said: ‘We are looking for substantial reductions and we will be ruthless in taking out any area that does not contribute.’
The link-up will also boost income for the station which has 16pc of the ITV audience but only collects 12pc of the revenue.
Last year ITV pulled in £1.6bn nationally, a bad year.
A 2.5pc increase in market share after the merger would put another £40m in the company coffers.
It will also create a new ITV company, valued at about £90m, lying third in the league table behind Central in the Midlands and Carlton in London.
Tyne Tees and Yorkshire will have more clout in negotiating programme sales to the ITV network and this will further boost income.
It will also ensure that the ownership of the Northern TV stations will stay in the North, for the foreseeable future at least.
Alone both Yorkshire and Tyne Tees would have been vulnerable to takeover, when rules lapse in 1994 to allow rival TV companies to make bids for each other.
But together they may be too big a proposition, and instead could turn from the hunted into the hunter.
Current broadcasting rules would ban the choice prize a takeover of Granada, the suitor Tyne Tees spurned last year.
But the big ITV stations are lobbying for all restrictions to be lifted, which would pave the way for a Great North TV spanning the country.
The cross border deal between the Tyne Tees and Yorkshire boards and major stakeholders, means the deal is certain to be approved when shareholders get the chance to vote later this year.
But this has not stopped the two companies, conscious of their high public profile, from starting to sell the deal to the viewers as well as the money men.
Tyne Tees managing director Ian Ritchie says the new company will invest £1m in its Middlesbrough studio, creating a new news service for the south of the region.
A southward looking Northern Life, serving South Durham, Teesside and North Yorkshire, will run alongside the existing Newcastle programme and the Leeds news service Calendar.
Well at least there's something in it for the viewer.
After last year's franchise battle and now this takeover most of the interest in ITV has been behind the scenes, not on the screens.
TO most people Yorkshire Television's takeover of (or merger with) Tyne Tees Television will be of little significance beyond the changes they will see on screen.
And at first glance, these promise to be for the better.
The south of the region, South Durham, Cleveland and North Yorkshire, has often felt neglected by the Tyneside emphasis on news coverage, perhaps more by the BBC than by Tyne Tees, and the promise of a £1m investment into a local news service from Middlesbrough is long overdue.
Add to that the potential extra income which the larger company might attract from advertisers and the additional resources for making and selling programmes to the national network and the region would appear to be better-placed by this merger.
Of course the apparent benefits to the region are offset by the inevitable losses in jobs and the suspicion that in years, perhaps months, the company will not be able to sustain two major broadcasting centres and that Newcastle will become little more than a satellite of Leeds.
That, considering the combined contribution the new company must make to the Government for its franchise will be a punishing £50m a year, might prove difficult to resist.
However, even a North-East service run from Leeds would be preferable to one based in Manchester.
The fact is that, had this marriage of friends not taken place, Granada would have sought to abduct Tyne Tees once restrictions were lifted in 1994.
And whereas it might be argued that Granada would have kept a strong news operation in Newcastle, control would have been out of the hands of the region.
That threat has now diminished, although it has not totally disappeared.
The bigger TV companies are now lobbying for further relaxations in the rules which would pave the way for a Great North TV station stretching from coast to coast and, inevitably, providing a diluted regional service.
Yesterday's takeover/merger, if it achieves nothing else, will have at least kept that at bay for a little longer.
TWO Northern companies were in the limelight last week as Tyne Tees Television recommended to its shareholders that they accept merger proposals with Yorkshire TV.
The all-share bid of 17 new Yorkshire shares for every ten Tyne Tees shares values the Newcastle-based company at £30m.
Should the shareholders of Tyne Tees accept their directors' recommendation the combined group will become the third largest television company in the UK.
The name will also be changed to the rather cumbersome Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television Holdings Plc.
The enlarged board of merged group will include several new directors taken from the present board of Tyne Tees.
Sir Ralph Carr-Elison, Clive Leach and Ian Ritchie will join in executive capacities.
Several non-executive directors of Tyne Tees will also be joining the new board and will include such prominent local figures as Robert Dickinson of solicitors Dickinson Dees and Paul Nicholson of Vaux Group.
The move to merge did not come as a great surprise to the shareholders of either company.
As the moratorium on takeovers within the industry ceases at the end of 1993 the combined group will be in a position to be a  predator and former hunter Manchester-based Granada could turn into the hunted.
Shareholders of both companies should benefit from future cost reductions as duplication of operations within the merged group are eliminated.
What though of the viewer?
The Independent Television Commission based its approval of the merger on ‘the specific benefits to viewers, especially those in the Bilsdale area covering North Yorkshire, Teesside and the southern part of County Durham.
The enlarged group should be able to produce both good returns for shareholders and a raising of programme standards on Northern TV screens.
William Baker Baker is a director of Wise Speke, Middlesbrough.