

The Northern Echo
FORMER CBI chief Sir Terence Beckett claims North-East small businesses have a better chance of survival than their counterparts elsewhere in the country.
‘What I have found in the region is that because it has experienced more downturns than other parts of the UK it has a resilience to the dips the economy may take,’ he said.
‘By contrast, talking to small and medium-sized businesses in the South-East I often find that they have only ever experienced one recession the current one and it can prove fatal.’
He also said the fall in the inflation rate announced yesterday would help add to the survival chances of small businesses.
Sir Terence was talking while formally opening Teesside TEC's business growth centre in the TEC premises at Queen's Square in Middlesbrough.
It has been in operation since last month, giving advice to around six established small and medium-sized businesses a day.
‘The centre is a splendid facility that allows the existing businessperson who wants to grow all the possible advice he or she may need,’ said Sir Terence.
Teesside TEC chief executive John Howell said the new centre aims to give help on three fronts business plans, marketing and technology.
‘We helped 500 businesses set up in Teesside last year.
Now we are trying to target some of the 8,000 existing  businesses who should be looking to use our facilities.
So far only 200 have done so,’ he said.
Dole shock:
With nine out of every ten EEC jobs lost last year being in the UK, Britain is the unemployment champion of Europe, claims Cleveland and North Yorkshire Euro MP David Bowe.
Inter city
INDUSTRIAL development staff at Sunderland's civic centre and town (or should that be city) hall have a lot to live up to.
Amid the celebrations of Sunderland becoming the United Kingdom's newest city, there was much talk of new investment and jobs following in the wake of the announcement.
It remains to be seen whether those words of hope can be turned into results.
But I suspect city status for Sunderland will not be a marketing panacea, as some believe.
After all, I think ‘Europe's biggest town’ is a more effective promotional vehicle than ‘'Britain's 51st city’.
Out of town
TO assess how Sunderland will fare as a city, interest has focused on Derby, the last town to be upgraded in status by Her Majesty.
In a radio interview yesterday, the Lord Mayor of Derby, offered high hopes to the newcomer in its merry band.
He spoke bullishly of new investment, relocations into Derby and of course the arrival of Toyota.
‘Derby is a boom town’, he concluded.
National link
THE early success of the Darlington Business Link, an  initiative designed by the Darlington Business Venture bring local trading companies together, has been latched on by other business organisations around the country.
According to the Link's busy manager Ken Lee, the Woodland Road offices have been contacted by several other business ventures around the which are interested in emulating Darlington's success.
The London East Business Link is a case in point.
So impressed was it with the Darlington operation that it also adopted the design of the questionnaire and the logo.
What a pity the venture can't franchise these things.
Nom de plume TALKING of questionnaires we received a curious release about a job appointment at the National Westminister Bank at Middlesbrough.
The release, looking like your bog-standard application form, detailed the new appointee's biographical details.
What was intriguing was that after the gentleman in question had filled in his first, second and third name there was room on the form, if he felt so inclined, to tell us the ‘forename or nickname by which you are popularly known’.
Wisely he opted to keep it simple and put in the name David.
Brickbat
REDLAND, the brick and tile company making a hostile bid for Steetley, has found a new platform for its offensive a development in Devon which uses bricks from both companies.
In case Steetley says there is no synergy between the two, Redland will point to a sheltered-housing complex made of products from both, built by North Devon district council.
It has been entered for the 1992 Quality Brick Awards.
The development is made of Redlands' multi-coloured bricks and Steetley's are used in large projecting bays which front the building.
‘It shows what a perfect fit we are,’ says Redland's fiance director Gerald Corbett.
Black day
BRITISH Coal are at it again.
Readers will remember my telling them of British Coal's current advertising campaign aimed at convincing the power generators to place any future contracts with it.
So far it has described the lads down the pit as millionaires and then businessmen.
Now, less than a week after the Wearmouth colliery pit disaster, when an underground train carrying miners to the pit was derailed, killing two of them a new advert has appeared.
And what title has British Coal used this time?
‘The world's  most advanced underground.’
MICHAEL Heseltine taking a break from passing judgement on the schemes of architects and property developers, has decided to put his own house in order.
As Secretary of State for the Environment he has decided the three towered 19-storey building nicknamed the toast-rack which his department works out of should be demolished.
The Marsham Street development has been adjudged too brutal for the London landscape and will be knocked down to be replaced by a single six-storey scheme.
The move has won acclaim from planners and developers in the capital and envy from property professionals elsewhere in the country, including the NorthEast.
‘It seems like a marvellous solution to ridding a town or city of past mistakes.
Just knock down any scheme you don't happen to like and have it rebuilt at the expense of the public purse,’ says independent property consultant Jonathan Landes.
‘If only it could happen in the North-East.’
His call has also been taken up over the past week by those with an interest in property, gleefully listing their own particular regional carbuncles ripe for demolition.
Neville Whittaker, the ebullient chief executive of the North East Civic Trust, says the region has so many bad buildings a great deal of it would not be left standing if he could invoke the Heseltine solution.
But confining himself to Newcastle he lists a depressing role call of both the mediocre and the plain ugly.
‘We don't have too many large office blocks in the North-East so I'd have to knock down a number of housing  schemes .
Tyne Towers would have to go, as would Cuthbert and Aidan Houses which surround and dwarf All Saints church.
‘They don't present a welcoming entrance to the city as you come across the Tyne Bridge.
Neither does Cale Cross House on the left of the bridge.
It's a most unfortunate building that disrupts the Quayside skyline.’
In the centre of Newcastle, Whittaker lists yet more tragic examples of the mistakes made by the planners of the 1960s.
‘Swan House is the best, or worst, example of all.
It is a boring and ugly building.
What I call T-square set-square architecture.
It's not what modernism should be about,’ he says.
Further south, Wearmouth Hall at Sunderland Polytechnic is ready for the Whittaker treatment.
‘One of the ugliest buildings of the 1950s,’ he shudders.
In York, where the brutalists have not been given their head, only one building seems to attract disgust; the Stonebow shopping and office scheme.
Peter Summers, past secretary of the York and North Yorkshire Society of Architects, says; ‘The whole city would like to see Stonebow removed.’
Mainly, he claims for its ugliness and its impact in the nearby Elizabethan Whip-ma-wop-ma-gate.
New schemes seem to have learnt their lesson, he adds.
General Accident's new riverside offices, for example, are complementary to the city's traditional architecture.
Further North Stockton and Middlesbrough would come in for some rough treatment at the hands of Rowland Holmes-Smith, principal of P&HS and chairman of the RIBS Teesside branch.
‘In Middlesbrough it would be easier to say which building I would leave standing!
For a start I would get rid of the Cleveland Centre.
It does nothing to celebrate the town centre,’ he says.
‘The whole of Coulby Newham and Ingleby Barwick would have to go as well.
They both show how we are slaves of the car.
We need to get back to understanding the purpose of communities.
‘Stockton's Castle Centre should also come down.
It has marred the High Street, and the road to its rear has destroyed all chance of a relationship with the river.
We're very good at that in Britain; turning our backs on natural assets.’
George Oldham, Newcastle's former city architect and now in private practice under his own name advocates a more drastic solution.
‘We should go in for wholesale demolition of buildings from the Sixties and Seventies.
They are, on the whole ugly and outdated, and architects need the work at the moment.
‘I'm not against tower blocks in particular just the bland.
John Hall won't thank me for saying this but the MetroCentre falls into this category.
‘It should have been something superb, he had the site for it.
I would like to see it made more exciting.’
Back in town, Oldham dislikes the new St Martins developed shopping scheme which dominates Blackett Street.
Despite reams of developer publicity claiming it respects Dobson and Grainger's original architecture, Oldham says it is a mere slavish copy of the past.
It is definitely not ‘wonderful’ as junior environment minister Robert Key claimed last month.
The litany of plain bad and ugly buildings goes on, but perhaps more depressing than that is the realisation that only one modern building seems worthy of praise.
Cummins' engine factory in Darlington, built by Roche and Dinkeloo in the 60s, is the solitary recent building to get a unanimous thumbs-up from all the demolition men.
STUART Fancourt has been appointed to the new post of business development manager at Northern Electric.
Formerly a sales manager he will be responsible for maintaining and strengthening links with the Northern Development Company, all other NorthEast economic development agencies and Business in the Community to promote investment in the region by overseas and national industries.
Sheila Tindle, 28, has been appointed a local director at the Middlesbrough offices of stockbroker Wise Speke.
She will look after the company's private client portfolio.
Alan Munkley, 39, has been appointed general manager of Fastflow Pipeline Services, a newly-formed joint venture between North East Water and German company Brochier Rohrsanierungstechnic Gmbh which specialises in mains laying and rehabilitation for UK utilities.
Peter Taylor, 37, has been appointed divisional manager of business development at Newcastle-based IMASS, the integrated information technology services company.
He is joined by Peter Fairbairn, 54, who has been appointed an external information technology consultant.
John Ward, 33 has been appointed an account director at Yarm-based advertising agency RDW Advertising.
He previously worked with Craven Advertsing in Leeds.
Laing Northern, the Newcastle-based building  company has made three changes to its management structure.
John Chambers, 35, has been appointed commercial manager responsible for all estimating and purchasing activities.
Ian Vickers, 33, becomes regional planner and Patrick Boyle, 24, has been appointed design and build manager.
Carol Anne Lee has joined Belasis Hall Technology Park the joint ICI and English Estates initiative on Teesside, as marketing consultant.
David Wild has been appointed senior manager at National Westminster Bank's Albert Road  branch in Middlesbrough.
He replaces David Hildreth.
Robin Roberts has been appointed head of Hoskyns automation and control division, the Peterlee-based supplier of computer services.
David Finlay has been appointed head planner and contracts co-ordinator at Tyneside builder Hall & Tawse.
He will  control work on the company's £500,000 refit of the Texas Home Improvement Centre at Stockton.
Robin Smith has been appointed head of postgraduate programmes at Newcastle Polytechnic's business school.
Previously chairman of the board of studies at Durham University Business School, he will be responsible for several courses including the Master of Business Administration degree.
Mark Wood has been appointed a partner at Newcastle-based law firm Wilkinson Maughan's commercial litigation department.
He is joined by Richard Brown who will work in the company's commercial property department in development practice.
NEW low cost homes went on sale in Middlesbrough yesterday marking the start of a key housing projects linked with the town's City Challenge cash bid.
Bellway Homes urban renewals division is building 140 two and three-bedroomed houses and flats for sale at Netherfields Green.
The £6.5m scheme is backed by a £1.4m Government City Grant, which helps keep the new homes at a price local people can hopefully afford.
Middlesbrough council has provided 7.6 acres of land.
The first houses are being offered for sale at between £32,500 and £48,000.
The council is keen to encourage tenants and people on the housing waiting list to buy homes at Netherfields Green.
Coun Bob Brady, chairman of the housing and community services committee, said: ‘The council is unable to build new homes itself, so we are working closely with the private sector.’
COUNCILLORS in Middlesbrough have voted to cut their allowances by ten per cent to keep civic spending within new limits.
Last year members approved an allowance scheme based on a £1,868 award for all councillors and a special responsibility allowance to be paid to council leaders and committee chairmen and vice chairmen.
But council solicitor Colin Crosman told yesterday's policy and resources general subcommittee the total for 1992–93 was equivalent to 90pc of the current year's allowances.
Tory leader Coun Peter Jackson claimed there were ‘huge inequities’ in the practice of paying lump sums to members.
He said there had been difficulties in some committee meetings in trying to achieve a quorum and said payments should be made as an award for members who attended.
But Coun Michael Carr, Labour leader of the council, said apart from some meetings held during the recess he was not aware of any difficulties.
The basic allowance for each member during 1992–93 is to be reduced to £1,681 to be paid on a monthly basis of £140.12.
The leader's allowance will be cut from £1,000 to £900, his deputy from £800 to £720 and committee chairmen from the current £800 to £720.
A BUS company is taking legal action against three Cleveland councils over claims of unpaid debts.
Caldaire North-East claims it is owed almost £800,000 by Middlesbrough, Stockton and Langbaurgh councils.
The cash is unpaid reimbursement for subsidised pensioners' travel provided by the three boroughs.
Caldaire managing director Mike Widmer launched a scathing attack on the local authorities.
He said: ‘Charges made to OAPs will have been brought about, not because of greed or avarice of the local transport companies, but because the local borough councils are incapable of working within their budgets.’
Stockton and Langbaurgh have warned that their free passes may have to go, while Middlesbrough says it could increase its £5 charge.
All three councils blame tough spending limits.
Mr Winder said last night: ‘Bus companies do not, and never have, subsidised OAP travel.
‘They have a written agreement with local authorities that states reimbursement will be made in full by that authority to the company concerned for every OAP  travelling free on its buses.
‘A pre-agreed percentage is deducted for those pensioners it is felt would not have travelled if the fare had not been free.’
Mr Widmer said in recent years, the councils had failed to fully reimburse the bus companies in line with the agreement.
The Caldaire debt went back to 1989, he added.
Mr Widmer said the company could not afford these unpaid debts and claimed the 1,300 Caldaire employees were under threat because of the debt.
Langbaurgh council leader Arthur Taylor said: ‘We cannot speak for other authorities, but as far as Langbaurgh is concerned, we have no debt with Caldaire.’
Middlesbrough council spokesman Mike Clark said Caldaire's comments were ‘premature’ as discussions were continuing.
A PROPERTY developer has claimed congested roads in Middlesbrough are hampering the letting of his scheme in the town's Enterprise Zone.
Adrian Newman, a director of Knottingley-based Paul Caddick, says potential tenants for the CADCAM office scheme have been put off by poor access into the development.
And he says a four-year-old promise by Middlesbrough Council and Cleveland County Council to rectify the problem has not been kept.
‘Even though the property market has had its problems and tenants aren't as thick on the ground as normal, a number have looked at CADCAM but gone elsewhere because of the traffic problems,’ he said.
‘Middlesbrough and Cleveland Councils promised to improve access into the Enterprise Zone, and until they do tenants will go elsewhere.’
Mr Newman added the councils' policy of inaction is shortsighted as a recent survey carried out by property agent Drivers Jonas for English Estates shows that 32pc of all office property in Middlesbrough is situated in the Enterprise Zone.
But David Walsh, chairman of Cleveland County's economic development committee, rebutted the criticism.
‘We share the developer's concern and are aware of the problems of access onto the Enterprise Zone.
We shall be meeting with all parties in the near future to try and resolve the situation,’ he said.
And a Teesside Development Corporation spokeswoman said the UDC is carrying out a traffic study of the problematical Hartington Road interchange.
‘Although highways are the county council's responsibility the TDC has an interest in people going into the EZ and anything stopping them,’ said a spokeswoman.
TWO Cleveland offshore businesses are in the running to win a construction order worth around £50m.
SLP Engineering and Redpath Offshore, both of Middlesbrough, have submitted tenders to build a 5,000-tonne accommodation block for oil company Conoco.
It will be used in its Heidrun oil field off Norway.
SLP and Redpath submitted tenders at the end of 1991 and are likely to hear the outcome before the end of the month.
But four Norwegian offshore businesses are also fighting for the lucrative work.
Geoff Race, director and general manager of SLP said a win for the Middlesbrough yard would allow the 950 employees to remain working at full capacity.
‘If we are successful then the timing is absolutely perfect.
We are just completing two major jobs and Conoco's could take up the slack,’ he said.
The yard is due to deliver a set of rig legs to British Gas for use in Morecambe Bay and an accommodation module to AGIP's Tiffany oil field.
John Weedon, marketing director of Redpath Offshore, said although he was hopeful of securing the Conoco job another major contract is due into the marketplace within two or three weeks which Redpath would also bid for.
Market reports suggest that the contract will also be for Conoco's Heidrun field, supplying drilling and processing packages.
Its value is also estimated at £50m.
ON being mistreated by British Rail most passengers probably prefer to forget the experience, get on with their lives and make a mental note to take night classes in the ridiculously complicated ticket system.
At parties occasionally we will recall the full horror of the event in one of those conversations which goes something like: ‘You were delayed six hours and then had to be diverted to a branch line 50 miles out of your way on a train that had no heating and no buffet.
That's nothing, you should listen to this.’
This mood of resignation was insufficient for John McArdle.
Instead of going home to forget he took BR to court, having given them ample opportunity to avoid proceedings, and won.
Talking about it yesterday the North-East solicitor urged other passengers to follow his example.
‘I feel we have the rail service we deserve if we're prepared to tolerate it,’ he said.
‘If enough people are prepared to do something about it then rudeness and inefficiency could be decreased.’
Those who had received poor service, he said, could consider their right of action and if necessary start proceedings in the Small Claims Court.
There a solicitor was not needed and legal costs would not be incurred.
‘That is my message from the experience I had,’ he said.
‘People can do something about it themselves quite simply.
I would urge them to do so.’
These were fairly strong words but Mr McArdle, of Middleton St George had a fairly dismal experience.
It is the sort of thing that has happened to most of us.
He and his wife were returning from a short break in Venice (’ no problems with public transport or with the plane’) and arrived at King's Cross station.
They were bound for Darlington and clutched in their hands pre-paid APEX tickets.
They had reserved seats on the 2.30pm train but had been told by their travel agent that the 1.30pm train also took APEX travellers.
The McArdles arrived at King's Cross minutes before the earlier train was about to leave.
It was almost empty, there was nobody around to check with and they duly boarded.
As it happened, they were not entitled to do so.
As the train pulled out the senior conductor came round.
He noticed that their tickets were not eligible for the journey.
He agreed that they could disembark at Peterborough and wait for the 2.30pm train.
The ticket inspector then interrupted the conversation and said this was not possible.
The full excess fare had to be paid.
Meanwhile, nobody was able to explain to Mr McArdle what the term ‘Must use the service’ meant on the ticket.
He had wrongly assumed he was able to use any APEX service as long as there was room.
As much put out by the ticket inspector's attitude as his demand for money, he paid and duly wrote to BR to complain saying he ‘could see no  justification in the circumstances for the excess charge.’
After four weeks he had received no reply.
He wrote to remind BR.
A further month went by and he wrote another letter to threaten proceedings.
A reply at last came which confused the senior conductor with the ticket inspector and said Mr McArdle had ‘unilaterally reneged the conditions pertaining to the tickets.’
The solicitor sued.
BR did not lodge a defence until it was too late and judgement had been made.
He was awarded the £40 he had been ordered to pay in excess fares plus interest plus costs.
He has yet to receive his cheque but has received a letter from BR's legal department to say it is on its way.
‘The facts you have set out make a sorry tale indeed.’
Mr McArdle is aware that he has the advantage of being a lawyer.
But legal expertise was not needed.
Determination to fight for a principle was.
As for BR yesterday, its Press office said it was considered Mr McArdle had received an apology in the letter which arrived more than two months after his original complaint.
The matter was now closed.
On being asked if it would not have been appropriate to let the McArdles continue their journey on a largely empty train which after all permitted APEX tickets the spokesman said: ‘Oh no.
There was no alternative but to do that.
Mr McArdle shouldn't have been on the train.
If we allowed it to happen once then all the people who read your paper would think they could do it as well.’
Not a word of additional apology or sympathy to the McArdles, mind.
THE second round of the Government's City Challenge initiative was launched yesterday with a promise of £750m for the country's run-down areas.
While some local authorities welcomed part of the proposals, critics said it would create more losers than winners.
The 57 Urban Programme authorities include Hartlepool, Langbaurgh, Middlesbrough, Stockton, Gateshead, Newcastle, North Tyneside, South Tyneside and Sunderland.
Twenty will be shortlisted to submit detailed plans for projects to start next year and each will receive £7.5m a year for five years.
Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine said yesterday: ‘Considerably more than £1bn has now been committed to City Challenge.’
Pamela Denham, leader of the Tyne and Wear City Action Team, said: ‘Winners will be decided solely on merit, vision, imagination and innovation as well as involvement with the private sector and the community.
Middlesbrough Council will be putting forward a strong case for a ‘core area’, including the Whinney Banks and Grove Hill districts of the town.
Council leader Michael Carr said: ‘We cannot turn down the opportunity of extra resources for areas of particular need.
That is why we will enter the City Challenge process again with the same commitment and drive, and hopefully the same result as this year.’
Coun Carr said members retained their reservations about the City Challenge.
North Tyneside Council said the riot-torn Meadow Well estate was among areas it was considering for the cash.
Sunderland said it would resubmit plans for regenerating the north of the city, while Newcastle will decide later.
Stockton Borough Council leader Bob Gibson said: ‘We are working on some excellent and imaginative schemes’.
Coun Ted Horseman, chairman of Hartlepool Council's planning committee, said: ‘The key to success is partnership with the private sector and already the response has been encouraging’.
But Newcastle City Council leader Jeremy Beecham, chairman of the Association of Metropolitan Authorities, said the scheme would create more losers than winners.
Drivers claim:
The Transport and General Workers Union is hopeful of receiving a five per cent wage increase and one hour reduction in the working week for its 2,000 Teesside lorry drivers.
District organiser Allan Gray said it was a realistic claim and hoped the companies employing the drivers would respond in a similar realistic fashion.
A BUS company and three NorthEast councils are locked in an impasse over allegedly unpaid debts.
Caldaire North-East Ltd says it is owed almost £800,000 by Stockton, Middlesbrough and Langbaurgh councils.
Stockton and Langbaurgh have denied they owe money to the company, which owns Teesside Motor Services and Tees and District Buses.
But Caldaire managing director Mike Widmer said last night the councils had short-changed the bus company over the concessionary fare scheme since 1989.
The councils pay the bus companies an agreed amount to operate the pass scheme, free in Langbaurgh and Stockton, £5 in Middlesbrough.
Mr Widmer said there seemed little hope of reaching a settlement before Caldaire turned to legal action.
But Stockton Council leader Bob Gibson said: ‘Mr Widmer's comments are ridiculous.
They can get their eyes on our money, but they won't get their hands on it.’
He said Stockton had entered into and adhered to cash-limited agreements with bus companies.
Coun Brian Roberts, chairman of Langbaurgh Council's policy and resources committee, said the authority had fully met its contractual obligations.
Mr Widmer said he was ‘bewildered’ by the comments.
‘The councils owe us money and we have facts to back up our case.
We have entered into agreements in good faith.
We have had a good relationship with the borough councils and don't want to lose it.’
But he said the company's patience had worn thin.
He claimed Stockton and Langbaurgh had shown no inclination to negotiate and only Middlesbrough had demonstrated any flexibility.
Middlesbrough Council leader Michael Carr called for ‘reasoned debate’ on the subject.
He said the council was involved in such debate with local representatives of Caldaire and he found Mr Widmer's remarks surprising.
MIDDLESBROUGH Council leader Mike Carr called on the Government to introduce a 100pc rebate for those least able to pay the poll tax.
Coun Carr, speaking to the policy resources committee during a pre-budget debate, said it was costing the council £16 per adult to administer poll tax against £7 per property under the old rating system.
‘Experience of the last two years clearly shows that the poll tax has caused immense hardship to many people of Middlesbrough.’
Open door for youth and enterprise
THE Enterprise and Youth Business Centre in Stockton will be open all day today.
The public will be able to visit the centre, talk to companies currently operating there and see how the centre can help new businesses.
Part of the Stockton Backs Enterprise  initiative other events today include a talk on how Cleveland County Council can help companies find business premises and negotiate a lease.
Peter Douglas, manager at the Stockton Enterprise Centre will explain the advantage of enterprise centre facilities at 2.30pm and Helen Marshall from MARI will discuss the workspace available through MARI for businesses.
— For more information telephone 
Marketing help:
Teesside TEC has joined up with Northern Marketing Initiative for an open day at Training and Enterprise House, Queen's Square, Middlesbrough, on February 28 between 10.30am and 5.30pm.
NMI aims to give marketing advice and business guidance to small and medium sized  businesses .
Any small businessmen or women can attend the open day or participate in two discussions entitled What Is Marketing? and Things To Think About.
A £94m HOUSING boost announced for the North-East yesterday was described as inadequate by critics last night.
Nick Price, Northern representative of the Federation of Housing Associations, said: ‘It is certainly too little.
Associations require money and so do local authorities.
We can't replace councils, we should be complementing them.’
He was speaking after the government funded Housing Corporation revealed plans to spend the money over the next 12 months on supporting schemes to build more than 2,000 homes.
The project aims to ease the homelessness problem in the region.
Victims of repossessions could also be helped.
Dermot Gleeson, corporation board member, said: ‘There is a greater awareness of the seriousness of the housing situation in the country as a whole and this investment will have a major impact on the region's housing problems.’
The allocation, which represents a 16pc increase on last year, is the highest amount spent in the North-East by the corporation.
Mr Gleeson said it would be unfair to suggest the cash injection had something to do with the forthcoming General Election.
A survey by the corporation showed that homelessness was increasing because of unemployment, mortgage default and family break-up.
More than 35pc of accommodation under the scheme will be set aside for the homeless.
But a spokeswoman for Tyneside Housing Aid, the North-East representative for the campaign group Shelter, said: ‘Whichever way you look at it, it is inadequate.
‘Any extra accommodation for the homeless is very welcome, but it has to be measured against the scale of the problem.’
Middlesbrough Council housing chairman Bob Brady welcomed its £12m allocation but warned there were no ‘overnight solutions’ to the borough's housing problems.
‘The Housing Corporation programme will provide around 2,000 new homes throughout the whole of the North-East.
Our own housing programme identified an immediate need for 2,686 new homes in Middlesbrough alone,’ he said.
The cash will be distributed as follows: Newcastle £15.7m, Middlesbrough £12.3m, County Durham £10.7m, North Tyneside £10.7m, Gateshead £8.7m, Sunderland £7.7m, Northumberland £7.3m, Stockton £6.2m Langbaurgh £5m, Hartlepool £4.7m, S. Tyneside £4.7m.
Housing boost too little
THE £94m which will be spent by the Government on new housing in the North-East over the next year is welcome news.
It will make a difference, but not much.
The scale of the problem is such that £94m could be spent in Middlesbrough alone and there would still be housing need in that town.
Homelessness has been on the increase for a long time and Government initiatives, based as they are on encouraging the private sector to fill the gap left by local authorities, have been essentially piecemeal and fragmentary.
There are schemes here and there which are excellent but they simply don't address the magnitude of the crisis.
The state of the country's finances doesn't allow this Government, or its successor, to wave a magic wand over the housing problem but there is more that could be done.
A first step for this current administration would be to discard its ideologically-inspired opposition to council housing building.
While we would accept that some local authorities have a poor record for building and maintenance dating from ill-conceived schemes in the Sixties and Seventies, social housing today has benefited from that experience.
There is no doubt that local authorities could build houses today that people would want to live in, would respect and protect.
If they were unshackled from the current over-rigorous financial constraints, perhaps we could make a real impact on a problem which threatens Britain's credibility as a civilised nation.
PUBLICITY for British Rail's new Trans-Pennine service is to receive a financial boost of up to £5,000 from Cleveland County Council.
The new two-hourly rail service linking Liverpool, Manchester, Leeds and York directly with Middlesbrough is to commence in May.
One train per day in each direction will also serve Hartlepool and  intermediate stations.
British Rail says it will be a top quality  service using the new Class 158 rolling stock with a top speed of 90mph, plus air conditioning and a table at every seat.
The council's environment, development and transportation committee decided that grant should be awarded out of the Cleveland Advanced Transit budget.
WORK on a £40,000 pilot project to save three areas of ancient woodland in Middlesbrough starts next week.
The woods in Coulby Newham, which have suffered from half a century of neglect, will be rejuvenated with help from three developers Wimpey, Yuill and McLean who are building on adjacent plots.
Tim James, the council's urban woodlands officer, said: ‘Dutch elm disease has killed some of the trees and the high winds have accounted for some of the pine and larch.
Dense weeds, bramble and elder are also choking growth.’
The rescue package, financed by the three developers, involves felling 300 dead trees, clearing away undergrowth and planting more than 1,200 trees.
The council has applied for Forestry Commission grants to maintain the new woodland and build linking footpaths.
Cash boost:
Environment Minister Lady Blatch signs on the dotted line today to endorse £40m of Government cash for Middlesbrough's City Challenge plans.
My ideas for rail freight hit the buffers full tilt
A Bedale businessman tried and failed to bring more freight traffic to the limestone line.
Mr David Kerfoot said Railfreight International put nothing but problems in the way of his plan to bring raw materials by train from Germany to his vegetable oil factory.
Mr Kerfoot, managing director of Wensleydale Foods in the old station siding at Bedale, chose road transport after his experiences with Railfreight nearly four years ago.
Wensleydale Foods acquired the station site in 1985 after the public delivery siding had been closed and the short piece of track leading from the limestone branch had been lifted.
The firm now employs 30 people, exports about 20 per cent of its pro-duct and has an annual turnover of £10m. in various currencies.
Mr Kerfoot said this week that in 1988 one of his oil suppliers on the Rhine had been keen to send raw material to Britain by rail instead of road because of pressure from the German Government.
Using past experience with a company he worked for at Tilbury, Essex, Mr Kerfoot obtained quotes for the hire of special railway wagons.
But when it came to dealing with Railfreight, he said, his ideas hit the buffers.
Railfreight said it could not justify moving the oil by rail to Bedale for economic and operational reasons.
The only option it could offer, said Mr Kerfoot, was one involving transfer of the oil to road at sidings in Middlesbrough at about £35 a tonne.
Mr Kerfoot said: ‘No one came to see us and the opportunity was lost.
ILLOGICAL
‘Instead of a rate for carrying oil throughout to Bedale we just got a rate for bringing it to Middlesbrough for trans-shipment to road, which was illogical to me.
‘A man at Railfreight International was doing his best but someone along the line at York said it was too much hassle.
‘The railway operating people put a massive number of problems in our way, and Railfreight's sales telex to us started with a mass of negatives.
What would any businessman do with a telex like that?’
Railfreight said that, according to the operations department at York, there were too many problems with the limestone train occu-pying the single line branch for about six hours every day.
An additional train had been introduced on Saturdays to meet British Steel's demand for more limestone.
Railfreight said all the physical difficulties could be overcome with investment, but all the options seemed to start at about £100,000.
Reinstating a siding at Bedale would involve a five-figure sum.
British Rail was prepared to invest only where returns were high and quick, which was unlikely in Mr Kerfoot's case.
Government grants were available in cases where rail would keep lorries off roads regarded as sensitive.
Railfreight, however, said the Department of Transport was unlikely to regard Bedale as sufficiently sensitive, being only a short distance from the A1.
Mr Kerfoot said: ‘The Channel Tunnel will open soon and we are de-investing in our railways, not re-in-vesting.
‘The tunnel will create an opportunity not for BR but for foreign railways, because they have an infrastructure.’
He added: ‘I was staggered to learn that limestone was to go from Redmire to Redcar by road when we were told in 1988 that British Steel couldn't get enough of it and had put on an additional train.
‘I think this is a decision based on a cost-cutting exercise.
Like all commercial businesses British Steel must make a profit and times are hard, but this is cost cutting which is going to be detrimental to our community.’
SHARE tips from both the business staff at The Northern and Middlesbrough stockbroker Wise Speke are outperforming the 2.4pc increase in 1992 by the FTSE-100 index.
The Northern has made a £1,690 profit on its imaginary £10,000 portfolio in the first two months of the year, while Wise Speke has made £574.
The best performer in Wise Speke's half dozen to follow is Darlington-based engineering group which last week announced that 93.9pc of the recent rights issue had been taken up by shareholders.
A rights issue is a means by which a company raises capital by offering new shares to existing shareholders at a fixed price.
In Whessoe's case they offered shareholders one new share for every four already held at a price of 185p to raise funds to purchase the Californian-based Varec.
The success of the rights issue has underpinned the strong rise seen in the company's share price since the beginning of the year as analysts are positive on the long term benefits of the  acquisition to the company.
Wise Speke analyst John Dean, says: ‘Whessoe and Varec have been known to one another for some considerable time although given their emphasis on different geographical markets they have rarely found themselves in direct competition.’
Having already been through some significant change the company is therefore well placed to face the likely ‘upheaval’ of the following year or so.
So far the personnel at Varec appear positive about their new owners and the signs are encouraging that Whessoe will get through this next important stage with full support.
Wise Speke is quietly confident that Whessoe has made a good deal for its longer term development.
ALL 32 homes on a new housing development in Middlesbrough have been reserved within four months of going on sale.
The Northern Rock Housing Trust, working in partnership with Middlesbrough council, is staggered at the scheme's success.
A campaign to encourage council tenants and people on the waiting list to buy the low-cost homes was launched last October.
Northern Rock Housing Trust managing director, Colin Blakey, said: ‘The low-cost housing we are providing is enabling many people to be the proud owners of their first home.’
The site, known as The Elms, has two and three-bedroomed houses, with central heating, double glazing and garage.
The prices were £33,500 to £39,000.
Northern Rock received a government grant of £183,000 to get the scheme off the ground and to keep the prices down.
ALMOST £3m needs to be spent on improving obsolete heating in Middlesbrough council houses by next year.
Nearly 2,000 dwellings in the town will be in immediate need of heating renewal from 1993.
But Middlesbrough council claims it will not have enough money to do the work.
Improved insulation for the 1,839 homes in Whinney Banks, North Ormesby, Hemlington, Acklam Garden City and the town centre would cost another £2.5m.
Council spokesman Mike Clark admitted: ‘Time is catching up on us.’
Just over 100 homes in Whinney Banks are first in line for renewal when cash is available.
A report to councillors recommends that work should be done ‘when resources allow.’
Mr Clark added: ‘If we spend all the money we need to on heating, we will not have any money for repairs, maintenance and existing programmes.’
Mr Widmer Bus company to sue councils over ‘£800,000 debts’ A bus company is to sue three Cleveland boroughs over what it claims is almost £800,000 worth of unpaid debts.
Mr Mike Widmer, managing  director of Caldair which owns United, Teesside Motor Services and Tees and District Buses, claims the debts date back to 1989 and are a result of the concessionary fares scheme.
He warned this week that the concessions for local pensioners would end ‘if not this year then certainly next year.’
He said bus companies had written agreements with local authorities, saying the councils would fully reimburse them for pensioners' travel concessions.
Over the last three years Stockton, Middlesbrough and Langbaurgh councils had failed to pay up; Caldaire was owed about £800,000.
He said the firm could not afford to ignore such losses as they could put the jobs of 1,300 employees in jeopardy.
His statement continued: ‘Caldaire appreciates that monetary problems and not bloody-mindedness are the cause of the problem, but financial hardship never has been justification for non-payment of debt.
The councils themselves emphasise this when chasing offenders for non-payment of poll tax.’
He said it seemed inevitable that free travel for pensioners in Cleveland would have to end.
Coun. Arthur Taylor, leader of Langbaurgh council, said: ‘We have no debt with Caldaire.’
Mr Bob Patterson, treasurer of Stockton council, said: ‘We set aside a certain sum each year for concessionary fares which we then share out among the bus companies.
I don't accept we owe the bus companies anything.’
Coun. Mike Carr, leader of Middlesbrough council, called for a return to ‘reasoned debate’ on the subject.
He said that last year the local authority spent £1.35m. on concessionary fares and would spend the same this year.
The problem lay with the Government for ‘consistently underfunding local government spending.’
The subject of travel concessions has been a controversial one for the last few months.
All three councils have considered scrapping them to cut their spending in line with Government guidelines.
On Friday last week a fourth petition this time bearing 1,039 signatures protesting against the possible loss of free bus passes was presented to Langbaurgh council.
Langbaurgh and Stockton are both considering either scrapping free passes or asking pensioners to contribute towards them.
Middlesbrough pensioners already pay £5 a year towards their passes and there the council is considering increasing the charge.
Boost for new homes in the North-East A £94m. cash boost will result in more than 2,000 new homes being built in the North-East over the next 12 months.
The announcement by the Government funded Housing Corporation will help a variety of projects throughout Durham and Cleveland.
The money, a 16 per cent increase on last year and the most the Corporation has ever spent in the region, recognises increasing levels of homelessness in the area.
High levels of unemployment, mortgage arrears and family break-ups are the chief causes of homelessness and more than a third of the properties will be targetted at those groups.
Most of the projects are for building new homes but modernisation and refurbishments are included.
The Corporation provides money to housing associations which rent and sell property.
They in turn work closely with local authorities and other organisations to ensure maximum impact.
Altogether around 7,000 people are expected to be helped in locations as diverse as the inner cities to villages.
County Durham will receive £10.8m.; Langbaurgh £5m; Hartlepool £4.7m.; Middlesbrough £12.3m; and Stockton £6.2m.
Individual projects include:— Langbaurgh: The Bradford and Northern Housing Association will receive £260,000 towards a £435,000 development at Bankfields; £989,000 towards a £1.665m. 34 unit scheme in Grangetown; £316,000 towards a £474,000 nine unit development in Willow Drive, Brotton.
The North-East Housing Consortium will receive £909,000 towards a £1.5m project in Grangetown North and £500,000 towards a £704, unit development at The Close, Redcar.
The New Era Housing Association has won a 100 per cent grant for a £245,000 six unit development at Derwent Park, Loftus.
Middlesbrough: £457,000 towards a £766,000 English Churches Housing Association 20 unit development at Aidcroft Nurseries, Coulby Newham; £842,000 towards a £1. 3m. 24 unit Habingtake Housing Association scheme in Kirby Avenue; £208,000 towards the £292,000 cost of various schemes by North East Housing Consortium Development.
The North Housing Association will receive £1.5m towards a £2.1m. 59 unit development at Marton Grove and £904,000 towards a £1.6m. 40 unit scheme at Saltwells Road.
Under the City Challenge scheme Middlesbrough will also receive £4.3m.
towards a 105 unit development worth £5.4m.
Stockton:
The NorthEast Housing Consortium will receive £512,000 towards a 20 unit £840,000 development in Redcar Road, Thornaby and £414,000 towards various schemes costing £487,000.
Three schemes next to and at Stockton Station will receive grant aid.
Northern Housing will receive £470,000 towards a £770,000 scheme at the Queens Hotel site; £991,000 towards a 35 unit £1.7m development by the Phoenix Housing Association at Queens Park; and £932,000 towards a £1.089m. phase one development at Stockton Station by the Railway Housing Association.
The Bradford and Northern Housing Association will receive a 100 per cent grant for the £370, unit development at Abbeyfield in Yarm.
MIDDLESBROUGH Labour MP, Stuart Bell, has asked the disqualification unit of the Insolvenvcy Services to expel two directors of the new owners of the Tees and Hartlepool ports from office.
Finance director, Fred Brown and chief executive John Holloway are named by Mr Bell as being involved in a number of activities in other companies incompatible with their new positions in Teesside Holdings.
‘I have sent an 11-page dossier to Patrick Chillery of the disqualification unit asking that the two be disqualified under the terms of the Disqualification of Directors Act 1986,’ said Mr Bell.
In a parliamentary debate last month Mr Bell claimed the two were ‘unfit persons’ to run the ports.
To add to his case, John Holloway has been revealed as the chairman of a company which was fined £45,000 in 1990 after making false declarations in connection with applications for vehicle excise licences.
Wearside network:
A network of four new business forums has been set up on Wearside, after the success of Hendon's business initiative.
Washington, Sunderland North, Pennywell and Houghton & Hetton all have a steering committee appointed to represent businesses in each district.
Local business directories and help links are also planned.
Washington area is to have its first meeting on March 17 at Wearside TEC.
For further information contact Darden Coulthard at The Wearside Opportunity on .
Training talk:
A communications and consumer care seminar will be held at 6.00pm on Wednesday 26 February at the Tyne & Wear Chamber of Commerce training centre.
Organised by the Northern Growth Forum, the evening will consist of two videos outlining Quality Management and the Psychology of Success.
Dennis Pinnegar of Thornaby-based Panda Supplies will explain how he uses both for in-house training.
Conroy success:
North-East retailer Conroys Furniture reported a 20pc increase in sales in January at its stores in Stanley, Washington and Middlesbrough.
The company spent almost £500,000 on expansion last year, including the purchase of a 17,000 sq ft warehouse.
COUNTY Durham Training and Enterprise Council has made two new appointments.
Ken joins as operations manager responsible for the marketing department.
He was previously promotions manager with British Coal, based in Durham.
And Keith joins the TEC, from Teesside Transport Training Association, to develop a Total Quality Management approach.
Durham City Council has Jane as economic development assistant.
She was previously senior industrial development officer with Middlesbrough Borough Council.
Chris 39, has joined the North of England Building Society as assiatnt general manager, in a new role responsible for product administration.
Alison 23, has been appointed hygiene officer at meat processing company Harris-Leeming Bar.
She joins the company from food retailer Sainsbury's.
Yarm-based RDW Advertising has appointed Amanda 24, as account executive.
She was previously editorial and production assistant at Product Communication, in London.
Also joining RDW is Suzanne 25, from Liverpool Playhouse, where he was youth arts marketing and publicity assistant.
She has been appointed public relations assistant.
Former Yorkshire Electricity chairman and chief executive Dr James has been appointed first-ever non-executive director of Tyneside consulting engineering group Merz & McLellan.
Ian 38, has been appointed sales and marketing director at Northumbrian Environmental Management, the waste management subsidiary of the Northumbrian Water group.
He was previously national sales manager with waste group Biffa.
Jed 29, has been appointed sales executive at Dutton-Forshaw's Jaguar dealership in Stockton.
He joins the company from another major franchise holder in County Durham.
Liz has been appointed customer services manager with Skipton Building Society, where she previously held a management post in the commercial lending department.
Paul has been promoted from the society's area manager in Lincoln to development manager for the North-East, overseeing branches in that region.
IT'S a question that has intrigued us, and doubtless thousands of others, for years.
In the shadow of a multi-storey and conspicuously carbuncular car park sit large licensed premises called the Middlesbrough Cycling Club CIU affiliated.
But do members just go along for the ride?
The answer, says a spokesman, is very definitely not.
For nearly 50 years the most strenuous activity in Middlesbrough Cycling Club has been snooker, in tandem with bingo in the next room.
‘We still get dozens of calls from people asking how to join the cycling club,’ says 72-year-old secretary Tommy Jennings.
‘They're quite disappointed when I tell them they're welcome, but there's not much point bringing their bike.’
The chain of events does have links with the age of the wheel thing, however.
Formed in 1884, the club took over the Rovers Cycling Club in Linthorpe Road.
The Middlesbrough Cycling News recorded that the first ‘Smoker Night’ was to be held ‘in honour of one of its achievements in the cycling events.’
Next door bookmaker Joe O'Brien, 45 years a member, recalls that before the 1939–45 war the club competed regularly in events throughout the North-East, with Richmond Meet one of the highlights.
Now the Brentnall Street premises the club's fourth headquarters don't have so much as a bike stand.
‘There used to be a stand in front of the old premises but that was before people worried about being riding home drunk,’ says Tommy, the Cleveland CIU president.
(We checked that one out.
Being drunk in charge of a bike is still a criminal offence, with a maximum £400 fine.)
Now the best remembered sporting connection is the time they persuaded Sir Matt Busby to judge the flower show.
‘Members have often urged us to change the name, but there's tradition in being the Cycling Club,’ says Joe O'Brien.
The club rang the column's bell because of last week's survey in New Cyclist magazine which praised York as a cyclist-friendly city, but condemned Middlesbrough, Newcastle and Gateshead.
Joe O'Brien agrees.
‘This must be the worst town in England for driving a car, never mind riding a bike.
A SELF-BUILD housing scheme looks set to go ahead in Middlesbrough.
Up to 41 people, including a number of tradesman, will build their homes from scratch on a site at Coulby Newham.
When the houses are complete, the builders and their families will be able to buy the homes at a 25pc discount.
Councillors yesterday accepted the idea in principle after a presentation by Homesmith.
Housing chairman Bob Brady said the scheme had a number of advantages.
‘It provides us with more houses, the sale of the land gives us capital receipts and it diversifies our housing stock,’ he added.
A housing sub-committee will decide the number of houses and fine details of the scheme.
If 41 houses were built, the prices would range from £32,000 to £80,000.
Councillors heard that Homesmith had a good self-build record, but agreed any contract should be put out to tender at a later stage.
It was also agreed that the scheme could be adopted in other parts of Middlesbrough, such as Hemlington and Whinney Banks, in the future.
There has only been one previous self-build scheme in Middlesbrough Paddock Wood in Coulby Newham, completed in the early Eighties.
STOKESLEY-based property developer and builder, Avon, is to build a £4m industrial park at South Bank, Middlesbrough.
The Department of the Environment is supporting the scheme with a City Grant award of £1m.
Avon's company secretary, Neil Whittingham, said the 89,000 sq ft scheme which could create 200 jobs, will go ahead almost immediately as planning permission for the greenfield site has been secured.
‘I intend to build ten self-contained units in four phases.
The units will range in size from 5,000 sq ft to 10,000 sq ft and will be available for sale,’ he said.
‘There is quite a lot of local demand for this type of building to be available to buy.
Langbaurgh Council, which owns the Skippers lane land, gets hundreds of requests for units like these.’
Mr Whittingham added that a 10,000 sq ft building should sell for around £360,000, equating to his development costs of nearly £36 per sq ft.
He received backing from Environment Minister Robert Key who said: ‘This programme epitomises what City Grant is all about.
Public and private sector working together to fund a project which will help local small businesses.’
POWER firm National Grid is believed to be offering ‘sweeteners’ to landowners in its attempt to put electricity pylons across the North-East countryside.
The Northern understands that up to £12,500 per pylon compensation is being offered in talks between the company and people who own land along the route.
Yesterday National Grid confirmed that talks were going on involving money.
The news came as protestors spelt out a giant message on a hillside in North Yorkshire opposing the proposed pylon route.
Local people fear that farmers facing hard times could accept the cash offer.
National Grid plans to put up 400kv lines on 150ft pylons across Cleveland and North Yorkshire from Lackenby on Teesside, to Shipton, near York to take electricity from a new power station on Teesside to the south of England.
A National Grid spokesman yesterday confirmed negotiations had been going on with landowners but he said it was perfectly normal procedure.
‘The National Grid does not own the land on which the pylons are to be built and it has to negotiate some form of agreement with the landowner,’ he said.
‘These negotiations are fairly typical and there is nothing unusual about the arrangement.’
He said he could not release details of the amount of money involved as it was confidential information.
‘As far as we are concerned it would not be proper to give the actual amounts, but these negotiations are useful for maintaining contact with the landowner.’
Mike Barr, from the Borrowby Pylon Action Group, said: ‘This is disturbing news and totally without precedent.
It is an outrageous act of bribery.’
Around 100 protestors spelt out the words ‘No Pylons’ on Beacon Hill, near Borrowby.
They used hundreds of bright placards to spell out their message 60ft high and 200ft long.
Mr Barr said: ‘We can remove our hillside protest, but the pylons if built will ruin our countryside forever.’
Yesterday, Hambleton District Council was urged to get tough.
Coun Caroline Seymour told the full council that it should not offer any preferred route to the public inquiry due in May.
She said that the public were becoming agitated because the council did not appear to be taking the toughest line possible.
But chief executive Colin Spencer said the Government inspector would expect them to put forward a preferred route as a matter of policy.
The council agreed to object to the pylons, but said if they had to have a preferred option, it would be for the western, or red route.
The pylon plan has received 6,000 objections.
Pre-inquiry meetings start today in Northallerton community centre and tomorrow at the Marton Hotel and Country Club, Middlesbrough.
AN INVESTMENT of £20m in the North's health was approved yesterday.
Improvements in the programme by the Northern Regional Health Authority include £4m to cut hospital waiting lists; £1m on heart surgery; £2m on new consultant posts; £1m on health improvement; and £2m on improving the quality of life for the mentally handicapped and mentally ill.
In Cleveland heart surgery will be developed in Middlesbrough and more adolescent health promotion clinics will be set up.
Improving immunisation for young children and community services for the elderly with dementia will be targetted in Durham.
Reducing waiting times and advice on diet, smoking and alcohol will be tackled on Tyneside while encouraging breast and cervical cancer screening will be targetted in Sunderland.
Prof Liam Donaldson, NRHA regional general manager, said: ‘The key to the future must be to encourage people towards good health through living healthy lifestyles.’
An £84m package to build and improve hospitals was agreed by the authority.
New units for mental health patients in North Durham and South Tyneside are among 16 schemes to start soon costing £8m.
Water fluoridation costing £260,000 is to restart to protect against dental decay in the region.
Progress had been held up due to a national dispute involving water companies.
THE North-East is to get nearly £12.5m to help clear away its eyesores in the coming year.
The funding up by 14pc on this year will enable 495 acres of derelict land to be cleaned up for industrial, commercial, housing and leisure development.
The Department of the Environment, announcing the allocations, said priority had been given to those sites which were most badly contaminated.
The biggest allocations go to Northumberland County Council, Gateshead and Sunderland each of which receive £1.7m with Durham County Council getting £1.5m.
The biggest allocation for a district council in the region goes to Darlington which receives £700,000.
Richard Bell, regional controller for the DoE, said the increase in funding was good news.
‘As a result we are able to fund three new rolling programmes in Northumberland, Sunderland and Durham, which show the region's long term commitment to cleaning up land for redevelopment.’
In County Durham the grant aid will allow the reclamation of Coxhoe Bank Heaps and the continuation of the massive scheme at the former East Hetton Colliery.
The county's director of environment David Newbegin said: ‘We are very satisfied with the settlement which will enable us to progress a number of schemes.
‘The commitment to fund a rolling programme in County Durham is also very good news as this will enable us to plan ahead over a three-year period rather than on a year to year basis as has been the case.
This will certainly help us to expedite our derelict land reclamation programme.’
And a spokesman for Darlington Borough Council said: ‘We think we have done very well this year.’
Their award will allow the completion of three major schemes which will improve the appearance of land alongside the main East Coast railway.
CLOTHING manufacturer FWH of South Bank, Middlesbrough, has been placed in liquidation with debts of £90,000.
A Tuesday creditors meeting heard that only around £40,000 could be realised by the sale of its assets.
Harvey Madden of Yarm-based accountant John B. Taylor said the business was a profitable concern until the end of 1991 when it lost a major contract with Edinburgh Woollen Mills to east European competition.
And right up until that time Fred Hann, managing director of FWH, was urging English Estates to let him buy the freehold of his Nelson Street warehouse.
‘It was really the loss of that one large contract which finished off the company, until then the factory had been fully committed’ said Mr Madden.
THE National Grid Company yesterday refused to specify which of several alternative pylon routes it would prefer to have built through Cleveland and North Yorkshire.
Opponents of the NGC's plans to erect pylons from Lackenby on Teesside to Shipton near York challenged the company at a pre-public inquiry meeting in Northallerton yesterday.
The pylons would feed electricity from a gas-fired power station at ICI Wilton into the national grid.
Plans submitted by the NGC suggest two alternative routes between Lackenby and Picton, and three between Picton and Shipton.
Solicitor David Parrish, representing North Yorkshire County Council, said: ‘It is most unusual to attend a public inquiry to find an application with three alternative proposals.
It is unfair on objectors, and encourages a ‘not in my backyard’ approach.
‘If there is a road scheme proposal from the Department of Transport and a local authority, they must choose a preferred route to which objectors can make representations.
‘If the Secretary of State asks the NGC to state their preferred route, it could save the inquiry a lot of time and money.’
But George Bartlett, QC, for the NGC, said: ‘The inquiry's time and cost would not be saved, because whether or not we express a preference for one of them, they will remain as alternatives before the secretary of State.
‘It is not uncommon when seeking consent for an overhead line to put forward proposals in the alternative.
It's the fairest way of ensuring that those affected by each route are able to what the case for and against that route is.’
The inquiry will have two inspectors: chartered surveyor Trevor Graham, representing the Department of the Environment, and chartered engineer John Lindsay, representing the Department of Energy.
Mr Graham confirmed it was in order for the NGC to offer alternative routes for the inquiry's consideration.
He added: ‘We may decide that all are acceptable, that none are acceptable, that some are acceptable and others not, or that some would only be acceptable with minor modifications.’
The issues to be considered by the inquiry will include whether the scheme is needed at all, what its visual impact would be, health and safety matters, its affect on local amenities, its impact on agriculture, road transport, aviation, radio and TV reception, whether it would create extra noise, and whether it would conflict with existing planning policies.
The two inspectors will make their recommendations to the Energy and Environment Secretaries, who will decide between them which route if any should be approved.
The inquiry, which will be held in Northallerton and Marton, near Middlesbrough, is expected to last two months with a break between June 19 and July 7.
A decision is not expected before next year.
THE Office of Fair Trading is to look into the hard-sell techniques used by a North-East double glazing firm.
A radio phone-in was swamped with complaints yesterday about Sure Style Windows salesmen working in Cleveland.
And Cleveland County Council's trading standards officer Eric Robinson has pledged to pass the criticisms on to the Office of Fair Trading.
He said: ‘We have had a number of complaints over the last few months.’
Radio Cleveland broadcaster Alan Wright said he was overwhelmed by the response when he raised the case of a Redcar man who had to call the police to get rid of Sure Style salesmen.
Tony Phillips asked the two men to leave 15 times but they only went minutes before police arrived.
The phone-in revealed two more people who had called the police to remove Sure Style salesmen.
In The Northern Echo yesterday Jeremy Mitchell, of Sure Style, said: ‘This is not the way to do business,’ and apologised to Mr Phillips.
But County Durham teenager Andrew Manning said the firm taught recruits to ‘hammer down’ clients to win a sale.
Mr Manning, 19, of Newton Aycliffe, was interviewed in Sure Style's Middlesbrough office last week.
He said: ‘It's not true when they say that's not how they do business.
‘They told me I should be prepared to sit in someone's house for three, four, five, six hours.’
‘Every time you are asked to leave, I was told to ask why.
I was told to hammer them down and not give in until I had a sale.
They are training people to do it that way, to batter people down.’
Mr Manning turned down the job then he said Sure Style turned the hard-sell on him.
He said: ‘They tried to batter me into taking the job, then rang me at home and tried again.
I told them I didn't like their techniques.
I was told to enjoy my life on the dole and they slammed the phone down.’
More than 50 listeners jammed the Radio Cleveland switchboard for two and a half hours yesterday to complain about the company.
‘It was the biggest response I can remember,’ said Alan Wright.
‘Any firm can have one or two rogue reps, but the complaints were so similar.
You have to wonder if they are telling them this is how to do it.’
Mr Wright said there were three positive callers, praising Sure Style's work but one admitted Sure Style had asked him to call the phone-in.
Eric Robinson had two pieces of advice for worried consumers ‘Nobody should harass you in your own home.
You should ask them to leave and if they refuse, call the police.
‘Anyone with a complaint should pass them on and we will forward them to the Office of Fair Trading,’ he said.
A spokesman for the OFT said the complaints would be considered before it decided whether to demand assurances concerning the company's future behaviour.
Press calls to the Middlesbrough office of Sure Style were yesterday being diverted to the company's HQ in Bury, Lancashire.
A prepared statement referred only to the case of Mr Phillips.
It apologised for his distress, adding: ‘We have recently re-staffed the Middlesbrough office and although we take great care in choosing recruits, unfortunately occasionally people do let you down.
‘It is not in our interest for representatives to upset potential customers and the persons responsible have been severely reprimanded.’
ICI has been branded a Scrooge after cancelling Christmas parties for pensioners.
More than 7,000 retired employees from the Wilton site on Teesside enjoyed the celebrations last year.
But the company has put a stop to the parties to save around £80,000.
Spokeswoman Fiona Bell said all costs were under ‘close scrutiny.’
Norman Swash, a Middlesbrough councillor and former process worker at Wilton, said: ‘Why have they targeted the pensioners when they make their cuts?
‘The pensioners are the people who have made the company what it is.
This is insensitive penny-pinching.’
But Mrs Bell said this was not true.
She said: ‘We value our former employees very much and every pensioner gets a hamper at Christmas.
They all receive hampers, whereas not everyone can attend the parties.’
Mrs Bell said the company had received many letters from pensioners who understood why the decision had been made.
‘We regretted having to do it, but we had more people attending the Christmas parties last year than we have employees at Wilton.’
But Mr Swash said: ‘These parties are one of the few occasions some people get out.
This means another lonely winter night in.
‘I've spoken to a good few people who are very annoyed.’
Malcolm Clark, secretary of the association for retired Wilton workers, said many members would be ‘disappointed’ by the decision.
ALISTAIR Arkley, the man defeated in his bid to buy Camerons has bought 56 pubs to add to his growing portfolio.
His Billingham-based operation, Century bought 185 pubs for around £60m from the same brewer last November.
While yesterday's purchase price was kept confidential it is believed that Mr Arkley paid between £150,000 and £200,000 for each of his new pubs.
Mr Arkley said his intention for Century is to run an estate of 500 pubs, and within two months of its formation he is almost half way there.
He said: ‘We now have two multi-million pound deals behind us, a growing management staff of the highest calibre and many dedicated tenants running well above average establishments.’
The 65 stretch down the eastern side of the country from Tyneside to Lincolnshire, and mix well with the company's  existing network.
More acquisitions will now follow, added Mr Arkley.
He hopes to have  around 400 pubs snapped up by the end of the year.
And he could return to Bass, which wants to divest itself of yet more pubs.
Pubs affected in the region by the switch to Century are: British Lion, Lindisfarne, Queen's Head, all Gateshead; Wrekendike, Wrekenton; Albion Inn, Burnopfield; Bridge Hotel, Harveys Wine Bar, both Darlington; Dog & Gun, Bearpark; Emerson Arms, Hurworth; Grey Horse, Dipton; Locomotive, Bishop Auckland; Moorside Hotel, Consett; Acklam Hotel, Liberty's, both Middlesbrough; Bay Horse, Stokesley; Pot & Glass, Egglescliffe; Tiger Inn, Saltburn; Vane Arms, Stockton; Earl of Stockton, Norton; Black Swan, Leyburn; Board Inn, Knaresborough; Hare & Hounds, Selby; New Inn, Cliffe; White Swan, Hunmanby; Dolphin Hotel, Eastborough.
BEDALE'S Paul Holdroyd, a well-known figure on the North Yorkshire scene and president of Snape AC, has done what most anglers only dream of and invested in a guest house in southern Ireland.
Based in the midlands near the River Shannon and Lough Ree, Paul is also organising an exciting new festival on the prolific River Inny around Abbeyshrule during the week of April 25 to May 2.
Several of the North-East top stars have already pledged their support for this first-ever competition on the venue which boasts over £4,000 prize money plus pools and trophies.
Noted for its phenomenal roach catches in the 100–200lbs bracket with specimens over 2lb, the tiny river by Irish standards is at its best during the spring when the huge roach shoals migrate from the nearby loughs in readiness for spawning.
Stickfloat or pole to hand tactics will be the method in the three-day tournament, limited to 90 anglers rotating between three specially selected sections.
Interested anglers should ring Paul Holdroyd on  for further details.
The tidal Tees around Yarm fished surprisingly well despite an overnight influx of floodwater for the Yarm AA Baillie Cup.
The famous alphabet length below Nellies Beck saw most of the action producing five of the top six weights.
Local ace Mick Broadley led by the nearest of margins beating Brian O'Keefe 19.6.0 to 19.5.0 off adjoining pegs.
Mick (Yarm Piscatorials) started on the groundbait feeder and maggot picking up mainly dace and a sprinkling of roach then, as the tide dropped, switched to the stickfloat down the edge to net the bulk of his winning haul.
Meanwhile Brian (Cleveland Angling Centre) on the peg below, utilised identical tactics to push Mick all the way.
In third place Dave Cockerill (Middlesbrough Newman Scott) interrupted the alphabet domination landing nine chub to ledgered bread for 18.10.0 from swim below the gas pipe opposite Aisalby.
A rising and coloured River Tees below Croft meant a struggle for most during the Thornaby AA February Cup.
Alan Smith (Thornaby) beat the 70-string field ledgering bread to pick up a trio of chub totalling 7.12.0 from the willows on the buff length.
In-form youngster Darren Presgrave, like the winner, located three chub to take next position.
The feeder and bread proved the right combination coaxing 5.4.0 from the end peg in the ringfield at Hurworth.
The penultimate match of the York Winter League on a swollen River Ouse below the city proved once again why many rate the stretch the fairest winter venue in the north.
A total of 98 competitors weighed in from an entry of 126 even though the venue rose five feet above normal.
Acomb Tackle's Dave Collinson, drawn at Palace Ings, edged the stickfloat and pinkie down the side locating three roach plus a specimen bream of 5.12.0 to clinch the match with 6.2.0.
Anglers' World saw three members make the frame, C Jewitt 4.13.0, T Harrison 3.6.0 and D Potter 3.5.0 ensuring victory on the day and now look certainties for the title.
Top three teams on the day Anglers' World 12.12.8, Acomb Tackle 8.7.8 and South Bank 7.5.8.
Top of the league to date: 1 Anglers' World 99 pts; 2 Acomb Tackle 88; 3 Bar Six 74; 4 Munro UK 731/2; 5 South Bank 71; 6 Bogeymen 66.
Other results: Thirsk Open, River Swale, Salmon Hall: Jim Cowgill (Knaresborough) 2.13.0, roach and dace, stickfloat and maggot; Ron Dalby (Leeds) 2lb 11oz and joint Alan Fenwick (Richmond) and Mick Wasun (Leeds) on 2.8.8.
Bradford City Open, River Ure, Boroughbridge: Rick Guyatt (Newton AC) 3.8.0 single chub falling to ledgered wasp grub from Steve Wilson (Pudsey) 2.2.0.
Richmond AS February Cup, Upper Swale, Broken Brae: Adrian Lee 7lb 2oz, two chub to ledgered bread.
Boroughbridge and District AC, Roecliffe Pond: Peter Ingledew 8.14.0 two tench plus three roach to the waggler and maggot from Gerry Tilburn 4.13.0.
Fixtures: Tomorrow Thirsk AC Open, Swale, Salmon Hall, tickets £10, Tel Ian Robinson on  — Middlesbrough AC Ron Evans Shield, Swale, Pickhill, Holme and Ainderby.
Angling Times Winter League southern semi-final, Gloucester Canal.
March 1 Hambleton Ales Snape AC, Ure, Boroughbridge.
Chester-le-Street Open, 80 pegs, River Wear.
Bradford City AA Open, 120 pegs, River Ure, tickets £2 from Richmond Tackle, tel .
Bradford No 1 AA Open, River Nidd, Cowthorpe.
Ring Howard Foster on  for this 80-peg match, tickets £5 all in.
Draw 9.30am the Middle car park.
Fish 10.30am to 4pm.
Dunelm AA Dennis Fox Memorial Open, River Wear, Durham, tickets £5, tel Phil Watson on  — York and District AA Tadcaster Tower Rosebowl, River Ouse, below York.
A SPECIAL convention was staged yesterday to encourage the spread of community enterprise projects in Cleveland.
The 1992 Community Enterprise Forum took place in Hartlepool civic centre with the aim of giving information and advice to people and groups wanting to set up projects or those already running them.
Organised by Cleveland County Council and Hartlepool Borough Council with support from the Cleveland Action Team, it followed on from the success of last year's inaugural event in Middlesbrough.
Coun David Walsh, chairman of the county council's environment, development and transportation committee, said: ‘The forum is a way of bringing people with a common interest together so that they can learn from each other 's experiences.
‘Community enterprises provide a vital role in enabling communities to develop all kinds of initiatives to deal with economic, social and environmental issues.’
THE biggest poll tax defaulter in Middlesbrough has been named it's the Government.
At a meeting to set the tax, Middlesbrough Council leader Michael Carr said the authority was owed almost £800,000.
The cash was promised to local authorities in last year's budget to ease the impact of poll tax bills.
Coun Carr told the policy and resources meeting, which set a tax of £353: ‘We have been short-changed £800,000 by the Government and that has inevitably had an effect on the level of the charge.
‘This is financial sleight of hand of the worst sort, typical of the spivs currently running our economy.
In effect, it makes the Government the biggest non-payer of poll tax of all and they must act to remedy this situation.’
He said the biggest element in the rise from last year's £309 was the Government's withdrawal of the ‘safety net’, which adds £14.87 to each bill.
The figure included for non-payment £28.04 is 50p up on last year.
Coun Carr said only an estimated £83.29 of the £353 was for Middlesbrough Council spending plans.
The rest was to fund Cleveland County Council spending.
The committee also accepted a £21.6m revenue budget £1.4m above the Government limit.
The Conservative group supported the budget.
Leader Peter Jackson said: ‘It is unreasonable for the Governemnt to expect us to increase our commitment without extra expenditure.’
The council will discover if it is to be capped in early April.
£20m. boost for health services The Northern Regional Health Authority is to spend an extra £20m. to improve services in the region.
The plans include spending £4m. to cut hospital waiting lists; £1m. on heart surgery; £2m. on new consultant posts; £1m. on health improvements and and £2m. on improving the quality of life for the mentally handicapped and mentally ill.
In Cleveland heart surgery will be developed in Middlesbrough and more adolescent health promotion clinics will be set up.
In Durham immunisation for young children will be improved, and there will be better community services for old people with dementia.
Prof. Liam Donaldson, the authority's general manager, said: ‘The key to the future must be to encourage people towards good health through living healthy lifestyles.’
An £84m. package to build and improve hospitals was agreed by the authority, and water fluoridation costing £260,000 is to restart to protect people in the region against dental decay.
NEW shocks emerged yesterday about the selling methods of a double glazing company on the day its Middlesbrough office manager and senior staff were sacked.
Sure Style acted after a rash of complaints about salesmen terrorising potential customers, refusing to leave their homes until they had agreed to buy double glazing.
Complaints have led to an inquiry by the Office of Fair Trading.
But as the Sure Style axe fell, one of its salesmen continued his pitch while a retired docker, Edward Donnelly, plugged himself into a lung machine for vital treatment.
The salesmen only left at 1.15am after 74-year-old Mr Donnelly and his wife Winnie, 67, had been battered into submission by seven hours of hard sell.
Mrs Donnelly said: ‘I explained I did not want to buy any windows, but the salesman said he just wanted to show us what was on offer so I let him in.
‘First he asked to go to the toilet.
Then he came back and asked for a cup of tea.
‘He sat on the sofa with tea and biscuits and asked if he could watch Coronation Street.
I was so taken aback I didn't say anything.’
Despite the elderly couple repeatedly telling salesmen Eric Stewart that they didn't want any windows he continued his talk and demonstration until 11pm.
Then there was a knock on the door of their home in Darenth Crescent, Middlesbrough, Cleveland and another salesman appeared.
‘Mr Stewart invited him in so he must have been expecting him’ said Mrs Donnelly.
Mr Donnelly underwent emergency coronary care treatment in hospital last year.
He was allowed home but needs to use a nebuliser six times a day to get drugs and oxygen to his lungs.
‘The salesmen could see the oxygen cylinder in the hall.
At about 11pm we explained my husband would have to go on his nebuliser but they just continued.
‘My husband put his mask on and we plugged him in and the salesmen just kept shuffling papers.’
At 1.15am nearly seven hours after the first salesman arrived Mrs Donnelly finally agreed to buy a window.
Mrs Donnelly agreed to buy £800 of double glazing.
She said the salesmen refused to take a cheque so she handed over £30 deposit and the salesmen left.
And yesterday Darlington bus inspector Malcolm Humble told how a Sure Style salesman put him through a five-hour ordeal before threatening to send him a bill for his time.
He had no idea the 2.30pm appointment he fixed up at his home in Rochester Way, Darlington, would last five hours.
‘I arranged for him to come on my day off.
I thought it would last about half an hour.
I didn't think he'd be here five hours later,’ said Mr Humble.
‘I kept asking him to just leave me a quote.
I'm not the type of person to tell him straight out to go.’
At one stage the rep left the house to make a phone call, leaving his equipment behind.
He returned, saying he had arranged for his boss to telephone 54-year-old Mr Humble at 6pm.
‘He rang me and offered me a door for £250.
I jumped at the chance,’ said Mr Humble.
‘But when we got down to signing the papers I saw there was £198 charged for the fittings and £223 VAT on the original sum I had been quoted.
‘There was no way I was going to go for that.
In the end he tore up the agreement in front of me.
But on his way out he said we were stupid to think we would get a door for £250.
He even threatened to send me a bill for his time.’
Yesterday company spokesman Andrew Lincoln said he could not comment on any individual case until he had investigated.
THE team of double glazing salesmen whose methods brought terror to householders has been sacked.
Management of Sure Style Windows yesterday dismissed the manager of their Middlesbrough branch and ‘a number’ of salesmen after complaints from the public.
A college lecturer in Redcar was reduced to a nervous wreck and had to call the police to get rid of salesmen while in Northallerton a salesman suggested he bedded down on a couple's sofa while they slept on £5,000 offer.
Heading the list of dismissals was Middlesbrough manager Jeremy Mitchel.
An unrevealed number of other salesmen had also gone, including David Basset, the one who had refused to leave the Redcar man without a sale.
Sure Style spokesman Andrew Lincoln said: ‘We have acted quickly to carry out an initial investigation into the activities of personnel at our Middlesbrough branch one of 15 remote locations in the UK.’
It revealed the sales representatives had been ‘acting outside the scope of the company's policy on sales techniques’.
The company will issue a code of practice to be signed by all sales staff, he added.
Sure Style was set up in March last year by two directors of the failed double glazing firm Storm Seal.
Chairman Mark Sweeney said: ‘I would like to apologise personally to anyone who has suffered as a result of the actions of any of our sales people.’
Dr Marjorie Mowlam, the MP who represents the Redcar victim has called for action to prevent  aggressive selling.
— More horror stories: Page 5
Divi dithering ICI's full-year results announcement in London lacked its usual razzamatazz last Thursday.
Chairman Sir Denys Henderson attempted to laugh off the company's poor performance by cracking jokes with the audience, which consisted of the best that world journalism could throw at him.
Failing that, he deflected questions to his number two: chief operations officer Ronnie Hampel.
However, Sir Denys' performance failed to convince, with profits down 10pc at £843m.
The matter was not helped by the company's failure to decide on the dividend payout until the last minute.
Amid the  pristine typeface of the company's glossy brochure those who decide these things decided to pencil in the final maintained dividend payment at 55p.
The handwriting was adequate but failed to convince the company's audience of the board's confidence in these matters.
Tasty treat
FURTHER concerns were raised at ICI's Millbank  headquarters on Sir Denys' comments on the company's new meat  substitute Quorn.
Asked about future investment plans for the fungus-based meal, much-beloved by vegetarians and other of that ilk, Sir Denys refused to be drawn.
The questioner, however, was not so easily fobbed off and used a familiar gambit in an attempt to get Sir Denys to open up.
‘I have tasted it,’ he explained to the stonewalling Scot, whose  riposte might have upset some shareholders: ‘And you've lived to tell the tale!’
Oh dear, perhaps this is not the sort of comment investors like to hear concerning a food which has been developed from toadstools.
Hanson, who?
STILL on ICI, the company's lowdown of the events of its financial year Reshaping ICI: A Diary of Events, makes interesting reading.
The interest is derived not so much from what the company achieved over the past 12 months, as for one small  omission .
Undoubtedly conscious of the impact Lord Hanson's 2.8pc stake in ICI has had on the company during the year the authors felt better advised to leave out any mention of the of m'lords takeover intentions of the company.
Out of sight, out of mind, perhaps?
Over size bed
VAUX chairman Paul Nicholson has always had a larger than life attitude to the manner in which he conducts his business.
So one would image that the latest new fangled marketing initiative at Vaux-owned Swallow Hotel in Gateshead gets his backing.
It wants volunteers to test its extra-large new beds and will reward than with a free stay.
Only people of 20 stone or more need apply, says manager Nick Burrows.
Or 30-stone couples.
Buns not guns
CREAM cake king Chris Liveras has stirred up a lot of  controversey since he decided to build a cake factory the Preston Farm site once earmarked for development by the Ministry of Defence.
The promise of quality MoD jobs has faded, not so the redoubtable Mr Chris, as he likes to be known.
Rumours currently circulating around Cleveland that the ‘buns not guns’ Greek-Cypriot.
Triumphant in this latest development in his career has bought a manor house in the area.
And just to put the icing on the cake he has named it Black Forest Chateau.
Talk, talk BT's help for the business community knows no bounds.
It has recently published a brochure giving a ‘who's who’ checklist of foreign conversation characteristics.
After telling the waiting world that Germans, Americans, Dutch and Scandanavians are most forthright and explicit; that the Japanese, British Italians and French are the vaguest and most subtle; and that the British, Americans, Dutch and Scandanavians are most informal and jokey, the guide goes on to warn: ‘Don't treat anyone as a stereotype’.
Port's spy THE Tees & Hartlepool Port story rolls on and on.
However, the latest allegation to arise is probably the best yet, eclipsing even the bribery/dodgy trucks/company liquidation tales.
During the final days of his reign as chief executive John Hackney was tipped off that his boardroom was bugged.
A codeworded rendezvous, at Amsterdam's Schipol airport, and appropriate ‘expenses’ would reveal the full story.
Hackney looked around and decided the type of man he needed as a rough tough sidekick on such a dangerous mission was Middlesbrough Labour MP, Stuart Bell.
Fortunately for Hackney, Bell recognised the James Bond-like plan as a hoax, leaving the port man to far more mundane matters such as calculating his iron ore tonnages.
ARTHUR Dicken has been appointed chairman of the CBI's Teesside area group.
He will succeed Sir Ian Wrigglesworth.
Mr Dicken is Teesside engineering manager for ICI's C&P division.
‘As chairman I shall be working to ensure that the business voice is clearly heard in any discussions on any issue affecting the economic well being of this area,’ he said.
Gordon Thom, 36, has been appointed manager of Midland Bank's Parliament Street branch in York.
Previously Mr Thom was manager of Midland's Queen Victoria Street branch in the City of London.
Allan Wright, 32, is the new sales and marketing director of Cecil M Yuill, the Hartlepool-based house-builder.
He joins Yuill from Twyfords where he was marketing manager for four years.
Steve Burrows, previously branch manager at Allied Dunbar's Piccadilly House offices in York, has been promoted to senior group manager.
Mr Burrows has been with Allied Dunbar for 16 years.
Geoff Norman, managing partner of the Newcastle office of Ernst & Young, has been appointed honorary treasurer to the Tyne & Wear Chamber of Commerce.
Dennis Finn has been appointed senior account executive of the Stockton office of broking and financial services group CE Heath.
Paul Heyes has been promoted to managing director of the Northern region of Compass, the food service management company.
Mr Heyes, who has been with Compass since 1972, will be based in Glasgow but responsible for the North of England.
Ken Lax has been appointed industrial sales manager of Stockton-based cathodic protection manufacturer, Wilson Walton International.
He will be responsible for all industrial cathodic protection involving buried pipelines, anti-fouling and jetty projects.
Three managers have been appointed in advance of the April re-opening of York's refurbished Fairfield Manor Hotel.
Janet Keye becomes personnel and training manager, Neil Reddington is the new front of house manager, and Susan Dixon becomes food and beverage manager.
Stewart Tempest, 29 has been appointed service manager at C D Bramall's Bluebell Roundabout garage at Middlesbrough, while Kenneth Beattie, 30, and Jon Wright, 27, have been appointed sales executives at the same dealership.
Neil Mackechnie, 40, has become Elsom's Seeds sales representative for parts of North Yorkshire, County Durham and Cleveland, while Mark Driffield, 33, becomes representative for the area of Yorkshire south of Northallerton down to York.
Frank Wood, 46, has been appointed Priory Garages' used car development manager, while Gavin Dickson, 47, becomes general manager at the group's Peugoet dealership in Sunderland.
A BUSINESSMAN who defied Sunday trading laws ten years ago, and gathered over £4,000 in fines and legal fees in the process, has been declared bankrupt.
The London Gazette has reported that a bankruptcy order was made against Mike Franklin on January 30 this year.
He filed the petition himself at Middlesbrough County Court.
No sum is disclosed but bankruptcy proceedings can only be brought if at least £750 is owed.
Mr Franklin, 49, was a retailer and haulier in Dundas Street, Saltburn under the titles Franklins Transport, and Franklins of Saltburn.
In 1982, Sunday opening for his mail catalogue surplus bargains was an instant success, with customers flocking from a wide area to his Saltburn premises.
But eventually, at the Chancery Court in Newcastle, Langbaurgh Council obtained an injunction against his Sunday trading in the borough despite his plea that it was an infringement of his liberty.
The rebellion was over at a cost he claimed to be more than £4,000 in fines and legal fees.
MIDDLESBROUGH'S community charge for 1992–93 was fixed last night at £353-a-head, an increase of £43.66 on the current year.
In addition, residents of Nunthorpe will have to pay an additional £2.16-per head and Stainton and Thornton, £1.75.
Both have parish councils.
In moving the acceptance of the charge council leader Mike Carr said although the total spending of £20.2m was 17.5pc above the government's recommended amount he was hoping an appeal to Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine for an increase would be successful.
The Secretary of State will be reviewing all council budgets in April before announcing his final capping criteria.
On Friday George Tinsley and John Warnock, of The North Yorkshire Brewing Company, are jetting off to a trade fair in Tokyo to promote the pride and joy of Teesside's real ale enthusiasts.
Specially selected bottles with Japanese labels have been chosen to attract the oriental beer drinker.
George and John, who started with a modern fun pub, discovered they were forever seeking a traditional pub for a good pint on their days off, so they decided to start their own.
Once that was underway they started their own brewery in North Ormesby, Middlesbrough.
George, sister Alison and father George senior work with brewer John to produce six brews which now sell from Cornwall to Alloa.
‘We know we have a good product and from what we've been able to learn about the Japanese I think they will like it,’ said George.
And the region can boast another brewing success story.
One of the UK's largest traditional ale houses is to be opened in Hartlepool.
Pubmaster Limited intends to spend around £200,000 converting the Greenside pub into the country's largest Tap and Spile.
The town's previous Tap and Spile was lost when Camerons Brewery was sold to the Wolverhampton and Dudley Brewery.
But Pubmaster quickly took over the lease on the Greenside to ensure an early re-opening.
Hosts Anne and Dave Bell have moved from the old pub in Stranton to the new Tap and Spile.
Dave said: ‘The Tap and Spile legend lives on even though the Greenside will not be as we would like it until mid-summer.’
WORKERS at Britain's only potash mine at Boulby near Staithes are expecting a boost in their pay packets.
After a two-year freeze on wage rises, management at Cleveland Potash have agreed a five per cent increase for the 956 employees, backdated to January 1.
A mild winter has led to a drop off in sales of salt to local authorities and there has also been a reduction in the market for potash in Britain as a result of the uncertain future in farming.
However, the company is still hauling 750,000 tonnes of potash each year from seams deep under the North Sea and is building up an increasing export market.
About half that figure is shipped to Western Europe, mainly Spain, Portugal, France and Finland.
Almost all of it is exported through Tees Dock at Middlesbrough, but some is also sent from Whitby.
The potash mine is by far the biggest employer in the Whitby and Loftus areas and all local authorities have been considerate in their handling of problems caused by it being on the edge of a national park.
Monitoring of lorries going through nearby villages takes place at frequent intervals and there are repeated calls for more potash to be transported by train.
However, when that happened there were protests from people living near the line in parts of East Cleveland.
SOLICITORS in parts of the North-East started industrial action yesterday in protest at proposed changes to the legal aid system.
Members of the Darlington duty solicitors scheme unanimously decided to suspend all court and 24-hour duty until April 3.
They say their action is a protest at the Government's proposals for fixed fees in legal aid cases and the 3pc increase in legal aid fees.
A statement issued by the group said: ‘Members of the scheme are aware that this action may cause inconvenience and possibly hardship but the decision was taken after careful consideration.
‘It was felt that the Government's proposals could only lead to inadequate funding which would inevitably force many practitioners to leave duty solicitor schemes and indeed the criminal practice permanently.’
Solicitors also fear the changes could reduce public access to legal aid and increase the likelihood of a miscarriage of justice.
Under the changes solicitors will receive a flat rate for each legal aid case rather than for the amount of time spent on individual cases.
Solicitors on Teesside took similar action yesterday and it is believed it could spread to North Yorkshire and Bishop Auckland.
Last year the Automobile Association took over operation of the scheme, which puts police in touch with local duty solicitors.
But the scheme ran into difficulties in the beginning and was criticised for sending solicitors to police stations miles away from their area.
Mr Hunsley said it was now up to the AA to find other duty solicitors.
Lawyers in Teesside withdrew their duty solicitor cover from 6pm last night.
Normally there would have been two solicitors covering police stations at Stockton, Middlesbrough, Thornaby, South Bank, Redcar and Guisborough.
There will also be no court duty solicitor today and throughout the week.
The action involves about 50 Cleveland solicitors.
AS a shipbuilder, Hughie Gollogly knows more than most about the ebb and flow of the economic tide in Whitby.
But now Hughie, a man who built his first craft at the old Whitehall shipyard in 1950, believes everything is ebbing away from Whitby.
The front garden of his house in Esk Terrace overlooks the former shipyard, the home for a Yorkshire Water Authority sewage works.
He shakes his head in disbelief.
‘With a lot of will we could still be building ships there,’ said 57-year-old Hughie, who has seen the Whitby shipbuilding industry decline so much that there are now just two people making traditional Yorkshire cobles.
Hughie's hopes were raised last year when it was suggested that a replica of one of Captain Cook's ships, either Endeavour or Resolution, should be built in Indonesia and brought back to Whitby as a permanent reminder of the feats of the town's most famous son of the sea.
When Hughie was picked as the person to head the project he just about had his suitcases packed for Sarawak.
But the idea was eventually sunk when Scarborough Council did not back the idea, which was designed to give the shipyard a new lease of life.
Hughie said: ‘You can say that shipbuilding in Whitby has gone down the sewer.
It's a sad day the end of a tradition.’
Now he has to content himself with the fact that the only replica of a Captain Cook ship he has been involved in was one built for the new shopping centre in Middlesbrough eight years ago.
It is a one-fifth scale model of Endeavour, built using traditional methods, but also allowing for modern safety requirements.
Cook set sail on ships constructed in the old Fishburn shipyard, just at the bottom of Hughie's front garden.
Plans for the shipyard do not include a heritage centre but there will be a marina, waterfront housing and a community building.
When the sewage treatment plant comes into operation in 1998 it will be able to cater for four times the population of Whitby.
Yorkshire Water has calculated that at the busiest time August Bank Holiday it could have 50,000 people using it.
THE establishment of a £11m nature reserve on Teesside is evidence that the Government's development corporations do have more than the interests of big business at heart.
Sometimes justifiably criticised for their apparent aloofness from local issues, the two North-East corporations have had to work hard to convince the doubters of their worth to the wider community.
Some remain unconvinced.
Paul Harford, the leader of Cleveland County Council, yesterday wondered whether the investment was justified while his authority was starved of cash for hundreds of worthwhile projects.
Sadly for Mr Harford, the £11m would never have been given to the Labour county council by this Government.
We have to welcome this money because Cleveland can't afford to play party politics when opportunities on this scale arise.
More importantly, there can be no question about the benefit to be derived from turning 2,500 acres of wasteland into the country's biggest man-made nature reserve.
This is an amenity that all Teessiders and others from further afield will be able to enjoy for generations.
The reserve forms part of the Teesside Development Corporation's strategy to ‘green’ the area in order to make it more attractive to outside investors.
In the crucial aspect of image-building, the TDC has had more to do than its regional partner in trying to alter the widely-held perception of Teesside as an area dominated by smoking chimneys.
While Tyneside has its share of industrial dereliction, in Newcastle it was able to boast of a vibrant city and the region's key cultural and educational institutions.
With the greatest of respect to Middlesbrough and Stockton, they do not, as yet, have that appeal.
Now the opportunity arises for the area to develop a different but equally valuable reputation.
A SENIOR ICI executive has joined Middlesbrough's City Challenge team.
Michael Stewart, OBE, has been seconded to the project as private sector liaison officer.
He will act as a key ‘link-man’ between Middlesbrough Council and local and national companies.
His roles will include offering advice on how City Challenge can help companies and tailoring customised training to the future needs of employers.
Mr Stewart has held a number of senior ICI posts on Teesside, the most recent as general manager of Phillips-Imperial Petroleum.
He is no stranger to the East Middlesbrough City Challenge area, having commanded the Territorial Army Signals Regiment at Brambles Farm.
His secondment lasts until May 1993.
THE former North-East company allegedly caught up in fraud and corruption has issued a statement dismissing the charges.
A TV documentary last night accused Marktrace Projects Ltd, formerly of West Street, Middlesbrough, of defrauding the Ghanaian Government.
But the company now operating from the Gloucester HQ of parent company Babcock Electrical Projects Ltd said in a statement: ‘These accusations are completely refuted and any acts of impropriety are vigorously denied.’
The This Week TV programme made in conjunction with Friends of the Earth accused MPL of misusing a £20m loan to rehabilitate a struggling state-owned timber company, African Timber and Plywood (Ghana) Ltd.
But the company says it has a claim AGAINST the Ghanaian Government ‘significantly in excess of £1m’.
The statement says: ‘The company also believes that far from stealing any money from the Ghanaians, it achieved a considerable amount for the local community.
‘The project involved giving employment to 1,000 local Ghanaians during the running of this contract and supplying the necessary hospitalisation, electricity, water and education, previously non-existent, and the control of the problem of malaria which was rife in the area.’
The company was awarded a contract to refurbish the Samreboi timber mill in 1986.
The statement says: ‘On completion of the first phase in September, 1989, the Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources hired MPL's expatriate employees and dismissed MPL, leaving a claim by the British company against the Government of Ghana which is currently under discussion between the two parties.
The company has had no further involvement in the project since September 1989.’
Friends of the Earth rainforest campaigner Tony Junper said they are confident that the claims against MPL would stand up.
SMALL Firms Minister Eric Forth refused to disclose the Government's view on a plea from small businessmen to tighten up the law on bouncing cheques.
The National Association of the Self-employed and Small Businesses wants to make it a criminal offence to issue cheques that are returned unpaid because no funds are available in the drawer's account.
Representations have been made to Mr Forth, but as yet no reply of any substance has been received.
Paul Barker, who runs a TV and video repair shop in Parliament Road, Middlesbrough, recently called in the police after a customer's cheque for £22 was returned.
Mr Barker said: ‘The police weren't interested.
They said that as the law stands they have to prove the customer deliberately set out to defraud me.
‘Every time a cheque bounces it costs me £3 in bank charges.
I've spoken to quite a few small businessmen who have been affected in the same way.
They all agree the current law is inadequate and just encourages people who want to avoid paying.’
Mr Barker said he hadn't insisted that the customer should produce a banker's card because she lived within a few doors of the shop.
A spokeswoman for Mr Forth said: ‘Any correspondence between the Nassb and the Minister is confidential.’
WORK is well under way on a private housing project in Middlesbrough which should leave more council houses available for new tenants.
Wimpey Homes is building 50 two and three-bedroomed houses on land provided by the council at Pallister Park, off Homerton Road, with the aid of a City Grant from the Department of the Environment of over £400,000.
It enables the builder to construct low-cost houses and yesterday the Mayor, Coun Eddie Bolland, performed the topping out ceremony.
The houses at Hillsview Meadow will be on sale from Easter weekend.
Preference will be given to current council house tenants and people on the housing waiting list.
BUDDING businesses in Middlesbrough can benefit from extensions to the town's enterprise centre.
The £220,000 extension to the premises in Silver Street, St Hilda's, offers more than 2,000 sq ft of extra floor space financed through the European regional development fund.
It includes communal workshops containing metal and woodworking equipment, and a training room with computer programmes to give the new-starter a grounding in marketing, book-keeping and business management.
At present 12 firms are based at the centre but the management is keen to stress its ‘open-door’ policy for the small business based elsewhere.
POLL tax payers in many parts of the North-East are having to pay higher than average levies because of non payment by others.
The average community charge bill in England is set to hit £279 this year but some bills in the north will be higher.
Councils have had to levy extra money for unpaid poll tax, business rates and interest on borrowing in a bid to balance the books.
In some parts of the country the extra charge amounts to just a few pounds but the average figure in County Durham and Cleveland is £20.
In North Yorkshire the levy is £7.
Council officers believe part of the explanation for such a difference could lie in the relative affluence of North Yorkshire in comparison to other parts of the North-East.
Richard Collin, Darlington's director of central services, said districts like Ryedale and Scarborough did not have the same problems as some of County Durham's former pit villages.
Mr Collin added: ‘Obviously, if people have a number of creditors the poll tax could be a casualty.
If someone is knocking on the door demanding some rent or the mortgage they are more likely to get paid than the borough council.’
One in five tax payers in Darlington have received a court summons for non payment.
Mr Collin said some people have threatened to withhold the £20 surcharge in protest only to find themselves facing the threat of court action.
Finance officers agree there will always be a small number of non-payers no matter what system of local government finance is used.
DURHAM:
Appointments for Enron Enron Power Operations has announced five key appointments at its Teesside Power Station.
The shift managers will be responsible for the generating plant which starts commissioning in April.
Mr Tony Byrne, aged 35, from Middlesbrough, joins the company from BASF where he has worked for 13 years.
He is married with two daughters.
Mr Alan Hogan, aged 28, has spent the same number of years with Tioxide.
He is married with three children and lives at Seaton Carew.
Mr Peter McGriskin, aged 41, joined Nuclear Electric from the Central Electricity Generating Board after privatisation.
He is married with two young children and will move to the area from Ingleton in Teesdale.
The three will be joined by two colleagues from elsewhere in the country.
Mr Garry Sewell, aged 40, has worked for the CEGB in Lincoln and Mr Andy Foote, aged 38, was a project engineer for the NHS in the South-East.
Sanderson Townend & Gilbert has let 113/115 Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough, to Catchlord which trades as Barnacles.
A yearly rent of £32,000 has been agreed for the 1,250 sq ft of trading space.
Browns Commercial of Stockton acted for Catchlord.
A MAJOR mortgage fiddle amounting to over £800,000 is being investigated by the Crown Prosecution Service, a court was told yesterday.
Nine people have been charged with conspiring to obtain mortgage advances by deception from various building societies.
Scarborough magistrates were told that the case involved a large-scale mortgage fraud alleged to have occurred between January 1985 and February 1988.
The charges relate to 24 separate mortgage advances, ranging from £61,750 to £17,500, worth a combined £803,000.
The institutions involved include the Britannia Building Society, the Yorkshire Building Society, the Leeds Permanent, the Woolwich and the Leeds and Holbeck.
The accused, who come from Scarborough, Grindale, Middlesbrough, York, Bridlington and Huddersfield, did not appear in court.
Melvyn Kelly, prosecuting, said it was expected that committal  proceedings would be able to take place in two weeks.
The case was adjourned until March 30.
THORNABY could become Cleveland's commercial capital of the future.
Neighbouring Middlesbrough has always been developed as the regional centre.
However figures out today reveal that the Teesside Development Corporation is building one million square feet of office space 84pc of the county's provision for the next decade and most of it will be concentrated on its flagship site of Teesdale, Thornaby.
The site is rising from the ashes of a former foundry following Mrs Thatcher's famous Wilderness Walk there in 1987.
The figures also reveal that Stockton has enough land on which to build 7,400 new homes, although the anticipated target will be 5,750.
Those statistics will be used by the town hall when resisting pressure from house builders to build on Stockton's green belts and rural fringes.
The report to Stockton councillors covers environmental issues, pollution control, housing, shopping strategy, tourism and leisure, and transport needs.
Russell Ward, Stockton Council's chief planning officer, said: ‘The plan itself will form a firm basis of rational and consistent decisions in planning applications and appeals.’
WHEN is a pizza not a pizza?
When it's a mizza, of course especially if it creates 25 new jobs.
Food Minister David MacLean is to visit the Newboulds factory in Startforth Lane, Riverside Estate, Middlesbrough, to give the mizza the thumbs up tomorrow.
The mizza, ‘more of a meal than a pizza’ went on show at the chilled-food fair at Birmingham NEC over the weekend.
Managing director of Newboulds, John Newbould, said: ‘The mizza is convenient, tasty and suits today's lifestyle.
It's also a healthy option in which saturated fat has been greatly reduced.’
It goes on sale at the end of May.
Country welcome:
Government views on national parks, saying their future should take account of the economic and social needs of the local  communities , were welcomed yesterday by Ian Kibble, regional secretary of the Country landowners Association.
‘Green audit’ call to businesses BUSINESSES in Middlesbrough are being asked to carry out a ‘green audit’as part of the town's Environment City year.
Firms will be asked to look at every aspect of their work and how it affects the environment.
Middlesbrough Council's assistant chief environmental health officer David Rigby explained: ‘The audit will include looking at the waste produced by companies and what they do with it, the raw materials used, energy costs and the whole effect of the process.’
THE name Skerne Iron Works means very little in Darlington today, but in its brief and eventful life, it created a worldwide reputation.
The company was formed on Albert Hill in 1864 and by the time it closed in 1879 it had been responsible for 40 bridges in Denmark, 20 bridges in Sweden all built in 1874, all the viaducts on the Whitby-RedcarMiddlesbrough line including the Staithes Viaduct, Llandudno pier, a bridge in Syria, another over the Tay in Scotland and a footbridge over the Tees at Barnard Castle.
Its biggest project was the Leith Docks swing-bridge over the River Liffey in Dublin in 1879, but despite the contract being worth £8,143, when the bridge first swung open Skerne Iron Works' finances were swaying perilously.
Up on Albert Hill in all likelihood its operations were on the banks of the eponymous river where the Cleveland Industrial Estate is now it had a massive and profitable operation covering 22 acres, employing 1,000 men and boys and working 90 furnaces.
The real problem was the Britannia Works in Middlesbrough which Skerne acquired after leading partner Walter Pease died in 1872.
His death meant a shortage of capital.
The other partners, Edward Hutchinson, a solicitor who married industrial magnate Sir David Dale's daughter, and R L Pratt, decided to float the company on the stock market.
Their prospectus said Skerne was thinking of extending further into the bridge-building field, and £200,000 was secured by the sale of 10,000 £20 shares.
With 120 furnaces and its own wharf on the Tees, the Britannia site no doubt looked impressive, but the 1870s were the wrong time for businesses to try to expand.
Britain was in the grip of a severe recession and by 1875 the Britannia Works were forced to close at an enormous loss which Albert Hill could not sustain.
The recession deepened as the 1870s proceeded, and by 1879 Skerne Iron Works had called in the liquidator.
But there is a glimmer of brightness in the Skerne story.
A group of former employees made redundant as the Albert Hill site wound down in 1877 clubbed together and formed Cleveland Bridge and Engineering Company.
A little-known Darlington firm might also have been active in this early phase.
There is a belief but open to much doubt that the bridge builder Teasdale supplied various canal spans for the pedestrian traffic across the River Jumna, a major tributary of the Ganges.
That this firm existed is confirmed by their name being embossed on a single span construction currently serving road travellers in Darlington itself.
Food Minister David Maclean sampled a mizza yesterday and declared: ‘It's delicious.
I can't wait until it's on the shelves.’
The pizza meal is creating 25 jobs at Newboulds' food factory in Middlesbrough.
Mr Maclean is seen with development manager Pamela Pierson.
The company expects to produce 30,000 mizzas every week within a year.
CHEMOXY, the Middlesbrough-based chemicals company, is on the verge of clinching a long-term contract just days after it revealed a £4m investment in the business.
A five-year deal to supply intermediate products to one of the major chemicals companies is about to be signed, according to Brian Hoare, finance director of its parent group Suter.
Chemoxy currently supplies ICI, Shell and Procter & Gamble with products and the customer is likely to be one of the three.
It has become a specialist in adding value to chemicals and selling them on to the major companies.
But Mr Hoare would only say ‘it is a big customer in the chemicals field.’
Dr Tony Gillham, Chemoxy managing director, added the deal is covered by a customer confidentiality clause.
‘But it would not have happened if Suter had not put £4m into the plant,’ he said.
The money has been used to upgrade the Middlesbrough plant's chemical reactor, allowing it to double its output of speciality chemicals.
Suter chairman David Abell said of the Chemoxy operation: ‘The skills of its management and flexibility in adapting to difficult market circumstances have enabled it to seize opportunities.’
According to Mr Hoare the Middlesbrough company attracted Suter's biggest single investment in a plant because it is the market leader in the supply of certain chemical intermediates.
Suter unveiled yearly pre-tax profits for 1991 this week.
The group saw profits fall from £24m to £17.8m on sales of £205.7m.
BUSINESSWOMAN Louise I'Anson spent one day a week for five weeks attending council-run courses and has emerged feeling even more confident about her plans for the future.
Louise was the 1,000th participant in a year in the Enterprise Action Programme run by Cleveland county council and yesterday was presented with a personal organiser by council chairman Ted Wood.
The presentation took place during a women's enterprise forum, held at the Impasse Centre, Corporation Road, Middlesbrough.
Louise, who runs Foil Printing from the Redcar Business Centre, said: ‘The sessions were of immense value to me.
When you start up in business you need a lot of advice.
‘The sessions not only pointed me in the right direction for obtaining information, they taught me a lot about the sort of questions I should be asking.’
Since Louise took part in the programme, another 100 people have enrolled.
Outpaced by prices
AS A result of privatisation, the gas, electricity, telephone and water price rises come to over £3 per week.
The rise in my old age pension is £2.25 a week.
Everything in the supermarkets goes up every week.
Where's it all going to end?
J. Burke, 95 The Hallgarth, Wheatley Hill.
Topping up
IN the Budget it was said that beer was going up by 1p a pint, was it not?
In the local and around it is up by 3p.
Brewers are wonderful, caring people are they not?
Answers on a postcard to your brewer.
COMPANIES on Teesside and Tyneside are in danger of missing out on cash grants if they don't get involved in the Government's City Challenge Initiative, according to one of the region's planning experts.
Chris Checkley of property agent Sanderson Townend & Gilbert claims thousands of businesses in the region can gain financial help with projects, but they need to act quickly.
An April 22 deadline has been imposed by central Government for local authorities to submit their City Challenge bids.
Nearly £38m is on offer, to be divided up over five years.
The winning areas will get the cash for projects such as improving company buildings and road access arrangements, car parking, and landscaping.
‘The Government is particularly keen that the money should be spent on partnership schemes for development and improvement involving the private sector,’ said Mr Checkley.
And if more companies apply to their local authority for grant cash it could sway the Government's decision to award the City Challenge money.
‘Any businesses or land owners with interests in the City Challenge Initiative bid should give urgent consideration to this matter over the next few days to make sure they do not miss out on this important opportunity,’ said Mr Checkley.
In the region Newcastle, Gateshead, North & South Tyneside, Sunderland, Middlesbrough, Stockton, Langbaurgh and Hartlepool are all bidding for City Challenge cash.
£2.75m MBO at Hickson CHEMICALS group Hickson International yesterday announced the £2.73m management buy-out of its floor covering distribution businesses in Manchester, Bristol, and the Midlands.
Hickson recently sold branches in Newcatle and Stockport.
The latest disposal leaves Hickson with four distribution outlets in Leeds, Glasgow, Bedford and Lancing, West Sussex, which are expected to be sold in the next few months.
TUESDAY:
Midland Bank announced it was to merge with the Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corporation.
Chemicals group Suter denied market  rumours it was poised to bid for parts of troubled Hutton Rudby-based MTM.
WEDNESDAY:
Canadian businessman Fred Davies completed his takeover of Shildon busmaker Omnibus.
The newly-christened Omnicoach will concentrate on the production of semi-ambulance vehicles.
The nmc-kenmore factory at Crook, gutted in a fire last year, re-opened safeguarding its 100-plus jobs.
THURSDAY:
Texas-based Enron said Teesside was among several sites it may consider if it goes ahead with plans to build a new petrochemical plant in Europe.
Middlesbrough company Chemoxy was on the verge of clinching a five-year supply agreement with a major chemicals group.
FRIDAY:
Software pioneer David Goldman, chairman and chief executive of the Sage Group, was named Entrepreneur of the Year in the annual Coppers Deloitte Awards.
The UK inflation rate in February remained at 4.1pcm, lower than Germany's for the first time in 25 years.
WEEKEND:
The assets of the Newcastle Building Society broke through the £1bn barrier.
It emerged Swan Hunter may be about to clinch its first strictly commercial shipbuilding order for seven years.
They said ‘The price we have paid for trying to control inflation has been unemployment and recession.
It is a tragedy that for all the sacrifices made the problem has yet to be resolved’ Joe Mills, Northern regional secretary of the Transport & General Workers Union.
‘It is disappointing that it has not fallen, but the level of 4.1pc is a measure of how we are starting to attack the fundamentals of inflation’ Paul Briggs, Northern chairman of the Confederation of British Industry.
PROPERTY analysts at UBS Philips & Drew set a puzzle last year.
‘When is a rental level not a rental level?’ they asked.
Answering their own question they replied: ‘Almost always’.
‘It has been remarkable, bearing in mind the massive oversupply of office and retail space, that we have continued to hear of unexpectedly high rents being achieved,’ said the analysts.
But behind the headline numbers lurked the truth, disguised in a veil of what the property market calls confidentiality clauses and what others call secret deals.
‘Property deals, unlike those in the stock market have no transparency, if required.
Not only are they not transparent, a property deal can be struck subject to just about anything,’ said UBS.
More bluntly they, and many in the market, were objecting to the prices paid by tenants to landlords for their shop units and offices being kept secret from the market.
Secret sales of property were also subject to the same lambasting.
The objection is that secrecy makes it very difficult to assess the value of a deal and therefore to judge the true state of the market.
More worryingly, confidentially clauses are being used to falsely maintain capital values.
And when rent reviews are due it can be almost impossible to assess what tenants should be paying.
Unfortunately most agents are more than willing to bow to pressure from landlords and tenants who insist that confidentiality clauses are inserted into any deal, no matter how small.
As an example, the property agent Sanderson Townend & Gilbert in Newcastle recently sent out details to the press of a regional letting.
The agent said it had sold a commercial garage in Middlesbrough to a named company.
Aside from its geographical location and the name of the other agent involved few other details were included.
Certainly not price or purchaser.
Paul Stevenson of the agent said: ‘The buyer did not want its identity revealing.’
Maybe not.
But the bald statement that a garage has been sold in Middlesbrough is neither a news story, nor of any help to agents working in the market who need to know such details.
To those operating in the specialist property press such lack of detail is intolerable.
Trade magazine Estates Times will not print the details of deals unless the property's address, size, rent or price involved and size of any premium paid are included.
And in a recent hard-hitting editorial its editor Lee Mallett said: ‘What is most disconcerting…is the apparent unwillingness…of leading figures in the property industry to acknowledge the distortions that are arising because of the suppression of information.’
Creditably a handful of influential figures are speaking out against the cult of confidentiality.
Most notable amongst these is John Ritblat, the urbane chairman of developer British Land.
He has called for the compulsory registration of all property transactions in an attempt to stop the use of secret deals.
In a newsletter published by his agency Conrad Ritblatt he said: ‘We must move towards compulsory registration of investment deals, lettings, mortgages and all transactions in land.’
Ritblat would like to see all such information logged with the Land Registry.
‘Those who scoff that this cannot be done should look to the United States.
In their most liquid markets New York and Los Angeles, for instance the Real Estate Data Inc publication will give you comprehensive details of ownership, values and rents on a street-by-street basis.’
The eponymous retail agent Clive Lewis has also added his voice to Ritblat's.
In his midsummer retail report last year he said confidentiality clauses were ‘falsely conceived protectionism’.
‘Such clauses succeed in frustrating the free flow of information so essential for accurate valuation at review.’
His report also noted that in order to obtain information some valuers have subpoenaed surveyors bound by confidentiality clauses to appear in arbitration hearings.
Equally notable figures will spring to the defence of the secret deal, however.
John Parry, managing director of developer Hammerson, was reported as saying: ‘If a landlord or tenant wants a deal to be confidential, then they should be allowed to.
‘It is an integral part of British law.
A lot of tenants don't want their competitors to know their cost base, particularly retailers.
‘The clauses probably have been misused or overused as a tool.
The trouble is you don't know where to draw the line.’
But UBS does.
‘We are aware that part of a substantial City office building was recently announced as having been let at £40 per sq ft,’ said the property analysts.
‘There was the ubiquitous confidentiality clause which we understand was to hide a two year rent free period.
‘Broken back over the five years to the first rent review, the true rent equates to just £24 per sq ft 40pc less than actually reported.’
This lead the analysts to estimate that all reported headline deals are probably around 10 to 20pc above the true market.
The property market should be following UBS's lead and saying deals reported at up to 20pc above their true value is precisely where to draw the line.
THE weekly market on a Middlesbrough housing estate is back in business after its winter break.
The Monday open market at Hemlington was established by the council at the suggestion of residents.
It starts up again on April 6 at its usual site in the Viewley Centre car park.
In Hartlepool, Labour  candidate Peter Mandelson said his party's plans for a better industrial profile for the North would help get the jobless back to work.
He told trades unionists that unemployment was at the heart of the problem.
Plans included new agencies for the North, such as a Northern Development Agency and a new Northern export service.
But Liberal Democrat candidate Ian Cameron described the manifesto as sketchy and added: ‘Where is the money going to come from and what good is it going to do?’
And Graham Robb, Conservative candidate for Hartlepool was equally critical.
He said: ‘This is all beautifully rosy but he has not mentioned his plans to tax companies by half a per cent on the payroll for a training tax or plans to enforce a minimum wage on small and medium sized companies which will be particularly badly hit.’
THE site where a building firm hopes to erect 28 executive-style detached houses and bungalows will come under the scrutiny of planning councillors on Wednesday.
Bellway Homes wants the development to go ahead on land at the south side of Guisborough Road, Nunthorpe, Middlesbrough.
The 7.6 acre site is currently used for grazing.
A previous planning application by the company to build 47 houses on the site was refused by the council.
Bellway's subsequent appeal against the decision was dismissed at a local planning inquiry in 1990.
INVESTORS and the City have watched spellbound as MTM's share price has continued to fall in value over the past week.
The  beleaguered Hutton Rudby-based company closed on Friday down 2p on the day at 74p.
The fall was of  special interest to The Northern Echo's business staff.
At the beginning of the year we invested a notional £2,000 in the company.
That £2,000 is now worth just £609, just 29pc of its original value.
The Echo's total £10,000 investment is now in the red at £9,712.
But its challenger in the share race, Middlesbrough stockbroker Wise Speke has also suffered as the market takes cover during the current bout of election fever.
Its original £2,000 investment is now worth £8,463.
Although MTM's shares rallied at the start of last week the publication by UBS Philips & Drew of an in-depth report on the state of the company's finances started them on a downward slide again.
The bad news from the analysts was compounded by the acknowledgement from the new board that the already twice-cancelled figures for 1991 will not be presented until at least mid-April.
The consensus in the markets is that the newly-formed audit committee, made up of board members, is examining more than last years figures.
The prospects for a rally in the shares now depends on a bid for the whole MTM operation, giving the shares some added value and stopping the downward trend.
This is not an investment for the faint-hearted.
For the bold punter, a bid above 100p is  unlikely without some signs of positive management action to stabilise cash flow.
That is what the City and investors are watching for.
A PLAN to build executive-style houses in an upmarket suburb of Middlesbrough has been refused for the second time.
Bellway Homes wanted to build 28 detached houses and bungalows on open grazing land at Guisborough Road, Nunthorpe, known locally as Lady Harrison's Field.
An earlier planning application by the firm for 47 homes on the site was refused by Middlesbrough council and an appeal against the decision was dismissed at a public inquiry.
The new application, for 19 fewer houses and improved landscaping, prompted 45 letters of objection.
They stated the site was needed as open space, the development would worsen traffic problems, put pressure on car parking at local shops and that there was already sufficient land in the area to satisfy any housing needs.
Members of the economic development and planning subcommittee voted to refuse planning permission after a site visit yesterday.
Planning officers had recommended refusal although chief officer Tony Noble warned that they may have to pay costs if the applicant succeeded at a subsequent appeal.
THOUSANDS of pounds were saved by a Middlesbrough school when industrialists offered to develop its new technology block.
Tees Offshore Base and its associate companies provided materials and labour to convert classrooms into a high tech resource base at Gilbrook School.
Tonight, Jim Potter, site manager at Tees Offshore, will officially open the air conditioned block for information technology and video editing.
Developed through the business education partnership, the resource area will significantly improve learning opportunities for Gilbrook's pupils, said headteacher Derek Smith.
The extra facilities allow the school to introduce media studies and make its own promotional videos.
THE future of Darlington is assured, according to chief scout Barrie Geldart.
The former Middlesbrough chief scout came to Feethams in May 1989, during the reign of far-sighted Brian Little, and with no real basis to work on.
The transformation has been incredible, with a real flow of talent coming through.
Geldart says: ‘When I arrived, there was only one schoolboy on the staff, and six YTS lads with no team to play in.
‘They were virtually left to fend for themselves, and, sadly, they had no chance to make an impact.
We had to let them go.’
He hesitates, and waves a hand at the board on the wall behind him.
On it are written the details of over 30 schoolboy and YTS players, all signed by the Quakers with a chance of making the grade.
‘We have 17 schoolboys signed on now, and there will be a further intake of 13 YTS lads during the summer.
‘We're always out and about watching games.
I've got several people helping me all over the area, and I watch three or four games on a Sunday myself.’
As well as those on the board, Geldart picks up a thick wad of letters from boys who will be invited to the club's Centre of Excellence, which takes place over two sessions every Thursday night.
‘There are 20 kids to a session, with each course lasting four weeks.
A lad has a week to settle in, then another three weeks to show us what he can do.
‘Parents and teachers can write to me, and tell me about their kids.
We will take a look at them.
Whatever happens, they will enjoy themselves.
‘This year, five boys two under 12s and three under 13s are going for training with the County FA regional squad, and for a club this size, it's brilliant.
‘We've got a conveyor belt of talent coming through now.
We have an under 16 side in the Yorkshire Conference on a Sunday morning, and I reckon three lads in there are going all the way.
‘They've already played in the Northern Intermediate League for under 19s, and they haven't left school yet.
As well as those two teams, we can play friendlies at any level, from under tens onwards.
‘We are on a par with anyone in the North-East.
Even though Darlington is a small club, this is still a prolific area for producing talent, and even after the big clubs have had their pick, there is still enough for us.
‘Our Centre of Excellence on Thursday nights for boys from ten to 14 helps us to compete.
‘They get first-class coaching.
All the first team players help out on Tuesdays and Thursdays, and we have specialist coaches coming in.
‘The biggest thing we can offer them is early progress.
Fifteen-year-olds are playing against lads a year older, the under 16s play in the under 19s, while some of the 17-year-olds have been playing in the Midland League for our reserves.
‘As everyone knows now, lads like Sean Gregan are playing in the first team and will be regulars in the future.’
The club's YTS scheme is impressive.
‘It's not only football,’ says Geldart.
‘They gain job experience at the Dolphin Centre, and have first aid courses with our physio Nigel Carnell.
‘Their education is taken care of at Longlands College one day a week.
They can take lessons of their own choosing, and some lads are aiming for degrees.
‘There is a definite path to the first team for these kids.
There were three of them in the first team at Peterborough last Saturday, and on Tuesday night young Adam Reed was in the squad.
‘There is no better place to come to than Feethams.
Anyone who wants to play football and reach the Football League has an ideal chance here.
‘With our financial position, it's a necessity for the club to have good young players coming through.
‘If they have what it takes, then they will get their chance early.
Lads like Gregan, Sunley and Isaacs are all putting themselves in the shop window, and some day a big club will come and get them.
‘The senior dressing room is getting younger, and the average age is down to 21.
These kids will save the club a fortune eventually.’
Geldart drools with enthusiasm when he speaks of some of the players who have broken into the first team or are on the verge.
‘Young Gregan can go all the way.
He's a midfield player really, because he is very good on the ball, and he can't express himself at centre half.
I can see him playing an anchor role in midfield.
‘Mark Sunley is another.
I signed him for Middlesbrough, and I jumped at the chance to sign him again here.
He loves to attack the ball, and is happier in the centre of defence instead of at full back.’
Those two Darlington fans know about, but there are many, many more.
‘Adam Reed will turn out to be another Gregan.
He has come on tremendously, and is still only 16.
‘Jimmy Montgomery comes in one day a week to coach the goalkeepers, and he raves about young Adrian Swan.
He says he is the best young goalkeeper by far in all the North-East clubs.’
There are more Matthew Scollett, Richard Cooper and Simon Shaw.
All unknowns to the fans, but perhaps not for much longer.
‘People should come and see the progress the club has made at Hundens Lane on Saturdays or at Rothmans on Sundays.’
But apart from a supply of talent, Geldart also needs hard cash.
‘We need a sponsor to help with travel expenses and the like.
It would be great to take the lads to international tournaments, because playing against foreign teams brings them on no end.
They learn quickly, and they bond together.
‘Anybody who wants to help out that way can come along and see the kids for themselves.
They won't be disappointed.
Manager Ray Hankin, meanwhile, is prepared to give the youngsters a chance in the first team before the end of the season.
With relegation fast becoming a foregone conclusion, Hankin has nothing to lose by giving teenagers an outing.
Sean Gregan, Lee Ellison and Anthony Isaacs all products of the youth policy, have all done well in the first team this season.
Geldart was mainly responsible for the Boro side that reached the FA Youth Cup final three years ago.
‘Nine players in that side appeared for the first team later.
‘I know I can do the same here, and I've got the feeling that a lot of people want to help me.
‘They travel all over the North-East watching matches, marking pitches and putting nets up, entirely voluntary the only payment they get is a match ticket.
‘Things are really beginning to roll now, and I've never been so happy.
And the results are there to see.
Lads in the first team, while the kids are drawing at places like Sheffield Wednesday, Leeds and Sunderland.
That shouldn't happen, but it is.
‘The youth policy is now firmly on the way, and no matter who comes to take charge, it's all set up for them’
FEARS were voiced last night over a plan by the North-Eastern Co-Op to build a £9.5m superstore and housing development in Middlesbrough.
More than 200 jobs could be created by the development, which is about half the size of the Co-Op's Somerville Hypermarket at Stockton.
But Cleveland County Council's development chairman said ‘very serious questions’ had to be asked about the plan for the Marton area.
Coun David Walsh is worried about the impact on existing shopping facilities and the possible huge increase in traffic.
There are fears that the proposal could be counter to the Cleveland structure plan, which sets out guidelines for future development.
Executive housing is also planned in the project, a joint venture between the Co-Op and Middlesbrough builder John Dowson.
Plans for the 8.2 acre site near the West Moor Nursing Home, off Dixon's Bank include nearly 20 four-bedroomed detached houses and four flatlets.
Neil Arnold, chief executive of the North-Eastern Co-Op, said: ‘We have 100,000 members in the Middlesbrough area, but only a four per cent market share.
We feel this new store will redress the balance.
‘Our Somerville Hypermarket is already trading successfully in Stockton and we hope to be able to offer the same quality of goods and standards of service to the people of Middlesbrough.’
Coun Walsh said: ‘Obviously, we will have to examine the proposals in detail, but I have to say that there will inevitably be serious questions to be asked.
‘The Co-Op proposals could run contrary to the structure plan because of the likely impact on existing shops at Marton, Coulby Newham, Middles-brough itself and possibly even Great Ayton.
‘It has to be pointed out that the consequences of the Co-Op's last development in the county was the closure of their Stockton High Street store.
‘Also, a development as large as the one proposed would generate a very substantial amount of traffic and we would have to examine in great detail the implications for roads in the area.
‘We are always anxious to encourage new developments and new jobs to Cleveland, but any project has to be judged on its potential impact on existing shops and jobs and traffic,’ added Coun Walsh.
Suzanne Heron, for the Co-Op, said traffic assessments suggested the road could take extra capacity.
Middlesbrough council spokesman Doug Allan said the planning application would be considered as soon as possible.
CONSUMERS who fell foul of the hard sell tactics of SureStyle Windows have been promised their cases will be chased up vigorously.
Cleveland trading standards officers were flooded with complaints about the double glazing firm in February.
Potential customer Tony Phillips had called the police after asking salesmen to leave 15 times.
One young man said he was told in an interview at the company's Middlesbrough office: ‘Be prepared to sit in someone's house for as long as it takes.
Hammer them down until you get a sale.’
Consumers who registered complaints were last night reassured by Cleveland trading standards officer Eric Robinson.
He promised: ‘We will chase up your cases.’
Mr Robinson admitted that the Office of Fair Trading which pledged to investigate the complaints was ‘not necessarily acting as quickly as I would like it to.’
Trading standards officers compiled a case file and submitted it to the OFT three weeks ago.
But OFT spokesman Terry Larkin said no action had yet been taken and admitted: ‘These things can take months.’
The OFT could demand assurances from the firm, which sacked staff from its Middlesbrough office after the affair blew up.
If the assurances were not given or subsequently broken, the firm could be taken to court.
Mr Robinson said he appreciated the OFT had a lot to do and claimed it would be more appropriate if trading standards officers could ask for assurances.
‘We will be pushing to do this locally and writing to the OFT on a regular basis to check on the state of play,’ he said.
Business help for Russia Translator Lingua Franca of Middleton St George has responded to the plight of a budding entrepreneur who wants to set up her own business in the former USSR.
Ekaterina Likhoda from the Sverdlovsk region, 200 miles from Moscow, has been sent a copy of Chester-le-Street business club's guide to starting a new business.
Partner John Winram says his business will also act as a co-ordinator if the venture gets off the ground.
Quality event: A seminar organised with the aim of explaining the purpose of quality  initiatives in business, and all its various accreditations such as BS5750 and ISO 9000 has been organised by the British Institute of Management's Teesside branch.
The event starts tomorrow at 7.00pm at Teesside TEC's offices in Queen's Square, Middlesbrough.
Training help: Durham City Council has linked up with Durham TEC, and the Chesterle-Street & City of Durham Enterprise Agency to provide training in gaining the popular quality accreditation BS5750 and proficiency in a foreign language.
The council provides subsidies as long as companies are based in Durham district and employ less than 100 people in a manufacturing or service industry closely linked to the manufacturing sector.
Insurance team: Insurance giant Pearl Assurance has set up a 60-strong team of commercial insurance consultants to target small businesses throughout the UK.
Pearl's new team will back up the  company's national workforce of 4,000 sales representatives.
They will initially focus on businesses such as shops and hotels.
Whisky galore: Invergordon Distillers yesterday increased its range of upmarket scotch brands by acquiring exclusive world rights to produce and market Sheep Dip malt and Pig's Nose blended whisky.
The Edinburgh-based group has reached a royalty agreement with the Sheep Dip Whisky Company which includes an option to buy the brands.
LIKE many Darlington-based firms, Whessoe emerged from humble beginnings.
A succession of rewarding domestic contracts braced the company to face stiff competition from Lancashire and West Scotland for pipeline and gas-holder contracts, which typified the technological changes throughout India in the early 1900s.
The earliest recorded gas-raising plants were installed throughout India's major coastal cities by firms from Manchester and Oldham.
With the bulk of India's coal production centred upon Raniganj in West Bengal, Whessoe occasionally in conjunction with another Darlington firm, Head Wrightson were exporting both heavy engineering products and expertise to raise gas in Calcutta from local coal.
Many of Whessoe's installations from the early years of this century still survive today and are used primarily for storage.
Whessoe's plaques, along with those of Head Wrightson, are displayed on some of the oldest power stations in working order in India.
From 1919 the company built seven power stations equipped with Middlesbrough structural steelwork that still radiate Darlington pride from an age when North-Eastern engineering ruled supreme.
Further west, when Bombay emulated Manchester as India's textile centre, there was a huge demand for cast-iron pipes to connect the Tata Hydro Power Plant with Bombay 92 miles away.
This enabled Whessoe to stamp its by now ubiquitously accepted name on the conduit that supplied vital water to the cotton city.
Installed in 1906, I saw the piping in full service as late as 1985.
ALMOST 270 small businesses have gone bust in Darlington since 1987, Labour candidate Alan Milburn claimed yesterday.
He blamed the Tories' lack of investment for the failure of small businesses.
‘Since 1987, 270 Darlington companies have gone out of business and it has been overwhelmingly small companies.
The number of Darlington firms going bust has more than doubled in the last two years.’
Victoria Dow, from Dow Design Group, Darlington; Alan Coultas, from Northern Systems, Middlesbrough; and Frank Allan, who runs a corner shop in Corporation Road, Darlington, all backed Mr Milburn at a Press conference.
Ms Dow said service industries had been most affected by the recession simply because there was no investment and Mr Coultas said manufacturing was the key to the future of Britain's economy.
Michael Fallon, defending Darlington for the Tories, said: ‘We have helped small businesses through the budget with lower rates of small business tax.
We are also encouraging fast payment by large companies.’
He said Labour had ignored the fact three new businesses had opened in Darlington since the beginning of the year.
Liberal Democrat Peter Bergg said the Lib Dems would ease the tax burden for small businesses.
They also hoped to redress the balance of the problems caused by the Conservatives.
BAT Industries' Brian Hutchinson went to the top of the class to mark the topping out of a £400,000 sports hall at Middlesbrough's City Technology College.
Macmillan College expects to open its new leisure centre for school and community use in June.
Funded by industrial sponsors and the Government, the hall solves some of the problems posed by the school's lack of playing fields.
Cleveland County Council has refused the college access to fields originally attached to the school site and pupils have had to walk to a nearby stadium for games lessons.
The topping out ceremony by Mr Hutchinson, community affairs manager of BAT Industries, celebrated the first phase of expansion plans which include altering the dining hall and providing more room for science and technology.
BRITISH Telecom has given another £25,000 to help the innovative Botanic Centre lay down firm roots in Middlesbrough.
Teesside Tomorrow, which supports the centre, received the cash from BT and to mark the event chief executive Alan Timothy visited the centre with BT customer services manger Gerry Parsons.
‘I am sure the Botanic Centre will be a great success,’ said Mr Parsons.
‘It will help spread the green message.’
Stuart Goldie, business manager at the Botanic Centre said it was fitting that it would be opening in May, as Middlesbrough started its year as Environment City.
BT has provided £75,000 in support of Teesside Tomorrow over the past three years.
National Grid states pylon case in public tome Details of evidence the National Grid Company will give at a public inquiry into plans for pylons across Cleveland and North Yorkshire were published this week.
Copies are available for inspection at planning authority headquarters, libraries and other public buildings throughout the area affected by the proposals.
The weighty document outlines a number of important areas to be covered at the public inquiry which starts in Northallerton on May 19.
A spokesman said they included the company's legal duties and responsibilities to transport power, the need for the high-voltage overhead lines and pylons, route options, pylon design, undergrounding, electromagnetic fields and the environmental impact of the scheme.
MANYCOPIES
Copies of the statement can be inspected at the following locations: National Grid Company, Hookstone Park, Harrogate; Cleveland county council department of economic development and planning, Gurney House, Gurney Street, Middlesbrough; Hambleton district council planning department, Civic Centre, Stonecross, Northallerton; Langbaurgh borough council planning department, Middlesbrough Road, South Bank, Middlesbrough; Middlesbrough borough council economic development and planning offices, Vancouver House, Central Mews, Gurney Street, Middlesbrough; North Yorkshire county council planning department, County Hall, Northallerton; Stockton borough council planning department, Municipal Buildings, Church Road, Stockton; Teesside Development Corporation, Dunedin House, Riverside Quay, Stockton; Cleveland County Library, Central Library, Victoria Square, Middlesbrough; Billingham Branch Library, Bedale Avenue, Billingham; Stockton Central Library, Church Road, Stockton; Nunthorpe Branch Library, The Crescent, Nunthorpe; Thornaby Branch Library, Westbury Street, Thornaby; Wrightson House, New Town Centre, Thornaby; Eston Branch Library, Normanby Road, Eston Grange; Lazenby Post Office; Seamer Sub Post Office; Hutton Rudby Post Office; Forbuoy's, Brus House, Thornaby; Grant-Sterling, Borough Road, Middlesbrough; Northallerton Library, Thirsk Road, Northallerton; and Easingwold Library, Market Place, Easingwold.
— A National Radiological Protection Board report published on Tuesday said there was no clear evidence to suggest people exposed to electromagnetic fields were more at risk from cancer.
However, the report recommended more research into the subject should be carried out before all links were ruled out.
The group which published the report was headed by Sir Richard Doll, the cancer specialist whose work proved the link between smoking and cancer.
ELECTRICAL company Dowding & Mills lost £632,000 in its failed takeover bid for North-East engineering firm Torday & Carlisle.
The price of the expensive tussle was outlined in figures published yesterday by Birmingham-based Dowding.
Chairman Peter Hollings still insisted yesterday its £18.3m bid last year was ‘generous and in the best interests of both  companies' shareholders’.
He said the offer was based on industrial logic.
Two-thirds of Tyneside-based T&C shareholders rejected the bid offer last November.
The failure of the bid followed two months of bitter rivalry, claims and counter-claims between executives of both groups.
T&C also paid a high price for victory.
A month ago its chairman Paul Torday, a former Northern CBI chairman, disclosed that the cost of its defence amounted to £653,000.
That means the abortive bid ate into combined profits to a total of £1.285m.
Mr Hollings confirmed that Dowding was holding on to its 8.7pc stake in T&C, built up in the run-up to and during the launch of the takeover bid.
He made his comments as the company announced a fall in pretax profits for the six months to December 31 of £3.6m, from £5.1m.
Sales fell 7pc to £38m.
Dowding has operations in Peterlee, Durham and Middlesbrough.
It also has an engineering subsidiary Bootham Engineering, with bases in Scarborough and York.
Mr Hollings said: ‘Trading is still very difficult and uncertain.
The timing of any recovery in the economy remains hard to predict.
However, when the upturn comes, the company, with its strong balance sheet and unique spread of service  activities , is well placed to continue its long record of growth.’
The interim dividend has been increased to 0.92p from 0.88p while earnings per share slipped to 1.76p from 2.46p.
Dowding's bid is considered an influential factor in recent  boardroom changes aimed at reviving T&C's fortunes.
Industry troubleshooter Peter Ryan, current chairman of airline Dan Air, will shortly move in as chairman replacing Mr Torday, who will concentrate on his role of chief executive.
Last year T&C scraped into the black by only £25,000, compared to a pre-tax profit of £4m in 1990.
GRANTS totalling more than £37,000 for a host of projects being run by organisations in Cleveland have been agreed by the county council.
Respond, an inter-church organisation tackling unemployment, is to receive £8, 000 from the 1992–3 development fund.
The council is providing cash towards the cost of a major survey in Hemlington, Middlesbrough, where plans for a Community Action Plan are under way.
The county council and borough council are each providing £6,000 for a survey to find out what local people want in terms of estate development.
A grant of £950 will be given to Dramarama creative arts to part fund a theatre project in Middlesbrough for people who are physically handicapped or who have learning difficulties.
Other recipients are: Raybee Credit Union, Hartlepool, £800, for office furniture and equipment; Thornaby Impasse, £620, to buy equipment for the centre; Outreach Advice and Advocacy Service, Thornaby, £3,935, towards the cost of providing advice sessions.
Middlesbrough/Stockton Community Radio Group, £3,000, to fund independent audience and business research document; Cleveland Community News Network, £1,750, towards running costs and community newspapers; Development and Recreation of Pallister Park Group, Middlesbrough, £900, to part fund the estate carnival day; Hartlepool Credit Unions, £750, towards a training programme.
West View Writers Circle, Hartlepool, £750, towards publication costs of book ‘Recollections of Old Hartlepool’; Hartlepool Toy Library and Playbus, £4,200, towards purchase of toys and  production of video; Cleveland Rotofac Trust, £3,000, towards the cost of a boat to take people with learning difficulties on cruises.
Central Park parents and children's association, Hartlepool, £650, for equipment and running costs of Barney's After School Club; Billingham Gingerbread, £500, for toys, camping equipment and running costs; Park Methodist Day Centre, Middlesbrough, £500, towards the purchase of a snooker table; Age Concern Cleveland, £500, towards the cost of leisure equipment for their Middlesbrough Leisure Club.
Seaton Lane Activities for Young People, Hartlepool, £774, towards the cost of Easter holiday activities; Blue Hall Bulk Buy steering group, Stockton, £640, to fund start-up costs for a bulk-buy co-operative; Guisborough Resource Centre for the Unemployment, £956, to buy equipment and materials.
THE number of empty council houses in Middlesbrough is being kept down to the bare minimum in an attempt to ease the town's homes crisis.
And the council's housing department is asking tenants thinking of moving on to help them make the most of the housing stock by giving early notice when they intend to leave.
New figures show just 119 of the 15,767 properties controlled by the council, less than one per cent, fit to be let but without a tenant.
Another 146 homes are empty because of major renovation works.
The council has over 6,000 on the waiting list and over 100 families having to be put up in bed-and-breakfast accommodation.
Housing chairman Coun Bob Brady said: ‘Our record compares favourably with that of any public or private sector landlord.’
He said in any system there was bound to be a turnover leading to some vacant homes.
‘To do our job we need the help of our tenants and I would urge anyone moving out of a council house or flat to give us plenty of notice so we can identify the property and allocate it to someone else,’ he said.
THE rise in share prices that followed the return of the Tories to power sharply reversed the falls that occurred following the announcement of a General Election.
The Stock Market had originally marked prices lower as opinion polls indicated a hung Parliament.
If that had been the final outcome, question marks over the ability of sterling to maintain its value against the Deutschmark would have been raised and there would have been a prospect of a rise in interest rates to protect the pound.
The working majority achieved by the Conservatives removed that worry.
Sterling improved strongly and the market sensed an imminent cut in interest rates which added support to the initial market euphoria.
Companies that were seen as vulnerable to a Labour victory led share prices upwards.
Northern Electric and Northumbrian Water both rose by over 20pc, strongly outperforming the market.
The prospect of reduced interest rates also helped the share prices of those companies geared to easier credit.
Local car dealer Cowie, now regarded as the quality stock in the sector, also outperformed the market strongly.
Though analysts remain sceptical on whether interest rate cuts will lead to a rapid revival in the housing market, this did not prevent strong gains being made in the sector.
York-based Persimmon was a favoured choice for investors and support was also noted in Barratt Developments.
FTSE 100 stocks with a local presence posted gains as buyers returned to the quality blue chips.
ICI broke once more through the £13 barrier but Glaxo failed to hold a rise above £8.
To a degree some of the rise in prices resulted from market makers scrambling to acquire shares to meet investor demands but the Conservative victory has restored confidence in the City, something which has definitely been missing over the last few weeks.
William Baker Baker is a director at Wise Speke, Middlesbrough.
A HOUSING partnership is helping families put down roots in Middlesbrough.
All 32 of the low-cost, semi-detached and terraced homes at The Elms, in Marton Grove, have been snapped up and there is a lengthy waiting list should any of the prospective buyers pull out.
They were built by the Northern Rock Housing Trust in partnership with Middlesbrough council.
Council tenants and people on the waiting list were encouraged to consider buying a house at The Elms, and nine have been bought by council nominees.
Coun Bob Brady, the council's housing committee chairman, said: ‘Financial restrictions have prevented us from building council houses for some time.
So, encouraging tenants or people on the waiting list to move into private ownership is one way of  releasing more of our own stock for those in need.’
Middlesbrough council provided the development land and prices were kept to between £33,500 and £39,000, with the help of a City Grant from the Department of the Environment.
Coun Brady said similar schemes were already underway.
THE number of empty council houses in Middlesbrough is being kept to the bare minimum in a bid to ease a housing crisis.
And the council's housing department is asking tenants thinking of ‘moving-on’ to help them make by giving early notice of when they intend to leave.
New figures show just 119 of the 15,767 properties controlled by the council are fit to let but empty.
Another 146 homes are empty because of major renovation works.
Housing chairman Coun Bob Brady said: ‘Our record compares favourably with that of any public or private sector landlord.
It is a reflection of sound management and a commitment to easing the homes crises in this town.’
He said in any system there was bound to be a turnover leading to some vacant homes.
‘But in Middlesbrough we are determined to ensure that the minimum number of houses are left empty for the minimum amount of time.
‘To do our job we need the help of our tenants and I would urge anyone moving out of a council house or flat to give us plenty of notice so we can identify the property and allocate it to someone else,’ he said.
The council has over 6,000 on the waiting list and over 100 families are in bed-and-breakfast accommodation.
A couple have backed a housing partnership by opening the door to top officials from the scheme.
Gary Cassidy and Kate Marron have moved into a Middlesbrough CouncilNorthern Rock Housing Trust development in Marton Grove, Middlesbrough.
All 32 low-cost homes have been sold.
Nine council tenants have bought properties, including Gary and Kate.
The pair welcomed council housing chairman Coun Brady and NRHT chairman Leo Finn.
Coun Brady said: ‘Financial restrictions have prevented us building council houses for some time.
Encouraging tenants or people on the waiting list to move into private ownership is one way of releasing more of our own stock for those in need.’
DARLINGTON'S showpiece Cornmill shopping development added another blue chip name to its list of tenants yesterday.
Developer Burton Property Trust has clinched an agreement bringing Anita Roddick's Body Shop to the town.
The international cosmetic stores network will have a 1,300 sq ft branch in the Cornmill's Northgate Mall, when the centre opens in August.
The move into Darlington will bring the worldwide total of Body Shop outlets to 750.
It will be the group's 175th franchise operation.
Liz and Terry McLoughlin, who already have the Body Shop franchise in Middlesbrough, will take over at Darlington.
Cornmill manager Albion Small said he expected several other famous names to join Body Shop.
‘In an expanding health conscious marketplace, a cosmetic specialist such as The Body Shop will be welcome in Darlington,’ he said.
Earlier this week, efforts to fill the 165,000 sq ft Cornmill received a fillip when WH Smith was confirmed as an anchor tenant, taking up 11,000 sq ft premises, also in Northgate Mall.
Smith's existing Darlington town centre store, in Queen Street, is likely to be taken over by its record and video retailing arm Our Price.
The other anchor tenant will be C&A, which has already signed an agreement to move in.
Earlier this week Burton Property Trust confirmed it was close to finalising an agreement with a prospective tenant for a 3,000 sq ft unit.
And fashion store Etam is thought to be on the brink of signing a letting agreement involving its switch from its Northgate store into the Cornmill.
Other retailers already signed up to move into the centre are Dixon Sports, Strand Cards, H Samuel, C&J Clark and Dorothy Perkins.
Car repair costs are set to rise under EC proposals threatening independent firms who make spare parts, the Consumers' Association has warned.
Drivers could end up paying a ‘monopoly premium’ to the big car firms, because independents face a ban on making replacement parts.
The threat comes in an EC green paper which would effectively prohibit independent firms from copying parts, said association.
Independents' parts are significantly cheaper and sometimes less than half the cost of the equivalent parts made by the manufacturers.
Stephen Locke, the association's head of policy, said: ‘If competition from the independents disappears, the already-high manufacturers’ prices could rise further.’
The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders said the proposals were still only at discussion stage.
French toddlers have been teaching a Middlesbrough sixth former who went to work in a nursery in France.
Lisa Fletcher spent two weeks studying their language when Acklam Sixth Form College shipped its A-level French students across the North Sea.
Other students worked as tourist guides, office and bank clerks, shop assistants and art technicians during the  exchange with Camille Claudel College in Soissons, north-east of Paris.
Many of them enjoyed their work experience in Picardy so much they are going back for more in their summer holidays.
The Body Shop will move into Cornmill Cosmetics and skincare chain The Body Shop has confirmed it will take a unit in the Darlington Cornmill Centre.
The 1,300 sq.
ft. unit is the 175th branch to open in the country, bringing the total number of stores worldwide to 750.
It is the first time the chain, headed by Anita Roddick, has traded in Darlington.
Mr Terry McLoughlin and his wife, Liz, who already have a Body Shop in Middlesbrough, will run the Darlington franchise.
Mr Albion Small, Cornmill centre manager, welcomed the news.
‘In an expanding health conscious market place a cosmetic specialist such as The Body Shop will be welcome in Darlington where it will join other famous names in the prestigious Cornmill,’ he said.
ALL GO ON WESTGATE ROAD:
Projects UK is being wound up amid talk of a new organisation and a new location.
There's not much talk at the moment of what is going to happen to the specially designed and equipped premises at Newcastle Arts Centre which it will leave behind.
The darlings of a couple of years back, Projects UK has fallen from grace or viability or both.
Meanwhile Zone Gallery, the new photography space on Westgate Road, opens with an  exhibition by Andres Serrano — works taken from the Saatchi Collection.
Serrano is famous for his images of Christ immersed in a variety of bodily fluids.
A TRIPLE bid from Cleveland for City Challenge funds was under way yesterday.
Projects from Middlesbrough, Stockton and Redcar are vying to be included among the 20 towns and cities which will receive Government cash for improvement schemes.
Langbaurgh Council showed it was determined to win cash for the Redcar bid with a spectacular document delivery.
The town's Labour MP, Mo Mowlam, and Langbaurgh councillors Brian Roberts and Len Douglass sailed down the Thames to Westminster Bridge accompanied by a flotilla of sailing dinghies.
The Redcar regeneration plan is based around a leisure complex for the Majuba Road sea-front area and a new town centre shopping development.
It also features schemes to improve car parking, housing and industry.
By contrast, Middlesbrough's bid for a second slice of City Challenge cash was a low-key affair.
Cliff Shepherd, the senior officer leading the City Challenge Two team, took the document which concentrates on Central and West Middlesbrough top London by train.
A theatre, leisure pool and arts and leisure complex are all part of the project, as are plans to tackle unemployment, health and housing problems.
The town is busy taking advantage of its first City Challenge victory by implementing plans aimed at revitalising East Middlesbrough.
Stockton's City Challenge bid document was also on a Whitehall desk in London today.
The bid to revitalise the town was launched yesterday at Stockton Town Hall by John Sefton, chairman of Stockton Central Area Development Agency, which drew up the document.
And helping with the handover to assistant chief housing officer Neil Schneider, were two young girls regarded by Stockton Borough Council as typical of the youngsters who would benefit from a successful bid.
Nathalie Ions and Clare Jefferson, aged seven and eight, both live on Blue Hall estate, which is included for revamping in the City Challenge bid.
Mr Sefton said: ‘It is absolutely vital that Stockton wins because the bid will bring in around £100 million over a five-year period for the regeneration of the town.
‘The win would transform the lives of the people of Stockton, including youngsters like Nathalie and Clare.’
NORTH-EAST shoppers spent more than £100,000 every hour last year at the North Eastern Co-op.
But the £30.9m rise in turnover to £366.3m failed to add to the company's bottom line.
Profits fell by 3.5pc to £5.5m.
Chief executive Neil Arnold said the shortfall in profits was due to the Co-op's ambitious expansion plans last year.
In 1991 the Co-op opened the £15m hypermarket at Stockton, one of the biggest in the UK.
Also opened were superstores in Chesterle-Street, Crook and Whitby, a new Toyota garage at Gateshead, under the Co-op's Priory motor dealership and a new BMW dealership at Wallsend.
Mr Arnold said: ‘Last years very ambitions expansion programme, and a lot of refurbishment work at our older stores cost us a lot of money.
‘These start-up costs meant there was a considerable early loss, so that did cut our profits to an extent.’
He said the Co-op's investment would bring considerable benefits to its members.
The food division which accounts for 64pc of the Co-op's sales in the North-East increased its turnover by 11.4pc to £257.5m, taking a large slice of market share from its main competitors.
The Co-op employs more than 6,000 workers at 300 outlets in the region.
Sunday trading introduced in a bid to fight off competition and a total of 14 stores now open on a Sunday.
The Co-op's 512,000 members will share in £493,000 shareholder benefits.
Speaking at the Co-op's general meeting last night chairman Bill Allison said: ‘We had to operate in the longest, deepest recession since the war.
It really has been a case of survival of the fittest.
‘In the 22 years I have sat on the North Eastern Co-op's board I cannot recall a year in which so many negative factors have combined.
To substantially increase sale and to produce reasonable profits is a considerable achievement.’
In 1992 the Co-op plans to open a further eight stores in the North-East, including one in Darlington and one at Marton near Middlesbrough.
Mr Arnold said the group would concentrate on areas which have become cooperative deserts and re-establish the Co-op name as a major force in Northern retailing.
— Co-operative Wholesale Society sales last year moved up to £3.2bn against £3bn last year.
CWS profits rose only marginally from £47.7m to £48.5m.
THE Middlesbrough office of property agent Hepper Robinson, the commercial surveying subsidiary of the Halifax Building Society, looks set to be bought out by its management.
Other branches of the nationwide Hepper Robionson chain will link up with former rival Richard Ellis, eventually coming under the RE banner.
But Middlesbrough and the North-East is not an area that appeals to the London-based agent, despite the opportunity to expand its regional representation.
Cheap land prices in the region, offering poor cash returns, have also deterred the agent taking it under its wing.
Hepper Robinson in Middlesbrough is run by two managers, Alan and Stephen Brown, who are due to receive details of the MBO deal from RE over the weekend.
‘We have only just found out that we have the opportunity to buy the agency.
I don't know what amount the Halifax is going to ask for the business,’ said Stephen Brown yesterday.
The merger and MBO offer signals the end of the Halifax's unsuccessful expansion into property, started in 1986.
Like the Prudential and Lloyds it was badly hit by the downturn in the market and made big losses.
Games Store plans to buy 10 new shops NEWCASTLE-based computer and games retailer The Games Store is looking to snap up 10 new stores this year.
It currently trades from 11 stores, including the flagship in Newcastle's Eldon Square, but the retailer has seen a huge increase in its core market.
According to managing director Richard Breakey the games market could have grown by as much as 30pc in the last year.
‘The market we operate in has been expanding despite the trials and tribulations of the retail recession and we need more space,’ he said.
Further growth of the market is anticipated, perhaps by 30pc again next year, and many of the big players are gearing up for expansion.
‘Competition will come from people like Virgin Games and Games Limited.
The multiples like Kingfisher and WH Smith are also increasing their presence in the market,’ said Mr Breakey.
Research boost for Teesside Poly Teesside Polytechnic has been awarded the right to accredit research degrees.
The polytechnic soon to be known as the University of Teesside has been granted the right by the Council for National Academic Awards.
From Friday it will be able to register research students, appoint examiners and confirm research awards on PhD and MPhil students.
The polytechnic currently has 71 research students and another 20 waiting to be registered.
In the past all its research work on a wide range of subjects from biotechnology to local history was directly supervised by the council.
Prof. Tom Thomas, chairman of the polytechnic's research degrees committee, said: ‘This is a crucial signal because it demonstrates that the work of the polytechnic extends to the highest levels of scholarship.
It is also a tribute to the ability of the many students who have already gained research degrees from the polytechnic.’
Towns go all out for City Challenge cash Multi-million pound City Challenge bids were sent off by hopeful Cleveland towns this week.
Stockton, Middlesbrough, Redcar and even Hartlepool are all hoping to be among the 20 British towns to win City Challenge status and cash for five years of improvement work.
Ambitious plans for all four towns were despatched with some ceremony to the Department of the Environment in London.
Stockton is hoping it will be second time lucky with its bid concentrating on ‘bringing quality of life’ to residents living in the centre of the borough, including the Blue Hall housing estate, Newton, Primrose Hill and the Parkfield areas.
Last year the town missed out, but the borough council, residents and business people have worked together on a new ten-point plan which includes regenerating the town centre by making it fully pedestrianised, building a new shopping development and improving access for disabled people.
The bid also includes a leisure park and 140 homes at Queen's Park, as well improvements to the Portrack and Tilery areas.
Private builders and housing associations will be brought in to improve 360 homes in the Blue Bell area, while derelict land will be reclaimed to form a Great North Park.
Industrial estates in the eastern parts of the town will be regenerated by offering grants and business advice.
Mr John Sefton, chairman of Stockton City Challenge group, said: ‘The bid is for £37.5m., just part of the £120m. total investment.
This indicates the levels of support and enthusiasm from the private sector.
This investment from all sectors will bring economic prosperity, paving the way for continued success long after City Challenge is fulfilled.’
Middlesbrough is hoping its bid will be lucky for the second time running.
In the first City Challenge scheme it was promised cash to help revitalise the eastern side of the town; now the borough council, residents and local companies have drawn up similar plans to improve central and western areas.
The bid is aimed at making the town centre the hub of business and community activities and includes schemes for a theatre, leisure pool and arts complex.
About 38,000 people live in the area covered by Middlesbrough's second City Challenge bid St. Hilda's, Ayresome, Grove Hill, Easterside, Newport and Gresham.
Male unemployment is running at 27pc, and this coupled with severe health and social problems are just some of the issues the second bid is hoping to tackle.
Coun. Michael Carr, leader of the borough council, said: ‘We have entered the second round of City Challenge with the same enthusiasm with which we approached the first, and I hope we enjoy the same success.
‘The plans are aimed at creating jobs and investment in an area of great need and great potential.’
Redcar sent off its bid with perhaps the most razzamatazz of all the Cleveland bidders.
The fun began on Monday when a giant sandcastle was built on the beach to raise money for the Ann Charlton Lodge and Kirkleatham Special School.
There Coun. Arthur Harvison, the Mayor of Langbaurgh, was presented with the first copy of the challenge.
On Wednesday a delegation travelled to London, where they were met by Dr. Marjorie Mowlem, MP for Redcar.
Together they sailed along the Thames accompanied by a flotilla of dinghies to present their bid to a Department of the Environment official at Westminster Pier.
Much of the Redcar bid is aimed at rejuvenating the town centre by building a shopping mall, a major office development, a leisure complex and a business park on the outskirts near Kirkleatham.
Langbaurgh council and private sector representatives also want to improve car parking facilities, housing and industry.
Hartlepool borough council, with the help of local people, has also concentrated its bid on renovating the town centre and particularly Church Street, hoping to attract firms into the town.
Ironmongers branch out King and Co, the Darlington ironmongers, have opened a new 4,000 sq ft shop on the Cannon Park industrial estate in Middlesbrough.
The new branch marks the beginning of an expansion plan for the company, which was established in 1744.
A controlling interest was recently bought by Mr Harold Usherwood and Mr Paul Thompson, formerly of Crossley builders' merchants.
Mr Usherwood, managing director, hopes the Middlesbrough shop will be the first of a succession of satellite depots to open across the NorthEast.
Darlington gets new scanner Mr Ian Botham, the international cricketer, yesterday opened the Magnetic Resonance Imaging Centre in Darlington, accompanied by his wife Kathy.
The building, in Dudley Road on the Yarm Road Industrial Estate, is the first outpatient facility in the area to offer the new type of scanner.
The radio waves, magnetic field and computer technology combine to produce vivid images of the body's soft tissue.
And unlike X-rays and other sorts of scanning there is no surgery or radiation.
The parent company, Health Images, already operates 33 MRI centres in the USA.
Darlington is its second venture in Great Britain: the first in Guildford, Surrey, was opened in November 1990.
The centre has already attracted interest from fund-holding GPs in the area as well as customers referred from Darlington Memorial Hospital and Middlesbrough General.
Retiring issues
COMPANY annual meetings are invariably tedious affairs.
So full marks to Lord Ridley for injecting some fun into last week's gathering of Northern Rock investors.
The aristocrat, bowing out after five years as chairman of the building society, made reference in his address to the headline of the AGM press release, which ran ‘Record results as Lord Ridley retires as Northern Rock chairman’.
To which the noble replied: ‘I don't know which is cause, and which is effect.’
Lordly rebuke
AND during subsequent cross examination of the society's report and accounts, Lord Ridley showed all the aplomb and expertise of a razor sharp stand-up comic.
Only one investor found the nerve to find fault with what the vast majority considered to be an excellent performance in 1991.
Failing to hide his irascibility at the belligerent critic, Lord Ridley adopted a tactic other directors may be well advised to follow to silence unruly shareholders.
He suggested that if the errant investor was not happy, he should take his money elsewhere.
Furniture ban MFI, failed to get a mention from Lord Ridley, although it is often the subject of many a comic's material.
So don't be too  surprised if it is the subject of some mirth over the next few months, in the run up to its £800m flotation on the Stock Exchange.
Already City brokers Smith New Court have chipped in, although perhaps unintentionally, with the notion of MFI being a leader ‘in the fragmented furniture industry.’
Soccer shop
SHOPS across the North-East must be contemplating this coming Saturday with dread.
Business come mid-afternoon will be down to a trickle as people head home to watch the F.A.
Cup Final in the comfort of their own room.
Furniture retailer Conroys is trying to engineer a compromise.
It is holding open days in its Stanley, Middlesbrough and Washington stores, supposedly in support of the Rokermen.
It is laying on colour TVs, seating and a glass of wine for men while they watch the match, while their other half does the shopping.
Perhaps Conroys misreads traditional North-East culture.
What will happen on Saturday is that the other half and kids will be banished to the shops, while he stays at home to watch the match in silence.
LLOYDS Bank Commercial Service has appointed Alan Hirst area manager, covering the North-East from Berwick to York.
His appointment is part of the bank's refocussing of its middle-market business banking activities.
He will support seven managers and staff, dealing with businesses with individual annual turnover of more than £1m.
Peter Warters has been recruited as contracts manager for civil engineering group Clugston Construction, at its Billingham office.
He will be responsible for managing contracts and developing new business in the North-East.
The Northern region of the Association of British Insurers has named Norman Watson as its regional chairman.
He is also local manager of Eagle Star Insurance, in Newcastle.
The ABI represents most insurance companies.
One of its main activities is provision of an information service.
Tyneside architects Angus Leybourne has appointed Edward Hill as senior consultant to the practice.
Mr Hill is an elder and past regional chairman of the Northern Region of the Royal Institute of British Architects.
John Hey has been appointed area sales manager, in Middlesbrough, for the Scarborough Building Society.
He was formerly district manager and project manager with the National & Provincial Building Society.
Former Durham Police chief superintendent Bill Hills has been appointed emergency planning and securities officer with Northumbrian Water.
He will monitor and review the company's emergency planning policies and security operations.
Newcastle Budilding Society has made a number of promotions and appointments at its head office.
Bob Gallagher, 55, has joined as insurance manager from Legal & General.
He has 30 years experience in the sector.
Neil Elders, 32, has been promoted to mortgage manager.
He joined the Society in April 1991 as business systems manager.
Leslie Tood has been promoted to chief solicitor following two years as legal services manager.
Ian Pearson, 30, has joined as management accountant.
He joins from Touche Ross where he worked in corporate finance.
And Bill Lott, 36, has been promoted to field sales manager after two years managing the Hull branch.
Recruitment specialist Mike Cockburn, 37, has joined human resource consultancy CPCR as a consultant.
He spent the last five years with Austin Knight in Newcastle, the last six months as agency director.
He is a specialist in psychometric testing.
Electric motor manufacturer Team Rewinds has taken on Mike Osman, 49, in the newly created post of works manager.
He joins the Gateshead company after 10 years in Australia working for a similar electric motor company.
Stuart Seller has been promoted to the post of service supervisor at Washington office equipment supplier Comcare.
Mr Sellar, 26, was previously service engineer at the company and has worked for the company since it was set up.
BUSINESSES in Middlesbrough are finding out more about the town's success in City Challenge.
A business reception organised by Middlesbrough Council and the Teesside Chamber of Trade is being held on Friday to outline the kind of initiatives available to local companies.
Speakers will include council leader Mike Carr, who is also chairman of the City Challenge Board, and chamber president John Kirton.
City Challenge manager Les Southern said: ‘At present firms on East Middlesbrough Industrial Estate and in the Saltwells, North Ormesby and Lawson industrial estates provide work for some 5,000 people.
‘A central part of the City Challenge initiative is to ensure that local firms receive the kind of help they need to survive and grow; and  identifying their needs and objectives is one of our main aims.’
Plans in the five-year, £37.5m City Challenge programme to promote business and enterprise in the area include improved security and environmental works on the East Middlesbrough Industrial Estate and a £4.5m Training and Development campus at the Berwick Hills Centre.
Coun Carr said: ‘Unemployment in the eastern parts of Middlesbrough is running at 20 per cent and this problem must be tackled if the City Challenge initiative is to succeed.’
THE banking union Bifu has drawn up a hit list of North-East banks which would close if the proposed merger between Midland and Lloyds goes through.
Staff from branches of Midland and Lloyds in the North-East are to meet in Newcastle on Thursday to discuss the planned takeover.
Hundreds of banking jobs are expected to be lost in the region if Midland shareholders accept Lloyd's £3.8bn offer.
The Shanghai and Hongkong Bank has made on offer of £3.1bn for Midland, but is currently reconsidering its offer.
Bifu North-East organiser David Carter said: ‘Lloyds estimate 20,000 jobs will go, although we think it will be nearer 30,000.’
Bank staff will meet on Thursday at 2pm at the Old George, Bigg Market, Newcastle.
The union has highlighted 24 regional branches which could close in a Lloyds-Midland merger.
— Towns in the North-East where one or more branches are likely to close include: Alnwick; Ashington; Bishop Auckland; Blyth; Byker Consett; Cramlington New Town; Durham; Gateshead; Gosforth, near Newcastle; Hartlepool; Middlesbrough; Morpeth; Grey Street, Newcastle; Northallerton; North Shields; Ponteland; Redcar; Richmond; South Shileds; Stockton; Sunderland; Thirsk; Whitley Bay.
Building society puts its trust in a former banker
THE new man at the helm of Darlington Building Society is believed to be one of the youngest chief executives ever appointed to such as post in this country.
Thirty-six-year-old Mr Peter Rowley succeeds Mr Alan Wood, aged 62, who retires at the end of next month after 21 years in the job.
Mr Rowley has moved to the Tubwell Row branch from the Newcastle Building Society where he was general manager.
His appointment as a director and chief executive of the 51,000-member DBS takes effect from July 1.
Originally from Burtonon-Trent, his wife, Hilary, is from Saltburn where her father, Mr George Medd, and late mother, Joyce, were the third generation of Medd's the bakers in the town.
Mrs Rowley is a lecturer at Newcastle Polytechnic business school.
The couple met at Manchester University where both studied geography.
With daughter, Jenny, aged eight, and son Alex, aged six, they live at Hexham but are looking for a home in the Darlington area.
Mr Rowley's career began in banking.
He once won a scholarship to go on a German banking state tour.
‘At that time they were way ahead and I think we still have a thing or two to learn from them,’ he said.
His time at Newcastle gave him the unique opportunity to take the building society into Europe when it became the first UK society to offer a full range of services on the mainland of Europe on opening a branch in Gibraltar in 1990.
‘It was my responsibility as a project to establish the whole thing,’ he said proudly, adding that his work at Newcastle called for a very broad range of expertise.
He says there is definitely a future for strong, locally-based building societies like Darlington, which has a total of 11 branches three in the town and others including Bishop Auckland, Stockton, Yarm, Redcar, Middlesbrough and Hartlepool and 20 agencies in South Durham, Cleveland and North Yorkshire.
Referring to last year's aborted plan to merge the DBS with the Mercantile, he said: ‘It is our intention to thrive and remain independent.’
He regards his appointment as an indication of the society's determination to go-it-alone.
A keen sportsman, he has several times completed the Great North Run.
He also enjoys rugby and football, these days as a spectator rather than a player.
And he enjoys squash.
He has worked in the North-East since 1986 when, after 12 years in commercial banking, he came to the area as manager of Sunderland Co-operative Bank.
The following year he moved to Newcastle as regional corporate manager, transferring from there to the NBS.
Mr Rowley is a fellow of the Chartered Institute of Bankers and a member of both the British Institute of Management and the Institute of Credit Management.
Mr Wood (left) and Mr Rowley.
NOW entering its third year, Teesside Training and Enterprise Council has already made a significant contribution to the social and economic life of the region.
Yet the TEC is determined to enhance its contribution still further over the coming years.
At a public meeting TEC's chairman, Les Bell, outlined some of the past year's achievements while chief executive John Howell unveiled plans for this year.
The mission of Teesside TEC is to promote and contribute to the economic growth of Teesside and it aims to do this by fostering individual initiative, community teamwork, business development and quality training.
Crucial role Highlights of the last 12 months include the launch of the Government's Investors in People initiative in September, the opening of the Business Growth Centre in February and the spectacular inaugural Trainee and Business Awards ceremony in March.
The latter attracted many high quality entries and was attended by an audience of more than 350.
Teesside TEC met all the Government guarantees on training places for long-term unemployed amd played a crucial role in the development of the original City Challenge bids from Middlesbrough and Stockton.
In the wake of the successful Middlesbrough bid, TEC staff have taken a lead in one of the major strategies.
These achievements were reached despite a background of deepening nationwide recession and the Government's decision to reduce the amount of funding available to TECs, particularly for adult training.
As a result, TECs generally had to make cuts in the number of providers of employment training at a time when there was a growing need for such investment.
Fortunately, astute financial management and income generation have allowed the TEC to support many schemes for which central funding was not available.
Looking to the future the TEC has produced a 1992–1995 corporate and business plan, detailing a host of initiatives.
Certainly the TEC itself has set some tough targets.
It aims to provide 40,000 training weeks by next April under its innovative and highly successful Training in Employment scheme.
At the same time it aims to devote more resources to special training needs.
Mr Howell stressed the TEC's intention to improve appreciation of the benefits of training among Teesside employers as a major thrust of the TEC's future operations.
‘We need to capture the hearts and minds of the people of Teesside to make them more aware of the professional help which our 124 expert staff can provide, and we need to improve further our accessibility,’ said Mr Howell.
As part of this strategy, the TEC will be opening satellite offices in Hartlepool, Redcar and Stockton with the aim of providing the full range of TEC services ‘on the doorstep.’
A particular emphasis will be placed on reaching the small business sector where the TEC's expertise can play a major role in helping to nurture start-ups and rapidly growing small companies which provide the majority of new jobs.
‘People are the most valuable asset any company has and we want to help each individual reach his or her full potential and in so doing gain maximum commercial advantage for their company,’ said Mr Howell.
The TEC remains convinced that Teesside has the potential to play an important role within Europe as a centre for the manufacture of petro-chemicals, steel and engineering products, supported by an increasingly diverse base of smaller firms operating in high technology sectors, relying upon a highly skilled workforce.
‘Unlocking that potential is what the TEC is all about,’ Mr Howell said.
Russian welcome:
Barclays Bank's Business Centre, in Middlesbrough, is playing host on Wednesday to five Russian businessmen visiting the UK to learn how businesses operate in the West.
They are part of a group of 20 from St Petersburg spending a week in the region at the invitation of Durham University Business School.
Capco merger:
Capital & Counties, the property  company that owns Newcastle's Eldon Square shopping centre, has announced terms for a merger with Transatlantic Holdings, the Luxembourg-listed life assurance and property group.
South Africa-based Transatlantic already holds a majority stake in CapCo but the deal will allow it to make an application to list its shares on the London Stock Exchange.
Unilever lower:
A weak performance in Europe held back profits growth at Unilever, the Anglo-Dutch food and consumer products group, figures out yesterday showed.
In the first quarter of 1992 the group made £377m before tax, compared with £358m in the  corresponding period last year.
Morland rejects:
Small independent brewer Morland last night rejected a £101.3m takeover bid from larger rival Greene King.
Morland's board of directors said it considered the offer inadequate and recommended shareholders took no action.
Riva package:
Electronic cash till maker Riva Group of Bolton, Lancs, has completed a refinancing programme to reduce borrowings by £5.8m to £6.9m and save some £800,000 in annual interest payments, it announced yesterday.
Steel rise: Steel production in Britain averaged 339,700 tonnes a week in April, 0.9pc higher than in March and 1.7pc above the figure for April 1991.
Investment up:
Investment capital group 3i has made new investments worth £275m in the six months up to March, nearly 90pc more than the figure for the corresponding period a year ago.
The group said the figures were a pointer to gradual economic recovery.
New flights:
Flights to the French town of Beauvais, using the Dan Air and Air Toulouse lines, have been introduced at Newcastle International Airport.
Tank contracts:
Stockton-based Wilson Walton has won two new contracts to supply corrosion prevention equipment for water storage tank  installations in Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates.
the award has been won by the company's Middle East division.
Press Construction wins £2.3m order PRESS Construction of Darlington has won two contracts worth a total of £2.3m that will consolidate work at the Haughton Road  business for its 500-strong workforce.
The first is to lay around 100 miles of cable television and telephone duct in Edinburgh for United Artists.
It will take around 12 months and could be a prelude to Press winning contracts worth £8m on the same job.
‘There is a lot of work left to win on that particular job and we will be trying hard to get it.
It is the largest project of its kind in cable television  work that we have secured in the UK’ said David Martin the company's business development director.
The second contract, worth £300,000 is to install a new compressor and associated pipework at the BOC plant in Grangetown, Middlesbrough.
Euro guide: A guide to the latest European legislation on building products has been produced by the construction law unit of Newcastle solicitors Dickinson Dees.
Building materials now have to satisfy a series of EC requirements relating to safety, hygiene, the environment and energy efficiency.
Hotel appointment: Accountant Touche Ross, currently supervising the affairs of Randell's Hotel in Skipton, has appointed Oriel Leisure to manage the complex.
Oriel holds management  contracts for several large  hotels in the UK.
The new manager will be Chris Hull, a former manager of the St Nicholas Hotel, Scarborough.
Package welcomed:
Cleveland and Yorkshie North Euro MP David Bowe has welcomed a package of measures which he says will boost maternity rights.
Both the European Parliament and Commission support the measures, which include 16 weeks maternity leave on at least 80pc of salary.
Now it is up to the Council of Ministers to accept the package.
ICI TRAVEL AGENT WINS AIRPORT AWARD
A Cleveland travel agent who sells holidays only to staff at ICI has won an award from Teesside International Airport.
Ms Sandra Milton, aged 31, has won the first Scheduled Services Award for selling more trips from the airport than any other travel agent during the last 12 month.
Four years ago she set up American Express offices at ICI Billingham and Wilton, and now has a staff of 24, operating five days a week selling holidays to chemical workers She said: ‘We're probably one of the largest offices in the area.
We organise travel worldwide, a lot of domestic travel, Europe and long-haul trips to the States and the Far East.
The Inclusive Tours Award went to Mr John Corlett, manager of Dawson and Sanderson based at the Upton's Store in Middlesbrough.
Mr Corlett, aged 49, who heads a nine-strong staff, said his selling success was due to Balkan Holidays offering flights out of Teesside Airport for the first time.
Runners-up in the scheduled services  category were Pickford's Travel, now known as Wagon-Lits of Stockton, and Thomas Cook in Middlesbrough.
In the inclusive tours section the runners-up were Lincoln Travel of Peterlee and Callers Pegasus of Stockton.
PEOPLE'S champion Gwen Lamb is battling on after a setback in her efforts to recoup £30,000 she lost in a bank crash.
Miss Lamb is outraged that liquidators have paid just 4.75p in the pound to investors hit by the 1982 collapse of the Isle of Man Savings and Investments Bank.
She described liquidators Cork Gully as ‘corpse snatchers’ and said it was unfair that they had taken a total of £7.9m in expenses over 10 years.
Miss Lamb, of Marton, Middlesbrough, said she would carry on fighting on behalf of all the investors.
Five men go on trial next month on fraud charges relating to the bank.
Afterwards, she hopes the Isle of Man government will reimburse investors.
No-one at Cork Gully was available for comment.
UNEMPLOYED Teessiders fear a self-build lifeline to a job and a home could be in jeopardy because of benefit rules.
The 22-strong team building homes for themselves in East Middlesbrough say regulations need to be standardised.
During a six-month Employment Action training period in building skills, they receive unemployment benefit plus a £10 ‘top-up’.
But after the initial training is complete, there is a question mark over whether they could still receive benefits while building the homes.
Chairperson of the Brunton's Manor project Tony Edwards said: ‘To qualify for benefit, you have to be available for and actively seeking work.
That could be quite difficult when you're in the middle of building your own home.’
More and more self-build projects are taking off all over the NorthEast and Mr Edwards said clear guidelines had to be laid down.
The team are building the properties on Hoskins Way, Homerton Road, Pallister Park.
Alan Harper, deputy manager of the benefits agency in South Tees, said there was no problem while the group was training.
‘The decision is whether the availability for work issue is addressed when they start building the houses,’ he added.
A spokeswoman for the employment benefit adjudication office said it had received a file on the subject, which was under consideration.
MONEY still does not grow on trees.
But from this weekend the public gets a chance to see the old phrase turned on its head.
Flanking the drive to Middlesbrough's innovative Botanic Centre, to be opened by Professor David Bellamy tomorrow morning, are native trees such as oak, maple and mountain ash.
Bursting with spring health, they are drawing sustenance from a compost containing thousands of banknotes and travellers cheques.
Discarded and shredded by the Bank of England and banknote manufacturer Thomas De La Rue, the paper money has been mixed at the Botanic Centre with sludge from a KP crisp factory on Teesside to form a peat-free compost.
‘We're confident we've created a good product,’ says centre manager Stuart Goldie.
‘It's ideal as a soil conditioner and for tree planting, and besides being used here it is being used in planting Cleveland's new Community Forest.’
At the centre, visitors can see not only the trees flourishing on literally the world's richest compost.
Also on view are the 16 ‘bins’, or bays, where various blends of the novel mixture, which also includes straw and other organic materials, have been prepared.
Some newly-planted cabbages also have the cash-based compost at their roots.
‘We're still developing it for use with seedlings and delicate plants,’ says Stuart, ‘but we're certain it has tremendous potential.’
The compost initiative is just one aspect of a project which, perhaps against expectations, puts Middlesbrough in the forefront of ecological awareness.
And evangelism.
For on its 20-acre edge-of-town site, with neat new houses nudging its entrance just off a busy roundabout, the Botanic Centre is ambitiously committed to spreading the Green gospel.
‘The headlines on environmental issues are invariably about problems and catastrophes,’ says Stuart, a former ICI technical manager.
‘We want the centre to project the positive side.
In particular we want to provide inspiration and ideas for the public, showing methods and techniques that they can adopt.
Apparently a poacher turned gamekeeper, Stuart sees no conflict in having switched from ICI's fertiliser division to the organic field.
‘The principles of good husbandry apply whether you are dealing with organic or inorganic methods,’ he says.
Perhaps more important is that the demonstration role of the centre, which was launched by Prince Charles three years ago, marks it off from most traditional ‘botanic gardens’.
For their prime concern is conserving and showing plants.
But the Botanic Centre, initiated by Middlesbrough Council, is determined to build bridges with the community.
Already about 80 well-wishers, including Middlesbrough FC striker Bernie Slaven, have ‘adopted a tree’ their £10 sapling marked by a plaque.
And strong links have been forged with local schools.
‘Pupils have been involved with soil analysis and seed propagation,’ says Stuart.
‘They've collected conkers, ash keys and acorns, to produce seedlings here which they will later transplant in the Community Forest.’
Most imaginatively, one school closely involved with the Botanic Centre, Acklam Grange comprehensive, is now devising a scheme to clean its waste kitchen water, which will feed a pond network.
Stuart comments: ‘We hope to extend these contacts by developing a complete education package.
We believe the Centre offers tremendous scope for projects and studies within the National Curriculum.’
Opening tomorrow is the centre's shop, tearoom, demonstration garden and exhibition hall.
Items on sale will include vegetables and herbs from the centre's own three-acre market garden and bread, jams, and other produce from the well-known Camphill Communities of Botton Hall in the North York Moors and its sister settlement at Larchfield near Middlebrough.
In the garden, visitors can see compost systems, natural means of weed and pest control and various cultivation techniques, including a ‘no dig’ system.
Head gardener Matthew Hayes, who trained at Emerson College, Sussex, a leading centre for organic horticulture, says: ‘We aim to provide a good insight into sound organic  practice , which visitors can adopt in their own garden or allotment.’
Though still in a somewhat raw state, the Botanic Centre is well laid out, with attractive pergola-framed walkways planted with honeysuckle, roses and clematis.
A terrace for open-air teas looks towards the award-winning British Tioxide white garden, re-created here after its success at the Gateshead Garden Festival.
The demonstration garden itself leads to a so-called 21st century garden, with wildflower meadow, pond, orchard and soft fruit area.
‘The idea is to create a garden that combines minimum maintenance with maximum attraction for wildlife,’ says Stuart.
‘Our wildlife areas are attracting a lot of birds, insects and butterflies.’
Though half the £300,000 spent on the project so far has come from central and local government and charities, the other half has been provided by industry.
This is mirrored in the exhibition centre, where, alongside displays on issues like global warming and acid rain, sponsoring firms including ICI and British Steel set out their environmental stall.
To some visitors this uncritical PR might strike an uneasy note.
But Stuart says: ‘Companies are keen to improve their image and there's a lot of good work going on.
It seems fair to provide a shop window.’
The centre hopes that cash generated by visitors will chiefly propel it into the final two phases of its development.
Expected to take at least four years to achieve, these will see the creation of a wide range of specialised habitats salt marsh, sand dunes, mountain stream, moorland and wetland all with their associated tree and plant life.
And the centre will equip itself to demonstrate the latest developments in wind, water, and solar power.
‘We think it will be unique,’ says Stuart Goldie. — David Bellamy will arrive at the centre off Ladgate Lane (A1044), near the Blue Bell Hotel, Acklam, at 10.30am.
The opening events, between 11am and 11.30am, will include a Free Fall display by the Black Lanyards and music by Lingdale Silver Band.
Attractions on Sunday and Monday include the Tetley dray horses, a Barley to Beer exhibition and a farming display.
— The centre is open at weekends and Bank Holidays, admission £1.20 adults, 40p children, 80p OAPs and unemployed, £2.50 families.
No charge for shop or tearoom.
Phone Middlesbrough (0642) 594895.
A CLEVELAND college is about to oil the wheels of the transport industry to make its employees more transportable.
Until now, people working in the transport industry have tended to specialise in one aspect of the distribution business.
But Longlands College in Middlesbrough has come up with a unique qualification, a BTEC Diploma in Business, Finance and Distribution, aimed at 16 to 19-year-olds as well as adults looking for a change in their career.
Lynne McBean, head of general education at the college, said: ‘With this qualification, a dock or port worker, for example, is less dependent on a single employer,’ she said.
‘They will be in a better position to change jobs and roles between  various branches of the transport sector.’
The course will run at the college from September.
LOVELL Partnerships, the social housing and urban regeneration specialist, has relocated from its Middlesbrough office to Harrogate.
The division of the YJ Lovell group says the move leaves it better placed to cash in on work it is currently bringing in from South Yorkshire.
‘We are getting a lot of work from Leeds, and the Harrogate base will give us access to work in places such as Wakefield,’ said sales manager Vic Chaney.
He added that the move did not lessen the company's commitment to the North-East.
‘We are still selling properties at Hartlepool Marina.
The market is quite slow but we are selling.’
he said.
The company has also embarked on a second phase of building at Port Clarence, near Stockton, providing cheap housing.
Lovell Partnerships' new 2,600 sq ft office is in the St Martins-developed Windsor Court scheme.
WORK on a £6.5m housing improvement scheme for a Middlesbrough estate should start later  this year.
The council's housing and community services committee approved a design guide for the Cargo Fleet Lane estate which, members were told, should redress environmental, security and management problems.
The refurbishment scheme ‘A Good Place to Live’ will be carried out over a period of five years.
Coun Bob Brady, committee chairman described it as an exciting project which would be part of the town's City Challenge programme.
Work carried out so far has concentrated on seeking residents' views on the problems of the estate and discussion on ways of resolving them.
The major criticisms are poor security of doors and windows, unsightly general appearance, lack of parking areas and proper recreational space.
Members were told training opportunities would be available to residents.
Owner occupiers account for 23pc of households and the inclusion of work to their properties would have a beneficial effect on the overall scheme, members heard.
Pattern maker goes under
AUCKLAND Creative Pattern Makers, based on the South Church Industrial Estate, Bishop Auckland, has gone into voluntary liquidation with liabilities of around £90,000.
The supplier of engineering patterns and moulds was forced into the move by a succession of bad debts and late payments, said liquidator Simon Lundy of Sunderland accountant Jennings Johnson.
Its assets accounted for around only £13,000.
HK help: Around 120 regional industrialists  yesterday heard how to maximise the opportunities open to business in Hong Kong following the award of the first major contract in the £10bn airport project.
The seminar was sponsored by the NDC and the DTI.
Specific topics included purchasing and selling to Hong Kong subcontractors.
A MIDDLESBROUGH designer and manufacturer of hand-blown glassware products has won one of the UK's top prizes for young business achievers.
Stephanie Middleton was yesterday voted one of the two runners-up in the 1992 Livewire UK Business Start Up Awards, winning herself £1,000 to invest in the business.
Ms Middleton, 24, who received her cheque from main sponsor Shell UK chairman and chief executive John Collins, beat off competition from eight other young businesses to clinch joint second place.
Her nine-month old business, Stephanie Ann Glassware, produces a variety of products including perfume bottles, brooches, tie pins and candlesticks.
She currently sells her company's products to outlets as diverse as Liberty, Harvey Nichols and the Guggenheim Museum in New York.
 Break even effort from Wise Speke
WISE Speke, the stockbroker with offices in Newcastle and Middlesbrough, could offer no relief to its parent company Sturge Holdings which announced poor interim pretax profits yesterday.
The underwriting agent reported a 30pc fall for the six months to March 31, dropping to £2.6m from £3.7m in the same period last year.
And it only managed to pay an interim dividend of 2.75p, compared to 5.5p last time.
Wise Speke's performance showed that although stockbroking commissions had increased by £400,000 in the period it had only managed to break even.
Sturge chairman David Coleridge said: ‘Wise Speke's performance in the first half year suffered from the depressed level of activity in the Stock Market as a result of political and economic uncertainty prior to the General Election.
‘In the last few weeks, however, the level of activity has improved considerably and we are confident that Wise Speke will make a reasonable contribution to the group's profits for the full year.
‘And it will continue to enjoy improved  profitability as the economic climate improves.’
However, Wise Speke's lack of profitability is the least of Mr Coleridge's problems.
He is also chairman of Lloyd's, the insurance market which is expected to announce the worst loss in its 300-year history later this month.
EXPERTS given the task of finding the skills available in Middlesbrough have put the finishing touches to their City Challenge project.
The 32-strong Skills Audit Team, recruited to find out all about the skills and work experience of the people living in the eastern district of the town, met for the last time yesterday at the end of a ten-week project.
The team, organised by the council's personnel department, were joined by Coun John Jones, deputy leader of the council.
He said the skills audit had been a success both for the people who took part in it, and for the City Challenge area.
‘Bringing jobs and better training opportunities to eastern Middlesbrough is central to the Challenge programme and we want to do that by building on the skills and qualities of the people living there,’ he said.
The Skills Audit was the first City Challenge project to get underway and the team carried out interviews in about 10,000 households in the area.
Their findings will now be put together to form a database for firms investing in the area, telling them about the people's skills and abilities.
Coun Jones said the team had done a good job for the whole community.
Dale Electrics' Mexican deal OTTOMORES Dale, the Mexican associate company of North Yorkshire based Dale Electric, has won a £1m order from communications company Telefonos de Mexico.
It is to supply 98 generating sets using some parts designed and manufactured by Dale at its UK plants in Scarborough, including the recently introduced Dale 6400 control panels.
Canary talks:
Negotiations about thousands of civil servants moving to London's Docklands are expected to start early next week, administrators to the collapsed Canary Wharf project said yesterday.
But they stressed that bringing civil servants to Canary Wharf would not necessarily save the project and added that the Government wanted Canary Wharf or any future owner to pay the £400m needed for an extension of London Underground's Jubilee Line to Docklands.
Flexible working:
The importance of flexible working arrangements, particularly for women, is to be discussed at a half-day seminar this month.
Sunderland University chief executive Anne Wright and TGWU regional officer Stella Guy will address the workshop at Derwent House, Washington on June 24.
For further information Telephone .
Contract complete:
Specialist building contractor Hall & Tawse has completed another contact within cost and ahead of programme.
The £5.6m scheme for the Army Airt Corps in Dishforth was handed over six weeks ahead of schedule.
Driver fled after causing crash
A FORESTER drove the wrong way along a dual carriageway to escape police after hitting another car, Thirsk magistrates heard yesterday.
Christopher Todd, 19, of Boltby, near Thirsk, drove his Land Rover into the path of a car on the A168 near Thirsk, injuring two people.
Then he drove off, the wrong way down the dual carriageway, said Jane Cockburn, prosecuting.
Blood tests revealed he was almost twice the legal alcohol limit.
Todd yesterday admitted driving with excess alcohol and failing to stop and report an accident.
The case was adjourned for reports Hens raid: Thieves raided a hen house in Ripon.
They made off with nine birds worth a total of £180 from a house in Studley Road.
HOPES of a rapid economic recovery were dealt another blow yesterday when unemployment rose to 2.7m for the first time in almost five years.
Another 21,300 people joined the dole queues in May, the 25th consecutive rise in the seasonally adjusted monthly total.
In the North another 200 people lost their jobs, taking the number out of work to 153,800 an unemployment rate of 11.1pc, the highest in mainland Britain.
The national figure of 2,716,600 is the highest since August 1987 and represents 9.6pc of the workforce.
More than 1.1m have joined the jobs queue since unemployment started rising in April 1990.
Employment Secretary Gillian Shephard said: ‘May's figure shows a welcome slowdown in the increase compared with the previous month.’
Tony Blair, Labour MP for Sedgefield and Shadow employment secretary, described the figures as ‘dire’.
‘Today's figures prove unemployment is still rising and with 29 people chasing every JobCentre vacancy in the region the Government's promise seems a long way from materialising,’ he said.
In the House of Commons Prime Minister John Major said: ‘While the increase in unemployment is very unwelcome, it is clearly now slowing.
So I think you can now see that we are on the road to recovery,’ he said.
His upbeat message just a day after Chancellor Norman Lamont warned that full economic recovery could be three years away sparked an angry clash with Labour.
Opposition leader Neil Kinnock said the Prime Minister's past predictions of recovery had been ‘absurdly wrong’.
‘The figures are mildly encouraging for economic recovery and certainly good news on the inflation front,’ said James Barty, economist at brokers Morgan Grenfell.
City investors were less convinced.
The FTSE index of the top 100 shares slumped 37.5 points yesterday, cutting share values by an estimated £8bn.
Unemployment increased in all parts of the country, with the biggest rises again in London and the SouthEast, followed by the West Midlands, East Midlands and South-West.
In the North the seasonally adjusted figure fell by more than 3,000 as the region started to gear up for the tourist season.
Despite a drop of almost 600 in its jobless total, the worst-hit area in the region continued to be South Tyneside with 9,752 on the dole, 17.4pc of the workforce.
The Government took comfort from other Employment Department figures which showed a fall of 0.25pc in the increase in average earnings in the year to March to 7pc.
The number of stoppages through industrial action was 23 in April, the lowest monthly figure since records began in 1920.
Figures for the North-East: Bishop Auckland 5,523, 12pc; Darlington 5,297, 9.1pc; Durham 5,948, 8.6pc; Hartlepool 6,278, 15.8pc; Middlesbrough 18,757, 13.9pc; Newcastle 42,633, 11pc; South Tyneside 9,752, 17.4pc; Stockton 9,799, 11.8pc; Sunderland 23,195, 13.3pc; Harrogate 2,315, 4.4pc; Malton 380, 4pc; Northallerton 779, 3.7pc; Pickering and Helmsley 387, 3.9pc; Richmondshire 935, 5.6pc; Ripon 669, 4.9pc; Scarborough and Filey 3,123, 7.7pc; Thirsk 319, 4.1pc; Whitby 968, 9.2pc; York 6,347, 5.8pc.
YORKSHIRE Television yesterday launched an agreed £30.4m takeover bid for Tyne Tees Television, ending years of behind the scenes courtship.
The new company promised it would provide a better service to the North, including a news service specifically for South Durham, Teesside and North Yorkshire.
It plans to invest £1m in its existing Middlesbrough studio which will produce a Northern Life style programme for the south of the region.
It will have its own presenters, and could lead to changes for Newcastle's popular Northern Life presenters Paul Frost and Pam Royle.
Tyne Tees managing director Ian Ritchie said: ‘The idea is for a totally free-standing half-hour news magazine programme from Middlesbrough.’
Despite the news of investment in programmes worried staff at both stations are bracing themselves for cost cutting and job losses.
The bid has the backing of both company's boards, Yorkshire's main shareholders, and the Independent Televsion Commission.
Yorkshire already owns 20pc of Tyne Tees.
The new company will be called Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television Holdings.
The merger will create the third biggest ITV company in Britain, serving 9m viewers, about 16pc of the national audience.
Together the two companies bid almost £53m to retain their 10 year broadcasting licences in last year's franchise auction.
Both Yorkshire, which made a £13.1m profit last year, and Tyne Tees, which made just £200,000, need to make big cost savings to support the bids.
Mr Ritchie, who will be deputy chief executive of the group, warned: ‘I cannot give a guarantee that there will be no redundancies.
There are going to be cost savings.’
Yorkshire managing director Clive Leach, who will head the new group, was more blunt, saying: ‘We are looking for substantial cost reductions and we will be ruthless in taking out any area that does not contribute.’
Tyne Tees National Union of Journalists official Neil Hacking said the staff were taking a ‘wait and see’ attitude to the takeover.
— ITV plans to take on the BBC in the lunchtime ratings battle with a new soap set in a North-East seaside community.
Runswick Bay, a multi-million pound investment by Yorkshire Television, is due to go out on the network five days a week next year.
— Changing scenes: Page 6.