

The Northern Echo
ANL supporters in Cleveland recently travelled to Paris to join an anti-racist demonstration, carrying letters of support from Middlesbrough council leader Mike Carr, Cleveland and North Yorkshire MEP David Bowe and Mehdi Husaini, chairman of Cleveland Racial Equality Council.
Safina Hussain and Huma Farooqui say they quickly signed up 25 students at their college for the ANL, and intend to continue spreading the message.
‘Our aim is to make others aware of what is happening,’ said Huma.
‘Some people tend to think it's some faraway problem that will never come to anything, but it destroyed human decency before and it can again if we don't stand up to it.
The Nazis killed six million Jews last time how can people say this kind of activity is not a threat?’
Supporters of the ANL in the NorthEast are particularly concerned about the ambitions of the BNP including the intention to field a General Election candidate in Darlington and racial attacks which in the past year have included nailing a pig's head to a synagogue in Sunderland and a similar attack in South Shields.
Their response includes proposals to demonstrate against far right rallies and against racial harassment in the region over the coming months, working to combat the latter with the recently formed Anti-Racist Alliance and existing anti-racist groups.
On February 22 many will be attending a rally in Sunderland called by the Tyne and Wear Anti-Fascist Association.
ANL organisers say it is up to individual members whether they take to the streets to fight racism, but Safina Hussain has little doubt about what action is needed.
‘You cannot sit back and let it happen.
Fascism is all about violence and there is no diplomatic solution to it.
We know that their violence has to be confronted, that people have to stand up to it.
There has to be unity between black and white and we have to face this together.’
The alternative if the British public turns a blind eye, she believes, is the prospect of a dark day when, because of the colour of their skin, two young Middlesbrough-born and bred women may not be allowed to reach the safety of their home.
A SEMINAR on vice is being organised by Middlesbrough branch of Toc H, and organisers want to invite a prostitute to the meeting.
Spokesman John Dunwell said: ‘Our premises in Zetland Road are just round the corner from from the town's red light district and some of our members do not like using the building because of the district's  association with prostitution.
‘We think this is largely due to a lack of understanding of prostitution and the issues surrounding it.’
Toc H has invited a representative from the police vice squad and a local health worker involved with AIDS awareness to the seminar.
Mr Dunwell said it was also hoped to arrange for a prostitute to address the meeting.
The seminar will be held on March 11 from 10.30am to 3.30pm.
YORK has come top in a survey to find the most cycle-friendly place in the country but the rest of the region has come a cropper.
A report in New Cyclist magazine revealed yesterday that York sits proudly at the top of a 150-city cycle league, but Newcastle should be avoided at all costs.
Liverpool is rated the worst place to ride a bike, but Newcastle is not much better, while Gateshead and Middlesbrough also get the thumbs down.
The survey looked at which cities cater for cyclists and covered everything from parking facilities to potholes.
Cycling officers were asked what measures they used to reduce traffic speed and if they had a cycling programme.
Cycle-friendly centres included York, Oxford and Cambridge.
Don Mathew, who compiled the survey, said: ‘Councils in Middlesbrough, Newcastle and Gateshead don't seem to care about cyclists whereas York really tries.
‘People who take their bikes out at weekends are terrified at the number of potholes, bumps and increasing traffic levels on roads.’
TRAGIC baby Bogdan Ursu last night began the most important battle of his short life.
And the first indications were that his potential life-saving operation went well.
Consultant neurosurgeon Fred Nath, who carried out the delicate operation yesterday free of charge at Middlesbrough General Hospital, said the next few days would be important.
‘It was a straightforward operation but if a small amount of infection was to get in it would be a very serious problem,’ he said.
The eight-month-old tot, flown to Teesside from his home in Romania for the delicate brain operation as a last chance hope for survival, suffers from hydrocephalus water on the brain.
Without surgery it was only a matter of months before he died in the orphanage at Iasi, in Eastern Romania.
Rod Jones, of Southfield Road, Middlesbrough, who organises Convoy Aid Romania, started the mercy mission to bring Bogdan over here.
The youngsters had a severe chest infection when he arrived ten days ago which delayed treatment.
The operation involved making a hole at the back of the head, another hole in the tummy and re-routing the fluid from the brain down through a tube under the skin.
‘The child's particular problems are related to the fact that his nutrition is very poor so his resistance to infection is not what it should be,’ said Mr Nath.
He hopes to set up a rolling fund to help other Romanian babies with problems which could be treated in this country.
He went out to Romania at the end of last year to see Bogdan after hearing about his plight from Mr Jones.
‘I think without any treatment, if the child was left in the situation it was in it would have died within some months,’ he said.
Baby Bogdan will be kept in hospital at least ten days depending on how he gets on and how his nutrition improves.
Mr Nath said he hopes to raise some money to bring over two other orphans for treatment.
They have cleft palates and as well as suffering a from a terrible-looking deformity they cannot swallow properly.
‘All the children in the orphanages are very disadvantaged but these two are  more disadvantaged than the other inmates,’ said Mr Nath.
And the plan is for other youngsters from the orphanage to be given much needed operations.
A CLAIM that patients in South Cleveland were being refused a lifeline because of cash cuts was refuted by a senior officer last night.
Clinical director Paul Lawler, who heads the intensive care unit at South Cleveland Hospital, Middlesbrough, said desperately ill patients were being turned away because they could not get into the unit.
He said a few years ago patients could be ‘fairly guaranteed’ a bed on the unit.
But Bill Murray, chief executive of South Tees acute hospitals, denied there had been any cuts.
He said the intention was that beds in intensive care units were managed so that the were occupied 70pc of the time leaving a 30pc capacity to take emergency cases like road accident victims.
He said the units were very much part of a hospital's working environment, usually to care for patients coming out of operating theatres after major operations.
He said if one hospital's unit is full units in adjacent hospitals are used, in South Tees' case units in North Tees or Darlington.
WHAT price a haircut?
Company cars and private healthcare are popular perks for firms to offer employees.
Many more offer their staff free hairdressing either on the premises or at outside salons.
It seems a minor, if pleasant, benefit until you mount up the cost of a weekly trip to the hairdressers.
At Vidal Sassoon, a cut and blow dry costs £25 pay that every week and you've enough to run a small car.
Prices around here aren't quite that high, but they're not that far off either, with the average among the bigger salons being around £12, though they range from £5 to £18.
Perms, interestingly, don't vary in price quite as much but check before you go in clutching your pennies, if the perm includes the cut and blow dry as well, otherwise that could come as an expensive little shock.
Very few salons have a sliding scale of charges bonus points for those who do.
They would argue that all their stylists are equally competent.
But we know that's not so.
And what about the occasions when a junior does most of the work, leaving the boss to come along and give an expensive twiddle of the hot brush?
That usually works out at about a fiver a flourish.
There are occasions when we have grudged paying a top rate, but been too cowardly to refuse.
In any case, why should someone with short hair styled by the most recently qualified, pay as much as someone with long hair looked after by their most expert?
Essanelle is one of the few to make this distinction they have stylists and ‘style directors’ for whose expertise you pay more.
Men always pay less.
‘Their hair's usually shorter and you don't have all that messing round with the tongs’ as one hairdresser cheerfully explained.
And ASK before you have your children's hair cut children's prices aren't generally fixed and most charge on a rule of thumb, height of head, sliding scale.
This can range from £2 to £9.
But whoever pays the bill, most of us still regularly visit the hairdresser, whether it's once a week or once a year and as each town seems to have at least 20 salons, this is an entirely random list.
We'd love to find the cheapest competent stylist in the region.
If you have any nominations, please let us know.
Headmasters, Chester le Street Women's cut and blow dry £9.25.
Men £8.25.
Perms from £26.30 to £35.
Replay, Darlington A wonderfully varied pricing system depending on who does your hair and when you make the appointment.
Women's cut and blow dry varies from £10.50 to £15.95 but that includes a neck and shoulders massage.
They also have a ‘stand by’ appointment scheme, where you can ring in at certain times at half an hour's notice, where prices range from £4 to £7.
Men's cut and blow dry is £8.95.
Perms range from £18.50 to £22.50, not including cut and blow dry.
Browns of Durham Cut and blow dry from £7.50 to £17.
Perms from £16 to £26, not including cut and style.
Headstart, Hartlepool Women's cut and blow dry £8.50.
Men £7.
Children from £2.
Perms from £15.50 to £25.50.
Hairworks at Sears, Metro Centre Women's cut and blow dry £11.80.
Men £8.20.
Perms from £25.50 to £50.
Kutz, Middlesbrough Women's cut and blow dry £7.50.
Men £4.20.
Perms £25 to £30.
Saks, Middlesbrough (prices vary between branches)
Women's cut and blow dry £12.95, men £8.60.
Perms £32 to £45.
John Gerrard, Newcastle Women's cut and blow dry £12.30, men's £8.50.
Perms from £28 to £45.
Klownz, Newcastle.
Women's cut and blow dry £15.50.
Men £33.50.
Perms from £40.
Stephen Russell, Newton Aycliffe.
Women's cut and blow dry £10.45.
Men's £6.25.
Perms £26.75.
Franco's, Northallerton Have a special offer on at the moment.
Special offer prices in brackets.
Women's cut and blow dry £10.50 (£8.50).
Men £6.90 (£5.70).
Perms from £21.95 (£17.95) to £30 (£24).
Talking Heads, Peterlee.
Women's cut and blow dry £7.25.
Men £5.75 Perms from £19.95 to £25.95.
Peter Gotthard, Ripon Women's cut and blow dry £18.
Men £11.50.
Perm £20-£30.
Snippers of Spennymoor Women's cut and blow dry £6.50.
Men £5.50 Perm from £15 to £28.
Jakob and Erik, Stockton Women's cut and blow dry £13.50.
Men £9.50.
Perms from £32.50 to £48.
Essanelle in Binns, Sunderland Women's cut and blow dry £12.95 or £13.95, depending on whether it's the stylist or the Style Director.
Men £9.50 or £10.50.
Perms from £25.50 to £44.
Shapes of Sunderland Women's cut and blow dry £9.50.
Men's £7.
Perms from £15 to £35.
Boss of Yarm Women's cut and blow dry £12.
Men £7.50.
Children under 12 £8.50.
Perms £15.50 to £23.50, not including the cut and blow dry.
Batta, Calls itself the ‘budget salon’ Women's cut and blow dry £9.25.
Men £6.75.
Perms from £19.95 to £25.50.
Geoffrey Stuart, York Cut and blow dry £12 to £14.30, depending on length of hair.
Perms from £35 to £39.
MILLIONS of pounds are being stripped from education budgets in the region and local authority education chiefs say the service will suffer.
The threat of poll-tax capping is forcing councils throughout the region to lop over £20m from education spending this year.
The exception is Tory-controlled North Yorkshire where the education budget is likely to grow by £5m.
But council leaders nationally have complained that a decade of education cuts make this the bleakest year yet.
Further reductions will devastate the service, they warn.
‘Cuts are far in excess of efficiency.
Becoming leaner and fitter has become a choice of which limb to amputate next,’ Mark Corner, Newcastle's Labour chairman of education said.
Ironically the financial constraints imposed by Government spending assessments coincide with increasing demand for education.
Costs are escalating as pupil and student numbers rise and new initiatives like National Curriculum testing, teacher appraisal and reporting to parents are implemented.
A rise in the birth rate means that this summer's 6,499 school-leavers will be replaced by 7,374 new starters in County Durham secondary schools.
The county's director of education, Keith Mitchell said schools and colleges are also the victims of their own success, doubling the staying-on rate in five years.
Bigger classes and lower education standards are predicted as teachers are sacked to save money.
Adult and community education, youth work, special educational needs, repairs and maintenance and central administration are set to be  sacrificed to protect individual school budgets.
Councillors in Gateshead expressed alarm that limiting home to school travel concessions and discretionary grants would discourage potential students from continuing their education.
Coun Corner said: ‘Progressive cuts will drive schools to either opt out of local authority control or else they will fall down.’
Since 1979, Newcastle's teaching force has declined by almost 1,000 with pupil-teacher ratios rising from 25:8 to 27:8.
Now schools are forecasting more job losses as £7m comes off the education budget.
Northumberland County Council is proud of its spending record praised as value for money by Ministers.
Yet the Government's spending assessment requires savings of £4m that will cost 140 teachers' jobs.
Education chairman Coun John Morris said class sizes of 35 were already too large but may have to increase to keep the budget within limits.
This week a deputation of Northumberland headteachers and MPs followed in the footsteps of school governors to lobby Schools Minister Michael Fallon for more cash.
In South Tyneside more than 100 jobs are threatened by cuts of £2m.
Director of education Ian Reid said: ‘We have amalgamated and closed schools and cut administration back as far as we dare although we need more staff to implement all the changes.
‘It is difficult to see how more savings can be made.’
North Tyneside Council one of the nation's first victims of poll tax capping is still debating where the axe should fall.
It expects to prune £4m from education.
Meanwhile Durham, Gateshead, Cleveland and Sunderland councils heaved a sigh of relief when they achieved standstill budgets and still saved over £6m between them.
School closures such as The Avenue Comprehensive in Newton Aycliffe and mergers like Boynton and Hustler Schools in Middlesbrough created windfall savings.
And councillors shuffled spending priorities to make room for more nurseries and support for special needs.
Then on Monday Durham County Council's best laid plans were thrown into disarray by the news the teachers' 7.5pc pay rise created a further deficit of almost £3m.
But Schools Minister Michael Fallon dismissed complaints from local education authorities as scaremongering.
‘I have never seen a cut in education spending,’ he said.
‘Every year we get scare stories before the budgets are set yet each year there is more money.’
YOUNGSTERS with severe learning difficulties could soon be enjoying a holiday.
Fundraising at Carrisbrooke School, College Road, Middlesbrough, is towards making holidays possible for 100 boys and girls.
Spokeswoman Sue Heyslop said: ‘Pupils will be encouraged to become as independent as possible and develop skills to help them on their way.’
A dance will be held at North Ormesby Club on Tuesday.
SWEETHEARTS Heather Shannon and Chris Fereday are living proof that love is blind.
They will spend Valentine's Day putting the final touches to their wedding following a whirlwind telephone romance.
Chris decided he wanted to marry 32-year-old Heather before he even set eyes on her.
And within a few hours of meeting 25-year-old Chris, Heather agreed to spend the rest of her life with him.
It all began when computers at the Middlesbrough Pearl Assurance office broke down.
Office manager Heather rang the company's technical services department in Cambridgeshire where systems analyst Chris picked up the phone.
‘His voice just triggered it all off, I knew it was the beginning of something’ said Heather, of Aberdeen Road, Darlington.
‘I think we both sensed almost immediately this could be it,’ said Chris, who lives nearly 200 miles away in Peterborough.
DELIVERIES of mail could be delayed because of cost-cutting and a management clampdown on Post Office workers' overtime, it was claimed yesterday.
Officials from the Union of Communication Workers say first deliveries on absent postmen's rounds may be ignored until colleagues can split the workload on second deliveries.
And a postmen's union spokesman said already some first class mail is not making trains to London and elsewhere because of shortages among sorters.
Royal Mail chiefs have refuted the claims and say that, in fact, the quality of service is increasing.
The union reacted bitterly to a toughly worded edict from Darlington area delivery services manager Spencer Hindmarsh to keep costs down.
Officials say that as a result of Mr Hindmarsh's letter, bosses in the Darlington area which stretches to Middlesbrough, Hawes, Spennymoor and Northallerton, will preside over a service which will diminish in quality.
Stating that there had been a £207,000 overspend, Mr Hindmarsh warned any office managers continuing to go over budget would be made to explain why.
The UCW believes the rounds of postmen who do not turn up for work will not be covered by overtime.
They say in areas where there is only one mail delivery a day, letters could be delayed by 24 hours.
But Mr Hindmarh said no letters would be delayed at all.
He said quality of service was of paramount importance and was being improved year after year.
He said: ‘Obviously, we are a business and we have to be cost effective.
If we are not cost effective we go out of business.’
Casual labour can be used at a cheaper rate than postmen on overtime.
Mr Hindmarsh said of the 2,300 postal workers in the Darlington area: ‘I am quite satisfied that most staff are happy with their conditions of employment.’
However, a UCW spokesman said many postal workers felt confused at recent changes and angry at the letter.
He said of the managers: ‘Their prime motive now is pounds and pence.’
Mike Findley, regional secretary for the union, has written back to Mr Hindmarsh.
He said: ‘There is enough pressure on District Office Managers and the staff without letters like yours.
We all want good quality of service to the customer because then we all benefit.’
BATTLING baby Bogdan Ursu was continuing to do well after his life-saving brain  operation on Wednesday night.
Bogdan was brought to Teesside from Romania by Convoy Aid Romania suffering water on the brain.
Last night a spokesman at Middlesbrough General Hospital said: ‘Baby Bogdan is fine and quite lively.
He has been sitting on a nurse's knee being fed from a small drinking cup.’
Convoy Aid Romania was due to leave Middlesbrough for Eastern Europe early today taking £10,000 worth of powdered milk to feed starving orphans.
Four tons of baby milk supplied by Cow and Gate were last night being loaded on board a replacement truck loaned by Transmore Van Hire, Stockton, after one of Convoy Aid Romania's two vehicles developed mechanical problems.
Organisers hope to set off as soon as the Romanian Embassy and the ferry company advise that they have registered the change of the vehicle's registration number.
BRITAIN'S unemployment soared above 2.6 million for the first time in over four years yesterday after a bigger than expected surge in the number of people out of work.
Unadjusted unemployment rose by 122,000 in January the 22nd consecutive monthly increase to give a total of 2,673,864 or 9.4pc of the workforce.
The seasonally adjusted total, regarded as the best underlying guide, rose by 53,000 last month to reach 2,604,000 9.2pc of the workforce and the highest number since October 1987.
In the North, South Tyneside continues to be the worst unemployment blackspot with 10,399 out of work, equivalent to 18.4pc of the workforce.
Across the North-East as a whole the seasonally adjusted figure rose by 1,500 on last month.
A total of 152,200 are now out of work, equivalent to 10.8pc of the available workforce.
Since unemployment started rising nationally in March 1990, 997,500 people have joined the dole queue and that figure is set to pass one million next month, when a General Election could be weeks away.
Employment Secretary Michael Howard said the increase was ‘clearly disappointing’.
He said: ‘It reflects the fact that recovery is being affected by world economic circumstances.
But it remains the case that the current rate of increase in unemployment is considerably lower than that experienced in the early part of last year.’
He added that the UK continues to have the highest proportion of people in work than any other EC country except Denmark.
Shadow employment secretary Tony Blair said the figures were ‘devastating’ and Liberal Democrats spokesman Jim Wallace called them ‘a national scandal’.
Mr Blair, MP for Sedgefield, added: ‘The trend on unemployment is now upwards.
We have got the fastest rising unemployment anywhere in Europe and the figures destroy the last vestiges of credibility for the Conservatives on the economy.’
Mr Wallace said: ‘While the Government continues a policy of indifference and inaction, over 120,000 more individuals, families and households are now suffering the misery of unemployment.’
Huge job losses announced in the past week at car giant Ford, where 2,100 workers will be made redundant, and at British Aerospace, which is cutting 2,300 jobs, have not even started to feed into the official figures yet.
Unemployment figures in the North were: Bishop Auckland 5,789 (12.5); Darlington 5,229 (9.0); Durham 6,299 (9.0); Hartlepool 6,404 (15.8); Middlesbrough 18,564 (13.2); Newcastle 44,342 (11.2) South Tyneside 10,399 (18.4); Stockton 9,847 (11.6); Sunderland 23,730 (13.3); Harrogate 2,296 (4.4); Malton 402 (3.9); Northallerton 887 (4.2); Pickering and Helmsley 408 (4.2); Richmondshire 950 (5.9); Ripon 651 (4.9); Scarborough and Filey 3,683 (8.8); Thirsk 332 (4.4); Whitby 1,178 (11.1); York 6,304 (6.2).
A PENSIONER was recovering at home yesterday after a frightening experience in which the car he was driving was in collision with a train at a level crossing near Whitby.
Richard Brightman, 71, walked away unscathed from the wreckage of his red Ford Escort after the crash late on Thursday afternoon at Ruswarp.
His car was crushed between an electrical equipment control box and a fence by the four-carriage diesel train on the Esk Valley line from Middlesbrough to Whitby.
It is the second similar accident at a crossing on the line inside four years.
A family of three in a taxi escaped uninjured when it was hit by a diesel train at another crossing only half-a-mile away towards Sleights in 1988.
As police and British Rail officials were making further inquiries yesterday, Mr Brightman, of Starbeck Close, Whitby, was refusing to talk about his lucky escape.
Only last month, BR agreed to put barriers back at the crossing at Ruswarp.
This was partly as a safety measure, but also as a result of a campaign by local councillors, who have been told about several near misses at Ruswarp.
Coun Cyril Pearson said: ‘This accident would not have happened if the barriers had been there now.
There has to be something to separate the traffic and the track.’
Train services on the Esk Valley line were delayed for a short time and the Sprinter train was allowed to continue its journey after it had been examined by experts.
DISQUALIFIED driver Peter Burgess escaped police twice in nine days, Teesside Crown Court heard yesterday.
But the third time he tried to drive away from them in his Ford Escort down a public footpath he was followed and caught.
Burgess, 21, admitted three offences of reckless driving and three of driving while disqualified.
Judge Angus Stroyan sentenced him to 12 months in jail and banned him from driving for two years.
Rodney Jameson, prosecuting, said police recognised Burgess, of Hutton Road, Eston, Middlesbrough, driving his car.
Burgess accelerated away and police followed.
The car was left in Birchington Avenue and Burgess ran away on foot.
He was discovered hiding in a garage in Hutton Road.
Shock increase in young mums-to-be NEW figures have revealed a big rise in the number of teenage pregnancies in Hartlepool.
The rate of conception in the 11–15 age group was almost 40pc higher than the national average and in the 16–19 age bracket, it was around 34pc higher.
The figures were compiled by Dr Janet Stevenson, a registrar with North Tees Health Authority.
Streets ahead:
Beat bobby Dave Peacock, 35, and parents on Middlesbrough's Thorntree estate have formed the CrossTree Youth Group to keep local youngsters off the streets and out of trouble.
FEW people outside Skinningrove have heard of the Tom Leonard Mining Museum yet they've just received an SOS from a remote Bulgarian monastery asking for food parcels.
The Bulgarian Embassy in London has confirmed the letter is no hoax and that its writer, Vladimir Russev is pastor superior of the Plakovski monastery.
‘Not everyone in Cleveland has heard of us, that is why it is such a mystery how a pastor in Bulgaria got our address,’ said museum spokeswoman Shirley Heselton.
Pastor Russev says his country is in the grip of ‘raging diseases, hunger and hopelessness.’
He goes on: ‘I have no resources and when I am miserable I cry for desperation.’
He adds: ‘I write this letter to you in desperate search for help — let God hear my prayers for help and choose you for his messenger.’
Carol Chambers of Middlesbrough Volunteer Bureau said: ‘I rang the Bulgarian Embassy only to find out this guy has written to loads of people.
He must have the Cleveland telephone book.’
Lily Netsova, the Bulgarian Press attache in Britain, says the village of Veliko Turnovo is built on terraces across the slopes of a mountain.
An appeal is being launched and anyone who can help should contact Carol Chambers on Middlesbrough 225158 or Shirley Heselton on 0287–642361.
CRITICALLY ill patients are being moved from one hospital to another in a desperate search for hospital beds, a medical expert revealed yesterday.
And during one period last year there was not a single spare intensive care bed in the Tees and Darlington areas.
A report to regional health chiefs stresses the situation as part of a push for a significant increase in intensive care beds for Cleveland and the surrounding area.
Dr Paul Lawler, South Tees hospitals' clinical director, revealed he has submitted a report to the Northern Regional Health Authority underlining the difficulties.
He said: ‘We had difficulties admitting patients to ICU in Middlesbrough several months ago, but that was not just in Middlesbrough.
There were no intensive care beds in the south of the region.
‘The Northern Regional Health Authority are well aware there have been difficulties in this district.
‘They have been told in writing.
It isn't just a local problem, it's a national problem.’
Langbaurgh Labour MP Ashok Kumar said the Government must listen to the concerns.
He has already briefed shadow health spokesman Robin Cook on the crisis in the region.
Dr Kumar said: ‘The Government's health ministers should stop their knee jerk denials to criticism of their handling of the NHS and listen to their own health professionals.
These dedicated people are not scoring political points, they are desperately worried.’
NORTHERN Electric fixed it for cerebral palsy sufferer Glen McQuilling to take a flight in its overhead-line patrol helicopter.
Glen, 30, who attends the Landsdowne Road day centre in Middlesbrough, is seen with pilot Peter Walker.
The headmistress at Bishop Auckland Girls' Grammar School walked into the school hall in tears.
‘She informed us all she had some very bad news and through her tears said that King George VI had died,’ recalls Margery Burton, of Redworth Road, Shildon.
Throughout the North-East lessons were cut short and special assemblies were called to pay respect to the dead King.
‘It was one of the quietest schooldays I can remember,’ says Alwyn Miller, of Granville Terrace, Binchester, Bishop Auckland, who was also a pupil at Bishop Auckland.
‘It was only during the afternoon that I remembered it was my 15th birthday.’
‘I recall some of the girls weeping,’ says Brian Fisher, of Beacon Avenue, Sedgefield, who was in the middle of a biology exam at a school in Chesterfield when the news was broken.
‘I remember bursting into tears and blowing my nose and saturating my tiny handkerchief so that it was no use for the rest of the day,’ writes P. Atkinson, of The Green, West Cornforth, who was revising for mock O-levels at Stand Grammar School for Girls, in Manchester.
Dorothy Young, of Crosby Road, Northallerton, was in a music lesson at Northallerton Grammar School.
‘We were singing our hearts out when the door suddenly opened and the headmaster brought the news.‘
The atmosphere changed completely — from happily singing children to a ghastly sadness.
I will never forget it.’
Anne Ingram, of Tunstall Avenue, Billingham, was at Alderman Wraith Grammar School, Spennymoor, ‘a 13-year-old with plaits in my hair,’ she recalls.
‘Some sixth form boys came up and Taggy Dixon said to the domestic science teacher Mrs Pattinson: ‘The King is dead.’
She was utterly incredulous and said something like: ‘The King dead?
Go on, he can't be.’
‘I had just reached the age where such things were becoming of interest to me, and it wasn't too long after the Royal Wedding of Princess Elizabeth when my sister and I had collected as many photos as we could lay our hands on.’
Christine Butterwick, of Farndale Road, Nunthorpe, Middlesbrough, was a young nursery nurse working in a primary school with a class of four and five-year-olds.
‘We were singing There was a Princess Long Ago and had just got to the last verse, ‘Now everybody's happy now’, when the headmistress came in and said the King had died.
‘I could not finish the song and have never been able to sing it since even to this day.’
On the other hand, a child's view of death could be quite unemotional.
Ken Thwaites, who remembers being told the news in the asssembly hall at Normanby Primary School, recalls: ‘The sad and important words were recognised, but what worried me more was would ‘Boro's FA Cup tie with Doncaster Rovers due that afternoon at Ayresome Park be postponed?
Father had promised to take me with the added bonus of an afternoon off school.
‘The match went ahead although most Boro supporters wished it hadn't — they were trounced 4–1.
‘Coming home from the match I recognised our school headmaster, Mr Mick Metcalfe — he had also had an afternoon off school to go to the match,’ adds Mr Thwaites, who is now a head teacher himself, of St Peter's C.E. Primary School, Saltburn.
Ann Smith, who was at junior school in Haltwhistle, Northumberland, remembers: ‘I know I felt really sad but the thought of a Coronation cheered me up a little bit until I found out it would not be held until the following year.
‘That evening my older brother and I set off to go to the pictures only to find they were closed, we did not have a television and the wireless was only playing sombre music,’ says Mrs Smith, who now lives at Campsie Close, Lambton Village, Washington.
M. Keenan, of Westfield Road, Normanby, was at Middlesbrough Schools Music Festival.
‘In the middle of the proceedings a man came on stage and announced the death of the King,’ recalls Mr Keenan.
‘Rehearsal ceased, we were all bussed back to our schools and the music festival was cancelled for 1952.’
Elaine Holland, of Hackforth, near Bedale, was an 11-year-old pupil at Birch School, Middleham.
‘The schoolmaster looked out of the window across the square to the castle where he announced to the class that the flag was flying at half-mast, so he popped out to find out why, thinking it might have been dear old Queen Mary.
‘When he came back he announced it was the King who had died in his sleep and it had been on the wireless.’
Chris Foote Wood, now Liberal Democrat leader of Wear Valley District Council, was an 11-year-old schoolboy when the King's death was announced at morning assembly.
‘I went with a friend to see the headmaster and ask his permission to go to our local church and say a prayer for our dead King,’ he says.
‘The head was surprised, but he allowed us to go straight away.
It was a cold, clear day and we were the only people in the vast parish church.’
Many children heard the news before their parents because they were listening to schools programmes on the wireless.
‘Suddenly the programme came to a halt and it was announced that the King had died,’ recalls John Rusby, who was a seven-year-old pupil at Cockton Hill Infant School, Bishop Auckland.
‘You could have heard a pin drop,’ recalls Mr Rusby, of Linden Road.
‘I can still remember the feeling of intense shock, but also a feeling of superiority that we had heard the news before many other people,’ says E. Walker, who was teaching infants at a primary school in North Yorkshire when Music and Movement was interrupted to bring the news.
‘All normal programmes were cancelled and brief announcements were made from time to time, interspersed with solemn music,’ recalls Jean Williams, of Noel's Court, Catterick Village.
After this we all went home and school was closed.’
F. Dowling, a teacher at Dyke House School, Hartlepool, was about to use the school's new tape recorder to record a radio play.
The class had just begun to read the play which I had chosen when at 11am the radio relay came to life with an announcer saying: This is London’, followed by the announcement that the King had died in the early hours of the morning and proclaiming the accession of Queen Elizabeth II to the throne,’ recalls Mr Dowling of Staindrop Drive, Middlesbrough.
For some people, the date February 6 was already a special day.
‘It was the tenth birthday of my youngest brother,’ says R Patchett, of Marmaduke Street, Spennymoor.
‘February 6 is my birthday and I was 15 in 1952,’ writes M. Horner, of Thornborough Crescent, Leyburn, who was at Yorebridge Grammar School.
M. Holden, of High Street, Newton Aycliffe, was teaching a class of infants at a school in Birtley.
The headmistress Miss Gargett broke the news, she recalls.
‘There was real genuine sadness for the death of this respected monarch in the staffroom that day.’
At Cornforth Lane School, Coxhoe, the children sang the 23rd psalm when the news was broken, says H. Ellerby, who was working in the kitchens at the school.
K. Peacock, of Belgrave Terrace, Hurworth Place, Darlington, remembers the whole class stood for a few minutes' silence when told the news at Queen Elizabeth Grammar School.
Irene Watson, of Newound Road, Throckley, Newcastle, heard the news from a school dinner lady and Joan Harrison, of Jenkins Drive, Bishop Auckland, from the head dinner lady (who was also the undertaker's wife).
‘We were all saddened at this news,’ writes Mrs Harrison.
Many children didn't know quite what the news meant, but were nevertheless suitably sombre.’
‘Although I was only six years old I can remember the seriousness of the matter and wondering how this affected us,’ recalls Judy Watson, of The Crescent, Northallerton.
Banger refused
WELL proportioned public relations director Alasdair Mitchell had an unwelcome rebuttal last week.
Nipping out of his Newcastle office for an early morning snackette the Robson Brown man intended diving into a local sandwich bar to sample, not for the first time, the speciality of the house; a grease-infused, artery-clogging, heart-stopping sausage sandwich.
But on spying Mitchell's cherubic features, the proprietor refused to serve him saying he had received instructions by ‘phone not to.
The mysterious caller had implied that maybe he was, er, portly enough already.
The Rubenesque hype merchant doesn't know whether to blame wife or workmates.
Right on
THE NATIONAL Health Service is a blunder, the Labour Party is unemployable and Adolf Hitler was one of two great developers of self-respect.
These are the opinions of Lord White, Conservative peer and joint founder of Hanson, which for a time threatened to take over ICI.
Questioned on his views by a Hull-based evening newspaper Lord White tried to backtrack.
‘I'm beginning to sound like a right-wing lunatic.’
Enough said.
POLICE need more resources and greater support from the criminal justice system if rising crime is to be tackled effectively, Cleveland's chief constable said yesterday.
Chief Const Keith Hellawell criticised the mechanism used to deal with young offenders in particular as slow and bureaucratic, adding his officers were having to deal with young people who had no sense of social values.
‘I am talking about a group of people who simply do not care.
They will flout authority in whatever form,’ he told the Teesside Business Briefing in Middlesbrough.
The conference was organised by The Northern Echo in conjunction with chartered accountants KPMG Peat Marwick.
POLICE say they are close to completing inquiries into allegations of theft of scaffolding, during which Richard Corden, the chairman of Darlington FC, was arrested and questioned.
Cleveland police have spent five months investigating the events leading up to Mr Corden's arrest in October last year.
He was quickly released on police bail and has not been interviewed again.
Mr Corden, 41, of Moor Green, Nunthorpe, Middlesbrough, became a director of Darlington FC in December 1989.
He took over as chairman a few months later.
The spokeswoman said the detectives will hand over a file to the Crown Prosecution Service.
It is understood the inquiry relates to the alleged theft of £100,000 of scaffolding from a company called Deborah Grayston Scaffolding.
TEESSIDE Polytechnic student Jonathan Welfare could soon clean up with an idea to rid the danger which dogs our footsteps.
The BA (Hons) design student has invented a poop-scooping device called a poopet, a cardboard contraption for disposing of dog dirt which is based on the principle of a puppet.
It allows users to pick up the dirt without the danger of coming into contact and the device has won praise from Peter Gitson, the officer in charge of Middlesbrough Council's dog warden service.
‘It is an excellent idea,’ said Mr Gitson.
‘Any help the public can be given to clear up after their dogs can only be applauded.
Jonathan's design is just what's required.’
He said the council intends to tighten up the by-law on dog fouling making it an offence for owners not to clear up after their dogs.
‘We are looking for an easy-to-use poop scoop and Jonathan's idea may well be the answer.’
Jonathan, 21, is on the final year of his industrial design marketing course and comes from Fleet, near Aldershot, where his parents breed old English sheepdogs.
He has already discussed the market potential of the poopet with Cleveland Innovation and hopes to develop the concept further.
A NURSE who had to learn to walk again after his neck was broken has hit out at the prison sentence given to his attacker.
Psychiatric nurse Neil McGregor still suffers from effects of the injuries he sustained in the attack five months ago and faces up to another two years off work.
His attacker, 33-year-old Peter Sigsworth, was jailed for three years.
But Mr McGregor said yesterday: ‘My sentence is a lot worse than his.
It was me who had my neck broken and me who is still suffering.
‘He has already done five months in custody so he won't serve much.
He got nothing but I and my family have suffered.’
Mr McGregor, a psychiatric nurse, was attacked by Sigsworth in St Luke's Hospital, Middlesbrough.
His neck was broken when Sigsworth hit him with a fire extinguisher.
On Monday, at Teesside Crown Court, Sigsworth was jailed for three years after he admitted causing grievous bodily harm with intent, wounding, assault causing actual bodily harm and two offences of burglary.
Mr McGregor, a father of three, from Linthorpe, Middlesbrough, has reduced function in his arms, numbness from the neck down and a ten-inch scar down his head as a result of the attack.
He said he was also angry that he was not informed about the court case.
AN MP has blasted as ‘criminal’ the ferrying across Cleveland of critically ill patients in a search for available beds.
A patient from a Middlesbrough intensive care ward was transferred to North Tees General Hospital, Stockton, at the weekend because the bed was needed for another patient.
Dr Peter Ritchie of North Tees said in the current financial year, 5pc of total bed days would occupied by Middlesbrough patients.
He said the ‘fittest’ patient in the intensive care ward was the one who was always chosen for the ambulance ride.
One critically ill Middlesbrough patient, transferred to Stockton, before last Christmas was in North Tees intensive care unit for 35 days.
Dr Ritchie said he always very happy to help but added: ‘What does concern me somewhat is the transfer of these patients.
‘It exposes the patient to a degree.
If you are moving along in an ambulance you are not as safe as you are in the static, intensive care environment of an intensive care unit.’
The Northern Echo revealed this week how Dr Paul Lawler, clinical director at South Tees Hospital, had submitted a report of the bed shortage to the Northern Regional Health Authority.
He claimed for one period several months ago, there were no spare ITU beds available in the entire southern half of the region.
Stockton North MP Frank Cook said: ‘You can picture the scene: a consultant walks into a care unit with five or six patients struggling, fighting for their lives and says: ‘Hands up those who have 15 breaths left in them to make it round the corner.’
It's criminal.’
The Northern Regional Health Authority said it has received the report it had requested from Dr Lawler and had now asked South Tees Health Authority to investigate.
PROSTITUTES will not be allowed to cash in on Hartlepool's £160m marina, police chiefs have pledged.
The promise follows reports that some Middlesbrough vice girls are considering moving to the town.
Supt Peter Coleman said: ‘We are looking into the matter and will take action if it proves necessary.’
The marina is currently in the early stages of development.
CLEVELAND Ambulance has been attacked for charging a pensioner £162 for a 36-mile journey.
Ena McMaster, of Walton Avenue, Middlesbrough, received the bill for an important round trip to a nursing home in Middleton St George, near Darlington.
Cleveland Ambulance said their charges were based on running a two-man vehicle and were no higher than elsewhere.
But John Scott, prospective Parliamentary candidate for Stockton South said: ‘How can this possibly be justified, particularly for anyone on a low income?’
He is writing to Cleveland Ambulance about the matter.
The scheme will be carried out in the town's Ormesby and Marton West Beck area as part of an overall £2.8m project to safeguard low lying areas next to the beck.
It involves lowering the existing lake in Albert Park, constructing a new one in the south eastern corner of the park where the children's playground is at present, and diverting Marton West Beck into the new lake as a buried overflow pipe.
The scheme was approved by the council's ground maintenance committee yesterday.
Members heard that leisure facilities such as fishing and boating will be improved by permanent fishing platforms and a proper jetty.
Wildlife will find a haven on a new island and access to the existing ones will be maintained.
At present Albert Park is closed in the evening but officers are aware the public use it during that time.
Gordon Bates, chief leisure officer, said street lighting round the lake would provide a safer environment for the public using the park at night and could allow that part of the park to be opened officially on an evening.
Members heard financial bids made for City Challenge funding would only cover the hard engineering part of the anti-flood scheme at a cost of £800,000.
Money for the repair of existing footpaths which are to be be retained, landscaping and street lighting would have to be sought from other sources.
In approving the scheme members authorised officers to seek funding for the extra facilities and running costs which are estimated to cost £2,280 a year.
A COUNCILLOR has criticised the Salvation Army for ‘Edwina Currie-like’ comments on the habits of Teessiders.
But Langbaurgh Labour councillor Sylvia Szintai agreed that families in the South Bank and Grangetown areas were ‘right on the breadline’.
Soup runs are planned in early March to feed the hungry Teessiders.
Captain Sylvia Bird said: ‘People are starving.
We have a lot of families in poverty who simply cannot feed themselves.’
But Coun Szintai criticised the Salvation Army for suggesting that some people brought the problem upon themselves by spending cash on smoking and drinking.
She said: ‘There are people going hungry, but the majority are genuine cases of people struggling to make ends meet.
‘People don't have the money to drink and smoke.
The Salvation Army seem to be adopting an Edwina Currie-style attitude.’
Coun Szintai said it was easy for families to run out of money a day or two before Giro cheques were handed out.
She said high unemployment and low benefits were to blame for the problem.
County welfare rights officer Tom Lamb agreed.
He said the problem extended into parts of East Middlesbrough and probably elsewhere in the county.
He said: ‘The rates of benefit are too low.
If payments for water rates, gas or electricity are taken out, there is very little left.’
The Salvation Army declined to comment on the allegations.
LOVE has proved stronger than a man's desire to change sex.
The 28-year-old embarked on a two-year course of hormone and electrolysis treatment last June and was due to have the sex change operation at Middlesbrough General Hospital next year.
But, he said yesterday, the love and understanding of a 26-year-old woman he met less than a month ago has convinced him he should remain living life as a man.
He has informed his doctors and begun the painful process to negate the effects of the hormones he has taken for the last nine months.
The man, who lives in Darlington and who can only be identified as David, had grown up believing he is a female in a male body.
He was told by doctors he has higher natural levels of female hormones than most men.
David, who had to leave Tyneside after telling his parents last year that he was transexual, had been due to become the North's first female master chef.
At home in Darlington, he said: ‘It's the first time in my life I have actually enjoyed being who I am.
‘I love Linda not for what she did for me but for who she is.
We may be together two weeks, two years or ten years.
It won't make any difference to my decision.
I know now what I want.
She has not put any pressure on me to change.
She has been the catalyst.’
The couple are not discounting marriage.
David, who has spent £20,000 on treatments, clothing and devices to help him appear to be a woman, first realised he was different when he was six.
He began trying on his mother's clothing when he was eight and realised he was a transexual when he was 17.
For the last nine years he has lived outside work time as a brunette, Diane, and has helped counsel others.
Linda said she was interested in the human being inside and ‘you don't chose who you fall in love with.
It just happens.
‘I love him because he is daft, and kind and considerate.
He's a good laugh.’
And she added: ‘There are not many girls who can say they have been in the ladies with their boyfriend.’
— Change of heart: Page 10
Could do better? for marks DID your schooling make the grade?
Young people in Cleveland get the chance to assess their education and training at a weekend school organisers hope will influence the decision-makers.
Up to 60 young people aged 16 to 25 in further or higher education, training schemes or unemployed can take part in the residential seminar at Ayton School, Great Ayton on April 3–5.
The event sponsored by Teesside Development Corporation, the Baring Foundation, Teesside TEC, Middlesbrough Task Force, ICI and Create aims to produce a report and recommendations for education and training providers.
Needs charter
A CHARTER for parents of children with special educational needs has been launched by Schools Minister Michael Fallon.
The guide spells out their rights, describes the type of help to expect in school, explains the process of issuing statements of special needs and sets out the appeals procedure for dissatisfied parents.
Other side
PHYSICS lecturers are going back to the nursery to teach toddlers in the water tub while admissions tutors consider the merits of palm-reading and astrology for selecting students at Newcastle Polytechnic.
Staff and students are turning the world of learning upside down during Alternative Learning Week as they try out inventive ways of teaching and learning.
Board bid
A NORTH Yorkshire prep school is flying to Hong Kong to recruit more Chinese pupils.
St Martin's at Nawton, near Helmsley, is among 200 boarding schools exhibiting at Hong Kong's largest education exhibition this weekend.
Would-be teacher learns to count her blessings AFTER five months teaching English to handicapped children in Poland, a Stokesley teenager has herself learned a valuable lesson to count her blessings.
Miss Kathryn Finel, aged 18, of Riverslea, is just back after working for GAP, a voluntary organisation, in the year between school and college.
After a week's crash course in teaching English to foreign students, she and a girl from Lincoln went out to Cracow, Poland's second largest city, to work in a school for the blind and partially sighted.
She had to pay her own air fare, but was given free board and lodgings at the school where she worked, and was paid a grand total of £5 a month expenses!
She helped the children with their lessons each morning, then took them for walks and on shopping excursions in the afternoons, finally helping to put them to bed at night.
She loved them, and she loved the work though it left her with little time for going out and enjoying  herself in the evenings.
This was, in fact, not too big a problem: Cracow had a 10pm curfew, and was in any case ‘dead’ after 9pm, she said She did try the odd night club and cinema, and was surprised to find English films with Polish sub-titles.
She was very impressed by Poland's beautiful mountains, but found the rest of the country grey and the poverty, depressing.
Food was in short supply, of course, and there were few signs of any material wealth at all .
Back home, the former Stokesley Schoolgirl is now doing voluntary work with autistic children at Beverley School for the Deaf in Middlesbrough, before going to Chester College in the autumn to study history and religion.
She hopes to put this year's experience to good use by eventually becoming a primary school teacher.
Mr Douglas with the ancient book.
Scholars' president looks to famous ancestor The Rev. John Douglas will seek his inspiration from a famous ancestor when he returns to the Friends' School at Great Ayton as president of the Old Scholars' Association.
Mr Douglas, who retired as vicar of Kilburn in 1988 and now lives in St. Giles' Close, Thirsk, has a leather-bound copy of the Apologia for, dating back nearly 300 years, which was handed down to him by his mother.
It was written for King Charles 11 by Robert Barclay, a classical scholar, in 1675 at the age of 25, and contains the beliefs and practices of the Society of Friends.
Mr Barclay, who became a Quaker when he was 15, ranks with George Fox and William Penn in the history of the movement, and his words will provide the inspiration for Mr Douglas' speech in June.
He said: ‘Without him I would not have got to the Friends’ School as a boarder.
My father had gone bankrupt, and my mother was nearly penniless, but as a relative of Robert Barclay, I got a good bursary.
‘You are not very interested in your ancestors when you are young, but when you get older you begin to look at the rock from which you are hewn.’
Added Mr Douglas, whose other names are Howard Barclay: ‘The book will provide the background to my presidential address.
I would be failing in my duty to the school if I had not read it.’
He went on: ‘Although I was already a member of the Church of England before joining the Friends’ School in 1937, I lean very much towards the Quaker faith.
The experience of being at a full-blown Quaker school made a profound impression on me.
I like Quakers.
I value their silences and self-expression, but what I miss in their faith is the glorious Anglican tradition of choral services.’
Being president of the Old Scholars' Association was, he said, one of the great honours of his life, following, as it did, the equivalent presidency of another Quaker School, Polam Hall, Darlington, by his sister, Mrs Trixie Lyburn, in 1986/7.
Born in Crook, Co.
Durham, in 1923, the son of Henry Percy and Stella Barclay Douglas, Mr Douglas was sent to the Friends' School after attending St. Olave's Boys' Preparatory School in Ripon now attached to the cathedral as the choir school.
He left Ayton in 1940, and after voluntary work in the Citizens' Advice Bureau in Darlington, entered St John's College, Durham, in 1941.
The war interrupted his studies, and in 1942 he became a member of the National Fire Service, serving in Dundee, Middlesbrough and Stokesley.
In 1945 he returned to Durham, graduated as a BA in 1948, and spent the following two years reading theology at Bishop's College, Cheshunt, Hertfordshire.
He was ordained in Durham Cathedral in 1950, and later served as curate at Hartlepool, Huddersfield and Gateshead.
In 1960 he was appointed vicar of Thirkleby, Kilburn and Bagby, where he remained until retirement.
He now leads a busy life as an honorary chaplain in York Minster.
Mr Douglas recalled the Spartan, but nourishing life at the Friends' School.
‘There was a happy atmosphere, little bullying, and generally speaking, a good relationship between staff and scholars.’
After a Bible reading, usually by the headmaster, Mr Herbert Dennis, mornings consisted of six lesson periods, interrupted by a break during which the students queued up for two half slices of bread known as ‘geordie.’
Mr Douglas' favourite lunch was stew and dumplings, followed by caramel tart and custard.
Afternoons were given over to village leave, organised games, set walks, leisure periods and detention.
After tea there was supervised prep, followed by geordie and milk.
Baths were taken in the main block, which meant that pupils in A dormitory, including Mr Douglas, had to cross two playgrounds, in all weathers, clad only in pyjamas, dressing gown and slippers.
‘Tuck’ was confined officially to fresh fruit and plain chocolate, and all books and magazines were censored, although as Mr Douglas recalls: ‘I don't suppose our own minds were any cleaner than those of today.’
Munich, Dunkirk and the Battle of Britain made enthralling reading in the Manchester but what Mr Douglas remembers was the spirit of friendship offered by the school towards the refugees of the Spanish Civil War and Hitler's Germany.
‘Towards these’, he said, ‘and countless others, Ayton exercised the caring spirit for which the Quakers are famous, and which has enabled the school to survive the difficult periods in its long and honourable history.’
Teesside college launches new school A new School of Health, Social and Policy Studies is officially launched at Teesside Polytechnic on Thursday.
The guest speaker is Dr. Mike Fitzgerald, director of the Polytechnic of West London and former Dean of Social Science at the Open University and former deputy director of Coventry Polytechnic.
Mr Geoff Crispin, Dean of the new Teesside Polytechnic school, said: ‘The school has over 1,000 students and 80 staff and is spearheading research into local issues, including economic development, crime and health.
‘It is also extending access to higher education for local people and expanding the range of courses for vocational education in social work, nursing, physiotherapy, occupational therapy and radiotherapy.’
Cash cuts blamed for intensive care unit bed shortage The head of a Middlesbrough hospital's intensive care unit claims cash cuts mean desperately ill patients are being turned away.
Clinical director Mr Paul Lawler said South Tees hospital was just one example of the situation nationwide.
His comments came after a Granada Television World in Action programme revealed people were being denied access to Britain's intensive care units because of cuts in staff and beds.
He said a few years ago patients could be ‘fairly guaranteed’ a bed on the unit if they needed one.
But Mr Bill Murray, chief executive of South Tees acute hospitals, denied there had been any cuts.
He said the intention was that beds in intensive care units were managed so that they were occupied 70 per cent of the time, leaving a 30 per cent capacity to take emergency cases, such as road accident victims.
He said the units were very much part of a hospital's working environment, usually to care for patients coming out of operating theatres after major operations.
If one hospital's unit is full because of pressure from theatres or road accidents, units in adjacent hospitals were used in South Tees's case, units in North Tees or Darlington, he said.
‘We carefully assess our use of intensive care beds and over the last 12 months we have been a little concerned that, at times, they were full,’ said Mr Murray.
‘In our business plan we are addressing the situation, trying to see if we need another bed or two because of the changing needs of the service.
‘None of our intensive care beds have ever been cut.
We have got nine.
We used to have less than that and now we are thinking of going to ten,’ he said.
Mr Murray said it cost about £100,000 a year for each intensive care bed so it was important not to over-budget for beds which would not be fully used.
Complaint about second local history book
A Stockton author who last week defended his book about Guisborough has now been criticised for his work on Middlesbrough.
In last week's D&S complaints were reported about inaccuracies in Guisborough.
A Pictorial by Mr Robert Woodhouse, reviewed last month by our local reporter.
The author has previously written similar books about Middlesbrough and his home town of Stockton.
After reading the article Mrs Marjorie Ellerton of Gunnergate Lane, Marton, contacted the D&S to reveal that she had previously complained to Mr Woodhouse about a mistake in his book on Middlesbrough.
She said a picture of Gunnergate Hall in Marton was claimed to be of Grey Towers, which is on the Poole Hospital site in Nunthorpe.
Mrs Ellerton said: ‘I'd only flicked through the book and that one mistake jumped off the page at me.
I rang Mr Woodhouse and he just said that that picture was ‘nearly’ like Gunnergate Hall.’
His reply so angered Mrs Ellerton, who has an interest in local history, that she wrote to the publishers in Shropshire.
Mr Noel Osbourne, editorial director for Phillimore and Company, replied saying: ‘This is the only indication we have had that there is anything at all wrong with this book, so I am sure you will be pleased with your purchase when you acquire a copy.’
Mrs Ellerton said: ‘I was furious at the publisher's letter.
I certainly wasn't going to pay £10 for something that was inaccurate.’
She then wrote to Mr Woodhouse enclosing a photograph of Grey Towers but she received no reply.
She added: ‘Extra care should be taken with reference books such as these as they could mislead future generations about the history of the area.
Both Gunnergate Hall and Grey Towers are well documented so it shouldn't be too difficult to make sure you've got the right photograph.’
Mr Woodhouse was unavailable for comment.
Czechs in Cleveland to learn how to cope with job losses WAYS in which the North-East came through the industrial upheaval of the '70s and '80s could prove an invaluable blueprint for revival for the people of Czechoslovakia.
Their country suffered years of economic stagnation and mismanagement under Communist rule.
And now a group of academics from the university of mining and metallurgy in Ostrava is hoping to change all that by introducing enterprise initiatives.
Members of the party are visiting Cleveland to study how the region coped with the loss of thousands of jobs.
And to help them through their carbon-copy situation, they are also studying ways in which they can emulate our enterprise challenge.
The main aim of their eight-week-long visit is to learn enough to set up a consultancy centre at the university as the Czechs, unused to the rising unemployment they now face, do not have the knowhow to cope with such upheaval.
Ostrava, in the northern part of the country, is an area very similar to Teesside, relying heavily on old-fashioned industries like steel and coal.
It is known as the iron heart of the country, responsible for half the region's 15m. tonnes steel output.
But that figure is rapidly dwindling, partly due to the fact that the Czechs no longer make military equipment for the Russians.
New incentives are needed, says Czechborn Mrs Debbie Welch, a lecturer at Longlands College in Middlesbrough, through whom the visit has been arranged.
Her family still lives in Ostrava and Mrs Welch, who visits them three or four times a year, says the area has a great deal in common with Cleveland.
‘Their current crisis is very similar to the industrial upheaval which Teesside and the North-East suffered in the early '80s, except that in Czechoslovakia things are worse.’
This, she explained, is because the politics of the country have provided few government institutions or educational bodies capable of guiding people and industry through such an upheaval.
British Steel's job-shedding experience of ten years ago provides Ostrava's industry with a particularly appropriate model.
‘But our experience in Cleveland can also show the Czechs that there is a future to be built by replacing obsolete industry with new skills, new industries and new products.’
Over the past two years, Longlands has led the way in co-ordinating links between various UK, Western and Czech training establishments, local authorities and industrial concerns.
The venture also includes expertise from Teesside Polytechnic, universities in Spain, America and Canada and colleges in Belgium.
The economic aid programme is financed through an EC grant, initially for three years, and the project will involve the exchange of staff followed by students.
Mrs Welch, head of trans-European and overseas initiatives, has been at Longlands for six years, moving there from Saltburn Comprehensive where she was head of physics.
She met her husband when he was working for British Steel in Czechoslovakia.
He was on a six-month exchange at the factory where her father was works manager.
The couple have a 21-year-old daughter, Michelle, who is studying maths and biology at York University.
When Mrs Welch came to this country, she did a crash course in English and then a post graduate course at Durham University before becoming a translator for British Steel and local industries.
She says she misses the better weather and the skiing in Czechoslovakia and is quick to approve of some of the systems there.
New mothers in Czechoslovakia can look forward to three years' maternity leave and the health service has a lot more going for it than ours, she says.
‘Child care is brilliant,’ she added, explaining that after-school care is a matter of course with 90 per cent of women needing to bring in a second wage to survive.
She also praised the Czech transport system.
‘Trams run every six minutes and cost virtually nothing.’
But British Rail compares favourably with the less reliable Czech rail.
Tourism is something that can be improved upon.
Millions visit Czechoslovakia every year but only for two or three days at a time as services are poor.
But, she says, it is a country where homelessness is non-existent and where central heating is very cheap because it is linked to the waste heat systems of local factories.
— Left, the visiting Czech academics in Cleveland.
—Right, Mrs Debbie Welch, who helped to arrange the visit.
LIFE for David, a 28-year-old North-East transexual, has never been easy or straight-forward.
Tormented and frustrated by his yearnings to be a woman, the certain and shattering knowledge that he was caught in the wrong body, he finally decided the only answer was to have a sex change operation.
Last year, at the age of 27 and after years of inner turmoil, he told his parents of his decision and left home soon afterwards.
He was unhappy but he felt he had at last sorted his life out.
David was about to become Diane.
And then he fell in love — with a woman.
And now the man who yearned with all his heart for all his life to be a woman and who is just months away from radical surgery wants to remain a man.
It is a moving end to a moving story for the son of a Tyneside lorry driver who first began wearing his mother's clothes at the age of eight and soon after began the inner turmoil which has caused him so much anguish.
David had appalling exam results at school despite his obvious intelligence because of his inner battles.
He says: ‘I didn't have any male ego at all.
I looked down at my genitals and I just wanted rid.’
He went out with scores of women but slept with very few.
He is not attracted to men in the least, however.
He says: ‘Every woman I went out with, I was studying the way they walked, the way they talked, the way they wore their clothes, their make-up, how they stood.
You have got to create an image of your own.’
His field study was successful.
While cross-dressing, he never once was found out by men and some attempted to chat him up.
He married at 21 to create a cover for himself and had two children.
He is now divorced.
The children do not know about his sex-change, and that is why the new couple prefer to stay anonymous.
David said: ‘I didn't really love my wife.
I feel rotten about it.
I have ruined her life.’
When he had sex, he secretly fantasised that he was the woman but even that was confusing because the concept of being with a man repulsed him.
David's decision to become female has already cost him £20,000 most saved from his wages as a master chef in hotels throughout the North-East and in Europe.
He got the rest of the money from cashed-in life insurance policies.
The remainder of the treatment would have cost a further £23,000, most of which would have been recouped in return for appearing in advertising promotions.
All that is over now.
David has cast aside the false breasts, the clamp that pushed his genitals under his body, the waist constrictors, the make-up and the clothes.
He is taking a course of dozens of injections to reverse the effects of the female hormones he had taken since he began the change process last June.
He will now begin the physically and mentally painful process of taking male hormones to establish for the first time his masculinity.
And there is no turning back.
He said: ‘I can never do it again.
Hospitals won't allow it.
The box is shut.
The case is closed.’
If he had not fallen in love with Linda his male genitals would have been sculpted to mimic those of a female by a surgeon in Middlesbrough General Hospital some time next year.
But now he has other plans: ‘I used to think I was a female in a male body.
Now I think I'm a male with too many female hormones.
If they can change me from one to another by using hormones, they can now give me the male hormones and then I've got everything I want.’
Ironically, David first went out with the woman who was to change his life on a girl's night in town.
Linda was with out with David's alter ego Diane.
At home, they talked about their past.
David found Linda was caring and understanding; soon he began to feel uneasy because he knew he could not have heterosexual Linda as a partner if he were to undergo his sexual transformation.
At the same time, Linda was becoming attracted to David's personality and also becoming uneasy.
She knew there could be no future in the relationship, and they were both scared of being hurt.
Linda became a target for abuse from others who knew about her friendship but it didn't worry her.
She says: ‘People should not make judgements about people.
We're all human beings.
I look on David as a person.
It doesn't matter what was on the outside.
It was the person, the personality that I grew to be really good friends with, that I have now grown to love.’
The emerging feelings bubbled to the surface in the unlikely setting of the Route 66 pub in Darlington on Friday, February 7 just a few days after they met.
The atmosphere between them was charged and Linda told David, dressed as Diane, she loved him.
David says: ‘I felt I should have been dressed there as a man.
I wanted to touch her and hold her and take care of her and I couldn't there and then.
It was my femaleness that was stopping me do it.
It was the first time I felt uneasy about being dressed as a woman.’
He adds: ‘I also felt that I wanted to give the love that I felt for her in the way she needs love to be given.’
They returned home immediately and David sent into his bedroom and emerged dressed as a man.
‘It was the turning point of my life,’ he says.
The couple are totally accepted by Linda's middle-aged parents who live in a terraced house in Darlington.
Her mum says: ‘As far as I am concerned, she has found a great lad.
Linda has got herself someone who is great and they are both very happy.’
Linda says: ‘What David has gone through makes him more of a person than a lot of other people.
I feel proud to have known him as Diane I wouldn't have missed that for the world.
I am proud to be with him now.’
The new couple are preparing for a life together as a normal man and woman.
David says: ‘Linda has understood who I was and what I was.
I've gone all the way around the circle and got to the beginning again.
‘She drew a door for herself through all the barriers I set up around myself and walked in.’
Information and help for transexuals and transvestites is available from the Magree Society on Darlington 382878.
Daredevil bikers a menace on pathway Daredevil young motorcyclists have made a popular path a danger area in East Cleveland.
The path between North Skelton and Leyland Bridge is now being shunned because of the menace.
Parish council chairman Alec Templeton said members had been trying to find an adventure area to get young bikers away from footpaths and roads because most were not even old enough to be licensed.
‘It is very worrying and we have called in the police,’ he said.
Dear Lennie, MY heart's gone out to you this week.
What with these little niggling worries you've had about the size of the crowd at Ayresome Park, coupled with some very obvious annoyance at Newcastle and Sunderland grabbing all the attention while the Boro do all the winning…
Frustrating isn't it?
Believe me it's going to get worse.
As a Southerner you will only recently have become aware about the passion for the game up here.
And Boro fans, of course, are as fanatical as any despite what everyone else would have you believe.
You will quickly realise, however, that it is a fact of life that the Magpies and the Mackems, despite having had consistently poorer teams than us over the last decade, will always grab the headlines.
The Boro could win the Rumbelows, the FA Cup and the Second Division championship this season and still come downpage to the news that Newcastle United have escaped relegation (probably on goal difference on the last day of the season, jammy penalty in injury time).
We might not even get as much coverage as Sunderland if they manage to get into the play-offs (and with the way their luck goes they'll get a play-off place by finishing tenth).
Why?
Simple really.
The geographical nature of the North-East dictates that the vast majority of North-East based national football reporters gravitate to Newcastle and Sunderland on a daily basis because the clubs are in such close proximity.
Middlesbrough, therefore, will always in a sense be the ‘third’ club; the one that can never quite match the charisma of the other two.
They will point out, as you yourself have done recently, that despite the Boro's Fortress Ayresome performances, attendances are down on last year hovering around the 15,000 mark.
I don't want to dwell too much on the obvious but a number of things should be pointed out here.
Firstly the price of admission went up by 50pc at the beginning of the season a lot of money in an area which still has among the worst unemployment rates in mainland Britain (and the lowest amount of disposable income per head of population if we are getting into statistics).
There is also the fact that both Newcastle and Sunderland are cities see, even the Queen isn't averse to a bit of Maccam favouritism with far larger population centres and far larger catchment areas.
They both also have greater historic cultural identities; Teesside is comparatively young and only recently can we say it has produced a generation of  indigenous people free of lingering Geordie and Scouse strains.
However…don't be fooled into thinking any of this means there is less passion on Teesside.
Take a look at Middlesbrough's travelling support it has never wavered and it has never let the club down, frequently imposing its vocal superiority at grounds from Goodison to Gigg Lane.
And the bedrock support of the club does not falter.
Even in the relegation season the attendance averages were above 18,000 (unlike those at Roker Park which frequently drop even quicker than did Marco Gabbiadini's reputation at Crystal Palace).
At the end of this season, when the achievements are totted up silverware or not Middlesbrough will have proved, once again, to be Cock of the North.
Something they have proved consistently over the last ten years.
All we have to do, Lennie, is shoulder away.
Let them have the headlines we'll have the points.
And when the nationals are forgetting all about us…well, you can always buy The Northern Echo…
FRENCH students from Middlesbrough's twin town of Dunkirk will be ‘shadowing’ council staff during a three-day visit this week.
The four teenagers are all final year business studies students from the Lycee du Noordover in Dunkirk, which has links with Marton Sixth Form College.
Coun Bob Kerr, chairman of the council's leisure services committee and lecturer at Marton Sixth Form College, said: ‘It promises to be a very useful initiative, given the growing importance of the European connection.’
Unemployment up by 13pc says MP
LANGBAURGH Labour MP Ashok Kumar has criticised the scandal of long-term unemployment on Teesside and revealed shock figures which show that unemployment in Langbaurgh has increased by 13pc over the past year.
Dr Kumar said the figures showed that the number of jobless in his constituency has increased by 591 between January 1991 and January 1992, bringing the real total of unemployed people to 7,263.
He added: ‘This means that many thousands of my constituents and their families are currently living under the shadow of long-term unemployment.
A crash programme is needed to build up the economy, boost training and create new jobs.’
Pylons battle: both sides prepare their action plans Objectors and would-be developers battling over plans for pylons across North Yorkshire and Cleveland draw up their plans of action next week.
Meetings at Northallerton and Middlesbrough on Wednesday and Thursday will enable both sides to prepare their arguments before a public inquiry in May.
They are designed to help all involved streamline their cases in a bid to keep the inquiry, expected to last two months, as concise as possible while covering all relevant points.
A Department of Energy spokesman said the inquiry itself would centre on the effect of the proposed pylons on landscape, health, historic sites, transport, aviation, agriculture and local structure and development plans.
The arguments have been well rehearsed over the last year.
The National Grid Company has always maintained that the 400,000-volt overhead line from Teesside to Shipton, near York, is needed to carry power from the Enron station being built at Wilton.
Protestors are furious that hundreds of 150ft. pylons would cut through some of the region's most beautiful countryside, disrupt farming, devalue property and risk health problems from electromagnetic fields.
However NGC has pointed out repeatedly that there is ‘no proven link’ between cancers and EMF.
More than 6,000 objections to the scheme have been submitted to the Department of Energy, many from important countryside and conservation groups including the Council for the Protection of Rural England, the Country Landowners' Association and the National Farmers' Union.
Local protest groups including Clevelandbased NEON sprang up along the length of the proposed line as the campaign against the pylons grew.
It became virtually impossible to find anyone except NGC in favour of the plans.
Public meetings held by NGC to explain the reasons for the new line did little to quell public fear of the pylons and hundreds of letters were despatched to MPs who joined the fight.
Mr William Hague, Conservative MP for Richmond, took the campaign to Westminster when he secured a Commons debate on the matter.
He was backed by fellow Tory Mr John Greenway, MP for Ryedale, and later in the campaign by Mr Tim Devlin, MP for Stockton South.
Langbaurgh Labour MP Dr. Ashok Kumar also joined the protest.
Local authorities were unanimous in their objections Stockton, Middlesbrough, Langbaurgh and Hambleton district councils and North Yorkshire and Cleveland county councils registered their concern.
Two routes for the Lackenby to Picton section of the line were proposed by the NGC, which is bound by law to carry power from new power stations.
One dubbed the Portrack option runs North across the River Tees, along Saltholme Marshes, back across the river to the A19, while the other the Southern option skirts Nunthorpe and crosses open countryside.
Only this week Mr Devlin suggested a third option which would bypass his constituency completely and follow the existing 275,000-volt line along Billingham Beck valley and ecology park.
However, the NGC said this route had already been rejected, partly because it meant a concentration of lines at Norton.
The idea was also condemned by Ms Dorothy Johnson, Labour candidate in the Cleveland county council Norton by-election on March 12.
‘Norton residents don't want these environmentally damaging pylons erected near their homes and I shall support them in their campaign to oppose them,’ she said.
Choice of routes for the final phase of the proposals, from Picton to Shipton, is severely restricted by the North York Moors National Park, the position of main towns like Northallerton and Thirsk and flight paths from RAF airfields in the area.
Route options have been squeezed in down a narrow corridor of land near the A19.
Undergrounding some or all of the cables is seen by many as one way of lessening the visual impact of the line but NGC says it could cost up to 18 times more than overhead lines.
The NFU is also against undergrounding because it would disrupt farming during installation, repair and maintenance work.
Other campaigners have questioned the very need for the line in the first place.
Mr Tom Haigh, who farms at Tanton Grange, near Stokesley, has challenged the NCG to prove upgrading work is necessary.
He claims the company is preparing the system to cater for future power stations in the Teesside area.
Mr Haigh has suggested piping gas south from Teesside to generate power nearer the area of demand, an idea also mooted by Mr David Bowe, Euro-MP for Cleveland and Yorkshire North.
The protest received a body-blow last month when Mr John Wakeham, energy secretary, approved upgrading of the 11km.
Norton to Saltholme transmission line without holding a public inquiry.
While this section had attracted fewer objections and replaced an existing cable, campaigners were angry no inquiry had been called.
They feared the approval of this first section would influence the inquiry on the remainder of the line.
The whole planning system came under fire from several quarters, including Mr Hague who called for reforms so that associated pylons and cabling would be considered when planning applications for power stations were submitted.
The inquiry, which starts in Northallerton on May 19, is expected to last two months although the inspector's decision is not likely to be known until early 1993.
‘Until that decision is known we cannot begin to draw up an engineering schedule but we should have all works completed by the end of 1995,’ said an NGC spokesman.
— The pre-inquiry meeting at the Marton Hotel and Country Club, Middlesbrough, starts at 10am on Thursday.
Polish boy to be treated in Germany Adam Dorz, the nine-year-old Polish boy brought to Britain by Cleveland Rotary Club members for medical treatment, was this week seeing doctors in Germany.
Adam, a haemophiliac, and his mother travelled to Bonn for further treatment arranged by Dr. Peter Jones, who cared for Adam during his stay in Newcastle Royal Victoria Infirmary in December.
Mr Colin Appleyard, of Thornaby and Yarm Rotary, thanked all who had made the journey possible.
Donations of cash and supplies for Polish orphanages and hospitals continued to flood in, although organisers still needed caravans, medical supplies and clothing, he said.
Mr Appleyard, who travels with a convoy to Poland later this month, thanked two fruiterers Hardy's of Middlesbrough and Mason's of Stockton for giving apples, oranges and eggs.
An anonymous donor had given 20 gallons of cooking oil, desperately needed in the stricken country.
Mr George Jameson, a dentist in Southend Avenue, Darlington, had given an electronic dental chair, instruments and equipment worth around £1,500.
A couple from Woodlands Terrace in the town had collected baby clothes and equipment.
Housekeeper and companion Muriel Fryatt was on her knees cleaning out a fire grate on the morning of February 6, 1952.
News of King George's death came out of the blue.
‘I had the radio on, heard the announcement and ran upstairs to tell my employer, Mrs Webster of West Tanfield, near Ripon,’ writes Mrs Fryatt, of Hambleton Close, Thirsk.
Beatrice Futter, Brafferton Village, Darlington: I was working at C. Nelson and Son, Northgate, Darlington.
It was my turn to go to the bank for the wages and I remember going back to the shop saying King George VI had died.
Have we all to cry?
George Little, High Street, Great Ayton, Middlesbrough: I was in our office at ICI Billingham.
My wife telephoned to give me the news which had been heard by our daughter listening to the radio.
She was recovering from an appendix op.
Gwenyth Batey, Hadington Crescent, Newton Aycliffe: I was a 20-year-old shorthand typist for the electricity board, taking dictation from Mr (JIH)
Bainbridge, the DCO of the region.
He stopped dictating to take a phone call and I saw his face become shocked, then very grave.
Replacing the phone he turned to me and said ‘the King is dead.’
It was a moment of great awe.
Jean Sparse, Toddington Drive, Norton, Stockton: I was 16 years old and working in my late father's general dealers shop in Hartlepool when a customer came in and said the King had died.
There was a poignant scene, customers had tears in their eyes.
King George VI was a much loved man.
Dorothy Bohannon, Henry Avenue, Bowburn, Durham: It was my 17th birthday.
I was a shorthand typist for British Railways at Stratford, East London, and I was working at my desk.
The photographers from the drawing office came in with the news which had just been broadcast on the radio.
M.E. Railton, Harcourt Street, Hopetown, Darlington: I was working at the Broadway Cafe in Darlington when one of the customers came in and said the King had died.
Basil Noble, Pine Grove, Darlington: I went to Runswick Bay to carry out a probate valuation.
Returning through Brotton I looked across the valley and wondered why a huge Union Jack was flying half-mast on the top of the Zetland Hotel at Saltburn.
It was not until I reached Redcar that I saw a Northern Echo placard lettered Death of King.
I.M. Dalby, Osric Place, Newton Aycliffe: I was at Maynards in the Haymarket, Newcastle, training to be manageress at the Bishop Auckland branch, when a lady from the snack bar next door came in to tell us of the passing away of the King.
I will never forget, the shop windows were dressed beautifully with mauve velvet.
Catherine Turnbull, Magdalene Avenue, Carrville, Durham: I worked at that time on public transport, Durham and district.
I picked up a young man on my first journey out of Durham about 6.30 on the morning.
He said he was a reporter and he told me of the death of the King, the news had just come through.
I didn't repeat this in case it was untrue but heard about 9am that it was true and had been broadcast.
I don't think any of the staff believed I already knew.
Belle Carr, Derwent Street, Chopwell, Tyne and Wear: I had not been long back in England after living in Malaya.
From living near the edge of a hot, steamy jungle in Army married quarters and coming back to England to live in a little house in Catterick Camp with snow everywhere, myself and my son, who was eight years old at the time, were sitting eating porridge feeling miserable and cold waiting for a plumber to come and mend a burst pipe.
I put on the wireless and heard the news that King George VI had died.
With the water from the burst pipe and our tears (watering the porridge) I never think of Catterick Camp without the very sad news of the King's death.
Annie Middlemiss, Dobinson House, West End, Wolsingham: There was to be a sale of furniture at the mart at Wolsingham and my mother and myself were at the viewing in the morning.
The auctioneer, Harry Pickering, came into the room and announced he had just heard on the wireless that the King had died.
J. Chapman, Sledmere Drive, Acklam, Middlesbrough: I was a final year pharmacy student in Sunderland and I was setting up apparatus for a chemistry experiment, when another student came in with the sad news that the King had died.
Rose Metcalfe, Vane Terrace, Darlington: I was attending the pre-natal clinic at Greenbank Maternity Hospital.
We were chatting away when nurse gave us the news that George VI had died, everything went quiet, we forgot our worries and thought of Elizabeth.
I had a lovely bouncing 8lb 9oz daughter one month later.
E. Hindmarsh, Dene Side, Lanchester, Durham: A number of our Methodist Women's Fellowship were gathered in our church for a weekly prayer reading.
We had been told our King was ill and that morning we commended George VI to God's loving care.
When we came out of the church we were told our King had passed away.
Lena Pye, Uplands, Etherley Lane, Bishop Auckland: I had been invited to the public gallery at Durham Assizes (crown court) by Supt Vickers to watch part of the trial of Mr Louis Bloom, a Sunderland solicitor.
He was accused of the murder of a Mrs Hessler.
The judge was about to pass sentence, but broke into the proceedings and stood up saying: ‘One does not know quite what to say in a case like this — the King is dead.’
Then he sat down.
The defendant was standing in the dock awaiting the sentence which was given immediately for the charge which had been reduced to manslaughter.
J. Marshall, Tanners Hill Cottage, Crook: I was standing on the steps of Durham Crown Court waiting to go in the public gallery, the assizes were on.
It was the trial of a Hartlepool solicitor called Bloom.
The flags were flying at half-mast.
When the court sat we were told that the King had died then the court went out for a while.
(Editor's note: Louis Bloom was acquitted of murder and found guilty of manslaughter.
He was sent to jail for three years)
Christine Thexton, Ashfield, Newton Aycliffe: I was in a sanatorium for two years having major surgery for a lung complaint, so the King's death is deeply implanted in my mind.
J. Waller, Pears Terrace, Shildon: I was going to visit my granny and as I got to the bottom of the street there was a church or a chapel nearby which was flying a flag at half mast.
I asked my granny why and she said that there had been what we now call a newsflash on the wireless saying the King had died.
Marjorie Heathwaite, Front Street, Cockfield, Bishop Auckland: I wrote in my diary February 6 1952: ‘The King died suddenly, broadcast 11.15am after Mrs Dale's Diary.
BBC closed down for the rest of the day, except for news.’
By the 9th I have written: ‘terrible BBC programmes, at least they let us hear Mrs Dale and The Archers.
On the Saturday no match broadcast, no sports report.’
Ann Petty, Carlisle Grove, Bishop Auckland: It was my half day off when myself and a friend usually went into Newcastle to the pictures, but because of public mourning they were all closed.
Instead we went to Tilleys Restaurant for tea.
It was a lovely place and meals were accompanied with music from the resident quartet.
E. Dewell, 7 Church Drive, St Andrews Road, Bishop Auckland: I was having lunch at my parents' home when my father-in-law, Frederick Dewell, telephoned me with the news.
He had received the news as chief reporter at the Bishop Auckland office of The Northern Echo.
COUNCIL employees in Middlesbrough have got on their bikes to prove the authority's Green credentials.
Public protection staff in the Environment City have received three brand new bicycles.
‘The bikes will be used,’ said environmental protection officer Jimmy Martin.
Pictured are Judith Lothian, Karen Hutchinson and Mr Martin getting into practice.
TIRELESS and daring fundraisers The Argyll Follies popped into the Teesside Hospice Care Foundation to visit staff and patients yesterday.
Members, the youngest of whom is 59, are all residents at Argyll Court sheltered housing scheme at Blue Hall, Stockton.
They raise money for the hospice and other charities through a varied range of activities, including abseiling and putting on stage shows.
One of the Follies, 83-year-old Mary Maugham, presented a fundraising doll to the foundation which she dressed in Edwardian costume herself.
Liz Hodgson, day centre sister of the hospice in Cambridge Road, Middlesbrough, said: ‘We are really grateful for their efforts.’
A health authority is being asked to investigate the waiting list for patients needing hip replacement operations.
Newcastle North MP Doug Henderson has written to city health chiefs, highlighting cases in which people are having to wait more than a year.
An authority spokeswoman said they were looking into the complaint.
YORK City Council has proved itself to be one of the region's most innovative local authorities.
Its council tenant service guarantee scheme launched a thousand charters and now it has thought of the alternative to the company car — the office bike.
Of course, it makes sense in a city like York.
The city council's boundaries are drawn so tight that everywhere is within cycling distance.
And driving a car around the centre is an exercise in frustration at the best of times.
At rush hour it is hopeless.
Sadly though, we don't think this is an idea which will be widely copied.
While the prospect of cycling through York is attractive the idea of doing the same thing in Newcastle or Middlesbrough does not have quite the same allure.
ONE of Cleveland's new all-weather fire and rescue vehicles swung into action when a man broke his leg on the Eston Hills.
The Pinzgauer was able to drive up 600m of hillside and bring down 27-year-old John Richards.
Mac Wood, of Cleveland Fire Brigade, said: ‘No other vehicle could have got up there.
The ambulancemen would have had to bring him down by hand, and he was a big lad, about 18 stone.’
The £45,000 Pinzgauer carried Mr Richards, of Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough, to a waiting ambulance, which took him to Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Last night he was said to be comfortable.
Pylon inquiry: inspectors explain how the hearing will be conducted Guidelines on how the pylons public inquiry would be run in North Yorkshire were drawn up at a meeting in Northallerton this week.
More than 200 members of the public packed the main hall at Hambleton Community Centre on Wednesday morning to hear how evidence would be presented at the hearing starting on May 19.
They included Lady Mary Bell, of East Rounton; Mr Tom Haigh, of Stokesley; Mrs Iris Wilkinson, of Sessay; Mr Ian Kibble, of the Country Landowners' Association; Mr Peter Edmonds, of the National Farmers' Union, and others who have spearheaded the anti-pylons movement over the last year.
THE IMPACT Mr Trevor Graham, one of two planning inspectors appointed to conduct the inquiry, chaired the meeting and explained how the inquiry could be organised.
The question of whether the proposed 400,000-volt overhead line and its pylons were needed at all would be considered first, he said, followed by the various options for the Lackenby to Picton and Picton to Shipton sections.
Three routes were out forward for the first section and two for the southern section.
The inquiry would consider the visual impact of the pylons, health and safety, conservation, buildings and ancient monuments, agriculture, road transport, aviation, radio and television reception, noise and the effect on local structure plans.
However, the inspectors were not empowered to deal with questions of compensation and other financial matters.
The appeal by the National Grid Company against Langbaurgh borough council's refusal of planning permission for a sub-station at Lackenby, a vital part of the proposals, would also be determined by the inquiry.
The NGC would present the whole of its evidence at the beginning of the inquiry, held mainly in Northallerton and expected to last more than two months.
Evidence from any supporters of the proposals would be heard next, followed by evidence from objectors local authorities, public bodies, conservation and other organisations, local residents' groups and individuals.
Repetition of evidence was to be avoided, said Mr Graham, although objectors were worried the full weight of opposition to the pylons would not be reflected.
‘A good argument is a good argument if it is made and made only once,’ he said.
‘A bad argument remains a bad argument even if it is repeated a thousand times.’
However, Mr Graham said the secretaries of state for energy and the environment would be fully aware of how many objections had been received concerning the scheme more than 7,000.
Although several members of the public and Mr David Parrish, the solicitor representing North Yorkshire county council, demanded the NGC identify a preferred route for each section of line, the company refused.
Mr Parrish said it was most unusual to have a planning inquiry with several options but the NGC said it was quite normal to make such planning applications.
Before the inquiry closed, the NGC would have the right of reply.
After the inquiry Mr Graham and Mr John Lindsay, a chartered surveyor and the second inspector, would prepare a written report for the secretaries of state with recommendations on whether the line should go ahead.
Objectors and supporters wanting to speak at the inquiry were asked to complete forms listing the witnesses they intended calling and roughly how long each piece of evidence would take.
Cross examination of witnesses would follow evidence given.
SITE VISITS Written evidence must be submitted to the inspectors at least three weeks before it was to be given at the inquiry.
The inquiry would take place mainly at Hambleton Community Centre but some evidence about the Cleveland end of the proposed line would be heard at Marton Hotel and Country Club, near Middlesbrough.
Sessions would run from 10am to around 4.30pm Tuesday to Thursday and 10am to around 2pm on Fridays throughout the hearing.
A break in the proceedings would be called from June 19 to July 7.
Mr Graham and Mr Lindsay would visit sites along all the proposed routes before the inquiry started.
A further meeting to provide an update on preparations will be held at Northallerton on April 14.
Any correspondence concerning the inquiry should be sent to Mr Alan Wood, Programme Officer, c/o Room 332, Department of Energy (Electricity Division), 1 Palace Street, London SW1E 5HE before May 19.
NORTH Yorkshire landowner Lady Bell yesterday spoke of the accident which left her son with serious head injuries.
David Bell was yesterday still very poorly after being hit by a pick-up outside his mother's farm at East Rounton, Northallerton, on Thursday.
Mr Bell, 30, of Arncliffe Hall, Ingleby Cross, Stokesley, is in Middlesbrough Hospital's special head injuries unit.
He is thought to have a fractured skull and is drifting in and out of consciousness.
Lady Bell said her son had been returning to his Land Rover, parked on the opposite side of the road to the farm.
‘He was helping with the feeding of the stock like he does every morning.
He shut the gate then just ran straight out on to the road.
He is normally so careful crossing the road.
He must have had something on his mind and he did something he does not normally do.’
The buildings at Hollins Farm go right to the edge of the road, making it difficult to see, she said.
The night after the accident he had come round but didn't recognise anyone.
A police spokesman said the view of the driver, David Robinson, 37, of Over Dinsdale, near Darlington, had been obstructed by the bend in the road.
No excessive speed had been involved.
Newcastle Polytechnic's plans to expand in the North-West are on the verge of a housing crisis months before the first students move into its £1m Carlisle campus.
Accommodation officer David Warman said a local advertising campaign produced a good response, but much of the accommodation offered was already rented to students.
Now the poly is now appealing to townspeople to join the hunt to find homes for around 100 students expected to need bedsits or flats in September.
The number of students on campus will swell to 700 within five years.
Meanwhile, the head of campus, Neville Harris and principal lecturer, David Hind, are busy visiting schools and colleges to tell potential students about the poly's business and management courses available in Carlisle.
A European-wide competition to design the cash that will be the currency of 12 countries was launched at a Tyneside school.
Pupils at Whickham Comprehensive, near Gateshead, were the first to learn how their money-making ideas could be the banknotes of the future.
Stephen Hughes, MEP for Durham and Blaydon unveiled the competition to draw up the Ecu European Currency Unit during a visit to the school.
The overall winning designs are expected to be adopted by the European Central Bank and be legal tender by 1999.
Eight pupils from two Teesside schools are giving up their holidays to get a good account of working life.
The Teesside High and Yarm School pupils will have intensive training in accountancy through the Waltons Clark Whitehill Schools Award Scheme.
The top boy and girl assisting in the production of clients' accounts, auditing and other financial services at Walton's offices in Hartlepool and Middlesbrough will receive £150 of book tokens to help their A-level and degree studies.
ROD Jones has returned from Romania with a message for his fellow aid workers: ‘The situation is desperate.’
The Convoy Aid Romania coordinator has challenged other mercy groups to a public debate but Cleveland Aid for Romanian Children has turned down the invitation.
‘I want the public to know the truth about the situation in the Romanian orphanages,’ said Mr Jones, based in Middlesbrough.
He returned to England on Saturday after delivering £20,000-worth of baby milk to Romania and was incensed by an article he read on his return.
It contained a claim by Cleveland Aid for Romanian Children that there was ‘no food crisis’ in the Iasi area which Mr Jones visited.
‘That's just not true.
Even the trained nurses who have gone out there weren't prepared for what they saw.
The children were on flour and water and all there was to eat was peas,’ he said.
Despite health problems compounded by the trip, Mr Jones is to head back to Romania in three weeks.
We had money left over from the Cow and Gate appeal and we are going to buy special waters and rehydration equipment for babies who have suffered from  dysentery and diarrhoea.’
But Paul Stage, of Cleveland Aid for Romanian Children, said CARC was not interested in a public debate.
Our information from official sources is that there is no immediate crisis.
Our policy has always been to improve the welfare of the children in the long-term by improving hygiene.’
HUNDREDS of signatures have been collected in a petition calling for swift action on the Skelton and Brotton Hospital.
Langbaurgh MP Ashok Kumar said more East Cleveland people would be asked to sign before the petition was presented to the House of Commons.
Dr Kumar said hardly anyone refused to sign in Skelton on Saturday.
He said: ‘Most people were very enthusiastic.
People really want this hospital.
‘It is not acceptable that the nearest emergency unit is in Middlesbrough, 35 minutes away.’
The hospital is due to be completed by 1994, but no site has yet been confirmed.
Dr Kumar was due to meet the Northern Regional Health Authority to discuss the matter last Thursday, but the NRHA pulled out due to an administrative blunder.
‘I want that meeting to happen before an election,’ said Dr Kumar.
‘The NRHA are playing silly games with the people of East Cleveland.’
A MAJOR survey which gets underway in Middlesbrough today aims to find out what women in the town think about safety.
Researchers will ask how neighbourhoods, town centres, streets and transport can be made more secure.
The project organised by Safer Cities could lead to a ‘Safe Transport’ scheme.
Safer Cities co-ordinator Pam McHale said: ‘Crime and fear of crime can have a serious effect on women's lives.
It is an issue which must be tackled.’
Middlesbrough Council's crime prevention manager Linda Hobson-West said many women felt vulnerable to attack when they went out at night.
She added: ‘A safe environment, one where women feel secure about their surroundings, is absolutely essential.’
The survey is part of Middlesbrough's International Women's day activities.
CLEVELAND Police could introduce a training and registration scheme for bouncers.
Club and pub doormen would have to carry registration cards and face a vetting procedure if the project takes off this year.
Police are keen to bring in registration to improve the image of the Teesside club scene.
A report which goes before Middlesbrough councillors on Wednesday says: ‘Concern has been expressed over the activities of some of those employed to control access to licensed premises.
‘It is known that some door supervisors have convictions and a history of violence.
‘Several serious incidents have occurred in recent years and in the worst, there have been deaths.’
Police believe training and registration could prevent crime, boost public confidence and enhance the sometimes ‘tarnished’ image of the licensed trade.
The county-wide project would mean premises employing bouncers would have to put them through a four-session training scheme and pay a registration fee.
Each applicant will be vetted by police.
Those with previous convictions will be allowed to put their case for registration before a selection committee made up of police and licensed and brewing trade representatives.
If door staff commit offences, any disciplinary action will take place after conviction unless there is video  evidence of a serious offence, which may be considered before a court appearance.
‘Preliminary discussions show a good measure of support in the trade,’ said Cleveland Police.
Police are presenting the scheme to all four district councils and the licensing trade this month.
They hope the authorities will adopt the principle in all public entertainment licences with effect from 1993.
RESIDENTS of Middlesbrough fear crime more than people in other parts of Cleveland, a survey has revealed.
The 1990 Cleveland Social Survey ‘Crime and the Community’ also shows marked differences between two problem Cleveland estates and the rest of the county.
‘In some respects, Hardwick and Whinney Banks have more in common with the inner London borough of Islington than they do with the rest of Cleveland,’ says the report.
It reveals that people in Whinney Banks and Hardwick are less likely to co-operate with police than in the county as a whole.
More diverse policing policy is recommended to tackle these differences.
Middlesbrough people fear crime generally more than other boroughs, but they fear burglary in particular.
‘Respondents in Middlesbrough also felt significantly more unsafe when out alone on the streets at night,’ the report says.
Burglary, thefts from cars and vandalism were the crimes considered most serious across the county.
A FEAR of handbag-snatching pedal cyclists led to a Stockton borough councillor trying to halt a proposed cycle route through the town centre.
Councillor Peter Andrew yesterday said pedestrians should come first.
He said cyclists should get off their bikes and walk when they get to the High Street.
He said: ‘We have a lot of old people who will benefit from the pedestrianisation of the High Street but I fear people will come round on bikes and pinch bags from poor defenceless old ladies.
‘It happens in the centre of Birmingham and it will happen in Stockton.’
His remarks were made when the environment and general services committee were discussing pedestrianisation plans for the High Street, along with an advisory cycle route through the centre.
His bid to halt the cycle route was defeated and the committee recommended allowing access into and through the High Street in both directions for cycles at all times.
The proposals have been agreed to with the co-operation of the police and Middlesbrough Cycling Group.
Tom Lamb, for the cycling group, said it was highly dangerous at the moment for cyclists to cross the Tees to get to Stockton.
He added: ‘Councillor Andrew should realise that cyclists do not kill pedestrians but cars kill cyclists and pedestrians.
‘The idea of believing that all cyclist are handbag snatchers is ludicrous.
‘Does that mean that every jogger must be a handbag snatcher, as well?’
Members also recommended proposals for disabled parking and a further plan to approach Cleveland County Council with a view to turning Nelson Terrace car park and its extension at Dovecot Street into a short-stay car park.
Members were told the move would compensate for the loss of car parking spaces in the High Street.
They also agreed to convert the western side of Wellington Street North car park from a long-stay into a short-stay.
Just like bees round the Jam Pot FOR the first two weeks no-one came though its doors.
But it caught on and this week around 100 young people came in to enjoy the snooker and non-alcoholic bar at their own meeting place, The Jam Pot Centre, run by the Church of the Nazarene in Lothian Road, Hartlepool.
The centre is open every afternoon after school between 3.30pm and 5pm and on a Wednesday and Friday evening between 6pm and 9pm.
Organisers are now arranging a camping trip to Grassmere in August.
FOR men who live out of a suitcase, Tuesday night must represent mid-week crisis.
Still three days, and many miles, from home.
Thus it seemed in the restaurant of the Golden Eagle at Thornaby, just half a dozen computer salesmen (and others similarly programmed) dining disconsolately in desultory ones and twos.
A representative audience, it might be said, and one poor lonely chap wearing a Frank Spencer pullover spent almost all the proceedings with his head buried in his hands.
A suitable case for treatment.
Opened in 1969, the Golden Eagle has 57 bedrooms and suites named after wartime bombers, a remembrance of the old Thornaby airfield.
The restaurant is the Beaufort.
It's a pleasant enough place, with particularly comfortable chairs, attentive service and curtains left open to reveal the doubtless uplifting vista of Thornaby town centre by night.
There's a fairly simple table d'hote for £9.75 and a Frenchified carte that included chicken breast in a Pernod sauce, glazed like most of the customers.
Vegetables proved a mixed bag: onion rings so cold they might have been brought from a chip shop in Middlesbrough, saute potatoes very good, others somewhere in between.
We'd started with a lobster bisque that was almost certainly Sainsbury's, but since Sainsbury's almost certainly make the finest lobster bisque that ever found itself in a can, there can be no complaint.
The Coke (this column is in danger of becoming a Coke-aholic) came without ice, lemon and (rather like the evening) fizz.
Clearly things are livelier when the suitcases are packed off on Friday morning.
A three course dinner is just £4.50 (booked in advance) on Friday and 40p more on Saturday.
Sunday lunch is £5.95, half for children, and by all accounts the Eagle's really soaring by one o'clock.
At the end of Tuesday's meal we were clocked by the general manager who insisted on paying.
The tapes played Wake Me Up Before You Go.
We went.
The news will be welcomed by people like Vic Gatenby.
An ex-Army sergeant from Bedale, he told last year of using the conversation lines for up to ten hours at a time.
His bill topped £5,300.
He admitted he had been stupid, but said: ‘They are too easily available and from my experience I think they should be banned.’
Mr Gatenby's addiction had started with one phone call because, he said, he was unsettled, did not mix easily and lived on his own.
And that, according to a North-East psychologist, may be for some the secret of the chatline compulsion.
‘People will turn to all sorts of people under all sorts of conditions just to get a sympathetic response,’ says Dr Derek Milne, chartered clinical psychologist for Northumbria health authority.
‘It's the same thing as people talking too loudly in public places so they can be overheard by strangers.
It's a way to share the burden of a problem.’
Callers phoning a chatline need have no fear of rebuff; the people they speak to want to talk as much as they do.
So there is little social embarrassment for the shy.
That may be why chatlines, costing up to 48p a minute, have been popular with young people since they were set up in the late Eighties dangerously popular, in some cases.
A Middlesbrough schoolboy ran away from home and spent three nights sleeping rough when he opened his parents' quarterly phone bill and found his conversations had sent it soaring to over six times its usual amount.
And a Manchester mother vowed she would rather go to prison for life than pay a £4,000 bill run up by her son.
She estimated it would take her 11 years to pay off the debt.
Attempts to regulate such services in 1988 led to the setting up of a compensation fund to pay the bills of unsuspecting parents.
The fund worked on the basis that the calls were ‘stolen’.
But it paid out more than £440,000 in two years, and now the kitty is running dry.
The 12 chatline companies have been asked to come up with £660,000, but only two have produced their share.
And now Oftel, the watchdog of the phone industry, has said it will withdraw the companies' code of practice next month.
This will effectively ban the lines as companies will be unable to obtain licences.
Oftel director general Sir Bryan Carsberg said: ‘I am no longer satisfied that the code makes adequate provision for compensating those who suffer.’
Almost anyone can set up a telephone information service.
Operators earn 28p a minute for peak rate calls and 16p for cheap, with British Telecom charging the person who is responsible for the bill whether he made the call or not.
BT which scrapped its own Talkabout service in 1988 is believed to take 30 to 40pc of the revenues for carrying the chatline call.
A spokesman yesterday said the company was delighted the lines were to be banned.
‘They are a blight on the phone service and almost impossible to police.’
And Vivienne Peters, director of the Telecommunication Users Network said of the decision: ‘It's brilliant.
The misery that is caused by these lines will at last be wiped out.’
The Cheshire 12-year-old who tried to commit suicide told psychologists after said after the incident that she was still a chatline addict.
‘Despite all the distress I would still go on,’ she said.
And for the thousands of chatline users who will be left high and dry when their service shuts down in April, Dr Derek Milne predicts a further search for support.
‘These people will find another ear,’ he says.
‘As the old saying goes, help is where you find it.’
FUNDRAISERS are planning to raise thousands of pounds for five North-East hospitals to help treat sick children.
The Stockton branch of the Independent Order of Foresters hopes to earn between £20,000 and £30,000 for vital equipment.
The charity is to write to doctors at North Tees, South Cleveland, Darlington Memorial, Hartlepool and Bishop Auckland General Hospitals asking what they want.
They will use cash from their Prevention of Children's Ailments appeal for the items.
Foresters spokesman Raymond Bell of Newton Aycliffe, said members from around County Durham and Cleveland were hoping to set a new fundraising record.
The appeal is launched on Thursday with a music night at St Peter's Catholic Club, Normanby Road, Middlesbrough.
POLICEMAN Dave Pick will today leave the North-East for Romania in a mission to save a mother's life.
The Northumbria police constable is making his mercy dash after the Freeman Hospital in Newcastle responded to a cry for help from Romania.
PC Pick is one of the organisers of the Newcastle Police Aid to Romanian Children charity, which has delivered about £4m worth of supplies to the troubled country in the past two years.
He was deeply moved when Romanian policewoman Carmen Teleanou wrote telling him that her mother Tina would die within months without heart surgery.
Romania has no replacement heart valves so PC Pick contacted the Freeman Hospital, famed for pioneering heart surgery.
The hospital's chief executive Len Fenwick immediately said the operation could be carried out on Tyneside.
But it was learned yesterday morning that Mrs Teleanou's condition had deteriorated and she could not travel.
So Mr Fenwick agreed to donate two plastic heart valves worth £4,000 which Dave Pick will deliver personally to the Brasov area of Transylvania in Romania where the sick woman lives.
There is one Romanian surgeon capable of performing the open heart operation to replace the middle aged woman's valves.
He spends six months each year in the U.S. but returns to Romania at the beginning of April when the operation is expected to be performed.
A spokesman for the Freeman Hospital said: ‘We have donated the valves and Dave Pick is going to take them to literally save the woman's life.
If she doesn't get the operation she is going to die.’
He is due to fly to Heathrow today and will fly out to Romania tomorrow.
PC Pick said: ‘The Freeman Hospital have been exceptionally good in giving us two heart valves to take over.’
North-East medical expertise has already saved one Romanian life baby Bogdan Ursu was recently brought to Middlesbrough General Hospital, where consultant surgeon Fred Nath carried out a vital operation to cure water on the brain.
THE new leisure pool in Middlesbrough will provide fun, excitement and escape from routine, councillors were told yesterday.
The leisure services committee formally approved plans for the £4.63m project which will form part of the Cameron Hall development in the town centre.
It should go out to tender next January and construction be completed by April 1995.
Hot dots to bring safety for pupils
A CLEVELAND school is to receive thousands of safety stickers so pupils can be seen at night.
Kathleen Fletcher, chairwoman of Stockton North Road Safety Committee, will present Billingham's Pentland Primary School with 5,000 fluorescent stickers which pupils can attach to their shoes, school bags or bikes.
The equipment, known as ‘hot dots,’ has been bought with a donation from Cameron Hall Developments, Wynyard Park.
CLEVELAND ramblers are being challenged to tread the green, green grass of home.
Sick of seeing Sunday morning ramblers waiting to catch car rides and buses out of the area, Cleveland County Council has made an offer it hopes walkers will not be able to refuse.
This Sunday there will be a 50seat bus waiting outside Middlesbrough railway station at 9am to take doubters into the heart of uncharted Cleveland.
‘It will be idyllic,’ said County Hall-based countryside champion Doug Hawkes, who has organised a 22-mile trek into ‘unequalled’beauty.
Doug said: ‘You see ramblers collecting to go to the dales and into North Yorkshire.
They don't know what is on their own doorsteps.’
Doug can be reached on Middlesbrough 248155, ext 2460.
TONI Halliday sees herself as a hard NorthEast woman.
Toni, lead singer with Curve, grew up in Washington and says her eight years in the area helped shape her personality.
‘There were things I loved about the area and things I hated,’ she said.
‘Some people were so small-minded and you couldn't do anything private.
Your business was everybody else's.
‘But I really loved the community aspect of it when all the neighbours supported you.’
Her first big music break came when she was 15.
She bumped into Eurythmic Dave Stewart in a cafe in Sunderland and was promptly signed to his Anxious record label.
Toni then met guitarist Dean Garcia, the illegitimate son of a Hawaiian American GI and an Irish Catholic, and formed a band.
But the couple fell out for three years following a very acrimonious split.
‘We didn't speak for ages as there were so many complications with debt and the record company.
But then suddenly we got in contact with each other and picked up where we left off.
The wounds became tiny scars and we now have a really strong friendship.’
Curve, who are in the middle of a nationwide tour, have just released a new single Fait Accompli.
It's a powerful, emotional song and looks set to put them firmly on the chart map indeed, it entered The Northern ‘s North-East chart at No 1 this week.
Their debut album Doppelganger, which was written and recorded in just three months, is out on Monday.
It was produced by Toni's boyfriend Alan Moulder, of Ride and Jesus and Mary Chain fame.
Toni, who has been called a dark Debbie Harry, was recently voted the best female artist and object of desire in the music press.
But she sees herself as anything but a sex symbol.
‘It's all a bit of a joke,’ she said.
‘I am 27 for God's sake and am not into all that.’
You can judge for yourself when the band play Middlesbrough Arena tonight (Fri).
YET more charity catalogues out for spring.
They're largely similar to the Christmas versions but minus the fruitcake and cards and plus beach bags and sun hats.
Revelations, produced by the Arthritis and Rheumatism Council, even has furniture a solid pine roll top writing desk for £199.95 and a chaise longe sofa bed for £195.
Details and catalogue from PO Box 20, Tanners Lane, Barkingside, Ilford, Essex, 1G6 1QQ.
UNICEF has the widest and most varied range of stationery lots of all purpose cards in all sorts of styles, plus handsome stationery sets with designs based on blankets woven by the Navajo Indians.
Catalogue from Unicef, Unit 1, Rignals Lane, Calleywood, Chelmsford, CM2 8TU.
AND Traidcraft have a slim catalogue devoted just to handmade and recycled papers.
Some wrapping papers are made from water hyacinths, sugar cane waste or jute waste.
They come from India and Bangladesh and are inspired by art from all over the world, though we particularly liked the Ocean Creatures wrapping paper eight sheets for £2 featuring whales, seals and turtles.
Traidcraft, Kingsway, Gateshead, NE11 0NE.
ANOTHER recommendation for a good but economical hairdresser this week mentions Janet's Unisex Hair Salon in Grangetown, Middlesbrough.
‘Friendly and polite staff.
Reasonable prices.’
Cut and blow dry £6.50, perms from £10.50, which, we think, is the cheapest so far.
AND we've had no success in our hunt for year long round Christmas pudding sauce.
But we've found some thin sliced bread including some at the Late Shopper in Bedale (thin sliced long loaf 53p) and we liked the suggestion from Margaret Gent, our retiring switchboard lady, who says she buys uncut loaves and slices them very thinly with an electric carving knife…
DUNE, Christian Dior's latest perfume, has been a great success.
In three months sales have totalled over 234 million French francs.
But to get that return, they used a publicity and promotion budget of 110 million francs.
Still think of perfume as a frivolous frippery?
BACK to earth with a bump, or a can of soup.
Campbells are offering a little recipe book with 30 ideas for using condensed soups in meals such as Spinach and Walnut Roll, Smoked Salmon Mousse, stews, stroganoffs and pasta dishes.
To get your free copy send biggish sae to Campbell's Leaflet offer, The Rowland Company, PO Box 4PU, London W1A 4PU.
INCONTINENCE is not generally the sort of thing people chat merrily about which means that there are, apparently, a lot of silent sufferers thinking they're the only one.
In fact, there are thought to be three million people who suffer from it.
To help cope, Boots are having a series of one day special clinics at some of their larger stores this month when experts will help and advise in total confidence and privacy.
For details of dates, contact stores in Darlington, Gateshead, Harrogate, Middlesbrough, Scarborough, and Sunderland.
IF you're trying to get back to work or change jobs, the Institute of Personnel Management and W H Smith have produced an Employment Pack with lots of practical help, how to do a CV, sample forms and formats and a guide to interviews, £3.99.
A GENERAL Election is looming you might have noticed.
For what, or for whom, will most of us be voting?
For ‘duds’, according to a government minister.
That's the unflattering term retiring Defence Minister Alan Clark applies to Backbenchers.
Confessing that he is ambitious for more power, but unlikely to get it, Mr Clark, who once described Africa as ‘bongo-bongo land’, says: ‘I'm not interested in the rest.
Nor am I interested in using the House as a handle for consultancies and all that, the provider of access to God-knows-what and free meals.
‘If you're a dud you can make a lot of money out of it kickbacks, mileages and second homes, employing your wife as a secretary.
You can climb above your worth.
A dud can't make it any other way.’
Rarely has there been a franker admission of the rot at the heart of our ‘Mother of Parliaments’.
Ending the scandal of ‘consultancies and all that’ the outside interests that colour, if not compromise, the activities of too many MPs should, but won't be, a General Election issue.
But if Mr Clark's remarks keep one or two voters from the polls it will be no more than our tarnished ‘democracy’ deserves.
RIGHT UP to the finishing tape of this Parliament, Richmond MP William Hague is diligently doing his local bit.
This week, in yet another head-to-head about the threatened Wensleydale railway, he sought assurances from BR that their apparent reluctance to allow charter excursions on the line isn't part of a closure strategy or ‘stitching the line up’, as local campaigner Stan Abbott vividly puts it.
Mr Hague could usefully ask the same question about the Esk Valley line, part of which runs at the opposite end of his constituency.
A week tomorrow a stupendous offer on the line comes to an end.
Since February 22, passengers buying a cheap day return have been able to get a second ticket for £1.
But there are no trains on Sundays, the best day to attract extra business.
And the offer isn't available to passengers from Middlesbrough or Whitby, the line's termini and main centres of population.
With ‘promotions’ like this a closure notice becomes almost superfluous.
CRASS phrase or profound insight?
Does the constant talk of a ‘kick start to the economy’ mirror Britain as clapped out old BSA?
If so we really have had our (micro) chips.
HOUSING plans at Nunthorpe, Middlesbrough, could still go ahead despite 45 written objections.
Bellway Homes has applied for permission to build 28 detached houses on 7.6 acres at Guisborough Road.
In 1989 outline planning for a similar development there by Bellway was refused by Middlesbrough Council's economic development and planning committee.
The refusal was upheld at a public inquiry.
Bellway's revised proposal, presented to yesterday's economic development and planning committee meeting, is half the total of the original application.
Tony Noble, chief planning officer, told members that from the inspector's earlier decision it was clear there would be no objection to a revised application.
Members accepted his advice to visit the site before a formal decision was taken.
Elderly are warned on conmen builders Elderly people in Stockton have been warned about ‘jobbing builder’ conmen after a pensioner parted with £2,500 of his savings.
The 69-year-old man, from Elsdon Street, handed over the cash on odd occasions over the past year.
Police say two crews of men carried out the work and are seeking two men in their 50s driving a red transit van and three men in their 30s driving a small van.
Tanzania has lifted a three-year ban on elephant hunting and will allow tourists to kill the magnificent animals, despite an international moratorium on the sale of elephant products.
Abubakar Mgumia, minister for tourism, natural resources and environment, said: ‘The hunting of a few elephants by tourists will not affect the number of elephants in the country.’
Tanzania's elephant population stands at about 55,000, but was more than twice that size before  widespread poaching from 19801989 nearly wiped out its herds.
Tanzania was one of the 101 signatories to the worldwide ban on trade in elephant products imposed in 1989 by the Convention in International Trade of Endangered Species, or CITES.
The ban aimed at eliminating the ivory market, which many conservationists believed was  fuelling widespread poaching which reduced Africa's elephant population from an estimated 1.2 million to 609,000 in the last decade.
By lifting the ban Tanzania becomes the only country in East Africa to permit elephant hunting.
Meanwhile Tanzania is seeking permission from CITES to triple its annual crocodile harvest to 3,000.
Legislators recently told the government to make the request because crocodiles have proliferated and are a menace to people near rivers.
A government scheme allowing its controversial City Technology Colleges to train teachers has been welcomed by Teesside's Macmillan College.
The college, which employs a number of staff without qualified teacher status, ‘has been fighting tooth and nail’ to enter the licensed teacher scheme operating in other state schools.
In December Education Secretary Kenneth Clarke listened sympathetically to the CTC's case when he visited Macmillan College in Middlesbrough.
Now he has announced that the UK's 15 CTCs will be able to train and award qualified teacher status to staff employed as licensed teachers.
Yesterday Macmillan's principal John Paddick said it was very good news for the college and would allow talented teachers with vocational qualifications to gain a teaching qualification.
‘This opens a whole lot of possibilities for us.
We'd like to be used in the same way as a training institution,’ he said.
A drive to attract more ethnic minority students to Longlands College, Middlesbrough, is showing good results.
Yasmin Awan and Tahira Khan, from the college's multi-cultural unit, said information on what was on offer had been distributed to communities and along with home visits and promotional events people were coming forward.
‘A number of students enrol first on the English for Speakers of Other Languages courses because they want to improve their language skills,’ said Tahira.
‘Once they gain confidence in communicating they go on to other courses.’
Two Asian students Perveen Akraman and Shanaz Anwar began by improving their language skills, then went on to a beauty care course for women and recently they both enrolled on a car maintenance course.
ON January 8, 1875, young James Springhall bade a tearful farewell to his parents and friends at Middlesbrough railway station on the first leg of an epic journey.
It ended over three months later when the emigrant ship Jerusalem completed its run from Plymouth Sound and docked at Sydney Harbour.
The handwritten diary logging weather conditions and life before the mast on the barque Jerusalem, has been donated to The Dorman Museum in Middlesbrough by North Ormesby businessman Bob Heward.
James Springhall was Mr Heward's great uncle.
‘We've always referred to the diary as ‘my grandfather's log book’,’ said Mr Heward, 65, of Birchwood Road, Marton, Middlesbrough.
‘It has always been in the family and we know that James Springhall lived in Cargo Fleet Road, but other than that I'm afraid we don't know a great deal about him, or his life in Australia.’
In the diary Mr Springhall reports how the emigrants' luggage was searched going aboard for intoxicating liquor, and how the ‘stress of weather’ kept the ship in port before before setting sail.
He describes a near collision with a steamer in the English Channel.
‘I could have jumped on board of her at the time from the jib-boom.’
Three days out at sea one passenger caused a stir by calling out that the ship was sinking and about 60 men on deck had to be assured by the captain there was no danger.
By February 10 the ship had reached the Tropic of Cancer.
‘A great number of flying fish flying about the ship.
A beautiful moonlight night, temperature in the shade, 70 degrees,’ he records.
By March the ship was getting into colder climes.
‘Crew commenced to get the passengers’ boxes out of the holds for the purpose of getting warmer clothes for the remainder of the passage’.
He logs: ‘Friday March 12. 6pm.
There was a fight between two single men  passengers , one an Englishman named Ben Palmer and the other named John Larkin.
‘There was quite an uproar and the sailors had to help the English for to keep back the Irish, they being the greatest majority.
The Englishmen gave Paddy a good hiding and made him so he had to stay in bed for a week.’
Although for many days the ship was becalmed and progress was slow, if at all, some days the vessel logged 12 knots and made good  progress .
By April 12 Australia could be seen.
‘There is  splendid scenery, full of woods and very high mountains.
A great quantity of shore birds flying about the ship’
On April 18 they were towed into anchorage at Sydney and visited by boats selling fruit.
The following day he records: ‘Rose at 6am, got washed ready for going ashore.
7am.
A pleasant morning, the sun shining brightly.
8am.
Breakfast, fresh bread we got from shore.
11am The Government Commissioners came on board to ask every person if they had any complaints to make for the treatment during the voyage.
1pm The Commissioners told us we were at perfect liberty to go on shore when we pleased.’
Assistant curator of The Dorman Museum Richard Devaney said: ‘The diary is written in perfect copperplate handwriting.
It is a valuable acquisition for the museum as it describes an experience which quite a number of Middlesbrough people must have gone through.’
A copy of the diary will be making the return journey soon when Mr Heward's sister Joyce, and her husband, visit Australia.
They will give it to a museum in Sydney.
Professor's research honoured at poly
A Guisborough professor's research work has been honoured with a new post at Teesside Polytechnic.
Prof. Graham Street of Kirkdale had the title Richard Lines Professor of Biochemical Engineering conferred on him last week.
The new post at the polytechnic's School of Science and Technology has been created thanks to Mr Richard Lines, executive chairman of MTM, the Hutton Rudby firm.
He is also chairman of the polytechnic board of governors and has given £100,000 to the new science school to help develop the study of chemical and biotechnological sciences.
Prof. Street, who is married with three children, is a graduate of Oxford University and helped establish the North-East Biotechnology Centre in partnership with Sunderland Polytechnic.
His research work has been published extensively and he recently led a team of representatives from Britain, Germany, Switzerland and the Netherlands to create the first European master's degree in biotechnology.
Other new posts created under the Richard Lines Award have gone to Dr.
Gurdial Singh, who has become the Richard Lines Reader in Organic Chemistry, and Dr. Joe McGuinnis, who is the Richard Lines Teaching Fellow in Inorganic Chemistry.
Dr. Singh is currently leading a seven-strong applied chemistry research group at the polytechnic and is a referee for the chemistry committee of the Science and Engineering Research Council.
Dr. McGinnis joined the polytechnic to strengthen the teaching expertise in the field of inorganic chemistry.
Manning cuts leave disabled rail travellers stranded Cuts in manning levels at railway stations have imposed a curfew on disabled travellers, it was claimed yesterday.
One disabled man said his visits to his seriously ill mother were being cut short as a result.
Mr Peter Pinder, aged 65, of Lister Street, Hartlepool, has used a wheelchair since suffering four heart attacks 14 years ago.
He said British Rail's decision to stop manning the town's station from 3.15pm every day ignored the needs of disabled travellers.
‘They haven't even considered us,’ he said.
‘I am in an electric wheelchair and there are a lot of people in the area who are the same as me.
‘I need help getting on and off the train and British Rail provides a ramp for this, but for about a month it's only been possible for me to arrive or leave the station before 3.15pm.
‘I feel very angry and frustrated.
I liked to have a few days out in Middlesbrough, Sunderland or Newcastle but now I can't do this anymore and I'm stuck in Hartlepool.’
Mr Pinder has also had trouble getting back from visiting his sick mother in Hull.
To be back in Hartlepool by 3.15pm he has to leave Hull by 11am on Sunday.
‘Six times out of seven the train is delayed,’ he said.
‘This means I miss my connection and then it creates a scatter at Middlesbrough as they try to fit me on to a train to get to Hartlepool in time.
‘Sometimes they've managed to find one that isn't even scheduled but I'm dreading getting stuck they'll have to send me home in a taxi.’
Mr Pinder said he had seen a woman in a wheelchair throw away two tickets for an evening performance at the theatre in Newcastle after she was told no-one would be available to help her on her return journey.
He said the bus services in the town often did not have ramps needed to get a wheelchair on board, and long journeys by bus were often more uncomfortable than travelling by train.
‘British Rail staff have always been very helpful to me but this can't justify the cuts and I have told them so in writing,’ he added.
Mr Ted Leadbetter, MP for Hartlepool, has met management to discuss the problem.
But in a letter to Mr Pinder he said he could see no sign of any change in the policy.
Mr Pinder has written to the town's prospective parliamentary candidates in the hope that they will pursue the matter, and has contacted Hartlepool Access Group to ask for help.
A spokesman said British Rail aimed to provide a good service for disabled travellers but was trying to cut the cost to the tax payer.
‘We have got to take a wider view,’ he said.
‘The manning hours at Hartlepool had to be reduced as we are trying to cut the amount of money that the tax payer has to find to run a socially necessary railway.
‘The lighter-used services seem to have to be cut down to do this.’
National pressure group Transport 2000 said there were certainly other cases like Mr Pinder's all the way along the DarlingtonNewcastle line.
Mr Peter Walker, chairman of the NorthEast branch, said: ‘There are stations all the way along the line that have no staff at all.
‘You only have to look at unmanned stations like Thornaby, Stockton and Seaham to imagine the scale of the problem.
‘There are also problems with the services to Bishop Auckland, Shildon and Aycliffe.’
He said British Rail's Passenger's Charter, which was launched this week, ‘looked good on paper but failed to tackle the heart of the problem.’
Transport 2000 wanted to see a radical shake-up of the funding system for the railways in this country to provide a better service.
‘We would like to follow the European model where the governments seem to be prepared to invest more money in improving the service,’ he added.
FAMILIES of residents at a hospital threatened with closure have joined the battle over its future.
Relatives say the care and dedication of staff at Thornton Lodge Hospital, Wensleydale, cannot be replaced by alternative plans.
Northallerton Health Authority wants to close the hospital, which caters for people with learning difficulties and handicaps, because it says it is not up to modern standards and is isolated.
A survey among the residents' families has shown overwhelming opposition to the closure proposal.
It was carried out by Coun Anthony Abraham, whose Richmondshire District Council ward includes the hospital.
The survey findings and families' comments will be presented to the district council's environmental health committee meeting tomorrow night, before it decides on its view of the issue.
The meeting will also be addressed by a health authority representative.
Families of residents say the hospital is a valuable asset to handicapped people in the area, provides excellent long-term and short-term care.
They say the hospital is not isolated, but close at hand for Dales people.
One woman, whose son is an epileptic, said her son had been to hospitals in Newcastle, Middlesbrough, Northallerton, Oxford, Sedgewick near Kendal, and Cookridge near Leeds, before Thornton Lodge.
She wrote: ‘Thornton is the most homely, loving and best run of them all.
The staff are second to none.’
Four of the residents are over 90 and another four are over 80.
Coun Abraham said Thornton Lodge was seen as a happy and successful establishment.
People would not welcome a move from their home and if closure went ahead over a long period of time staff would inevitably leave.
He said the survey also showed that people believed ‘the experts’ had already made up their minds and were not interested in others' views.
THE Princess of Wales spoke of her first-hand experience of family break-up yesterday.
The Princess, whose parents divorced when she was a child, was recounting her tearful experiences when sitting in on counselling sessions organised by Relate, the former Marriage Guidance Council.
She gave her moving account at the presentation of the Family Of The Year award in London to the Donbavand family from near Leeds.
Finalists Andrew and Helen Williams of Grey Towers, Nunthorpe, Middlesbrough, were also there with their five sons.
JAMES Player, deputy chief officer for Age Concern in York: ‘It is not a good budget for pensioners.
They may well feel that they have been offered a few crumbs.
This is not nearly enough.’
A Darlington pensioner: ‘It's like getting blood out of a stone.
I don't know what I'm going to do with all this wealth.’
Hugh Bayley, Labour parliamentary candidate for York: ‘Instead of cutting tax the Government should be investing in schools, the health service and above all in creating jobs.’
Jonathan Fry, director of Yorkshire and Humberside Low Pay Unit: ‘We welcome the new tax rate of 20p in the £ for the first £2,000 of taxable income although we would prefer it to be even lower.
The new rate will be worth £1.92 a week if all £2,000 is earned which doesn't sound like a lot but it is crucial if you are on a low wage.’
Peter Bergg, prospective Liberal Democrat candidate for Darlington: ‘The disgusting thing is that he has borrowed to pay for tax cuts.
That has to be paid for some time, and it cannot be justified.
It is all good vote-winning stuff, but I hope the electorate will not be fooled by it’
John Scott, prospective Labour candidate for Stockton South: ‘In a last-ditch attempt to remain in power the Government is prepared to bribe the people of Stockton by borrowing to pay for tax cuts.’
Beth Lakhani, welfare rights advisor with the Child Poverty Action Group: ‘This is a disappointing budget.
There is no increase in child benefit, no help with child care and no extra help for the millions of families with children living on benefits.
While noting the help given to more families by the introduction of the lower tax bands CPAG doesn't support this as part of a move towards a basic 20p tax rate.’
Joe Harris, chairman Darlington Licensed Victualler's Association: ‘The Chancellor has done nothing for us with this Budget, times are hard enough for publicans.
People think a penny in duty will mean a penny on a pint but it will work out as three or four pence to the customer.
Christopher Bullock, director of public affairs for the Tobacco Advisory Council: ‘The 13p increase on a packet of cigarettes is totally unfair to the UK's 17m smokers.
It will add to inflation and aggravate rather than cure the current recession.
As usual it will be less well-off smokers who suffer most as a disproportionate amount of their income will be swallowed up in tax.’
David Williamson, prospective Conservative candidate for Bishop Auckland: ‘This is a fair budget, spending power of the lower paid is increased proportionately most.
This is a budget which may well produce an interest rate cut.
It is good for the consumer and is helping the country out of recession.’
Paul Harford, leader of Cleveland County Council: ‘This is a standstill Budget offering little or no hope to those who are unemployed or dependent on benefit, or hoping for proper training to help them escape the poverty trap.’
Ged Parr, Green Party parliamentary hopeful for Middlesbrough: ‘This Budget is an opportunity wasted.
In Green terms, it is neither use nor ornament.
He has made cars cheaper which is going to put more of them on the road.
And the car tax itself is only raised by a paltry £10.’
SCHOOLCHILDREN from throughout the North will tomorrow tell a panel of judges about how they would promote their area.
It is the second year that the Northern Development Corporation has run the Quality Quest competition among schools from Redcar to Carlisle.
Each of five finalists have produced a presentation on the theme of ‘Promoting the North as a quality region’.
DOCTOR Sam Ramaiah showed no hesitation when asked to don a Humphrey Bogart Casablanca outfit to take part in No Smoking Day.
At the Central Park Cafe Americain in Middlesbrough Dr Ramaiah, the South Tees director of public health, urged smokers to ‘Kiss it Goodbye’.
And he said he was prepared to say it again and again to get the message across.
About 650 people die from smoking attributable diseases every year in South Tees and the bill for hospital care for smoking-related illnesses is £1,895,000.
‘Add that to the cost of outpatient treatment, of non-hospital care, prescribed medicine and days off work, and the total cost is enormous,’ said Dr Ramaiah.
South Tees Health Authority plans to help people stop smoking, to help create more smoke-free places and to try to stop young people from starting.
‘We run regular courses to train health and other professionals to run stop smoking groups and to give help and advice on a one-to-one basis to all smokers who want to stop,’ said Dr Ramaiah.
Malcolm Archer was punched and kicked in a dispute over the sale of the stall he had bought.
When he ran to call the police trays of fish were upset and passers-by given the products.
Other products were taken from the stall and given away to a Middlesbrough stall.
The rest was put in Anne Marie Miller's fridge.
Miller, 44, Paul Jowers, 31, and Terence Jowers, 25, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted affray.
Terence Jowers also admitted theft of five bottles of spirits from Gateway supermarket.
Gerard Hardman, 27, admitted an offence under the Public Order Act and burglary.
Sentence on Paul Jowers, of no fixed address, was adjourned for a social inquiry report.
Miller, of Montrose Street, Middlesbrough, was jailed for nine months.
Terence Jowers, of Palm Street, was jailed for 15 months and Hardman, of Lytton Street, both Middlesbrough, was jailed for two years.
Tim Clayson, prosecuting, said the four had driven to Redcar market where Mr Archer had his stall that he had bought from Miller's estranged husband.
She believed she was owed money by Mr Archer for the sale.
Once at the market Miller approached Mr Archer and the men then punched and kicked him.
Miller broke a pair of scales on the stall and Terence Jowers upset several trays of fish.
When Mr Archer's 20-year-old assistant, Lisa Pratt, came on the scene Miller demanded to know where the takings were and she was then punched in the chest and ribs.
Deborah Sherwin, defending Miller, said she had sold her home to set up the fish stall at Redcar and Ferryhill markets but when her marriage broke up her husband took over running the stall on the understanding it would provide for their daughter.
Miss Sherwin said she found out the stall had been sold for below the price she thought it was worth and felt ‘ripped off’.
The court was told Terence Jowers had his own grievance against Mr Archer and had taken the opportunity to sort it out.
Aidan Marron, defending Hardman, said his client played a lesser role in the market incident and had helped carry away boxes of fish products.
A TOWN hall wants to add a little dash to the opening of Cleveland's first university.
Governors of Teesside Poly have agreed to redesignate the Middlesbrough seat of learning as the University of Teesside.
They are seeking Stockton Borough Council's endorsement.
Councillors have suggested using Tees-side using a hyphen to emphasise the name of the river rather than the name of a local authority.
Newcastle University's School of Education has won a £15,000 Audit Commission contract to study pupils' attainment at GCSE.
It will also carry out a year-long research project into pupils' choices at 16 for Staffordshire County Council.
The contracts are among £1.6mworth of research secured by the university last month and brings its total research income to £14m.
Personal qualities are as important as vocational training for success at work, North-East gurus are telling the rest of the nation.
A team of specialists at Northumberland College in Ashington have put together with Employment Department funding a Toolbox for Success.
It is a booklet of practical ideas from lecturers and trainers and aims to encourage trainees to develop their personal effectiveness.
A Newcastle school aims to open a shop to sell pupils' bright ideas.
Gosforth High School has won a £240,000 Government grant to re-equip technology, science and maths areas so it can join the country's select band of 88 Technology Schools.
The school also plans to extend its industrial and community links so pupils can pit their technology against a wide range of real-life problems.
Governors' vice chairman Graham Butler said: ‘A longer term intention is to establish a Newcastle Schools Product Centre through which students’ solutions to problems will be exhibited and marketed.’
North Yorkshire's national reputation for education and industry links is confirmed as it hosts two major conferences.
More than 50 Science and Technology Regional Organisations attended the SATRO three-day conference in Scarborough this week.
Next weekend the county's Schools and Industry Association runs a series of workshops during a two-day business education partnership conference.
Finalists in last year's Quality Quest competition, Macmillan College, Middlesbrough and Dowdales School in Dalton in Furness are staging a rematch in Newcastle, where they are among five schools battling it out in the Northern Development Company's competition.
Marktrace Projects Ltd is named tonight in a Thames TV documentary Raiders of the Rainforest for alleged misappropriation of a £20m loan.
The company was formerly based in West Street, Middlesbrough.
Chairman John Harris said from the company's HQ in Gloucester yesterday there was no corruption.
‘These matters are in the hands of our solicitors,’ he added.
‘We have told them that we are issuing a document and if they make allegations of corruption, we will sue.
On behalf of MPL, I refute any charges of corruption.’
The loan, arranged by the Bank of Scotland and backed by the Government's Export Credit Guarantee Department, was given to the company to rehabilitate an ailing state-run timber company in Ghana, African Timber and Plywood.
Mr Harris said MPL was set up specifically for the contract.
The This Week programme made with Friends of the Earth centres on MPL, but a report claims many other companies were involved in defrauding the Ghanaian economy of a total of £30m by taking advantage of aid opportunities in its timber industry.
The programme makes further allegations about the activities of Marktrace Projects Ltd, now operating from Gloucester as a subsidiary of Babcock Electrical Projects Ltd, ultimately controlled by FKI plc.
At the time of the alleged fraud, MPL was ultimately controlled by FKI Babcock plc, since renamed FKI plc.
At the time of the alleged fraud, MPL had three directors Peter Gough, current chairman John Harris and Alan Moore.
Mr Moore now works for engineering consultants MorganMoore, based in Pennine House, West Street, Middlesbrough the same premises used by MPL at the time of the alleged fraud.
Yesterday Mr Moore was said to be away on business until the end of next week.
Friends of the Earth want a full inquiry by MPL, by the Bank of Scotland and by the ECGD.
Both the ECGD and Bank of Scotland said they would not comment until the programme had been shown.
TEACHERS are grappling with the appliance of science in the primary classroom.
Those lacking confidence in their own scientific skills and knowledge, are undergoing a metamorphosis with a 20-day course at Teesside Polytechnic.
And they are getting hands-on experience of a giant octopus, molluscs and butterflies with the life-like models made and collected by naturalist Ian Coggin, left, seen during a training session with primary teachers at Whinny Banks junior school, Middlesbrough.
He set up his own business, Metamorphosis, six years ago to provide science workshops for pupils and he says demand has increased dramatically since the National Curriculum imposed science lessons on five to 11-year-olds.
TWO pensioners are marrying today after a whirlwind romance.
Widow Mary Todd, 64, met Bill Raisbeck six months ago when she moved into the same sheltered housing scheme at Thornaby, Cleveland.
Despite becoming constant companions, she says his marriage proposal still came as a shock.
Bill popped the question at his birthday party at which Mary, of St.
Cuthbert's Court, was a guest.
‘I iced his birthday cake,’ Mary chuckled.
‘He asked me in front of a niece and her husband.
I would not give him an answer until we were on our own.
I was embarrassed.’
The couple will be married at Middlesbrough Register office before a reception in a local pub.
Coun Hazel Pearson said there was a ‘total lack of reverence’ at the Teesside Crematorium's chapel in Acklam Road, Middlesbrough.
She told the council's cemeteries and crematorium consultative committee she was a regular visitor and the items being placed in the chapel of remembrance made it look like a shop display.
Coun Pearson, who is leader of the Conservatives on Cleveland County Council, was speaking on proposals to ban artificial flowers, pot plants and plaques from the premises.
Peter Gitsham, cemeteries and crematorium officer, said there was a developing practice of people bringing their own vases and plaques into the chapel of remembrance as permanent memorials.
Although a notice had been placed in the chapel stating that the policy was under review, and asking people not to bring their own vases, plaques and large birthday-type cards, two people had objected.
He said arranging flowers and cleaning vases was carried out by crematorium staff and was becoming very time consuming.
Coun Pearson called for a return to the original idea of a chapel of remembrance, where people could sit quietly and think of the ones they have lost.
Mr Gitsham said a survey of bereaved families was being carried out asking for their views on various issues including how best to provide a permanent memorials.
He said one possibility was to  designate a public room outside the garden of remembrance where such memorials could be placed.
In the meantime members agreed that only fresh cut flowers, unwrapped, should be allowed.
A notice is to be placed in the council's free  newspaper , Middlesbrough News, asking people to remove existing plaques.
A CHARITABLE company set up to help homeless and needy people has given its own helpers a vote of thanks.
Settlement (Furniture) Services, based at Grangetown, Middlesbrough, was helped by Teesside TEC's innovative Training in Employment.
The initiative helped it to take on new staff, all previously unemployed, and train them in skills ranging from computing to business  administration .
‘We have had 12 months intense activity and TIE has enabled us to expand our operation much more quickly than envisaged,’ said Les Harbron, the company's project co-ordinator.
‘We provide furniture to homeless families and individuals moving into temporary accommodation, mainly in the Langbaurgh area.
They may have been on the street, or coming out of bed-and-breakfast lodgings.
All face the problems of having new accommodation without basic necessities such as furniture.’
NATIONAL park visitors are being asked to give their cars a rest on Sundays this summer.
The North York Moors National Park committee has agreed to expand its Moorsbus service which for the last ten years has enabled visitors to get to the heart of the moors without congesting roads and villages with private cars.
Special buses will run every Sunday from the end of May until the end of September linking Darlington, Stockton, Middlesbrough, Hull, Beverley and York with services between Scarborough, Whitby, Pickering and Helmsley.
Bill Breakell, the park's tourism officer, said: ‘Recent surveys have shown many people are extremely concerned with the impact of the car on this special area.
‘Using Moorsbus is one way of the public saying that they care for the future of the moors.
After all, it is a national park, not a car park.’
The five Moorsbus operators have agreed to accept each other 's tickets on services within the park in an effort to encourage greater use of the new services.
The national park  committee also agreed to support a timetable for all public transport within the park and to help with British Rail's Esk Valley line.
HUNDREDS of caravanners caught in the middle of a three-year planning row on Teesside have been given new hope.
Stockton South MP Tim Devlin says a new winter storage site may have been found for families being forced to pull off a site at Stockton by April 1.
Darlington-based Keepsafe opened a site, without planning permission, on an old foundry site, but land owners, the Teesside Development Corporation, ordered the firm to close down the site.
The firm later lost a planning appeal to keep the park open.
The TDC is now being asked to look kindly at  allotting the 350 dispossessed caravans land at Middlesbrough.
‘We have identified a site for them at Middlesbrough, on the riverside, which we asking the TDC to look at,’ said the MP.
‘It is already levelled and is a possibility.’
Former Auxilliary Territorial Service girls, now all pensioners, enlisted the sponsorship of 22 ex-servicemen's organisations and the five civic heads of Cleveland to commission their own flag.
And yesterday they marched to All Saints Church in Grange Road, Middlesbrough, for a dedication service.
Spokeswoman Mrs Margaret Fick, one of 70 Second World War veterans who took part in the march, said the pensioners had themselves launched into ‘Trojan’ fundraising efforts.
THE names of a new generation of universities were announced yesterday.
Fourteen polytechnics, including three in the North-East, were given approval to become universities by the Privy Council Office under the Government's higher education reforms.
The changes will add such places as Sunderland and Teesside to the elite club of university ‘towns’.
Newcastle, Leicester and Liverpool all get second universities each with a carefully chosen name to avoid confusion.
Newcastle Polytechnic will be the University of Northumbria at Newcastle.
Leicester Polytechnic becomes De Montford University, and Liverpool Polytechnic is the new Liverpool John Moores University.
The remaining 20 polytechnics are expected to adopt the university label shortly.
The change in status marks the coming of age for polytechnics, a 1960s creation.
There were celebrations at Newcastle Polytechnic where the Director, Prof Laing Barden, has campaigned long and hard for university status.
He said: ‘We are extremely excited about our new title.
The sooner we can work under our new title the University of Northumbria at Newcastle the better.’
Dr Anne Wright, Rector of Sunderland's new university, said the news is a double boost to Wearside coming so soon after the granting of city status.
Saddened that polytechnics have been unable to throw off the second-class public image, Teesside University's director, Dr Michael Longfield said: ‘The three polytechnics in the North-East have been universities in all but name for many years.’
LEADING civil servants were yesterday criticised by MPs for failing to prevent crucial exports in the Iraqi supergun affair.
Yesterday's report from a Commons inquiry accuses the Department of Trade and Industry of failing to identify warning signs and therefore failing to prevent British firms supplying components of five long-range artillery pieces to Saddam Hussein's Baghdad regime.
The supergun first came to light two years ago at Tees Dock, Middlesbrough, where Customs agents seized a shipment of giant steel tubes destined for Iraq.
The two-year inquiry by the Commons trade and industry select committee found civil servants kept vital information from ministers.
The committee also said the affair raised ‘serious and important questions’ on the accountability of the intelligence services, both to ministers and to Parliament.
The Commons inquiry was denied access to intelligence sources, and its report was published despite the many questions it said were still unanswered.
The report accuses DTI staff of taking decisions on the basis of telephone conversations, of which written records were not kept.
‘Knowledge within government of the project was like a number of people all holding pieces of a jigsaw without realising that they were the pieces of the same jigsaw,’ the report said.
Vital information was not referred to ministers, which meant the puzzle of warnings was never put together.
REGIONAL crime squad officers used video cameras to spy on a team of men involved in a major car theft scam, Teesside Crown Court heard yesterday.
Officers mounted the operation to compile evidence against seven men from around the North-East allegedly involved in the conspiracy.
Barry Stewart, prosecuting, said gang members would buy written-off cars and then steal a vehicle of the same model.
The stolen car would be stripped of identifying marks such as its chassis number and number plates and given the write-off's markings a process known as ‘ringing’.
The ringed car would then either be sold or go to one of the ring's members, while parts from the wrecked vehicle would be sold off.
Mr Stewart told the jury six of the group have already pleaded guilty to conspiracy to steal cars and were due to be sentenced on Friday.
The seventh, Sean Wood, 23, of Windermere Avenue, Easington Lane, County Durham, has denied the charge and is being tried this week.
Mr Stewart said: ‘The roles of the conspirators can be divided into two types, those who actually stole vehicles to order, and those who played the main role of changing vehicles’ identities.’
He alleged Wood fell into the second category and was at the heart of the conspiracy.
Mr Stewart told the jury they would see a regional crime squad video of the group, including Wood allegedly working on ringed cars, set to be screened today.
The six who have already pleaded guilty are: Paul Bartley, 22, of Victoria Road, Middlesbrough; John Coulson, 28, of Court Road, Bedlington, Northumberland; Mark Barry Cross, 23, of Victoria Road, Middlesbrough; Alan Davison, 28, of South Hetton Road, Easington Lane, County Durham; Anthony Gamble, 21, of Rugby Terrace, High Clarence, Cleveland; and Darren Watson, 23, of Cotswold Crescent, Billingham.
A DECISION to allow building on one of Darlington's largest car parks has sparked fresh fears about the town centre's commercial future.
Darlington Council has given permission for Conder Projects to develop an office block on Russell Street car park just outside the ring road halving its total spaces.
Council planning officers argue the car park is already under-used but the statistics used as a basis for the decision relate to the pre-Cornmill shopping era.
And when the purpose-built shopping centre opens, Russell Street will be the nearest convenient car park.
Although it is not known if the move will put off potential customers for the Cornmill, there are already fears an existing severe shortage of parking spaces threatens the future prosperity of Darlington's town centre.
Town centre  traffic has increased but no new car parks have been built recently.
And with existing sites under threat, traders, politicians and residents are urging the problem be tackled as a matter of urgency.
The shopping centre already faces a threat from the attractions of large out-of-town developments, like the Gateshead MetroCentre, which offer free car parking and hundreds of shops under one roof.
And although there are many spaces in Darlington there is still an overflow at peak times.
Darlington has approximately 5,800 parking spaces in and around the town centre.
Car parks can accommodate 2,500 vehicles while streets account for the rest.
Of the 22 car parks in Darlington, two are privately-owned with less than 400 spaces between them and prices way above council rates.
Sergeant Stewart McDade of darlington Police said: ‘An average of 20 to 25 tickets are issued every day.
People are found parking just outside shop doors and on the footpaths.’
On top of this is the danger that other council car parks could be swallowed up by new development.
Norman Campbell, Chairman of Darlington Chamber of Trade, said: ‘The availability of parking space is vital for the future of the town, it is our lifeblood.’
Ross Chisholm, Darlington council's head of local planning, said: ‘Proposals have been put forward to build three new multi-storey car parks in Commercial Street, Beaumont Street and Crown Street.
This should solve any problems arising when the present car parks are redeveloped for alternative uses.’
But the cost of building these new car parks would have to be financed by the sale of the present ones and multi-storey developments are almost prohibitively expensive.
Eight years ago, the council gave Burton Property Trust permission to build a multi-storey car park as part of the Cornmill but it has not taken up the option.
When they were in control of the council, Tories proposed an underground car park beneath the market square and a multi-storey car park in Beaumont Street but this was rejected by the Labour administration as impractical.
Higher charges at council parks have also added to the problem.
Short stay charges and places in premium car parks have risen and drivers caught flouting the rules face a hefty £30 fine.
Darlington Tory Coun Peter Jones said he believed the increases, set to net the council an extra £120,000 a year, would force motorists to Stockton and Middlesbrough to shop.
But Coun Bill Dixon, deputy leader of the controlling Labour group on the council, said budget cuts had forced the authority into ordering the rises.
Freedom from smoking harm
I READ the anti-anti-smoking feature by your smoking reporter Chris Lloyd (Echo March 10) with utter amazement.
Computers and photocopiers are more harmful than tobacco?
There are 115,000 deaths per year caused by exposure to computers and photocopiers?
Office workers ought to be told!
But that is what the Forest campaigner states.
Forest Forcing Others to Re-inhale Exhaled Smoke from Tobacco plays upon the freedom of choice.
What about my freedom to eat a canteen meal in relatively clean air, to wear clothes that do not reek of stale tobacco and to breathe air as clean as is reasonably possible.
If it is the smoker's decision, why not the cocaine snorter's or the heroin injector's decision (those ‘habits’ probably do not kill 115,000 people per year in the UK alone).
Eric Gendle, 13 Mayfield Road, Nunthorpe, Middlesbrough.
ILLOGICAL I was amused by the reasoning of the Tobacco Advisory Council's recent full page spread in the national Press.
The content of this huge expensive advertisement claimed that advertising has no effect on cigarette consumption.
Illogical, as Star Trek's Mr Spock would say.
David Cook, 9, Elliott Street, Sacriston.
A SUCCESSFUL after-care scheme run for elderly people at Middlesbrough General Hospital has been extended for a further year, it was announced last night.
The pioneering scheme, run by Age Concern Cleveland, provides escorts for elderly people in the hospital's accident and emergency department and ensures that they are settled at home after discharge.
For the past five years the scheme's costs have been met on a limited term basis through special funding by the Government and then by joint agency funding.
Dave Punshon, Age Concern's chief officer, recently expressed fears that the scheme would have to close and its staff have been under redundancy notice since Christmas to finish on March 31.
But last night the South Tees Health Authority and the South Tees Acute Hospitals agreed to split the £30,000 costs to enable the project to continue during 1992–3.
Philip Brakenbury, consultant in accident and emergency at the hospital, described the scheme as invaluable.
He said: ‘The Age Concern staff are superb.
Elderly people who have had an accident derive great benefit from the project.
Only a handful of hospitals do this and we would like to see it emulated everywhere.’
Bill Murray, chief executive of South Tees Acute Hospitals, said the unit was ‘delighted’ to be able to ensure the scheme's survival.
He said the scheme would be reviewed over the next year to assess how it integrates with the work of other agencies, such as community health services and social services.
LANDLORDS who own bedsits have been warned to keep their properties free from dirt and squalor.
Khalid Hussein was yesterday fined £1,700 with £399 costs by Teesside Magistrates.
Now Middlesbrough Council has told other landlords that they must keep their properties in order or else.
Environmental health officers visited Hussein's property in Kensington Road in March 1991.
They found conditions in the three-bedsit property ‘quite unacceptable’ and served notice on Hussein to undertake immediate repairs and maintenance.
The work needed included replacing rotten window sills, removing dangerous floorboards and cleaning the bathroom and carpets.
The property was inspected again on May 31, but it was no better.
Hussein, of Woodlands Road, Middlesbrough, was found guilty of seven offences relating to dirt and squalor under the Housing Act 1985.
Environmental health officer Steve Beamson said: ‘The decision should be seen as a warning that bedsit accommodation should be kept in reasonable condition.
‘Few cases end up in court, but where necessary, the backing of the law will be sought to enforce acceptable standards.’
IF Indians once travelled by comfortable express train to Eastern Bengal, now Bangladesh, they have the Darlington firms of Stephenson locomotives and Cleveland Bridge to thank.
For the people of Pakistan to enjoy the huge benefits of heating and cooking at the press of a switch, then praise be to the Darlington firms of Head Wrightson and Whessoe.
Villages throughout Bihar, Northern Bengal and Assam, once isolated communities with little food or water, need only acknowledge a Darlington firm, Skerne Iron Works, for their very livelihood.
The massive P&O steamers which berthed at Calcutta and Chittagong, off-loading India's vital imports, relied upon huge anchors cast in wrought iron by Darlington Forge to keep them steady.
Throughout the Indian subcontinent, the numerous disjointed populations relied upon the combined expertise and devotion to engineering excellence of Victorian British Made Limited.
And there are few towns more represented by engineering achievements than Darlington.
Although Darlington, and her partner of Middlesbrough, cannot claim to have started the Indian connection, by 1860 her  foundries were indelibly etched into the Railways for the Raj title especially locomotives, rolling stock, rails, bridges, station steelwork and coal.
Apparently only signalling fell outside Darlington's province.
For the record, the first iron bridge (1815) and steamboat (1816) built for India were actually made by a Derbyshire firm.
Railways didn't arrive until 1853 with the inaugural locomotive supplied by Kitson of Leeds.
But then the scene was set for the first of Darlington's structural engineering companies to install a series of iron bridges on the rapidly expanding rail networks.
The first firm in on the act was the Skerne Iron Works which had a somewhat chequered career as an occasional supplier of bridgeworks to the Great North Railway which ran through Darlington.
Skerne Iron Works somehow failed to expand properly to make the big league.
However, when India's railway demands began stretching Britain's structural engineering firms, smaller contracts filtered down to Skerne.
Skerne competed successfully to build eight spans of 206ft each to bridge the Know-ke-Mulla between 1856–63.
In 1868 a flood of unprecedented proportions washed away most of the caissons (the strong cases keeping out water while the foundations are built) while the Skerne's trusses were found to be flawless.
In 1869 Skerne joined forces with a Dudley company to win a contract from the Bombay-based Grand India Peninisular Railway.
Between 1870–71, the Ironworks produced 36 spans at the rate of three a month each of 107ft to make a total length of 3,852ft for the Kistna Viaduct.
The total weight was 2,500 tons, sold at £11.10s a ton, and shipped from Middlesbrough.
The bridge was still in service at the time of Indian independence in 1947.
Other work enabling Skerne to earn kudos and rupees was on the East India Railway, which was extended in 1873.
The foundry supplied some 42 spans of varying sizes which enabled the natives to travel from Benares to Calcutta by through train.
The line from Howrah to Dacca and a bridge in Calcutta itself (1875–78) ensured that the Skerne plaque competed favourably with aggressive competition based in Glasgow, Wednesbury, Manchester, London and Teesside, at least for medium-sized structures.
DOG owners in Cleveland have been warned they will have to pick up the tab if their pets go walkabout.
Canine control must be stepped up by April 1 under new Government rules.
If pets stray, owners must pay for their keep in the dog pound and another £25 to reclaim.
Dogs not wearing tags could mean a Control of Dogs order, a prosecution and a heavy fine.
Peter Gitsham, head of Middlesbrough Council's dog warden service, admitted if fewer dogs were reclaimed, more would be destroyed.
‘No one wants to see that, but the simple fact is that stray dogs are a menace.’
A LAST minute decision to continue funding the after-care scheme for elderly people at Middlesbrough General Hospital was welcomed yesterday by Age Concern Cleveland.
The scheme which offers help to people aged 70 and over discharged from the accident and emergency department has been run on short-term funding for over five years.
South Tees Health Authority has agreed to fund the scheme for one more year to assess how it integrates with the work of other agencies.
Dave Punshon, Age Concern's chief officer, said: ‘The decision to include financial provision for this scheme is a positive comment to practical care in the community.
‘Other health authorities are now looking to replicate this innovative scheme which helps many older people and prevents them  having to be admitted to full time care.’
Brenda Holmes, Age Concern's deputy chief officer who started work as the scheme co-ordinator five-and-a-half years ago, said their efforts had been rewarded.
‘The energies expended on continually fighting for funding could have been put to more practical use but the decision vindicates that effort,’ she said.
THE communications revolution of the 1990s should revive a ‘dead’ language in state schools, the Archbishop of Canterbury has told Cleveland Latin students.
Lord Robert Runcie is among a dozen famous names backing a recruitment campaign by enthusiastic Latin pupils at Nunthorpe School in Middlesbrough.
Hoping to convince other pupils of the value of studying the language, the teenagers wrote to the famous and the not-so-famous to find out whether Latin lessons are any use in modern life.
They hope to publish comments of Latin fans including authoress Dame Iris Murdoch, actress Maureen Lipman and writer and broadcaster John Julius Norwich who reluctantly began studying Latin because he had ‘no option’.
He says it makes it much easier to learn other languages while knowledge of Roman history aids understanding of British history and world affairs.
Dr Runcie told them: ‘We live in days of a communication revolution.
There is a great need for more careful use of language, otherwise we shall be at the mercy of bureaucrats and their jargon.
If people learn Latin they learn the better to express themselves.’
Sorting office still facing ‘difficulties’
A ROYAL Mail boss has admitted there are still ‘difficulties’ at the sorting office in Middlesbrough.
John Ensall said residual problems had hung over from the change in working arrangements introduced in January.
He was responding to criticism by Cleveland County Council's Labour group.
Secretary Andy Wilson said: ‘I am aware significant delays are being experienced in mail being processed by the time it has to get to the mail trains.
Cleveland residents are paying first class and getting a second class service.’
Mr Ensall admitted there had been delays, but that all mail had been processed on time since March 9.
‘It's been a problem, but it's a problem we are tackling and winning,’ he said.
French trip:
A party of 48 pupils from Billingham Campus School, aged 12 and 13, spent a day practising their French in Boulogne, when they visited local shops and the Eurotunnel exhibition outside Calais.
NURSES from South Tees are jetting off to the U.S. this month to find out about baby care, American style.
The foursome, who all work at the special care baby unit at South Cleveland Hospital, Middlesbrough, will be attending the world's first conference on neo-natal care, held in Washington DC.
Sisters Jan Gavey, Janet Goodman, and Heather Carter, and staff nurse Katie Clark, leave Teesside on Wednesday.
They will spend four days at the conference meeting their counterparts from abroad to share findings, experiences and the latest thinking on care for frail and premature babies.
The South Tees nurses will be particularly interested in findings on the use of narcotics in very young babies.
They plan to carry out research at their unit to judge the benefits and effects of using small amounts of morphine to relieve pain in premature babies.
‘We expect to come back with lots of information and ideas on all aspects and ideas of neo-natal care, said Sister Gavey.
‘Its a tremendous opportunity to see how they approach treatment in the U.S. and we are very grateful to everyone who has helped us to get there.’
The group had to make contact with an American unit willing to keep staff up to date with the very latest developments.
Collections, raffles, sponsored events and a quiz night/disco were held to help the nurses raise the £3,000 they needed to make the trip.
They also secured sponsorship from the Women and Children Division of South Tees Acute Hospitals, and from outside companies.
PATIENTS in South Tees hospitals could soon have complaint forms by their bedside.
Information packs now being compiled will include details of how to complain about treatment.
South Tees Health Authority and South Tees Community Health Council have drawn up the forms.
The packs are being introduced to help the authority meet the needs of a Patients Charter.
Authority spokeswoman Heather Harding said the aim was to offer ‘a patient-centred not a profession-centred’ service.
The information packs will also be available at GPs surgeries and through community nurses.
MONEY from a national fund could be used to boost sport for youngsters in Cleveland.
If the bid is successful it will mean a second series of Champion Coaching courses in Middlesbrough.
Last year the town was chosen to promote the programme which provides expert after-school tuition for 11 to 14-year-olds in a wide variety of sports.
The National Coaching Foundation has now received more than £1m from the Foundation for Sport and Arts, and Middlesbrough council is seeking a share.
Sports officer Ian Gardiner said: ‘We will be submitting a bid for funds to put on a new series of Champion Coaching based on the popularity of the last course.
‘The courses are in high demand.
We could cater for 190 youngsters and had almost 300 applicants.
‘Obviously we will be looking at the sports which proved so popular last time, but we will also be looking to see if there is scope for more specialised activities such as water sports and outdoor  pursuits .’
A new breed of ‘green’ car could soon be on the road, thanks to university research scientists.
Dr Gary Coles has designed a sensor accurate enough to monitor tiny changes in exhaust gases given off while the vehicle is being driven.
The sensor, linked to a computer, would alter the engine's air-fuel mixture when the level of poisonous fumes such as carbon monoxide becomes too high.
The sensor could also warn drivers when their catalytic converter needed replacing.
‘With equipment like this, the legal limit of exhaust emissions could be further reduced which would be good news for the environment,’ said Dr Coles, of Swansea University.
Dr Coles's sensor is made of tin dioxide a cheap and readily available substance previously rejected by engineers for more expensive materials.
He also believes his gas sensor could play a key role in improving home safety by acting as a fire detector.
It would respond immediately to an increase in carbon monoxide levels, working quicker than current detectors which respond to smoke after a fire has taken hold.
Teesside Polytechnic is joining forces with a German institution of higher education to develop new courses and share academic expertise.
Poly director Dr Michael Longfield has signed an agreement with the Fachhochschule fur Technik, Mannheim.
The link means the fachhochschule joins the poly and colleges in Surrey, the Netherlands and Switzerland, piloting a pan-European masters degree in biotechnology
THE RSPCA in Yorkshire is fighting a ‘vicious circle’ of cruelty and suffering to hundreds of animals, it is claimed today.
Figures released in a new report by the county's RSPCA show that cruelty complaints reached a new high of 10,561 last year and convictions for cruelty to dogs increased by 12pc to 183.
RSPCA regional manager Sue Mace said: ‘Constant public vigilance is needed as sadly in many cases it is too late to help animals.
Prevention is the only answer.’
RSPCA inspectors had combatted the vicious ‘sport’ of dog fighting in the region with 14 convictions compared to five in 1990.
She said: ‘Gruesome cases on the increases also reflect a national trend of cruelty through ignorance.’
There had been a ‘frightening’ increase in cruelty to farm animals.
Inspectors had been especially vigilant at markets, overseeing millions of animals for sale.
At Thirsk a lamb with a broken leg had been put up for sale, and transit offences to cattle and sheep rose from no convictions in 1990 to 15 last year.
Rescues to animals in distress soared by 26pc from 232 in 1990 to 293 in 1991.
Mrs Mace said the RSPCA in the county had carried out 76pc more inspections 1,865 of premises where animals are kept, such as pet shops, stables and zoos.
In the North-East region, figures show that in the York area there had been 2,311 complaints, 33 rescues, 49 convictions, and 743 inspections; in the Middlesbrough area, 1,364 complaints, 38 rescues, 563 inspections and 46 convictions; and Newcastle 2,565 complaints, 40 rescues, 232 inspections and 78 convictions.
MORE than 30  unemployed people today start work on a vital City Challenge project in Cleveland.
The recruits have been signed up to carry out a door-to-door ‘skills audit’ in East Middlesbrough.
The aim is to identify the strengths of the City Challenge area in order to boost long-term employment prospects.
Deputy leader of Middlesbrough Council John Jones said: ‘The team's work will help us research, identify and target the  strengths of the area as the first step in our Route to Work strategy.
‘It is very important that the audit is carried out by local people.
We promised that City Challenge would involve local residents…now we're showing that.
‘Our recruits will earn a good weekly salary and they'll also be given quality training which should help their employment prospects in the long-term.’
The team will learn basic interviewing skills and be shown how to deal with the technical side of the three-month survey.
COUNSELLING, German, the Environment (with a capital E), French, more Counselling (with a capital C) and poetry.
The enduring appeal of the Workers Educational Association is that of the public house: all human life is there.
Perhaps it would be a pretty good discussion trying to decide in which establishment you could learn more.
For a change, however, this is a plug for the WEA and not the PUB.
It provides a rather more formal learning structure, and given the price of beer over a session can probably be had at a similar cost.
The six topics mentioned above are some of those available in Darlington starting at the end of April.
Idly flicking through their brief prospectuses yesterday (no, not in the pub) it was clear that there is a whole world of books and learning out there.
The poetry will concentrate on love poetry and is to be taken by John Metson, that is Metson, not the unromantic football commentator.
Introduction to Counselling is intended to assist in the techniques of attending, focussing, listening and understanding empathy.
The only way to discover what on earth this means is probably to fork out £60 for the ten-week course or £48 for the eight-week course.
Choosing the latter will presumably give you a lesser understanding of empathy.
The French aims to pass on enough ‘to prevent getting lost in the Metro or starving to death in a cafe’ while the Environment will look at national and local industries and their emissions.
To tackle any of these it may be advisable to go on the Look After Yourself classes.
These aim to teach a sense of positive personal well-being.
It is not known if two or three pints two or three times a week come into this category.
Gong show VIC REEVES, the big lummox, was on television the other night dropping the gong he received for the most original programme.
As it fell to the floor through his Woolworth's bag (a startlingly original trick, that) it was hard to decide whether Reeves or the town football club was bringing greater discredit to Darlington.
Still, he and Bob Mortimer were the only North-East recipients at the BAFTA awards ceremony.
Big Vic and Bob, who comes from Middlesbrough, went through an embarrassing little routine for a couple of minutes.
It is true that his programme is original, though whether it is funny is quite another matter.
When his trophy fell ungratefully to the floor it almost certainly woke up comics like Chaplin and Keaton and Morecambe while they were turning in their graves.
STUDENTS made light of physical disabilities to abseil down a viaduct yesterday.
The 50-plus team from Kirby College, Middlesbrough, raised more than £500 by tackling Guisborough Viaduct, near Slapewath.
Several of the group who took part most from the Certificate of Pre-Vocational Education course are handicapped in some way.
Lecturer Marianne Doonan was delighted to see 17-year-old Shari Youdale in confident mood.
‘Shari has cerebral palsy and was a little scared when she first abseiled,’ said Marianne.
‘This time, she was helping everyone else.’
Melanie Bowman, 18, who has severe epilepsy, also took the task in her stride.
The money raised will pay for two outdoor residential courses, organised for college students and Fairbridge.
The Teesside branch of the charity organises activity trips for more than 200 ‘young people at risk’ every year.
BABY-SITTER Joyce Cotton had to call the fire brigade when she got stuck in her own front room after putting her twin grandchildren to bed upstairs.
As she returned downstairs at her home in Pym Street, South Bank, Middlesbrough, a table top which the babies' dad, Brian, had placed behind the front room door fell over trapping her.
‘I didn't know what to do,’ said Joyce, 45.
‘I couldn't budge the door and the bedroom windows are double-glazed.’
She ended up calling the brigade and a friendly fireman eased out an inner window and removed the table top.
‘He was marvellous,’ said the relieved gran.
‘Only Victoria woke up, Anthony slept through.’
Last night the eight-month-olds were back home with mum and dad, Carol, and Brian Cotton, 23, a few doors away.
CHILDREN are being encouraged to take part in the Cleveland Community Forest venture by planting young trees at the Middlesbrough Botanic Centre.
Nursery beds at the centre are to be used by school groups to nurture the seeds of the trees.
In autumn, youngsters will be urged to collect conkers, ash keys and acorns to grow next year's seedlings.
The children will watch the trees grow, transplant them into part of the Communiy Forest nearby and monitor their growth over several years.
Andrew Bowden and Ben Fawcett pupils from Acklam Grange School, Middlesbrough are pictured planting young oaks, chestnuts and Scot's pine alongside Alistair Scott of the Forestry Commission.
I WAS glad to see that someone has at last taken a stand on the cheap labour schemes connected with the TEC system.
I have been unemployed for seven months now and all the people I meet in the Job Club seem to have at least one bad experience of these so-called training schemes.
For some people their whole working lives so far have been one scheme to the next, never getting any really worthwhile training and never being paid a decent wage.
The TEC system obviously allows people to make money by exploiting young people.
Quite simply it is not enough for Mr Bell to resign; the whole TEC system needs to be scrapped and replaced with something which is genuinely controlled by ordinary people and not simply by the ‘fat cats of Cleveland’.
Chris Allen, 42 Somerset Street, Middlesbrough.
Smoking offensive
I WISH to complain most strongly about the article ‘No smoke without ire’(Echo March 10).
It was false, patronising, offensive and downright rude.
According to Chris Lloyd, I, as a nonsmoker, am some sort of do-gooder who should mind my own business.
Clearly Mr Lloyd has had his head in the sand for a number of years and is totally out of touch with current public opinion.
Also Mr Lloyd fails to recognise and understand the distinction between an anti-smoker and a non-smoker.
I would be interested to learn how such a one-sided statement can be included in your newspaper when all material is supposed to be fair.
Also, if a person chooses not to smoke why should he be subjected to such a poisonous, foul and unpleasant cocktail of several thousand gases in the form of tobacco smoke?
Perhaps Mr Lloyd expects a non-smoker to abstain from breathing while in the vicinity of tobacco smoke.
Mr Lloyd's comments are also a slur against those suffering from ill health.
Obviously an individual does not have the freedom to work.
John P. Harrison, 31 Myrtle Grove, Wallsend.
TEESSIDE'S first purpose built university college has been hailed as a boost for the area by Education Secretary Kenneth Clarke.
He visited the site at Thornaby, the result of an initiative taken by Durham University and Teesside Polytechnic.
Mr Clarke said: ‘I think it is a great boost to the area and extremely important.’
Mr Clarke answered criticism from Cleveland County Council leaders in comparing the money being spent on the City Technology College in Middlesbrough and what the education authority has to spread over the county's state schools.
The CTC cost £7.5m to set up with £5.5m coming direct from the Government.
Cleveland County Council was allocated £3.5m for the whole of Teesside's education system.
Mr Clarke said: ‘The CTC money did not come out of money that Cleveland County would otherwise have got.
He accused the county council of being ‘completely churlish.
Ashok Kumar, Labour candidate for Langbaurgh, blasted Mr Clarke for snubbing  representatives of Cleveland Ambulance staff during his whistle-stop tour of Cleveland Ambulance Trust headquarters.
He said he was ‘disgusted’ that Mr Clarke had refused to meet representatives of the ambulance workers.
A CHANCE to escape to the 19th century is being offered at a special day school in Cleveland on Saturday.
The event at the Leeds University adult education centre in Harrow Road, Middlesbrough, is intriguingly titled When the Riot Act was Read and focuses on Victorian Teesside.
Tutor Dr Malcolm Chase said Teesside was one of the focal points of the Victorian economy becoming a magnet for immigrants from every corner of Britain and Ireland.
The Infant Hercules, as Prime Minister Gladstone described it, acquired an awesome reputation for squalor and toughness.
‘Yet the picture of politics which survives is completely different,’ said Dr Chase.
‘It is largely made up of the petty squabbles of shop-keepers and the airy superiority of the ironmasters.’
Those attending the day school, from 9.45am to 5pm, will discover:— female agitators in Stockton;— local Irish nationalists;— muck-raking pamphleteers;— the first Labour challenges for a parliamentary seat anywhere in Britain, in Middlesbrough in 1874.
Dr Chase is undertaking a long-term project to investigate the social history of Victorian Teesside, with particular reference to working-class politics and culture.
School election to feature on TV
ELECTION day comes a little early for a Middlesbrough school which goes to the polls on Wednesday.
Langbaurgh School, in Sulby Avenue, has been chosen to take part in the BBC Newsround Election, the world's biggest ever children's election organised by the BBC in association with the Hansard Society and supported by a national newspaper.
Pupils will cast their ballot papers in mock polling booths before school and at morning break on the day.
The national result will be broadcast in an election special on Friday.
Visitors from the three main parties will be attending the school today.
CHRONIC asthma sufferer Jeffrey Harrison was held up as an example of the alleged inadequacy of student loans and NHS funding by Labour yesterday.
Jeffrey was refused help with the prescription for his inhaler because the Department of Health said his income exceeded the required level.
The university student had applied for help under the NHS Low Income Scheme, but said he had been assessed on a £300 loan he did not take out, which put him 39p in credit and not entitled for help.
Marjorie Mowlam, Labour Party candidate for Redcar, wrote to Baroness Hooper, Under Secretary of State for Health in the House of Lords, about his plight.
Lady Hooper's suggestion was that Jeffrey should buy a £17.60 season ticket for prescriptions.
Jeffrey said yesterday the system was unfair even if he was 39p in credit as incorrectly stated in Lady Hooper's letter to Dr Mowlam.
Baroness Hooper's letter states on the first page with regard to student loans: ‘Students are not obliged to take up a loan if they do not need to do so and indeed Jeffrey has not availed himself of the facility.’
Dr Mowlam claimed Jeffrey's predicament revealed the ‘fiction’ that the student top-up loan was voluntary.
‘If you are a student, the maximum student loan for your situation is taken into account as income whether or not you have applied for it,’ she said.
Jeffrey, 19, of Woodcock Close, Bankfields, Eston, Middlesbrough, a maths student at Warwick University, says he finds it almost impossible to manage.
‘I don't get out much, can't afford to,’ he said.
‘I don't have a lot of money when I come home and my parents, who are both on income support, are basically keeping me during holidays.’
Dr Mowlam said Jeffrey's asthma and eczema were getting worse as a result of the stress and worry about the money he has to pay for the medication.
Baroness Hooper's letter stated that help with NHS charges for students were based on an individual assessment of ability to pay and on circumstances which existed at the time a claim was made.
A HOMELESS
Middlesbrough family is now complete and settling into a new house after months of anxiety and fears for the health of newly arrived triplets.
Margaret Donoghue and Clive Brown were living in bed-sits and staying at her parents' home with two of their babies before the move to Calthorpe Court, in the town Cannon Park district.
The triplets were born prematurely on October 24 at 26 weeks and had to stay in incubators in the baby care unit at South Cleveland Hospital.
Christian and Chelsea were allowed home for New Year but Andrew, who has had five heart murmurs, was released just a few days ago.
The couple were allocated their new housing association home through Middlesbrough Council.
Proud mum Margaret, 31, said: ‘It's just great to be all together in our own home.
We are very happy here.’
A HOUSING committee chairman said his council was ‘greedy for awards’ after picking up a top prize yesterday.
Langbaurgh Council was honoured for revitalising the Spencerbeck Estate, near Eston, Middlesbrough.
The programme to rebuild the run-down estate included bulldozing 38 properties and refurbishing many others.
‘We gave people space,’ said housing chairman Terry Collins, who received one residential quality award from The Royal Town Planning Insitute Northern Branch.
Planning committee chairman Norman Lantsbery picked up the other.
‘Spencerbeck was a notoriously bad estate and the scheme was a  fantastic success,’ added Coun Collins.
‘Now we want to build on our success by improving other estates.
We have shown we can do it we just need the money.
We are greedy for awards.’
Valley Bridge firm's award WARDS of Sherburn, near Scarborough, the company which stepped in to finance and build the £130,000 barriers on the resort's notorious Valley Bridge, has won an accolade from the Civic Society.
The Valley Bridge, which links the South Cliff with the town centre, became notorious for people jumping to their deaths and, since 1970, 47 have died there.
At the latest hypermarket to open in the North-East you can buy 13,000 different food items from all over the world, whatever the season — strawberries at Christmas, plums in spring, nuts in May and new baby vegetables at any time.
Now you can furnish your house, clothe your family, open a bank account and book a holiday, all under one roof.
You can dish up lavish meals without doing anything more than popping a ready meal in the microwave.
Fresh veg come already cleaned and cheese already grated — and you can go shopping on Sunday straight from Church.
We are no longer just customers, but consumers.
And we consume a lot more than our parents did, though the proportion of income we spend on food is just 12pc compared to a third 50 years ago.
It was Jack Cohen, founder of Tesco, who invented the ‘Pile it high, sell it cheap’ philosophy that changed British shopping dramatically in less than a decade.
Those were the days when shops were shops and supermarkets hadn't been invented, days of dark wood counters and lots of assistants, when carrier bags were always made of brown paper with string handles that ripped off in the rain.
By 1951 Cohen had converted four stores to self-service — a revolution.
And ten years later most other high street stores were following suit.
We called them supermarkets.
But they weren't really that super.
Many stores were as small as 500 sq ft— about the size of the corner shops which they still resembled — but as the big boys got bigger the small shops went to the wall.
Families were better off, more mobile.
They had fridges at home so didn't need to shop every day on the corner.
Few homes as yet had freezers, but shops did.
‘Frozen Food Sold Here’ said the signs and a new generation was born — the first to be raised on fish fingers and beefburgers.
In the great store wars to get customers in, supermarkets invented the ‘loss leader’— lines such as bread on which they were prepared to make a small loss if it lured people in.
But customers were no longer quite as wide-eyed as they had been when first faced by all this merchandise.
This is when we started forming consumer groups and demanding watchdogs to protect us in this shopping jungle.
Shoppers started making moral choices — boycotting battery-farmed eggs, for example— or political ones, which affected sales of South African fruit.
And the new consumer awareness made increasing demands on manufacturers as we entered the great and glorious age of the hypermarket and out-of-town superstore.
This, though maybe we didn't realise it then, was when shopping moved into the future.
People started shopping for fun.
The working week shrank.
Shopping became a family outing — hordes would go to ASDA in Stockton on a Saturday.
Not a cosy High Street shop but a hangar-like building on the edge of an industrial estate.
Under one roof you could buy food, clothes and electrical goods and park just outside.
The novelty was appealing.
The supermarket shopping pattern spread all over town.
Small companies combined to survive until they became vast conglomerates squeezing out the smaller shops.
The Burton Group came to own not just Burtons but Debenhams, Principles, Top Shop, Evans, Champion Sports and Radius — an awful lot of the average high street.
In town centres, they decided to get rid of cars altogether and invent shopping precincts.
In the space of a few years we had Eldon Square in Newcastle, the Cleveland Centre in Middlesbrough, Milburngate in Durham, where you could stroll heedless of weather and traffic.
Inevitably, it all culminated in the MetroCentre, the biggest shopping centre in Europe, which attracts busloads of shoppers not just from other regions but other countries.
If shopping is the new religion, the MetroCentre, with over 350 shops, cinemas, restaurants, fountains, trees, loos and spotless walkways must be its cathedral.
YOUNG mum Angie Wilson is praying for a speedy end to her homeless heartache for she is expecting a third baby in just nine weeks time.
And after losing the family home two weeks ago Angie, husband Bill and their other two children are living in one room at a bed and breakfast hotel.
‘The thought of having the baby without a home to take it to is awful,’ the 22-year-old mum says.
‘The bed and breakfast place is nice, it's clean and comfortable and friendly but it's not like having your own home is it?’
The Wilsons were made homeless when the rented house they had lived in for three years was seized by the building society their landlord had not been paying his mortgage.
They also discovered, when the bailiffs arrived, that they were illegal tenants.
The landlord was not supposed to sublet the house.
‘Not that that mattered really,’ Angie says.‘
Because two weeks later we were out anyway.
You could say it was a bit of a shock.
We'd lived there three years, decorated it and everything and then bang we're out on the streets.
‘You read about this sort of thing happening to others but you never think it's going to happen to you.’
It does though.
It's happening to more and more people and right across the social spectrum.
Homelessness is fast becoming one of the scourges of the late 20th Century.
‘And it's going to be one of the biggest problems in the 21st century as well unless something is done very rapidly,’ warns Bob Brady.
BRADY, Middlesbrough council's housing chairman, says the town is now in the throes of its biggest homes crisis with the council virtually powerless to act.
‘It is almost unbelievable,’ Brady says.
‘We are declaring people homeless and then they are having to join a queue because we can't do anything for them, there is such a backlog.’
There are now 100 families in the town living in bed and breakfast hotels and more than 60 placed in hostels the situation is so bad that the council has been unable to move anyone off its waiting list for almost two months.
‘People talk about going on the priority list.
There isn't a priority list anymore.
It is all priority work now.
Basically what we are doing now is managing crises.’
Brady has a reputation for straight talking, for furious commitment, but even he is beginning to run out of words, to run out of answers.
‘There is only one answer really,’ he says.
‘Build more homes.
It's the only way we can solve the crisis.’
But Middlesbrough is not in a position to build more homes.
In fact this year, for the third year running, not one local authority house will be built in the town.
Brady blames a £200m ‘black hole’ for the crisis now threatening to make a mockery of the council's housing plans.
Over the last 12 years, he claims, the council has been short-changed by that amount on its housing allocation demands.
This year, for instance, the council asked for permission to spend £25m on tackling the town's housing problems but it has been allocated only £3.8m one third of which is earmarked for improvement grants to private homes and the rest to ongoing council schemes.
‘That means that for the third year running not a single council house can be built despite the fact we have more than 4,000 people on the waiting list and last year had to rehouse 750 homeless families.’
Brady and other Middlesbrough councillors obviously have a vested interest in laying the blame for the housing crisis at the door of the Conservative government it is after all a Labour-controlled authority.
Environment ministers, and Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine in particular, respond with anger to the Labour charges.
They point to how popular their Right to Buy legislation has proved almost 110,000 homes have been sold in the North-East and Cumbria since the laws were introduced in 1980.
They also believe that Labour authorities have for too long abused their position as chief low-cost housing providers allowing bureaucracy and waste to mushroom at the expense of tenants.
To this end their policy has been aimed at creating a greater diversification of supply bringing in housing associations and private builders to create a greater choice and, according to the Conservatives, value for tenants.
There have been some success stories, particularly where local authorities have entered into partnership deals with private sector agencies.
In ‘crisis hit’ Middlesbrough, for instance, the council and Bellway Urban Renewals have launched into a £6.5m partnership to build 140 low-cost homes on a 7.6 acre site at the resource-starved Netherfields estate.
I N recent years it has become I increasingly obvious that I councils prepared to ‘deal’ with the private sector in this way will be ‘rewarded’.
Hence, one could conclude, for instance, Middlesbrough's success in Heseltine's City Challenge scheme; a part of which will, if the council's full bid is passed, see a £50m housing investment programme for hard-hit outlying areas.
Politics aside, however, there are growing doubts about the validity of all main party housing policies.
Several recent reports have warned that homelessness will continue to grow unless greater public sector resources are ploughed into housing.
The most recent of these warnings comes this week from RIBA, the Royal Institute of British Architects.
The report's authors claim that all three major political parties have failed to address themselves to the country's ‘housing emergency’.
RIBA president Richard MacCormack, speaking at the report launch, said: ‘Even the most conservative estimates suggest we need to build one million new homes in this country by the end of the century.
‘Yet none of the major parties has deemed it worthwhile arguing the case for housing.
Meanwhile we have reached the ridiculous position where executive homes lie empty and unsold in suburbia while the country's rural young and inner city poor remain unhoused.’
An even harder-hitting report from the National Association of Citizen's Advice Bureaux claimed that for every council house in the country there are ten people on the waiting lists.
If, as RIBA says, none of the major parties have produced policies which can tackle this crisis then the fear for those caught in the homeless trap must be that, whoever wins on April 9, there is little prospect of an end to their predicament.
A MOTHER told how getting up for a drink of milk saved her family from a house fire.
She and her husband rescued their three children from their blazing home with seconds to spare early yesterday.
Nancy Kipling, 40, of Hilton Street, Barnard Castle, said: ‘It was a miracle we escaped.
Had I not woken up to get a glass of milk we would not have known about the fire and would have been trapped upstairs.’
Mrs Kipling said she got her children from their bedroom then was confronted by thick smoke.
She said: ‘I thought I wasn't going to make it.
But I kept my head and thought ‘I have to reach the door for my children’.’
‘My husband collapsed on the lawn outside, but got up again to try and save our dogs from the side of the house.’
Allen Kipling, 46, was last night ‘comfortable’ in Middlesbrough General Hospital with burns to his feet and legs.
Mrs Kipling said when she put her children Gwynne, three, Sarah-Jayne, two, and nine-month-old Aaron to bed, Gwynne said he could smell something but she thought it was burning toast.
Then at 3am she smelled burning in the sitting room and opened the door to get the smoke out before waking her husband.
Mrs Kipling said her husband tried to put it out with a jacket.
‘But the next thing I heard him panting and screaming.
I ran to the door to shout: ‘Help, Fire!’
I was terrified.’
Barnard Castle fire crews put out the fire.
Station officer Dave Hodgson said: ‘The family was very lucky to get out.
The whole front room was gutted.’
An electrical fault is the suspected cause.
TINY tots in Cleveland planted acorns and conkers in nursery beds at Middlesbrough for the forest of their future.
The event took place at Middlesbrough Botanic Centre, where 30 youngsters from Kirklevington primary school, aged between three and five, braved the wind and rain to carry out their  important work.
They will return to visit their tiny trees, which will eventually be planted in Cleveland Community Forest.
The project is an initiative of the Countryside Commission and the Forestry Commission.
Spokeswoman Debbie Bell said: ‘The Cleveland Community Forest is a project for the future.
This means we should involve the community from the earliest age.’
VOTING Day came early for some schools in the North-East who went to the polls yesterday in a mock General Election.
The selected schools were taking part in the world's biggest children's election organised by the BBC in association with the Hansard Society.
Schools were given pin numbers so that results could be phoned through to Newsround Results Hotline.
The National result will be broadcast in a Newsround Election Special tomorrow.
Langbaurgh School in Sulby Avenue, Middlesbrough, was one of the schools chosen to take part in the exercise.
School press officer Adrea Menzies, said: ‘The school gained a great deal of experience related to the issues of a general election and into voting procedures as well as taking part in a nationwide children's election.’
The school Labour leader Neil Kinnock visited on Teesside last week, voted for a Liberal Democrat election victory.
The result at Egglescliffe School, Eaglescliffe, was a win for the Lib Dems with the Tories second and Labour third.
At St John's Comprehensive School, Bishop Auckland, the Labour candidate was top, followed by the Green Party, the Liberal Democrats, and the Tories, with the Monster Raving Loony candidate bottom.
PUPILS at a Teesside school are raising money in memory of a fellow student who died earlier this year.
Melanie Dean, a pupil at Langbaurgh School, suffered from cystic fibrosis.
Now her schoolmates are raising cash for a CF charity as a tribute to the brave 15-year-old, of Pallister Park, Middlesbrough.
Pupils were left to their own devices to organise a fundraising afternoon, which included a series of sponsored events.
‘The most popular was a sponsored staff gungeing,’ said teacher Andrea Menzies.
‘Eleven members of staff volunteered and pupils paid 5p to vote for the one they wanted to cover in gunge.’
Anthony Leckonby and Carl Barrett, both members of Melanie's class, are climbing Ben Nevis in May to raise more cash.
Mrs Menzies said the final total could be as much as £750.
CLEVELAND's libraries and health centres are to display information next week on Parkinson's Disease.
Leonard Palmer, secretary of the Cleveland/Middlesbrough branch of the Parkinson's Disease Society, says the idea is for sufferers and helpers to ask questions.
He added: ‘Our members find that they are not the only ones out there with Parkinson's Disease and they are eager to find out more about the condition and ways that they can be helped.’
An open exercise session takes place at the Landsdowne Centre for Physically Handicapped People, Landsdowne Road, Middlesbrough, on Wednesday, from 3.15 pm to 4.15 pm, with a trained physiotherapist.
ABYSMAL:
Your report on the pedestrianisation of High Row and Skinnergate in Darlington (Echo March 31) yet again demonstrates the abysmal lack of understanding on the part of the able-bodied with regard to the needs of the disabled.
To impose the condition that disabled parking spaces must be taken up before 10.30am will render it impossible for many, many of them to take advantage of this ‘concession.’
R.F.
Ashbridge, Lutterell House, The Garden Village, Richmond.
Falling standards
IT is unfortunate that NASUWT, the career teachers' organisation, should be banging on about quality in education in a leaflet just issued.
Having apparently made a good case (to wit, the UK now spends nearly two per cent less per head on education than in 1980) it starts talking about  education .
Charity Swindle There is still but one sponsor for my wicket-keeping efforts in the coming season.
Stephen Smailes, Stockton cricket buff and councillor, is offering 50p a time to charity (yet to be decided) for each catch and stumping.
That will be matched from here and others are welcome to join in.
Somebody called to suggest an amendment to the rules governing the sponsorship.
Instead of paying cash for each chance accepted would charity not benefit far more if 50p was paid for each dropped catch and missed stumping?
Despite the profit-making prospects in this it has been treated with utter contempt on the grounds that charity begins at home.
A TEESSIDE man has complained to police about conditions in a Middlesbrough police cell where his son is being kept.
Donald Murphy was remanded in custody on an assault charge by Teesside magistrates last Friday.
His father, John Murphy, said he should have been taken to Durham Prison, where medical treatment which he said his son needed was available if necessary.
But there was no room there and the 22-year-old had spent the last six days in Middlesbrough police station.
During that time, he has undergone several medical examinations at the request of his father.
His solicitor, Bob Kneale, said the situation was highly unsatisfactory.
He added: ‘When magistrates remand someone in custody, one would assume they meant Durham, where medical facilities are available.’
Mr Murphy, of Grange Road, Middlesbrough, said his son had a bang on the head which needed an X-ray.
‘He has now had an X-ray, but if it had been serious, it might have been too late.’
A police spokesman confirmed Donald Murphy had been in police custody since last Friday.
He said: ‘Police surgeons have looked at him and said it's safe to detain him in a police cell.’
AN alert was flashed to police forces across Britain last night for an articulated lorry stolen from Cleveland.
On board the trailer are drums of copper cable with a scrap value of £10,000.
Police on Teesside expect to find that the maroon coloured ERF tractor unit and its 40 ft long trailer have been abandoned and the cargo removed.
The reels of copper wire will have to be stripped of their insulating casing.
‘South Bank CID are dealing with inquiries but we are certainly contacting forces throughout the country,’ said Insp Dan Forster, in charge of Cleveland Police control room last night.
‘Clearly, once it gets on to the motorway it can get anywhere.
‘It could be found locally but we have to cover as many angles as we can.’
The £48,500 vehicle and cargo were stolen from Middlesbrough Road, South Bank, sometime during Saturday night.
The registration number is A51 NUM, the trailer's chassis number is 37383.
The specially constructed trailer, unique to the Cleveland area, has a Ferrari Hyab-type hoist mounted midway along its length.
Police are appealing for anyone with information about the lorry or its load to call South Bank CID on (0642) 326326.
MORE than 2,000 youngsters are doing their bit this week to make Middlesbrough a tidier place as part of The National Spring Clean week.
Middlesbrough's beck valleys are the main attention of the children's efforts in the mammoth tidy-up co-ordinated by the council's public protection department.
The decision to target the town's ‘green corridors’, combining environmental awareness with the general cleanup, was taken after meetings involving council officers, the Tidy Up group and Cleveland Wildlife Trust.
CHILDREN from Brambles Farm Nursery, Middlesbrough, wear teddy bear masks at a dance to celebrate the reopening of their local library which has just had a £36,000 facelift.
Thorntree Library, at Beresford Crescent, Middlesbrough, has had £12,000 of streamlined shelves fitted and a new £24,000 central heating system installed.
Trail blazing for disabled
THE first woodland trail designed for the disabled will open in Kielder Forest, Northumberland on Friday.
Duke's Trail, which starts and finishes at Kielder Castle, can be used by people with little sight, wheelchairs or walking difficulties.
It was made by Forest Enterprise, part of the Forestry Commission, with money from the Federation of Master Builders.
Baroness Masham of Ilton, a member of all-party committees on the disabled, will perform the opening ceremony.
Victim ‘improves’: Doctors treating Michael Gibson, 20, who was attacked in Darlington at the weekend have said his condition is improving and he has been taken off the critical list at Middlesbrough General Hospital.
His parents are at his bedside.
How one charity helps another The Goodwill charity shop in Court Arcade, Darlington, closed its doors for the last time on Tuesday after four years of fund-raising for a children's village in India.
But another charity, The Knights of St Columba, has stepped in to put unsold stock to good use by sending it to help needy families in Poland.
‘It's sad that we are closing but our lease is due to expire and I always knew it would end if we couldn't find other suitable premises,’ said Mrs Erica Law, of Reeth, who set up the shop.
‘But at least what we cannot sell is going to help other people overseas.’
Mrs Law, who ran the shop with a small team of volunteers, sent the proceeds to the Children's Village in Thandigudi, in Southern India.
The village, which is home to 132 orphans, was set up in the early 1980s by Mr Mr John Foster, a teacher at the former Central Comprehensive School in Darlington.
Mrs Jill Buxton of Gainford will use stock from the shop, which includes clothing and books, to help fill four 40ft containers which The Knights of St Columba send to Poland each year.
The charity has been running for the past ten years and also has a branch in Middlesbrough which specialises in providing relief for sufferers of cerebral palsy in Poland.
‘People see Romania and Albania in the media all the time now but Poland has been suffering for a long time and people are still very much in need of our help,’ she said.
Mrs Buxton, aged 82, plans to travel with the containers: ‘We have been running as a charity for about 10 years and I usually go over with the donations to cities such as Krakow and report back on what is badly needed over there.’
The BR spokesman said although the end of the direct service from Darlington to Hartlepool was bad news the good was that a new two-hourly service in each direction from Middlesbrough to York and then on to Leeds, Manchester and Liverpool will be introduced.
Taking your driving test in 1952 cost 10s. — and you had to demonstrate hand signals.
Today the fee is £21.50 (£35 on Saturdays)— but you don't need to worry about the hands.
The great British driving test has remained stubbornly familiar to three generations of motorists since 1952.
And it is still considered the most terrifying experience of many people's lives.
Ursula Lane, 51, a staff nurse from Eston, Middlesbrough, describes it as ‘the worst possible nightmare.’
She spent £3,000 on driving lessons over four years before passing her test at the 29th attempt.
‘The main trouble was that I was sick with worry before tests and my feet froze on the pedals,’ she said.
‘The thought of taking the test worried me more than driving, so I would request morning appointments to stop myself getting worked up.’
Piped music and houseplants were introduced to test centre waiting rooms in 1990 to help candidates relax.
‘We are very aware what a frightening experience the driving test is for learners,’ says Wilf Rostron, the supervising examiner in Middlesbrough.
‘Small things like music, plants and magazines in the waiting rooms help to calm nerves.
Our efforts are reflected in improved standards — the pass rate of 45pc in 1977 has increased to 52pc.’
He has had some ‘testing times’ since he became an examiner in 1960.
‘Once I was driving up High Street East in Sunderland with a local priest when I saw a furniture van ahead with its ramp down.
‘The priest was so preoccupied he didn't see the van and was heading up the ramp when I stopped him.’
And the driving test has produced some local heroes.
Like Diane Barker, of Bishop Auckland, a deaf teenager who passed her test first time in 1984 after having special mirrors fitted so she could lip read commands from the driving instructor without taking her eyes of the road.
Or Alice Welch, from Byron Drive, York, who became Britain's oldest novice when she passed her test on her 74th birthday — at the sixth attempt.
Ursula Lane believes her 29-times driving test marathon has made her a safer driver than some of the ‘young Kings of the Road’ who pass at the first attempt.
‘It would be better for these people to suffer the knock of failing their test once than have a bigger knock afterwards, such as a road accident,’ she says.
‘There are many driving skills still to learn as you gain experience,’ agrees Keith Cameron, Chief Driving Examiner, ‘but passing your test is the end of the beginning’.
CHILDREN at Ayresome infants school in Middlesbrough have been busy painting the painters.
Pupils got on so well with the decorators when the school got its first brush-up for more than a decade that they decided to remember them in a life-size painting.
‘They were here for well over two months.
They even bought sweets for the children when they left and we have 260 pupils here,’ said school secretary Helen Chilvers.
Pictured are pupils Richard McManus (left), Hanah Norton and Anthony Powell catching painters John Thompson (left), Anthony Macdonald and Steven McCoy in action.
WELFARE rights workers in Cleveland claim thousands of people in South Tees are being denied benefits because of Social Fund rules.
It is claimed they are being refused community care grants and budgeting loans.
A spokesman said the priority list for Middlesbrough, Eston and Redcar from the Department of Social Security grouped claimants into the deserving poor and the undeserving poor.
But a spokesman for the DSS Benefits Agency in London said priority groups were defined nationally and local managers provided guidance to ensure that the scheme reflected local needs.
Cleveland Council Council welfare rights officer Tom Lamb said the figures for 1991–92 indicated that 75pc of claimants who applied to the Social Fund were refused community care grants.
And 42.5pc of claimants who applied for budgeting loans, which would have to be repaid, were also refused.
Mr Lamb said the DSS had identified lowest priority groups as families under stress, young people leaving local authority care and people without a settled way of life.
He said the priority list was discriminatory.
The Benefits Agency spokesman said the discretionary nature of the Social Fund scheme permitted local officers a good deal of flexibility in cases where they could provide assistance.
‘It should be stressed that the priority groups defined by the Secretary of State and the local manager are only guidance,’ he said.
The DSS figures for April 1991 to January 1992 show 9,337 applications made to the Social Fund for community care grants, of which 6,929 were refused.
The grants aim to help people live in the community as independently as possible.
The Benefits Agency spokesman said the figures for budget loans showed that 7,509 people were helped out of the 13,060 applications made.
For crisis loans, helping customers meet expenses in an emergency, 3,315 people were helped out of the 3,508 applications made.
TOUGHER laws to stem the rising number of juveniles committing crime while on bail in Hartlepool, were called for yesterday.
This year the town has been plagued by teenagers burgling houses and  stealing from cars, according to Chief Insp Colin Makepeace, chairman of the Cleveland branch of the Police Federation, who made the call.
He said the next government, whatever its colour, must make attempts to improve the legal system so that youngsters were not allowed out on bail to commit more offences.
He said: ‘In the present situation there is no justice for the victim or society and little for the police.’
At the Police Federation meeting held at the Marton Hotel, Middlesbrough, it was revealed this year 34 juveniles had been bailed for 108 offences in Hartlepool.
Of those offences 24 were committed by five juveniles, who were still out on bail.
At the meeting federation vice-chairman Richard Coyles called for 3,000 more beat bobbies throughout the country to prevent ‘anarchy’ in cities.
AN EPIC battle over a five-a-side complex has gone into extra time after protestors lodged 1,000 letters of objection.
Teesside licensing justices yesterday delayed a decision on a drinks licence for the £1.25m Anchor International project, planned for Clairville Common, Middlesbrough.
Chairman of the bench Lawrie Wild said his colleagues felt a site visit was essential in the light of such heavy protests.
‘We need to consider it carefully and look at all aspects,’ he added.
The drinks licence has become the main stumbling block in Anchor's plan to build ten floodlit pitches on the common.
Jill Coleman, one of the leading objectors, said afterwards: ‘We are surprised, but we think Anchor and Middlesbrough Council are starting to realise the strength of the protest.’
Middlesbrough Council leader Michael Carr has said a ‘minority’ of residents oppose the scheme.
But Liberal Democrat Coun Joe Michna, who collected many of the standard letters of protest, said: ‘Last time, we had 700 letters and 15 people in court, this time 1,000 letters and 30 people in court.’
Objectors also produced a map showing where objectors lived.
Coun Michna claimed the vast majority living near the common.
Anchor's first application for a drinks licence was refused in December.
The new application will now be considered on May 13, after a site visit by magistrates the previous afternoon.
John Pitt, joint mangaing director of Anchor International, said: ‘We are not willing to say anything which might prejudice our application.’
Middlesbrough Council supports the project, claiming it will bring jobs and an important facility to the town.
Spokesman Mike Clark said: ‘We will continue to support the scheme.
We are satisfied it will be a valuable asset for the immediate area and that it has considerable support from the community.’
Objectors claim they do not oppose the development, just the proposed site.
Philip Newbold, secretary of Teesside Civic Trust, said: ‘We want to retain Clairville Common as green open space, enjoyed by everyone.
‘We do not object to the development, but why is it not on a derelict piece of industrial land?’
To repairing vandalism, £13.47; to supplying books, £11.97 N-E towns are bright spots in the school vandalism statistics Schools in Durham and North Yorkshire have bucked a national trend by recording a drop in the amount of money spent on repairing vandalised buildings.
National statistics released this week showed the cost of vandalism and arson attacks on schools had doubled in a year from £60m. to £120m.
And the North-East was among the worst-hit areas.
On average £13.47 was spent per pupil in Britain every year repairing vandalised schools £1.50 more than was spent on books.
IMPROVEMENTS However in the NorthEast, Tyneside and Wearside appeared to contain most of the blackspots while the smaller towns and rural areas showed marked improvements.
Mr Keith Banks, assistant director of buildings with Durham county education department, said in the mid-1980s the county spent £680,000 on repairing vandalised schools.
In the last 12 months the bill was around £400,000, an even greater drop when inflation was taken into account.
The cost of thefts from schools had risen from £60,000 to about £70,000 over the same period, representing a drop in real terms because of inflation.
However, education officials were still acutely aware of the cost in time and money of vandalism.
Mr Banks, a member of the North-East Regional Schools Security Group and vice-chairman of the Association of Local Authority Risk Managers (Alarm), said the county had looked at various ways of improving security in schools.
Intruder alarms were fitted in many premises and linked to 24-hour manned police stations, storage facilities had been strengthened, property marking had taken place and extra fire barriers installed.
Roller shutters, anti-climbing barriers and spikes on walls and drainpipes were fitted to try to stop break-ins.
‘While we would hope the money we are spending at the moment is proving to be cost-effective, at the end of the day electronic security is really only buying time,’ said Mr Banks.
‘We need to get to the root cause of the problem.
‘We have instituted a range of education-based schemes in schools like talking about vandalism as a crime, developing crime prevention panels and other measures.’
He praised the fantastic co-operation the education department received from Durham police and fire services, who attended meetings of the NorthEast Regional Schools Security Group and encouraged children to take part in anti-crime projects.
ANTI-CRIME North Yorkshire reported a low level of vandalism on school premises.
An education department spokesman said teachers, governors and the police worked closely on a number of anti-crime schemes in the classroom.
‘In North Yorkshire we are fortunate in having relatively few problems over school vandalism, although most schools encounter the occasional difficulty,’ he said.
Cleveland's total bill for school vandalism over the last 12 months rocketed after an arson attack on Greengates School, Redcar, when £800,000 worth of damage was caused.
A further £73,000 went on repairing other damage from fires, almost all of which were started deliberately.
OWN FINANCES A spokesman for Cleveland education department said it was difficult to assess accurately the total cost of vandalism across the whole county because many schools now controlled their own finances.
The last available county figures, collated two years ago, showed £800,000 a year was spent on vandalised schools, not including fire damage.
‘The county council has only limited insurance for its schools simply because of the enormous premiums which would be required to provide comprehensive cover,’ he said.
‘In almost all cases the costs of fire damage have to be met from the authority's own contingency funds.’
SECURITY GUARDS
The national figures, released by the Municipal Mutual Insurance company, showed schools particularly prone to vandalism were encouraged to employ 24hour security guards, however there were no plans for this in North Yorkshire, Durham or Cleveland.
— The main vandalism attacks on schools in the area over the last year included £50,000 worth of damage at Hustler School, Acklam, Middlesbrough; £15,000 at Stephenson Way Junior and Infant School, Newton Aycliffe; and £80,000 at Newtown Junior School, Stockton.
IN today's leading article (Echo April 6) the necessity for reform of the libel laws is again addressed, but without any suggestion of what reform is required.
I feel that one simple change is all that is necessary.
If the reporter, the editor and particularly the owner of a magazine or newspaper were liable to a six-months prison sentence for printing untruths and fabricated stores, then the problem would shrink to minute proportions.
As the situation is at present, any damages are paid for out of increased sales.
The issue of real damages for real physical injuries could then be sensibly discussed.
Eric Gendle, 13 Mayfield Road, Nunthorpe, Middlesbrough.
I REALISE everyone must have suffered from the saturation coverage of the election regardless of which party they support.
But it seems to me that every time I've open a newspaper over the past two or three years, Stuart Bell, the Labour MP for Middlesbrough, has been staring out at me.
And it is not just the newspapers, I've had more than my fair share of his election missives shoved through my letterbox along with all the other junk mail.
I can tell you, having Mr Bell's physog dished up like a plate of cold suet every time I wish to relax is beginning to unnerve me.
One can have too much of a good thing.
And why does it always appear to be the same photograph?
Is it not possible for the media to get some kind of award organised, say if a newspaper or TV station  succeeds in not showing Mr Bell for several years, weeks or even days?
This award could be called the No Bell Piece Prize.
Glynn Porteous, 19 Clive Road, Middlesbrough.
Fair time:
The first of three antiques and collectors' fairs will be held by Guisborough Parish Church today in the parish hall from 10am to 4pm and on April 18 the church annual decorated egg competition will be held in the hall.
Garage blaze: Most of a garage was damaged after a car caught fire at a house in Durham Road, Stockton.
Engine fire: Firemen from Stockton put out a car engine on fire on the roadway at Rawlinson Avenue, Billingham.
New pond: Volunteers have created a pond on the banks of the Tees at The Holmes, Thornaby, in a bid to attract more wildlife to the area, in a Cleveland County Council, British Trust for Conservation Volunteers and Wildlife Trust partnership.
Rare chance: Music fans in Hartlepool are being offered the chance to see one of Africa's most famous reggae bands.
Harare Dread is due to play live at the Grand Hotel ballroom on April 17.
Tickets are £3.50 and available from the civic centre, the Mill House Leisure Centre or the door.
Playground date:
Middlesbrough Council's mobile playground is in Grove Hill during the first week of the Easter holidays, which start on Monday.
Holiday sun:
A party of physically handicapped people are heading for the sun of Majorca later this month on a holiday organised by Cleveland County Council social services.
Pride events: Stokesley's Pride In Our Town Association have taken over the town's Mayday celebration, part of a series of events to promote and improve Stokesley.
The day will include dancing round the maypole by Stokesley Primary School.
Forget all the images you have of little plastic boxes and bored housewives.
Nowadays Tupperware is big business and its hardy teams of demonstrators — there is no such thing as salespeople in Tupperspeak — are regularly motivated to sell, sell sell.
Motivation is the name of the game.
And each week around 80 demonstrators from the region meet in Middlesbrough to get a motivation injection.
To a background of loud, pumping music prizes are given to the best demonstrators and to the units — groups of demonstrators — who have made the most sales.
Demonstrators whoop and holler as colleagues receive gifts…a Tupperware colander…an Oriental rug.
There's a quasi-religious, Gospel feel about it all as grown women clap and cheer.
Demonstrators are called to the microphone to be presented with their prizes and there's lots of hugging and kissing.
Managers line up in the good old Miss World tradition as their units' achievements — sales figures to you and me — are read out in reverse order and the best one is presented with a sash.
The only thing missing is Eric Morley.
One woman was close to tears as she was named Top Unit Manager of the Week.
‘I suppose it is all very Come On Down and Leslie Crowther-like, but it is an American idea,’ says Kath Bradley, a star Tupperware lady, who has graduated to executive manager.
‘However, I believe it is one of the few jobs where you actually get recognition for what you do.
It's all about motivation and each week we set each other challenges and incentives.’
Incentives for the most sales include trips on the Orient Express, holidays in Greece, weekends in Barcelona and trips to Australia.
The competitive spirit thrives because the salespeople — sorry demonstrators — know there are good prizes up for grabs.
But the rivalry is friendly.
There's a feeling of belonging and caring; the demonstrators seem bonded together by a common link.
Demonstrators are looked after by their managers — affectionately known as Mums — in a unit.
Each unit has its own name — Emeralds, Crystals, Gems or Lasers — and the aim of each is to outdo the others in sales at the end of the week.
Demonstrators sit with their Mums and the good ones are patted on the back and encouraged.
Some get standing ovations for being promoted to manager — to be a manager you need to recruit three demonstrators for your unit.
And others are cheered for doing well despite personal problems.
Tupperware doesn't advertise for staff — all its demonstrators are recruited on personal recommendations.
Each new recruit goes through an AP — or Announcement Party — when she invites a group of family and friends to get rid of her kit — or goods.
Demonstrators can rise to the ranks of manager, and ultimately distributor, which brings with it a company car.
Kath now has a company car in recognition of her achievement.
Tupperware ladies do not win prizes, they achieve them.
She says she enjoys her job tremendously as she can work as and when she wishes.
‘I am still as excited about these plastic boxes as I was three years ago when I started,’ she says.
‘But it's not just the little white plastic boxes your mother or grandmother used to buy.
Tupperware has changed an awful lot and is really up-to-date now.’
Recent health scares over cling-film have had a knock-on effect on Tupperware and it has enjoyed a boom in sales.
The company is very eco-conscious and Tupperware products which do not make the mark are recycled.
‘People are a lot more aware of food hygiene and storage,’ says Kath.
‘Our boxes are environmentally-friendly and if you buy a bacon storer you know you have got it for life.’
The accent is very much on looking forward — Tupperware now also makes toys and microwave products.
And most motivation groups have creches for children as they still recruit mainly women demonstrators.
‘We have had a few men demonstrators and we would like to encourage more,’ says Kath.
‘With unemployment we thought more men would have come forward.
‘We also have a lot of young people and we hold a lot of tupperware parties in young peoples’ homes.
I find I am competing with the Ann Summers ones now.’
Tupperware, it seems, has come a long way.
THE Smokebusters of South Tees showed that you don't need to smoke to have fun yesterday.
Members of the club joined in a wide range of activities and ate a healthy lunch at the Southlands Centre, Middlesbrough.
Smokebusters encourages youngsters aged eight to 14 not to smoke and to spread the ‘don't smoke, have fun’ message.
For membership details, contact Bridget Drury, Health Promotion Unit, West Lane Hospital, Acklam Road, Middlesbrough.
AN ELDERLY couple gave up £1,000 worth of golden wedding presents to help the blind.
Arthur and Kathleen Lea, of Manfield, near Darlington, asked friends and relatives to give money for a guide dog instead of gifts for 50 years of marriage.
The couple matched the £1,000 collection with £1,000 of their own enough money to sponsor two guide dogs.
Staff at the Guide Dog for the Blind Centre in Middlesbrough were overwhelmed with the gift.
A spokeswoman said: ‘It was a wonderful donation and because it was so generous we gave the Leas the chance to name the two dogs.’
Mr Lea, 71, said: ‘We asked our two eldest grandsons James and Philip Heslop, aged seven and four, to name them.’
So the youngsters, of Netherby Rise, Darlington, chose Oliver and Abbi as names for the dogs whose training, feed and vet bills are paid for by the Leas' gift.
‘We always wanted to sponsor a guide dog and by the time you've been married for 50 years you've got everything you need and there's no point in getting presents you don't really need,’ said Mr Lea.
PUPILS are to be evacuated to a neighbouring school while their own is rebuilt despite objections from staff, governors and parents.
Three schools were suggested as temporary homes for 300 pupils and teachers while builders work on the 87-year-old Sacred Heart Primary School in Middlesbrough this summer.
The first, St Joseph's in Marton Road, had space for 200 children but objected since it is still recovering from the effects of housing another primary school following a major fire.
Archibald School in Barnaby Avenue had room for 170 children but staff and governors argued toilet facilities were insufficient and there would be problems at playtimes.
Ayresome Infant and Junior Schools are only 200 yards away but staff, governors and parents claimed sharing their school would deprive them of facilities.
County Education Officer Brian Worthy agreed facilities such as a TV room and library may have to be sacrificed for eight or nine months, but disputed the claim the toilet system would not cope.
Yesterday the county council's education committee decided Sacred Heart will move into Ayresome Infant and Junior Schools and part of the adjoining education development centre.
The areas of Sunderland and Middlesbrough we looked at were both poor working-class areas, yet there were considerable differences in the health of their communities.’
Dr David Morris of Newcastle University A MAJOR new study is to be made of the health of pre-school children on Teesside and Wearside.
It is the latest in a series of studies aimed at determining the cause of especially poor health statistics in parts of the North-East.
The research project is being funded by the Northern Regional Health Authority, and will be led by Dr David Morris and Dr Peter Phillimore of Newcastle University.
Yesterday Dr Morris said: ‘The latest work will be a follow-up to an earlier study that showed how the community's health was 30pc worse in some parts of Sunderland than the country as a whole, and 30pc worse again in parts of Middlesbrough.
‘This time we shall be focussing on the health of pre-school children.
We have already been in touch with two GP practices in Middlesbrough to see how much of the medical history we can pick up, and shall be doing the same in Sunderland.
We shall be comparing the development of low birth-weight babies in each area, and also looking at their siblings.’
He added: ‘We have two groups of politicians saying different things about why health standards are poorer in some areas than others.
One group says it is to do with social deprivation, and the other blames people's lifestyle, saying they eat badly and smoke and drink too much.
‘Our research so far suggests there are factors other than social deprivation and lifestyle that make a difference.
The areas of Sunderland and Middlesbrough that we looked at were both poor working-class areas, yet there were considerable differences in the health of their communities.
‘Our plea is for a hell of a lot more epidemiological research to find out the causes, so that whatever problems there are can be addressed.’
The two academics had asked for a grant of £40,000; they have been given around £18,000.
As before, the Teesside end of the research will look specifically at Grangetown and South Bank.
A large number of families from Grangetown have received legal aid to explore the possibility of suing British Steel and ICI.
They believe their children have asthma because of emissions from the two plants.
Last night former Grangetown councillor John Walsh, a leading antipollution campaigner, said: ‘I'm very pleased this study is to go ahead.
The more information becomes available, the easier it will be to devise solutions.’
Book back
TWO decades have passed since the Bible Exhibition first went to Northallerton.
‘We hadn't got children then and now they've grown up and left home,’ said David Coleman.
‘We thought it was about time it came again.’
It has been touring Britain for 30 years now.
It was in Darlington in 1988, it was in Middlesbrough last year.
It has yet to fulfil its central claim which is as big as they come: ‘Make no mistake, Christ will soon be back on earth.’
The desirability of this is obvious, though it must be said without wishing to offend anyone that it seems as imminent now as it was when the claim was first being made 30 years ago.
David Coleman is unworried by this.
He is a prominent member of the Christadelphians sect which mounted the exhibition and takes it from town to town, week by week, year by year.
Mr Coleman is as diffident as his television namesake, at the microphone, is garrulous.
He thought it was worth having back in Northallerton after such a gap.
It might be possible to pick up more people.
Casual passers-by might take a look.
Having seen it twice it is to be recommended.
The Christadelphians happen to believe everything in the Bible, which is their right.
It is not necessary to do this to get something out of the exhibition.
It is not necessary to believe that Christ will be here tomorrow, although it may help to believe that he will be here some time.
It is in Northallerton Town Hall from Monday.
Conservation areas:
Parts of the centuries old villages of Flixton, Folkton and Reighton near Scarborough are to be designated as conservation areas by Scarborough Council.
DETAILED plans for a multi-million pound centre to stimulate jobs, training and business in Middlesbrough's City Challenge area were approved yesterday.
The £4.5m Training Advice and Development Centre (TAD) is being promoted as a City Challenge flagship project.
The centre is to be built in Berwick Hills and will include a conference hall, 40-bedroom residential centre for management training and an advice base to direct the unemployed into jobs or training.
A European advice and resource centre and business growth centre will also be included.
The project will be guided by a board comprising members of Middlesbrough Council, Teesside Training and Enterprise Council, industry and commerce.
Irene Berryman, who chairs Middlesbrough Council's economic development committee, said: ‘This partnership scheme is clearly one of the most important in the entire City Challenge programme.
It will put the area on the national map and offer a place where local people can go for advice.
‘Male unemployment in east Middlesbrough is running at 27 per cent and tackling that is central to the success of City Challenge.’
AN 11-year-old Teesside boy has told police of his plans to beat the joyriders.
Mark Stevenson, of Lambeth Road, Linthorpe, Middlesbrough, visited Cleveland Police's traffic unit at Cannon Park, Middlesbrough, to hand over his picture of the police car of the future.
‘It's much more aggressive and mean-looking, so it might make people think again before joyriding,’ said Mark, of Lambeth Road, Linthorpe, Middlesbrough.
Cats' alert: Fire caused at least £10,000 of damage to the first floor of a house in Pannal Avenue, Whinney Banks, Middlesbrough last night.
It started in the bedroom of a 21-year-old woman.
Her parents were alerted by their pet cats and the family escaped unharmed.
THE number of families in temporary bed and breakfast accommodation in Middlesbrough continues to rise.
On March 9, there were 85 families living in B and B an increase of 50 on March 1991.
This represents a rise of a massive 140pc and has contributed to the high number of households registered as a priority for rehousing due to homelessness, currently 211.
Ten more families have been added to the list since January 3.
Households are also staying in  temporary accommodation for longer periods, a report to Middlesbrough Council's homeless advisory committee reveals.
The report suggests this is due to the number and percentage of empty properties in the borough.
Last year, there were 215 such properties (1.35 pc of total stock), but this year that has fallen to 119 (0.75 pc of total stock).
This is partly blamed on applicants waiting longer for a property to become available in their ‘first choice’ housing area.
There is some good news in the report, which reveals that the number of priority homeless cases has reduced slightly.
Monuments to a dream that turned into a nightmare, they can still be seen from afar, standing tall and silent like dinosaurs waiting to become extinct.
Over 1,000 high-rise blocks of flats were built in London in the Sixties and Seventies over 200 in Birmingham.
And the North-East did not escape from these tower block communities which were supposed to answer all our housing problems.
Instead, some crumbled, some caused fear and crime and many led to isolation hundreds of feet up above the rest of the town, But back in 1952 something needed to be done to take us out of Victorian and Edwardian accommodation and into the second half of the 20th century.
Today, half of the dwellings you see around you were built after the Second World War and two out of three are owner-occupied.
Things were very different 40 years ago when 50pc of housing stock was rented from private landlords.
Today, the figure is 6pc.
Only four million homes were owner-occupied 40 years ago compared with 15 million today.
Both Labour and Conservative governments since the Second World War have presided over a massive expansion in building, including 21 new English towns — three in the North-East.
Newton Aycliffe and Peterlee both began to take shape in the late 40s coming out of a need to find a new living and working environment and they were followed by Washington in 1964.
It was around this time that the twinkle in the planner's eye was transformed into a 20-storey tower-block.
Professor John Greve of York University's Centre for Housing Policy says it was ‘a high-tech period where prefabrication was seen as a golden solution for building speedily.’
Although they might have been relatively cheap to build they were expensive to maintain, a point that some experts were putting at the time.
‘We tried to save money by building economically, but it has cost us more in the long run.
Our high-rise flats were based on Scandinavian flats, but they build them to a much higher standard.
There has always been this tendency over here to try and save on public spending,’ says Professor Greve.
Some of the flats disintegrated.
Ronan Point, a 22-storey block in East London, crumbled like a pack of cards after a gas explosion in 1968.
Three people died.
Other high-rise blocks are still being pulled down.
The image of an unfortunate resident having to climb 20 flights of stairs because the lift is out of order is now a common one.
Local authority building reached its peak in the 1970s.
Between 1971 and 1980 111,000 new council homes were built every year.
The irony was that many would soon end up owner-occupied thanks to a central part of Thatcherism — the right to buy scheme.
In 1988 only 21,000 council houses were built in Britain.
At the start of this year over one and a half million council-built homes had been sold to tenants under a scheme which let tenants of more than two years buy their homes at a discount.
Professor Greve says the Conservative Government moved the goalposts as far as council house building was concerned.
‘When the Government was persuading Parliament to accept the right to buy scheme, they said that local authorities would be able to use accumulated funds from selling their houses to build more.
But this soon coincided with a clampdown on public expenditure and councils were told they couldn't spend as much as they wanted on housing.
‘But there has been an increase, since 1988, in funding for housing associations.
They are now expecting to build 40,000 houses a year by the mid-90s.’
Many people who work with those struggling to find somewhere to live put part of the blame for homelessness on the right to buy scheme.
‘It has added to the problem, especially in rural areas,’ says Shirley Chambers, an advisor at the Tyneside Housing Aid Centre.
‘In places like Tynedale they only had a small stock of housing anyway and that's been reduced.
It means that young people, instead of staying in their home town or village, have to stay with their friends or relatives or move to bigger places like Newcastle or Gateshead and that means more people on the waiting list.’
Nearly 170,000 households are now classed as homeless in Britain.
There are about 80,000 homeless people in London alone — about the population of the town of Darlington — and 35,000 are children.
But Shirley, says the statistics don't reflect the true situation because they don't include single people or those without children.
She wants the legislation changed so that those people can get help.
There are, she says, around 71,000 households on council waiting lists in Tyne and Wear, Northumberland and County Durham and yet housing and homelessness rarely surfaced as an election issue.
‘Homelessness isn't a very attractive issue.
Homeless people tend to be stereotyped but you can walk past someone in the street without realising they're homeless.’
But despite the fact that he has been ‘steadily critical’ of successive governments' housing policies, Prof Greve does see some hope for the future — and even for some of the tower blocks.
‘Some have been sold to private developers who are spending a lot of money on them,’ he says.
And he admits to being impressed by new housing partnerships between the public and private sectors on projects which could not have been built without the co-operation of both parties.
‘My hope is that Britain may become a sort of housing laboratory, like we were the welfare state laboratory,’ he says.
But there's still the need to first get rid of the modern slums which replaced the Victorian slums standing when the tower block was just a few lines on an architect's sketch board.
LIN GALES, playgroup leader in Middleton St George.
I have been working at the playgroup in Middleton St George for about seven years now, and I've been the leader for about two.
I first became involved when my youngest child started attending the playgroup and I was asked to work there a few mornings a week.
About two years ago the playgroup leader left and I was asked to take charge.
During the time I have been working for the playgroup I have come into contact with about 200 children.
I can still remember many of their names.
I mainly run and organise the playgroup sessions which take place each weekday morning, usually for two and a half hours.
Unfortunately at the moment we have had to move the playgroup into temporary accommodation so we can only offer two hours a day.
We now have about 45 children on our books.
We take two-and-a-half to three-year-olds for one morning a week and three to five-year-olds for the other four mornings.
Around 20 to 24 children attend each session and take part in different activities including playing with toys, making cakes, songs, dancing, dressing up, and story-time.
Other people help out at the playgroup.
Usually I'm joined by two other helpers.
Sometimes we are joined by mums who we encourage to stay and see what we get up to, and some of the fathers have helped out as well .
The village school takes pupils in January and September each year, and before they go I like to get together with them to have a talk, teach them how to put on socks and shoes, and other things they might need to know.
I also work as a lunchtime supervisor at the school so it's nice to watch some of the children who went to playgroup grow up.
It's also good for them to come to a new school and know at least one face there.
The playgroup is a non-profit making organisation, and we rely heavily on the fees paid for children to attend and on fundraising.
Recently, we raised more than £1,000 in six weeks from several events including a sponsored walk, and we hope to raise money from a sponsored mini  assault course for the children.
We're also hoping to hold our regular teddy bear's picnic, sports day and fair this year, and are planning a family walk, following the success of the last sponsored walk.
Money raised is used to buy equipment for the playgroup, provide other things we need regularly, and give the children small gifts at Easter and Christmas.
We also like to involve the children in growing plants and flowers which also costs money.
Usually, we also provide a free day out at a farm for the children.
Last year, we took the children to a farm near Coulby Newham in Middlesbrough.
We also get a number of visits at the playgroup, including the local road safety officer who talks to the children.
I enjoy my work at the playgroup and hope I will be able to continue for many years to come’
A CLEVELAND aid team is taking on a major project to improve the lives of children in Romania.
Volunteers at Cleveland Aid for Romanian Children are beginning to get together everything they need to renovate a 55-bed children's hospital on the outskirts of Iasi.
Chairman of the group Paul Stage said: ‘It needs absolutely everything.
There is no heating apart from wood burning stoves which provide little background warmth, no showers, no baths, there are electric light bulbs hanging from bare wires.
It really is a total mess.’
The charity organisation assessed the hospital's needs on its last visit to Romania when it took out over 30 tons of relief aid on three articulated lorries.
The trip also saw the end of the group's work on one of the orphanages in Iasi where volunteers have been renovating the building.
The orphanage still needs wardrobes and furnishings but Mr Stage said the charity's work had come to an end.
Now the organisation is turning its attention to the children's hospital.
Mr Stage said: ‘Funds are desperately needed as well as equipment.
We need first aid supplies, cleaning materials, toiletries and disinfectant.
We also need large scale catering equipment for the orphanages.’
Anyone who wants to help the charity should telephone Middlesbrough 253643.
DICK Whittington has a lot to answer for, according to a Middlesbrough-based homeless charity.
‘People still do believe the myth that the streets of London are paved in gold,’ said Chris Kemp, chairman of Community Campus.
The group this week played host to Eleanor Button of Centrepoint Soho, which aims to re-settle homeless youngsters who flee to London in search of a future.
Community Campus are working with Centrepoint Soho to set up a Return Home project in Middlesbrough.
One of several planned throughout the country, it could be in operation by the end of the year.
Under the scheme, Teesside youngsters who find themselves homeless in London would be helped to re-settle in the NorthEast.
‘In the past, people heading for London often found jobs, but struggled for accommodation now there is very little accommodation and very few jobs,’ said Chris Kemp.
‘But people still go.’
The project aims not only to resettle youngsters who struggle to lay down roots in the capital, but to stop them heading South in the first place.
Properties have already been identified to make the Middlesbrough scheme a reality.
A JOBLESS couple are determined to start a new business life in face of a vandalism threat.
Paul and Lynda Wilson of Middlesbrough want to open a pizzeria in a small shopping parade in New Marske.
Like several other premises in the precinct the shop is empty.
People in the area blame vandals and troublesome youngsters making it a nightly ‘no-go’ area.
More than 400 villagers have signed a petition against their application feeling their venture would aggravate the problem.
Coun Vera Moody told Langbaurgh's planning committee that it had been a long-standing problem with young people congregating in the shopping parade.
There is also a fish and chip shop in the parade and people felt another takeaway would encourage more noise, litter and vandalism.
She said: ‘When the police come the troublemakers scatter through aged persons’ accommodation behind the shops.
Youngsters do wheelies in bikes and cars and it is all very frightening for people in the area.’
Coun Arthur Taylor said there was no planning opposition so they should not give in to the vandals by refusing the application.
Planning officer Peter Wilson, recommending approval, said the couple had agreed to make closing time 10.30.
Councillors agreed that in view of the large petition they had to meet the objectors and there will be a site visit.
Mr Wilson said last night that they had talked to a lot of the villagers and were determined not to give in to the vandals.
THE opponents of a major pylon scheme received a boost yesterday when a government department confirmed it intended to lodge a formal objection to the route.
A public inquiry begins next month into the National Grid Company's plan to build overhead power lines from Lackenby on Teesside to Shipton, near York.
The scheme has attracted several hundred objections.
Yesterday the Department of Transport said it was concerned about both proposed route options between Lackenby and Picton, near Yarm.
One alternative, known as the Southern Option, follows an existing pylon line for about half its route, then deviates southwards around Nunthorpe.
The other Portrack Option avoids the area of countryside to the south of Middlesbrough, traverses industrial areas close to the Tees, and follows the A19 south through Thornaby.
The NGC will open its case at the public inquiry in Northallerton on May 19.
RESIDENTS in the area where a new superstore is planned have come out against the proposals.
A public meeting held in Middlesbrough for the people of Coulby Newham and Marton ended in a unanimous decision against the plans for a £9.5m North Eastern Co-op superstore.
Residents claimed Dixon's Bank would not be able to take the extra traffic that the store would cause, and there would be a detrimental affect on other shopping areas nearby.
Newham ward councillor Peter Jackson, leader of Middlesbrough Council's Tory group, said the matter would now go to the council's economic development and planning committee.
He said: ‘I will be faithfully reporting the views of that meeting to the planning committee.’
The Co-op store would be built on the 8.2 acre site near the West Moor Nursing Home off Dixon's Bank.
If it were given planning permission the store would create 200 jobs.
A NEW awards ceremony in Middlesbrough will reward gardeners, allotment holders and businesses who brighten up the town.
Middlesbrough Council is planning the event to increase interest in competitions throughout the town run by community and neighbourhood councils and residents' associations.
There will also be an award for the best garden in town.
Assistant chief leisure services officer Mick Hannon said the Council did not want to replace the competitions already being held.
‘By planning a major event bringing together everyone who works to make the town a better, brighter place we hope to increase interest in these local contests.
‘We recognise all the work that goes in to promoting a greener Middlesbrough and what we are doing here will hopefully strengthen that community involvement.’
Helpers needed for Romanian hospital project Volunteer plumbers and electricians are needed to help a Cleveland charity renovate a Romanian children's hospital.
Cleveland Aid for Romanian Children has set itself the task of completely renovating a 55-bed long stay hospital in Iasi for children suffering from  hepatitis and diabetes.
Charity workers have recently returned from Romania after completing a survey of the hospital and Mr Paul Stage, chairman of the organisation, said: ‘It has nothing in the way of modern conveniences.
There is no hot water in the building, the electrical system is dangerous and the kitchen and laundry are 40 years out of date.’
At the end of May the charity is hoping to send a group of volunteer tradespeople out to renovate one block of the hospital.
In July work on a second dormitory will be completed, and in September  the dining and kitchen areas will be renovated.
Mr Stage said: ‘To bring the hospital up to Western standards will cost £ 7m. but we can do a lot of vital work with a lot less.
‘We need electricians and plumbers willing to give up two weeks of their time to work in the hospital and also fundraisers to help raise the cash to fund the work.’
The charity has recently completed major electrical and plumbing work on a Romanian orphanage and is now waiting for the authorities to upgrade the power supply and sewerage system before volunteers complete the renovations.
On the recent trip to Iasi, as well as carrying out a full survey of the children's hospital the charity also delivered more than 30 tons of aid to ten orphanages, two children's hospitals and the main hospital in the region.
Mr Stage said: ‘Staff there told us that the equipment and particularly the surgical instruments and incubators would save lives.
They have the skill to carry out life saving operations and treatments and now they have the equipment to do it with.’
Anyone who would like to help can contact Cleveland Aid for Romanian Children on Middlesbrough 253643.
ON ONE hand the Government is concerned about the vocational needs of children while on the other it wants to turn the clock back by insisting on paper and pencil testing instead of exploring what children really need.
Engineers have a good helping of functional grey matter with which to devise theories.
They also need the conditions in which to test them.
Budding engineers are going to face a situation where what they achieve practically receives the inadequate reward of a terminal examination which fails to let them demonstrate not only the full extent of their knowledge but also understanding of the processes involved.
Swap engineers for any other subject in school and we have the same retrograde situation.
Just because you can do something well does not mean that you are not brainy but when you show your academic prowess along practical lines you are not considered by this government to be of the same worth as someone who can recall knowledge on one day.
When next you step into an airliner just ask yourself if you want a pilot who has a knowledge of flying or someone who not only has knowledge but aviation skill as well.
It is time this government valued the academic nature of course work.
W. Morehead, public relations officer, National Union of Teachers, 33 Brompton Walk, Darlington.
Geography lesson
WHEN will the media and particularly its local elements learn some simple geography?
A glance at a map of Cleveland County shows the meanest intelligence like mine that four boroughs, including Middlesbrough and Langbaurgh, make up the county.
Grangetown and South Bank are in Langbaurgh and used to be in Eston Urban District.
They have never been a part of Middlesbrough, except that for the Post Office's convenience that town is used as an addition to their postal address.
Are you part of a campaign to expand Middlesbrough's boundaries?
I regularly see reports on Grangetown, Middlesbrough, and today you report Newcastle University's study on child health using input from ‘two GP practices in Middlesbrough, one in Grangetown and one in South Bank’(HAS April 11).
I concede that the Newcastle doctors may be ignorant but there is no excuse for you.
Sid France, 354 West Dyke Road, Redcar.
FAREWELL then Wensleydale Cheese.
You are no more.
After centuries of crumbling gently before exciting our taste buds with your delicate flavour you have finally departed your origins.
This means, of course, that there will be no true Wensleydale Cheese in future.
The sad decision to close down the creamery in Hawes means that you will not be made in the dale from now on.
How can Wensleydale Cheese come from anywhere but Wensleydale?
Quite easily actually.
The European Commission draft regulation seems to permit you to be made anywhere.
Wensleydale by name but not by nature, as it were.
‘When a product has already travelled from its place of origin there isn't intended to be any restriction,’ said Alison Fellows of the European law unit at Dickinson Dees in Newcastle.
‘The two draft regulations which have been proposed by the EC are designed to protect local foodstuffs.’
Parma Ham springs to mind.
It could hardly be Parma Ham if it came from anywhere else.
But that is not the case with lovely Wensleydale Cheese.
The truth is that despite the siting of the creamery it has probably not been made with local products for some time.
For instance, the milk, which is a fairly essential ingredient, has not necessarily come from Wensleydale.
‘Cheeses in this country are no longer localised,’ said Alison Fellows.
‘Therefore, there's no point in protecting.’
A point which sprang to mind here to complicate the issue surrounds cheese which is made in several places, including the one after which it takes its name.
Caerphilly Cheese might be made in Caerphilly, Bristol and Mars.
Which would be the real one?
All of them it seems.
Equally, said Alison Fellows, we would only want Bordeaux wine from Bordeaux.
Of course we would.
‘We've lost many of our localised products because they've been taken over by multi-nationals.
But others will be deliberately protected.
There may be points of dispute in which case they'll have to be settled in court.’
The two directives have not yet been enshrined in statute, though there has been much fanciful discussion about what might happen.
Whatever the law, there does seem something odd about having Wensleydale Cheese made elsewhere.
But the choice between that and not having it is easy.
Happy Return A BIRTHDAY notice appeared in this newspaper the other day offering greetings to Ken Snowdon, scholar, conversationalist, heart throb, author, humorist , broadcaster, nuclear fission expert.
‘Well, I'm a broadcaster,’ said the presenter of the BBC Radio Cleveland early morning show, ‘though I suppose some people would say that's debatable.’
The result of the publicity was that the following morning he received eight cards at the Middlesbrough station.
Though not in favour of DJs wittering on about their birthdays he doesn't he was no doubt grateful for these.
They proved that somebody out there listens.
Snowdon would probably like some cards on his birthday too.
It was not last week.
He will be 39 on May 22.
Rural Rail WEARING this space's social concern hat here are some facts from Countrygoer News, the oddly-titled magazine which promotes public transport in rural areas.
Buses and trains run on lead free fuel.
A third of all British households have no car.
More than a third of all journeys are made for leisure purposes.
Given current trends, car usage will increase by between 80 per cent and 140 per cent over the next 30 years.
If only five per cent of car journeys were made by bus or train instead it would save over a quarter of a million tonnes' worth of pollutant each year.
There are more where that came from, but you will easily catch the drift.
What remains difficult in the country is catching the bus.
Catching the train is impossible.
A COURSE to help people cope with divorce starts in Middlesbrough next month.
The Divorce Experience’ is a five-session course, which aims to help people rebuild their lives after divorce.
Organiser Catherine Jackson, of the Cleveland Family Conciliation Service, said: The divorce rate at present, roughly one in three marriages shows no sign of dropping.
Statistics show it is a common experience, but for the individuals involved, it is almost always traumatic and frequently a crisis which shatters their whole way of life.’
The course combines practical information with group discussion.
It starts on May 12.
For more information, call the conciliation service on .
The Budget doubles the price of beer and puts 3d on a 9d packet of cigarettes.
Cinema tickets are increased to 6d.
Drastic rationing of motor tyres is brought in to help Britain's critical rubber position.
Only owners of vehicles vital to the war effort are able to obtain new tyres.
A reader from Crook, County Durham, writes to The Northern Echo complaining that some shops are being unfairly allocated double rations of eggs.
Middlesbrough football club is knocked out of the first round of the War Cup by Bradford.
Safety railings are installed along the King's and Queen's staithes at York after several people walk into the river during blackout.
Fred Astaire (above) and Rita Hayworth are starring in You'll Never Get Rich at the Regal, York.
l California Syrup of Figs is advertised in The Northern Echo.
Mothers are encouraged to give their children one dose a week to prevent pimples and spots caused by clogged up bowels.
STEVEN has followed the rise of the drug in the North East since it became part of the club scene in 1989 he says its popularity has soared since 1991.
‘I've been taking it for two and a half years.
‘I don't really ‘bang it’ but at one stage I was doing it three weekends out of four.
I've taken two at once and speed (amphetamines) at the same time but I'm not silly so I usually only take one.’
He is calm about the fact that Ecstasy is easy to fake: ‘Although some people are selling bleach pills it can burn a hole in your stomach.
I know there's little pure E around; most of it's heroin, speed or acid (LSD), but it's still a feeling worth going back for.’
THOUSANDS of young people in the North East are finding a new way to enjoy their weekends they are taking Ecstasy, described as the next best thing to an orgasm.
And despite the fact that the designer dance drug has been blamed for at least eight deaths, Alan Hewitt, Tyneside manager of the North Eastern Council on Addiction, says requests for information about it have rocketed.
‘Over the last six months the most common request for information has been about Ecstasy,’ he says.
‘Everybody wants to know about it.
There is a general feeling among young people that it's a safe substance.
But it isn't.
I've come across three people who have become psychologically dependent on it one of them just 15.’
Steve, an unemployed 22-year-old from Middlesbrough, is one of the young people who sees Ecstasy or E as perfectly normal.
‘Users just want to have a good time,’ he says.
‘E is not a big deal, it's just a night out.
People just like getting off their heads.’
He rates the rush he gets from Ecstasy very highly: ‘It's like you've just scored a goal in a football match for three hours.’
Steve says the small scale dealers buy 50 tablets from bigger dealers, and sell them on weekends before clubs open, or once they're inside.
He has been tempted to deal himself.
‘I've considered it,’ he says, ‘but it's a class ‘A’drug.
If you get caught with more than seven tablets you're in big time trouble.’
Ecstasy is sold across the North East in night clubs and ‘raves’ all night dance parties in warehouses under brand names designed to appeal to its young market.
For £10 to £20 users buy tablets or capsules called White Lightning, Pink Panthers, Triple X, Green Monsters, Phase Four, White Doves and California Yellows.
The Government is increasingly worried by the spread of Ecstasy since it arrived in Britain in the late Eighties.
Estimates of Ecstasy users in the country range from 500,000 to three million.
Most of the drug makes its way here from Holland, with much of the North East's supplies coming through Middlesbrough.
However, since Ecstasy is a designer drug, a competent chemist can make it anywhere and underworld sources claim it is produced in the region.
Ecstasy technically MDMA was invented by German chemists in 1914 as an appetite suppressant.
It was used by American therapists, before being banned in 1985, for marital problems as it encourages empathy and dispels hostility; it is often called the ‘hug’ or ‘love’drug.
In Britain it is a class ‘A’ drug like heroin, so possession can lead to a seven year prison sentence.
It works by boosting the supply of serotonin a chemical produced naturally in the brain.
A surge produces a feeling of being happy and alert.
In the long term production of serotonin is reduced, leading to depression most suicides have low serotonin levels.
Excessive doses can cause panic, confusion, inability to sleep, hallucinations and paranoia.
Experts say the deaths were caused by blood clots and internal bleeding.
It does not appear to be physically addictive.
Sharon Ombler, addiction prevention co-ordinator at Darlington Memorial Hospital, says one of the risks of taking Ecstasy is the ease with which it is adulterated often with heroin or amphetamines.
She is also worried by its deliberate use with other drugs.
‘E gives people a heightened sense of well-being,’ she says, ‘but when people go to nightclubs they can't actually dance all night, so they take amphetamines to overcome tiredness.’
She says younger users often expect the drug to work immediately although its affects can take up to an hour so they take more, which increases the risks.
‘Another practice is ‘stacking’,’ she says.
‘That's when people take multiple doses to try to keep going all night.’
She advises everyone to avoid Ecstasy, but has risk limitation tips for those who insist on taking the drug.
Users should take the drug only occasionally, eat and rest before taking it, and drink plenty of fluids.
Detective Inspector Keith Felton, head of the Northumbria Drug Squad, says Ecstasy is becoming a major problem.
‘In January the drug squad recovered 2500 tablets in one raid,’ he says.
‘It was one of the biggest recoveries in the last year.’
He is particularly worried by the adulteration of Ecstasy tablets: ‘It is manufactured by criminals who are out solely to make money,’ he says.
‘They will cut it with any powder that looks suitable Ajax, baking powder the risks are horrendous.’
He has a two-pronged response to the increase in Ecstasy use: ‘We're trying to cut off the supply,’ he says.
‘But the demand is coming from the young so we look at the educational side to cut that demand.’
Dr Dick Hobbs at the Sociology department of the University of Durham is dubious about attempts to control Ecstasy use.
‘There's little they can do,’ he says.
‘If people want to take drugs they will do so.
All we can do is make sure adequate information is available so they know the likely effects.’
He sees Ecstasy largely in terms of the market place: ‘Professional criminals have realised there is money to be made and over two years they have managed to take over the market.
Unlike other drugs it is taken in specified public situations, so it's easy to dominate the market.’
He has sympathy for the small scale dealers: ‘They've been brought up in an entrepreneurial country under Thatcher where they've been taught to make money.
In a way they're they're the perfect Thatcherite entrepreneurs it's a way out of working class life.’
Alan Hewitt of NECA tries to reduce harm Ecstasy users do to themselves, and to offer alternatives to drug use, but he recognises the problems.
‘We live in a society which is increasingly recreational and recreational use of drugs like Ecstasy is going to continue growing.
Ecstasy's been described as the next best thing to an orgasm, so if your life feels empty it can appear to fill that gap quite nicely.’
—Tomorrow: An addict's story how Ecstasy took over her life.
FIREARMS enthusiasts have invited gun law campaigners to visit their club to inspect the strict security conditions imposed on members.
Richmondshire Rifle and Pistol Club members fear a public backlash against their sport after an armed siege in Darlington.
Darlington's new Labour MP Alan Milburn has called on Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke to review Britain's gun laws in the wake of last week's siege.
But a spokesman for the club said many enthusiasts believed politicians were targeting the wrong people.
He said: ‘Britain already has some of the tightest firearms laws in Europe.
We no longer have the use of self-loading rifles and some of our shotguns have been reclassified as firearms as opposed to shotguns.
‘The security requirements for those holding any kind of firearm have been increased considerably and these are  rigorously enforced by the police.
This has meant that legally-held guns and those applying to hold them are already subject to very tight controls.’
Members hope to convince Mr Milburn that he should be targeting criminals who find it easier than ever to get hold of an unlicensed firearm.
They believe moves to tighten the gun laws even further could result in even more firearms flooding the black market.
MORE than 80 delegates attended the national conference of superintendent registrars overseers of the births, marriages and deaths records in Middlesbrough yesterday.
The conference was officially opened by Cleveland County Council chairman Ted Wood.
Speaking of the challenges facing the service, Hartlepool's superintendent registrar Peter Spires, said: ‘New technology will have an enormous impact and we also have to consider the Government white paper on the service.’
Cleveland County Council has announced plans to issue new passes to allow blind people to continue travelling free in Langbaurgh.
Passes for those under pensionable age should be valid from next Tuesday, while urgent talks are to be held to discuss how to help blind people over pensionable age.
POLICE chief Terry Tasker has praised Middlesbrough fans for their excellent behaviour during the Boro's busy season.
He revealed ‘encouraging’ figures on arrests and ejections of home supporters in the aftermath of Boro's final home league game this week.
Although arrests are up slightly at 20, Chief Supt Tasker said most were for very minor offences, such as drunkenness.
Last season, 14 home fans were arrested.
Home fans ejected from the ground fell from 82 to 55.
Class warfare,’ my mate Mick from Middlesbrough recently told me, ‘went out years ago.’
And he paused for a moment before adding wistfully, ‘more's the pity.’
It might seem unlikely but down in serene Somerset about as far from Teesside as you can get there are a few locals who would agree with him this week.
They have just suffered the unpleasant experience of having a three day annual convention of Young Farmers inflicted upon them.
Now I'm sure there are some nice lads among the Young Farmers good salt of the earth stock and all that but it has to be said that, in the sweeping generalisation way of things, they are a generally unpleasant breed.
The good people of Minehead certainly think so.
They were the unfortunates who paid host to the YF annual convention three days of pillaging the like of which has not been seen since this lot last had droit de seigneur.
As well as causing widespread damage to the fixtures and fittings of Butlin's Somerset World where they were based they spread out over the local towns and villages, generally hooting their way around, leaving considerable wreckage in their wake.
The boys stripped naked and showed their rustic posteriors at every opportunity, threw food around in restaurants and had water pistol fights.
They also, it is said, beheaded a few pigeons and murdered the odd duck.
Not a bad three days' work all in all.
Just the sort of behaviour, in fact, that, had it been the work of the lads from the local council estate, would have resulted in a platoon of plods descending at great speed, batons ready in the best of LAPD fashion.
The sort of behaviour that, in sunny costa del bovver, labelled the British as a nation of hooligans and had the Tories publicly screaming for passport controls and privately considering drowning every male working class child at birth.
But these were not the lads from the left-overs.
These were society gentlemen.
And so they roistered to their stone-hearted content.
Young farmers, of course, are not generally farmers these days.
Farmers are normally too busy trying to run their dwindling holdings and make ends meet to be able to swan off to Butlin's for a spot of pigeon-beheading.
YFs these days include all sorts of riff-raff; solicitors, accountants, stock brokers, that sort of socially unacceptable type exactly the sort Mick from Middlesbrough thinks should be subjected to an attack of class warfare.
Individually they are hard to spot, they sort of melt into the crowd.
But once grouped together they become instantly identifiable: they are the ones with the loud haw-haw voices, the ones with the genetic swagger and the ones with the invisible chins.
(And, incidentally, the ones with the throwaway cash to be able to drink every pub in Minehead dry the pub landlords were the only ones in the town who would welcome a return visit from the YFs).
So, short of sending out an army of class warriors from Teesside, what are we to do with these socially unacceptable socialites?
Well, maybe, they could be, for once, treated just like their lower class brothers the football fans.
Plod could herd them all together into a group, march them to and from their destinations, depriving them along the way of all alcohol (not to mention all civil rights) and beat the living daylights out of any who still insisted on stepping out of line.
No, that wouldn't be right.
Not really.
It's not right when it happens to the lads from the inner cities, so it wouldn't be right if it happened to the lads from the county set.
But there again.
It might at least remind the YFs and their like that tomorrow doesn't necessarily belong to them.
UPTON & Southern, the Middlesbrough shops and property group listed on the Stock Exchange, yesterday saw its pre-tax loss for the year to the end of January 1992 double from last year's £1.4m.
It announced a loss of £2.8m, on a turnover of £13.5m, thanks mainly to write-downs in the depressed property market.
The three shops at Stockton, Middlesbrough and Redcar fared better, according to chairman Richard Whittington.
‘The group's retailing activities showed a satisfactory increase in sales from our department stores but margins were depressed and overall profitability showed a small decline,’ he said.
In an attempt to reduce bank borrowings the group has sold property developments, including one at Richmond, and an investment property at Congleton, in Cheshire, added Mr Whittington.
As last year, no dividend will be paid.
The shares ended the day unchanged at 7p.
Three children to raise, two moves in ten years and an OU degree on top TEN years' study is rewarded next Saturday when Mrs Catherine Goode graduates from the Open University.
She is among about 250 people who will receive their degrees at a Newcastle City Hall ceremony.
Mrs Goode's success follows that of her husband, David, who graduated two years ago in technical and computer studies.
The couple live in Knaresborough but originate from Cleveland.
Mr Goode's parents, Mr and Mrs Denis Goode, live at Maltby, near Yarm, and Mrs Goode is from the Berwick Hills area of Middlesbrough.
A number of years ago she worked in the social services department of Cleveland county council.
The couple lived at Redcar and Hartburn on Teesside before moving to live in Warrington for six years.
Mrs Goode studied sociology and education subjects and hopes her degree will help her to obtain work in teaching when her youngest child, four-year-old James, starts school.
They also have a daughter, Susan, nine, and son, Michael, who is seven.
She says bringing up three children plus two career moves her husband works for a computer firm strung out her studies.
Some of her time has also been devoted to caring for Michael, who was badly scalded in infancy.
For two years he needed massage several times a day and still goes for regular check-ups at hospital.
Since moving to Knaresborough a year ago, Mrs Goode has become involved with the local playgroup where she does three sessions a week.
She also does two afternoons' voluntary work at the school which her children attend.
Aged 40, Mrs Goode says of her studies: ‘While the children were young it was useful to keep the brain ticking over.
It's been good.’
A GROUP concerned with mental and emotional crises suffered by homosexuals, bisexuals or those in doubt about their sexual identity is to  receive a £1,000 cash boost.
The Friend Teesside group was formed four years ago to provide a counselling and advice service and last year received 597 calls for help.
The £1,050 grant from Cleveland County Council will go towards rent, running costs, training and subscriptions for a year.
Friend Teesside runs a Saturday monthly drop-in session at St Mary's Centre, Middlesbrough, and a helpline from its office in the International Centre two evenings a week.
A SPIN-OFF from the Teesside Women's Cancer Prevention Unit appeal, which has raised over £ 5m in four years, became £500 richer yesterday thanks to staff at the Royal Mail sorting office in Middlesbrough.
Consultant gynaecologist Mr Ray Garry accepted the cheque from Post Office worker Carol Evans on behalf of the Women's Endoscopic Laser Foundation, of which he is director, at Middlesbrough General Hospital.
The gynaecological department at Middlesbrough is now the leading unit in Britain, treating a variety of women with the latest technology and minimum surgery.
Mr Garry said: ‘Our expansion is such that we are now treating 1,000 women per year with NHS referrals from right across Britain, including the Channel Isles.’
Mrs Evans initiated the fundraising at the sorting office on the Cannon Park industrial estate after her daughter, Kerry, 17, was diagnosed last year as suffering from cancer of the cervix and womb.
The laser treatment she received means she is well on the way to recovery.
Bikers rev up to attack EEC curbs Hundreds of motorcyclists are expected to converge on Cleveland for a mass demonstration against new EEC proposals today.
The Motorcycle Action Group, which organised the event, claims the ideas currently being discussed by the European Commission are ‘unjust and unfair’ and will hit small bike manufacturers.
From the start of 1993 the European Commission wants to make leg protectors compulsory on all new machines, which bikers believe are more likely to cause serious injuries in the event of an accident.
It also proposes that all components for a motorcycle must be approved for each model of machine so bikers could not use alternative tyres, for example, without paying for them to be tested and approved for their motorcycle.
The EEC wants to limit noise emissions from bikes to 79 decibels, which riders claim will make all air-cooled machines illegal, and also limit power to 100hp for motorcycles with more than 400cc capacity.
A spokesman for the rally organisers said: ‘There is no statistical or experimental proof that the power of a motorcycle is related to the likelihood of the motorcyclist being injured.
It is unjust that the European Commission should limit the power of motorcycles, claiming this will reduce the accident rate.’
The mass demonstration will leave Teesside Industrial Estate in Thornaby at 1.30pm and travel through Stockton and Middlesbrough to Redcar, where bikers will put forward their views to Mr David Bowe, Euro MP for Cleveland and Yorkshire North.
A SUPERSTORE development on the outskirts of Middlesbrough has been opposed by Cleveland planning officials.
The North-Eastern Co-Op want to build the store on land at Dixon's Bank, Marton.
But a report by William Ault, Cleveland County Council's Director of Environment, Development and Transportation, says the planned development is highly unsuitable on the proposed site.
He recommends that councillors state their objections because the proposal is against the Cleveland structure plan and could increase congestion and accident potential on a busy road.
The county's development control sub-committee will discuss the application tomorrow.
Playground plan gets go-ahead A HOLIDAY playground for children in an East Cleveland village has received the blessing of Langbaurgh councillors.
Lingdale Residents' Association asked the council's permission to organise school holiday activities on spare land in Wilson Street.
Secretary Bruce MacKenzie said villagers were concerned about the amount of vandalism in the school Big leap: Multiple Sclerosis sufferer and Guisborough councillor Rod Douglass, 34, will make a 10,000ft parachute jump for the charity and Middlesbrough General Hospital at Topcliffe Airfield next Saturday.
Holemeal bread
as if they knew that the problem was not resolved a letter arrived yesterday from the headquarters of British Bakeries.
It came just as some bread with holes was unwrapped in our house.
‘I have spoken with our Newcastle bakery where the production has investigated the above points to ensure plant settings are optimised,’ said Dr Peter Wood, BB's technical executive and an affable chap.
‘Whilst not giving a guarantee that the fault won't occur again, I believe the problem should now be eliminated.’
Yes, well.
There were two incomplete slices in the latest loaf.
It is something one might have to learn live with, though one would hesitate to suggest that BB's production processes have almost as many holes as its bread.
A POLICE CHIEF yesterday warned that lorry drivers had ‘no chance’ of illegally crossing a weight restricted bridge without being landed with a fine.
Chief Insp Malcolm Fordy of Barnard Castle police said video cameras were recording all the time at Barnard Castle Bridge over the River Tees.
Mr Fordy was speaking on the day the town's magistrates court dealt for the first time with truckers who had ignored the 7.5 tonne weight restriction.
He said: ‘There's no chance of anyone getting away with it.’
Around 80 drivers are caught every month at the bridge.
The camera monitoring began last September in an attempt to safeguard the ancient monument.
Mr Fordy said all local hauliers were sent letters before the restriction came into being.
Drivers with lorries weighing above 7.5 tonnes face a five mile detour around the bridge.
Mr Fordy said: ‘Our concern is not to catch them going over the bridge but to stop them going over the bridge.’
He did not accept written excuses, read out in court, by some of the 21 offenders who claimed they had not seen warning signs until it was too late.
Mr Fordy said the signposting, on roads as far away as the A66 and A167, was adequate.
At the magistrates' court, chairman of the bench Pat Partridge said: ‘I think we are all aware of the signs in the area and I think my colleagues would agree that it's not a very good excuse.’
David Newbegin, Durham County Council director of the environment, said: ‘If we don't put the message across to the heavy goods drivers that they must use alternative routes, the bridge will deteriorate and then no-one will be able to use it.’
All 21 pleaded guilty by letter.
North-East drivers who were fined £100 and ordered to pay £20 costs for crossing the weight restricted bridge were: Brian Robinson, 54, of Spennymoor, who had a ten tonne truck; Terence Cuthbertson, 49, of Chester-leStreet, 17 tonne truck; Anthony Jennings, 48, of Middlesbrough, 16 tonne truck; Geoffrey Storey, 49, of Spennymoor, 16 tonne truck; George Agar, 32, of Malton, 38 tonne truck; John Layton, 36, of Langley Park, 17 tonne truck; Raymond Brown, 46, of Redcar, 17 tonne truck; Bernard Hagen, 56, of Gateshead 17 tonne truck; Neil Wall, 37, of Bowburn, 11 tonne truck and William Davison of Choppington in a 16 tonne truck.
Other drivers came from Newark, Burnley, Telford, Blackpool, Penrith, Eavesham, Warrington, Airdrie, Cambridge, Saltash and Wolverhampton.
Two of the men from outside the region were fined £80 with £20 costs, the rest were each fined £100 with £20 costs.
WITH the demand for golf courses vastly outweighing supply, it is refreshing to note that a number of courses have been given planning permission in the Durham and North Yorkshire area.
Both Redworth Hall, Heighington, and Hallgarth Hotel, Coatham Mundeville, have got the go-ahead for their proposed courses, while Romanby golf course, Northallerton, will be opening their 12bay driving range at the end of the month with an 18-hold, 6,660-yard course due for completing by 1994.
Former Stressholme professional Fred Thorpe is the newly appointed pro at Romanby, whose 200-acre sites takes advantage of the natural features of the River Whiske as well as the construction of two man-made lakes which will give the course added character.
The venture has been masterminded by local farmer Brian Craven with backing from a Dutch consortium.
They intend to run the course as a pay as you play facility, however, they intend to offer a membership scheme so as to accommodate competitions and team matches within the club.
Durham County B team entertain their Cumbrian counterparts at Barnard Castle golf club this weekend when players on the brink of full county honours are given the opportunity of catching the attention of selectors.
Home player Mark Brown is given an outing after his very good showing at Tyneside in the Durham County championship qualifier, while Geoff Charlton, who had the joint leading score in that event, is unable to play due to previous commitments.
Team: M Brooksbank (Darlington), D Burnham (Woodham), I McEntee (Birtley), J Goss (Wearside), M Ridley (Beamish Park), D Goldsmith (Boldon), D Wales (Bishop Auckland), R McGhan (Woodham), C Hoggart (Eaglescliffe), S Musty (Dinsdale Spa), M Brown (Barnard Castle) and D McGee (South Moor).
Reserves, Stuart Ord, John Hutton (both Hobson).
THE Teesside Union hold their annual 36-hole scratch NYSD championship this weekend at Catterick Garrison golf club.
The event has a rather disappointing entry this year with a number of players choosing to play in the York Rosebowl at Strensall golf club, their scratch event.
Durham County champion Craig Kilgour made the first steps towards his comeback last weekend when he was among a number of county players who took part in a coaching session held by English Golf Union coach Bill Ferguson.
Ferguson  accompanied the European Ryder Cup team as Colin Montgomery's personal guru to Kiawah Island last year and has groomed many leading amateurs, several of whom who have made their mark on the European professional circuit.
He will continue to coach the Durham team throughout the season while they bid to capture the elusive Northern Counties League title.
Wearside golf club played host to their fellow centurians City of Newcastle golf club last weekend 98 years since the club had first contested a game.
The format was an 18-hold shotgun four-ball with ladies and gentlemen from both clubs joining in the festivities.
Wearside, who host the Durham County championships in a fortnight's time, have produced a book which chronicles the history of the club from its humble beginnings in 1892 to this their centenary year.
Peter Sutton, the 1991 captain, has reduced the hardback against all odds as two club house fires destroyed vital club records over the years.
He has therefore used local newspaper cuttings as well photographs and spent a considerable time talking to some of the senior members of the club to produce the book.
A must for collectors of golf memorabilia, it can be obtained from Wearside golf club for the modest sum of a tenner.
— STRESSHOLME Golf Club came in for high praise yesterday after staging the Mizuno Tournament a major event for assistant professionals.
The North Region PGA brought an event to the Darlington municipal course for the first time and tournament controller Les Massey said: ‘We can't fault this place.
‘We can't believe how good it is.
It's one of the best courses we will visit this year.
There's not a blemish on the fairways.’
The professionals found it a tough test, with Wirral's Andy Mitchell returning the only sub par round in the 36-hole event.
He shot a one under par 70 in the second round.
The event was won by Rossendale's Steve Holden, who was three over par on 144 with rounds of 73, 71.
Leading local scores: 149 M Forster (Hexham) 74 75; 150 M Ure (Billingham) 77 73; 151 D Fletcher (Bishop Auckland) 75 76, D Brolls (Roseberry Grange) 78 73; 152 D Pearce (Barnard Castle 77 75, A Robertson (Castle Eden) 79 73; 156 A Nicholson (Middlesbrough) 74 82.
Hand signals
THE familiar imbalance of quart and pint pot meant that the final three paragraphs were omitted from last Friday's piece on Shotton Comrades' under 19 team.
Faithful readers will recall that, despite being bottom of the Banks Group Northern Youth League, the lads had played the entire season without a booking or sending off until the catastrophic 82nd minute of the final game.
The words on the cutting room floor reported that despite the sheer, stunned disbelief at a rotten decision youth manager Don Hawkins and the remaining players all shook the referee's hand at the bitter end.
They might have got on the wrong side of the man in black, but the Comrades made an awful lot of friends.
Victoria line
SOMETHING else from last Friday's column pondered the two major links between Liverpool and Stirling Albion football clubs.
We're grateful to those who provided them, not least the Cleveland chap who wrote on the back of a particularly unamused picture postcard of Queen Victoria, apparently eating from a box of Huntley and Palmer's biscuits.
This is not, of course, a reflection on Messrs Huntley and Palmer's wonderful biscuits.
Apparently the miserable old queen always looked like that.
Another reader brought in the 1960 European Cup semi-final programme between Dundee and Milan to underline one of the connections Dundee manager Bob Shankly had previously been gaffer at Stirling.
His brother Bill was quite well known elsewhere.
The other link is that Liverpool (of course) play at Anfield and the Scots at Annfield.
Albion are moving house in the close season: we just got there in time.
Trapped.
IN humility it should probably be mentioned that having overcome the first two rounds of the Darlington and District 5s and 3s knock out, feckless Falchion B have finally succumbed.
The Greyhound beat us in the end.
UNEMPLOYED women over 25 and living in Cleveland are being given the opportunity to join a free six-week course on media techniques.
The offer comes from Community Arts Middlesbrough and runs from June 8 at The Pavilion, Esk Street, North Ormesbsy.
The course covers desktop publishing, photography and silkscreen printing and runs for 21 hours-a-week so benefit payments will not be affected.
Course co-ordinator Tony Bland said the course was designed for people with little or no experience in the use of media-based resources.
‘It provides an ideal opportunity for those who want to gain practical experience in using and applying media-related skills.
‘It will also help to develop people's creativity and ideas in using these skills in the community, whether it's setting up a business, starting a co-operative or completing a personal project,’ he said.
A NEW physiotherapy service in Middlesbrough and Langbaurgh will mean speedier treatment for patients.
General practitioners asked South Tees Health Authority if they could refer patients with urgent need for treatment directly to a physiotherapist without having to see a hospital consultant.
Now the health authority has asked the community and mental health unit to appoint four physiotherapists who will take patients referred directly to them by GPs.
Catherine Dalton is the first to be appointed and she is based in Cleveland Health Centre, Middlesbrough.
Catherine, who was born in Middlesbrough, trained at Newcastle and has just returned from working in Australia.
Her new job will involve running group sessions and making home visits.
When South Tees Health Authority's public health officials questioned GP recently, direct access to a physiotherapist was top of their list of requirements.
The new  service will be extended over the next few months to cover all GPs practising in the South Tees area.
It will mean patients get quicker treatment and reduce pressures on hospital outpatient departments.
Dr John Canning, of the local medical committee, said he was very pleased the service was becoming available.
A DRIVE is under way to improve orthopaedic services in the South Tees area following concern by local doctors.
Orthopaedic doctors and staff from Middlesbrough General and South Cleveland hospitals, GPs and the district health authority hope to reduce waiting times and provide better quality of service.
Specific initiatives include a back pain clinic to start in the summer to clear the long list of patients waiting for treatment.
A fortnightly clinic at Guisborough and a monthly clinic in Brotton is also prescribed.
Faster and better information to GPs about the progress of their patients is planned.
The orthopaedic department is working towards a one-year maximum wait for patients on a waiting list for an operation and hope to drastically cut the wait for an outpatient appointment.
Dr Rajan Madok, consultant in public medicine for South Tees Health Authority, praised the staff for their cooperation in the drive.
A GRANT of £40,000 will ensure a firm's development plans fit in with Middlesbrough council's planned facelift for the area round the town's famous Transporter Bridge.
David Tennet (Contractors) has been given the grant to help convert a disused two-storey building in Commercial Street into four purpose-built industrial units.
Work will include new wall cladding, windows and paving to ensure the building looks attractive and is in keeping with the ‘new-look’ planned approach to the bridge.
Other Industrial Improvement Area grants approved by Middlesbrough council's economic development sub-committee were:— Crystal Galleries, glass engravers in Brentnall Buildings, Gilkes Street: £3,037 to help repair new building for business in Westbourne Grove, North Ormesby.
Two additional jobs to be created.
— Clear Vu Windows, double-glazing and glass merchants, Greta Street: £8,100 to renew semi-derelict property in Kings Road, North Ormesby.
Two additional jobs to be created.
— Palladium Meats, meat products retailer, Eastbourne Road: £2,050 for renewal of roof tiles.
— J&J Gaffney, industrial gas suppliers, Lawson Industrial Estate: £8,280 to provide extra office space and car parking, security fence and landscaping.
Four additional jobs.
— Walpoles Health Foor Stores, health food retailers, Gilkes Street: £4,682 to extend and improve premises.
Three additional jobs.
— T S Engineering Industries, engineers and metal fabricators, North Ormesby Road: £11,283 for new boundary wall.
— The New Albert, social club and snooker centre, Grange Road: £10,000 for new brick facade to improve appearance of the building.
Magnum Packaging (NE), suppliers of polythene and  paper bags, Depot Road: £4,799 for cladding for external walls.
Teachers are going back to university to learn how to teach the National Curriculum.
Teesside Poly is expanding its range of after-school courses in September when it will be the new University of Teesside.
Three new courses to keep teachers up to date lead to one-year certificates or two-year diplomas in English in the primary school, drama in education and a revamped course in science for primary teachers.
The poly's 20-day certificate in primary science has been extended to meet the revised National Curriculum.
To meet local authority funding requirements, applications for course places must be made by the end of May to John Walton, the Inset unit, University of Teesside, Borough Road, Middlesbrough, tel (0642) 342386 or 342392.
England's first four-year law degree course is to be run by the new University of Northumbria at Newcastle.
The course developed by Newcastle poly which should become Northumbria University next month is a one-stop route to becoming a trainee solicitor.
It replaces the traditional three-year degree and one-year Law Society Finals course and was developed in response to a Law Society initiative.
JUNE HAWDON talks to a man whose work with mentally handicapped people is an inspiration.
His untiring efforts over a 27-year period include developing services for the mentally handicapped in Cleveland, including setting up a joint unit of Venture Scouts and Ranger Guides.
He also spearheaded a £180,000 project to provide an art and resource centre Menro House and his advice on musical drama for the handicapped has been sought from all over the UK.
Charity worker extraordinaire takes to the water
NOT many actors literally know their lines backwards and can say them that way!
But Mr Arthur Chance will never forget the time one of his prodigies did just that.
It happened during a performance by a newly setup amateur dramatic group, all of whose members were mentally handicapped.
Mr Chance, of Nunthorpe, Cleveland, is a charity worker extraordinaire whose good deeds are mostly connected with mental handicap.
He is hoping this month will see his latest venture become a reality when he launches a floating ‘school’ to teach handicapped youngsters about the Tees as they cruise along it.
He and his wife, Kathleen, live in the grounds of Upsall Hall.
They moved there in 1965 to take on the joint roles of warden and matron at the then residential and day training centre for the mentally handicapped.
It was a turning point in their lives and the first contact they had ever had with such youngsters.
Ever since, work with and for them has filled their lives.
Even at 70, the energetic Mr Chance cannot do enough for those he feels have been restricted in their activities and their education and have little or no chance of mixing with the community.
He says: ‘I am a simple guy.
I like handicapped people and until I came here, I had had nothing to do with them.’
His boat project is the result of a surprise nomination by his son, David, in a ‘Senior of the Year’ competition.
He was the regional winner before he knew anything about it.
The £7,000 prize money had to be spent on travel.
At the London final, where they were interviewed by Gloria Hunniford, one contender wanted to paddle down the Amazon and another wanted to climb Kilimanjaro.
‘I said I wanted to take the handicapped along the River Tees to show them Middlesbrough and teach them sailing a combination of pleasure, leisure and education,’ says Mr Chance.
Needless to say, it was a winning combination.
But Mr Chance has had to raise much more than he won to see his dream come true.
With more than £21,000 in cash and another £5,000 promised, he hopes Children in Need will come up with enough to hit his £33,000 target.
He hopes to find a good second-hand craft and be afloat before the end of this month.
Mr Chance, who at one time owned a cruiser, holds an international helmsman certificate from the Royal Yachting Association.
His plan has the backing of the River Tees police and others.
‘There has been a tremendous response,’ said the father-of-two.
His son, Philip, a marketing manager, and his wife, Margaret, deputy treasurer for Aycliffe town council, live at Redworth, near Darlington, with their nine-year-old son, Christopher.
The Chance's other son, David, an entertainment manager in Glasgow and one-time director of tourism in Scotland, will shortly be moving to the London area as general manager of a theatre and arts complex.
His wife, Mari GordonPrice, a singer well known in Scotland, is at the moment entertaining on the Canberra.
Before moving to Cleveland, Mr and Mrs Chance ran a 14-bedroomed hotel in Northumberland which they developed from a pub.
Six years on, the family moved to Ugthorpe Lodge on the Whitby moors, a hotel with caravan site and smallholding where Mr Chance also had stables and where he involved himself with the Goathland Pony Club.
From there they moved to Whitby where Mrs Chance became secretary to the entertainments manager and Mr Chance became civil defence officer.
In 1978, Mr Chance became liaison officer of a team for the mentally handicapped at North Tees Hospital, going on to become mental health officer to Cleveland county up till his retirement eight years ago.
Since then, he has crammed in a whole host of charitable activities including being secretary of Cleveland Rotafac Trust, a charitable group set up by the Rotary Club of Guisborough and Great Ayton.
Mr Chance recalled that first offering by the dramatic society entertainment to fill a gap in an otherwise busy conference schedule.
Joseph and His Amazing Technicolour, performed by Our People's Theatre Arts Group, was so well received they were asked to take it to lots of other venues, including Sunderland Empire.
‘There were youngsters who couldn't read who had to learn from tapes and constant repetition,’ says Mr Chance, ‘and they never faltered.
One lad said he knew his words backwards and that's how he said them.’
A little Northallerton girl with Down's syndrome knew every word and every song from, he said, smiling as he recalled a scene from the production.
Everyone was drinking but scattered at the sight of Bill Sykes but this little girl went back on stage to finish her drink!
Mr Chance also won a local competition as Citizen of the Year for 1990/91, from which he donated the £500 prize to Menro House, at Thorntree, Middlesbrough, another successful project which is now run by Mencap.
‘My original recreation was riding,’ said the amiable grandfather, who recalled his first time on a horse at the age of eight a wooden horse at Middletonin-Teesdale show.
His grandfather, Mr Albert Edward Cook, was a Wesleyan lay preacher who travelled round the dales chapels, and the young Arthur often went with him.
A favourite place was Newbeggin-in-Teesdale where they stayed at a farm and where he learned to ride.
Mr Chance has written a book based on the many talks he has given, papers he has written and conferences he has attended a record of his years working with the mentally handicapped.
He is having a small number printed for family and friends, the front cover bearing the appropriate motto which, translated, reads: To God not by Chance.
Mr and Mrs Chance with their Great Dane, Aimee.
LANCE Henderson was a boy of 13 on the overcast night he heard about the crash.
The news spread as quickly as the horrendous fire which engulfed the fallen plane.
He seized his bike and pedalled furiously to the scene.
The wrecked Wellington bomber still smouldered in the open field.
The shattered bodies which had been hurled from it when it exploded were being gathered up on stretchers.
The dead young men on them were covered by the nylon parachutes they had been unable to use to save their lives.
It was but another appalling accident of war which is never slow to throw them up.
Lance Henderson has never forgotten it.
He never met the young air force crew, never even saw them, yet he has never forgotten them either.
Tomorrow, May 21, at a few minutes before six in the evening it will be precisely half a century since Wellington DV841 came down over the County Durham village of Roddymoor.
It merely compounded the tragedy that the plane was on a training flight.
Her crew was days away from taking part in the war against Germany for real.
It is extremely probable that nine days later they would have been part of the 1000 Bomber Raid on Cologne.
Possibly, they might not have come back from that either.
‘There are other people like me,’ said Lance Henderson.
‘They too will remember that crash all the rest of their lives.
I was just a boy and it affected me deeply.
I was in the air force a few years later.’
Over the years he has pieced together the plane's last, dying moments from the second one of its engines caught fire.
He has run a quiet, determined campaign for a lasting memorial to be erected to the men who died.
At last, it looks possible.
For a decade his gentle pleas have been ignored, but now Wear Valley Council has promised to treat his request sympathetically.
He wants not a huge monument which would hardly be fitting but a small plaque somewhere in the village the plane narrowly avoided.
The pilot was a 21-year-old Australian called Roberts.
It is almost certain that he would have had to take evasive action to miss Roddymoor's houses and likely too that he tried to make a pond to douse the licking flames.
He missed by yards.
The plane, on a training flight from RAF Finningley, flew feet over the head of farmer John Burn and his father.
It was simply too low for the crew to eject.
Burn had been ploughing that May afternoon and was leading his horses back to the field after his tea.
The plane swooped above them and thudded into the earth.
The horses bolted.
The young farmer ran towards the plane.
The pilot was slumped over the controls.
An airman lay on the ground close by.
As Burn tried to tend him the plane exploded.
Ammunition exploded, bullets began to fly, John Burn was incredibly lucky to escape serious injury, a mile and a half mile away in Crook an excited Lance Henderson was dashing to his bike to see for himself.
Burn shouted to people running from Roddymoor.
He urged them to keep down.
The crew had been scattered.
A gunner was found strapped in his turret 200 yards away from the fuselage.
Gathering the rest of them was a gory, gruesome task.
They were taken to the mortuary at Crook cemetery while the investigation into the crash started.
It was conducted amid the lingering, unwholesome smell of perspex.
Death was in the air too all around the scattered wreckage.
Later the crew was buried by the RAF in the war graves section of Darlington West Cemetery.
A visit there on a warm, sunny afternoon yesterday, knowing something of how they met their end, made it easy to support the installation of a small plaque.
Their end must have been harsh and violent but here was tranquility and pleasantness.
Three Canadians, Roberts, Reeves and Boates, are buried between two Australians, Groom and the other Roberts.
There will be scores and scores of 50th anniversaries this year, marking brave deaths and futile ones.
The point which Lance Henderson makes and he stressed over and over again that he seeks no personal recognition at all and the point of retelling this story here long, long years after is that they should never be forgotten.
Eye witness SO, there was Les Gunn, presenter and rush hour travel reporter for Tfm Radio, giving the lowdown on the evening's traffic chaos.
He was well placed to comment.
The ebullient Gunn was stuck in Riverside Park, Middlesbrough, some distance away from the Stockton studios.
He was forced to deliver the bad 4.50pm motoring news to commuters over his portable phone.
Which at least finds a justification for portable phones.
‘Fortunately the traffic cleared and I got to the studio to start my show with two minutes to go.’
Most fortunate, like the Red Sea parting for Moses, what.
THE law must be changed to make parents responsible for the actions of their children, according to Gwendoline Lamb.
Mrs Lamb, who lives in Middlesbrough, has urged the Home Office to act after she was sprayed with lager by three youths while sitting in her car in Hartlepool.
She telephoned police and as she waited for them to arrive she noticed the same youths approach a man with two young children and drench one of the children.
She claimed that one of them went to headbutt the man.
The police warned the youths before allowing them to go.
Mrs Lamb said she had expected tougher action.
‘People can't be put at risk like this.
Parents have got to be made responsible for their children's action,’ she said.
INJUSTICE:
It is good to see so many cheese and Wensleydale lovers quick to defend the same.
Would that as many animal lovers were as quick to speak and defend dumb animals instead of staying silent as so many do.
Silence when we should speak up condones cruelty and injustice.
Mrs A. Unwin, 49 Logan Avenue, Peterlee.
‘Drab’ shutters are criticised SHUTTERS installed by Famous Army Stores to repel ram-raiders in Redcar High Street have been criticised for being ‘drab’.
Langbaurgh mayor Brenda Forster told the planning committee that it was a sad reflection on society that the roller shutters had to be used but at least they could be a little more colourful.
The planning officer said they would be insisting that roller shutters should be painted according to the livery of the shop, particularly in conservation areas.
THE kids burst of the car park and rush through the trees towards the yearned-for acres of open space and green grass.
They give their footballs an enormous kick, trying to boot them further than any football has been booted before.
One of them gets his timing wrong.
The ball soars and ploughs into some branches showers him with twigs and leaves.
The ball lodges, sticks, stays; the kicker bursts into tears.
Tears, and the show's not even on the road yet This is the Picnic in the Park hosted by Radio 1, the start of the BBC's Radio Comes To Town week.
And even though that town is Stockton, the roadshow has come to Stewart Park in Middlesbrough.
It should be christened the Teddy Bear's Picnic — Europe's biggest teddy bear's picnic according to advance promotional material but Radio 1 has decided that sentimentality over lost childhood went out with Smashy and Nicey.
Now the emphasis is on families and communities, and everyone comes together for the feeding of the 30,000.
But DJ Gary Davies is out of synch and tries to evoke that period of naff-Seventiesness by calling the crowd ‘gang’ and dropping a ‘mate’into every sentence during an early link-up with Simon Bates in London.
DAVIES has a deep Italian suntan emphasised by a cool white shirt, a dark fringe through which he continually runs his fingers, and a frightening ability to strike a dramatic pose.
He comes on like a Greek god and claims credit for fixing the weather.
Down at the front behind the crushbarriers, the little girls go wild.
Throughout the show they squeal painfully for Ga-ry’ and his co-host, Jakki’— Jakki Brambles, who despite her blonde bimbo looks is one of the new breed of thoughtful DJs.
It seems quite bizarre that people who play other people's records for a living can reach these dizzy heights of stardom.
And fix the weather.
The sun breaks through the hazy Teesside smog just as the show kicks off with the release of hundreds of helium-filled balloons about as environmentally-friendly as the tall factory chimneys they fly past.
Strangely, as they soar ever upwards, the balloons take on a mushroom-shape as if there's been a nuclear explosion beneath.
The fallout is the delicious smell of burgers and soggy onions that wafts tantalisingly across a crowd estimated at 42,000 by Jakki.
One of the vans that sells such fare is called the Chuckwagon perhaps the head chef's called Charles.
Or perhaps his food doesn't stay down too well.
Next door is an enterprising butcher from Yarm who has cleared all the carcases out of his freezer-van and loaded up with cans of drink.
This being Bank Holiday Monday the British are participating in their traditional Bank Holiday pastime: queueing.
Queueing for the Chuckwagon; queueing for the freezer-van; queueing for the toilets installed by WC in Fields Ltd.
There's even a queue to stroke the police horse.
And this being a boiling Bank Holiday Monday the British are burning.
Out comes the sun, off come the clothes.
Bleached bodies lie beached in the full heat, revealing sights that should never be disclosed to the closest lover let alone half of Teesside.
Numerous torsos are tattooed: the most affectionate was a young man who had Michelle written above his right nipple and Stephen over his left.
It seemed a shame that while he stood in the Chuckwagon queue he called his girlfriend ‘Tray’.
But all this is incidental.
Everyone has come to see the Radio 1 Roadshow and be entertained.
Ga-ry and Ja-kki are only outdone in the hard-work stakes by the man from the council with the large hammer who perpetually replaces fence posts as the crowd swells and the area cordoned off for the benefit of the saplings shrinks.
Forever jolly, always bouncy, rarely lost for words and always exhorting the audience to scream that little bit louder, the two DJs keep alive a potentially boring formula (music blaring from a large kebab van can be heard in any town on any night).
That Radio 1 has not altered that formula in over ten years is testimony to their professionalism.
Just before the airtime comes to an end at 2pm, an interesting development in crowd psychology occurs: people leave early ‘to avoid the rush’ and in doing so create a rush of their own.
Consequently when the real rush arrives, the bank holidaymakers have a ready-made queue of crawling cars to join a queue parted Moseslike by mothers who stand on the kerb holding their pushchairs at arm's length (nappies probably are contagious after three sweaty hours in the park) so conveniently placing baby midway between front bumper and exhaust pipe.
But this, like the Radio 1 Roadshow, like the queues, like the tears before we've even begun, like the sunburn, is what Bank Holidays are all about.
There will be a lot of people glad to be back at work today.
OFFER a plate of mushy peas to a Parisian and the response is a curt non merci.
Serve them up in Shildon and it's ta very much.
Connoissuers on the Continent are turning up their collective noses to the great stalwart of British cuisine.
Market researchers were astounded when they took the thick green liquid abroad to test the reaction.
Fewer than ten per cent of those living in Brussels, Paris and Milan were even willing to try a sample, let alone part with their hard-earned ecus on a dollop.
But on the streets of County Durham, not to mention the beaches at Redcar, mushy peas once reputedly mistaken by a top politician from the south who didn't know better as avocado mousse are still top nosh.
Phyllis Aldworth, 64, of Mable Avenue, Shildon, has been surviving on them for years.
‘They've never done me any harm and I have seven bairns,’ she said while eating a bag of chips in the sun.
‘I think they're beautiful.’
Pubs and clubs of the region rely heavily on keeping their customers happy with a side serving of mushy peas.
Ken Robson, president of Darlington Club and Institute, High Northgate, said: ‘We run a pie and peas night down here about five times a year.
I personally don't like to eat them while I'm drinking because I get too full, but if I put a plate of pie and peas down in the club they would go like lightning.’
Mushy peas are believed to have originated in the North and remain as popular today as they have ever been.
At around 40 pence per portion, they are a prominent feature on any chip shop menu.
David Preston of Mayfair Fisheries, Harrowgate Hill, Darlington, reckons he sells two gallons of them a day at the height of the summer season.
‘They're more popular than gravy and curry sauce,’ he said.
‘The traditional way to to eat peas is to buy them separately and put salt and vinegar on them for a sweet and sour taste.’
Customers vary in age, he added, although the younger ones tend to ask for a pea butty a scoop of mushy peas in a bun.
‘We had a girl in here the other day with an exchange student from France,’ said David's wife Esther, ‘She didn't know what mushy peas were so we gave her some and she hated them!
But I suppose it's like us going over there and eating frogs’ legs.’
Despite the Mediterranean sunshine at Redcar yesterday, the tell-tale signs of mushy peas and chips were blowing in the wind.
Chips and mushy peas by the coast are as popular as ice cream and donkey rides.
The town boasts several fish and chip shops and between the hours of noon and two queues stretch out to sea.
Antonia Hunt, 30, of the Glendale Cafe, likes to flavour her peas with a dash of vinegar.
For just £2.75 the happy eater can sit down to a plate of fish, chips, mushy peas and a bread bun.
‘We get people asking at the windows for mushy peas.
They are the most popular thing we sell,’ she said.
The story is the same further down the sea front at Zetland Cafe.
Thomas Gibson, 32, who owns the shop with his sister Linda, 28, is constantly running out of peas.
‘People just eat them because they are there.
We get through a one-gallon tin a day, and sometimes more at the weekends,’ he said.
But it seems it will take more than 1992 to set the Continental palate tingling to the tune of mushy peas.
Elvis growled on behalf of a whole new generation when he warned that it would be highly  inadvisable , no matter what the circumstances, to tread on, or in any way meddle with, his precious blue suede shoes.
The year was 1956 and teenagers were hatching out into fashion peacocks, no longer content to follow blindly in the footsteps of their sober-suited parents.
The footwear they chose as they tramped and danced their way towards the end of the decade was improbable-looking to say the least.
While the Teddy Boys brightened the high street with their crepe-soled clodhoppers, their girlfriends trod an altogether more elegant — if precarious — path.
As skirts shortened, so heels rose and toes narrowed to a point.
By 1959, winkle-pickers had become so elongated they extended a good 4–5cms beyond the natural toe line.
The result?
All the hip young things were forced to buy shoes up to two sizes larger than normal.
Stiletto heels narrowed as well and had to be strengthened with steel supports.
Dance halls across the country bore pock-marked testimony to what happened if the casing sheared off, leaving the metal tip exposed to tut-tut across the floor like a disapproving chiropodist.
Heel bars flourished.
Other popular styles at the end of the Fifties included lightweight Italian shoes — slip-ons were more casual than lace-ups — and new water-repellent leather made a big impact on the market.
Another design that was to remain a firm favourite was the waterproof snow boot — fur-lined, with suede on the outside and fastened at the front or side with a zip.
And then came the Sixties, stamping a new and distinctive bootprint on the fashion scene.
Space-age French designer Andre Courreges came up with a classic in 1964 that has been much copied since — the mid-calf, soft kid, white boot for women.
Zipped up the inside, and with a squared off toe, it was the last word in futuristic chic that was to be adapted and toned down for the mass market.
The boys, meanwhile, were yanking on elastic-sided ankle boots; very hip, very Beatles.
As the Sixties swung ever onward, Mary Quant's ‘kinky boots’ high-kicked their way onto the market.
High boots were the in-thing — sleek and shiny with chunky zips fastened with huge decorative rings or tabs.
The end of the decade saw more comfortable, functional footwear, reflecting the simpler silhouette of clothes — shoe heels became chunkier and wide-strapped sandals complemented the ubiquitous kaftan imported from the East.
Everyone stepped up a mark in the Seventies.
Platform shoes from the Thirties and Forties — now in bright shiny colours or mock reptile skin — left us tottering, swaying and living in permanent fear of a sprained ankle.
Heels could be up to 10cm high and toes were as rounded as the ever-popular clog.
This was also the decade of leisure; sneakers were everywhere, sports shops blossomed and tennis star Bjorn Borg fused fashion and sport with his trend-setting striped headbands.
Skiing grew in popularity and our footsteps in the high street were muffled by the so-called moon boot, with its futuristic fastenings.
The Eighties dawned to the soft pad of the training shoe for everyday wear, while the Gucci loafer popularised a flat, moccasin style for the newly-invented Sloane Ranger.
Bright colours were no longer confined to the ‘fun’ shoe as they had been in the Seventies.
At the same time, no power-dressed working woman would be seen dead without her higher heeled shoes — both to stamp on the toes of the men as she stepped up the corporate ladder and to balance her wide, padded shoulders.
The fashion for the gentler Nineties is generally for lower heels.
A regional footnote — the lumberjack-style Timberland boot was a big hit in the Eighties.
One shop in Middlesbrough said Teesside man couldn't get enough of them — at over £100 a pair.
Such dedication to style.
Elvis would understand.
AN INNOVATIVE project to give a voice to people who provide and receive care services takes to the stage in Cleveland tomorrow.
All Upstairs, a play by Peter Spafford, aims to bring the carers and those they care for the disabled, elderly and ill inside the ‘system’ which often excludes them.
It forms the centrepiece of a day-long seminar A Voice of Their Own to be held at Menro House in Brambles Farm, Middlesbrough.
Trisha Brady, of Cleveland Council for Voluntary Services, said the project had caused a great deal of interest in the county.
‘The organisers the Cleveland Community Care Forum was accused of becoming bureaucratic and excluding the people it aimed to represent,’ she said.
‘We looked at different ways of involving people in decision-making and commissioned the play.’
A COMPREHENSIVE review of free travel for the blind in Cleveland is under way.
The county council's transportation committee chairman David Walsh said the aim was to ‘achieve a fair system across the county.’
The Teesside and District Society for the Blind called on the county to extend the free scheme to the partially-sighted but Coun Walsh said this was unlikely due to cash constraints.
‘We are already putting more money into free travel for the blind since the previously consistent approach to concessionary fares by borough councils started breaking down in the face of financial  pressures ’, he added.’
Blind people under pensionable age in Middlesbrough have had their free travel safeguarded by the county council.
Middlesbrough Council is to introduce a 10p per journey charge from Monday.
The county has already acted to allow Langbaurgh's blind people free travel.
‘We have taken short-term action in Middlesbrough and Langbaurgh, but we need a comprehensive review,’ said Coun Walsh.
‘We remain committed to supporting the needs of blind people and our aim must be to achieve a fair system right across Cleveland.’
Health Line
WAITING LISTS:
The College of Health operates a telephone service for doctors, patients and relatives wanting information on the shortest NHS waiting lists in their area or nationally.
It is open from 10am to 4pm Monday to 081–983 1133.
Crime Line
CRIMESTOPPERS:
If you have any information about a 0800–555 111.
Calls are free, you don't have to give your name and you could receive a Community Action Trust reward.
Ring Us You can ring a Northern Echo reporter at head BARNARD on Teesdale BISHOP 091–384 MIDDLESBROUGH 272578; 091–232 280613, 675678, 091–567 3422; 656476. — Fax Number for The Northern editorial department (0325) 380539
A
TINY bit of County Durham's green and pleasant land was preserved this week thanks to the efforts of persistent petitioners.
Members of Sedgefield District Council unanimously rejected plans for 25 executive houses and a nature park at the Agnew Plantation, Newton Aycliffe, after planning officers said the development would seriously damage a green belt and wildlife area.
The move has to be applauded and shows the strength of public feeling about the plantation.
County Durham needs its pockets of green land and wildlife habitats for endangered species.
It is even more important now as a recent environmental report said Britain's woods are disappearing much faster than the Amazon rain forests.
Mining, new towns and motorways have gradually eaten away at woodland in the region.
The World Wide Fund for Nature has called for tougher safeguards to protect Britain's remaining natural forests.
And it is essential that this call should be echoed by North-East conservationists.
THE Royal Navy will visit the North-East in force this month as part of its first ‘Shop Window’ exercise in over 15 years.
A Task Group of four ships and a submarine, led by HMS Ark Royal, with Sea Kings and Sea Harrier aircraft embarked, will stop over during its circumnavigation of the UK.
Naval regional officer Commander Bill Sidgwick said: ‘The aim is to show the public how the Royal Navy is adapting itself to the modern changing world.
‘Since the collapse of the Warsaw Pact, and the removal of the perceived threat for which our defences can be specifically tailored, it is considered that now, more than ever, the navy needs to display the ability to react swiftly and with great flexibility, in any number of roles.’
On June 16 about 80 people representing the region's community and media will be flown in naval helicopters to HMS Ark Royal about 50 miles off shore from Newcastle.
There they will be treated to displays of close  manoeuvring by the Task Group, Royal Marines rapid roping teams in action and an aerial display by Sea Harrier, Sea King and Lynx Aircraft.
Rear Admiral Bruce Richardson will be on hand to discuss defence and related topics.
On the same day a Shop Window 92 Shore Event will take place in front of Middlesbrough Civic Centre, including a march and displays by the Royal Marine Band of the Flag Officer Scotland and Northern Ireland.
LIKE the children he helps, Rod Jones is being given a second chance.
It is two years since the 44-year-old former convict set up Convoy Aid and now he devotes his life to the Romanian orphans.
He has made 12 trips to Eastern Europe and helped by his Romanian wife Fanica, who he married in November 1990, has now mastered the language.
The larger-than-life character is becoming well-known on the streets of Iasi youngsters in the town have dubbed him The Black Horse and even taken to copying his distinctive hairstyle: slicked back with a pony-tail.
Rod now spends several months a year in Romania fighting for the children who have no voice of their own.
Bringing baby Bogdan Ursu to Middlesbrough for a vital operation grabbed the headlines, but Rod has developed an affection for all the children he has helped on his trips.
He has no time for the fair-weather aid groups, who will only go to Romania in the summer and is annoyed by those who deliver basic supplies, take a few pictures and never return.
His belief is that work has to go on all year round, whether or not that means taking on the hazardous and snow-covered Carpathian mountains.
But the thousands of miles clocked up behind the wheel have taken their toll.
He has been told not to drive, having developed thrombosis in his legs.
He already travels with a corset for his back problems and leg strapping.
Stomach and bowel problems have also laid him low but he shows no sign of stopping.
The next trip is on July 6, when Rod's battle with the Romanian authorities will begin again.
He is quite ready to use his abrasive manner in an effort to get a better life for the orphans.
This has led to constant clashes with everybody from health ministers to bishops and police officers.
Rod himself admits that he's been very close to arrest.
But his frustration with what he sees as the corruption and inertia of the Romanian system means he is always ready to push an argument.
Arrest and imprisonment would be the ultimate and tragic irony for Rod Jones, a man whose aims in Romania are simple: ‘All I want to do is give the children a second chance.’
NORTH-EAST Greens staged a mock earth summit at the weekend, as world leaders prepared to descend on Rio for the real thing.
Individuals took the roles and negotiating positions of developed and developing countries in the simulation exercise at St Mary's Centre, Middlesbrough.
One of the organisers, Peter Goodwin, admitted that the day was in many ways depressing.
‘We found it quite frightening that we put national, short-term and electoral interests first,’ he said.
‘Those representing developed countries were primarily interested in protecting their own industries and jobs and security at the polls, not in protecting the environment.
‘It was interesting to take on these different values and it gave us a new perspective.’
Issues discussed included climate changes and global warming, hazardous wastes and CFCs.
‘We found it was very easy to come up with agreements that said nothing, but would impress the folks back home and the media,’ said Mr Goodwin.
‘But we all believe that's what will happen anyway, so I think the day reinforced our views.’
But he believes there is still a point in world leaders going to Rio for the summit.
‘Every opportunity to help the environment must be taken,’ he said.
A MASSIVE shake-up of local government unveiled yesterday almost certainly sounds the death knell for ‘unloved’ county councils such as Cleveland but could mean the return of the Yorkshire Ridings.
Environment Secretary Michael Howard, presenting the review, said there would public consultation and changes could take place within two years.
The new Local Government Commission will examine the current structure with Cleveland, Durham and North Yorkshire among those in the first stage.
Northumberland is to be examined in the fifth stage.
The review will take place over the next four years with all the changes in place by 1998.
The Labour Party immediately criticised the proposals as an attack on councils they run and said the plans would lead to more centralisation and privatisation.
The current two tier system, introduced in 1974, looks certain to be scrapped in favour of unitary authorities which the Government is known to favour.
Cleveland County Council leader Coun Paul Harford called for a ‘calm, careful debate and above all open minded debate.’
Cleveland is thought to be most at risk.
The authority was created 18 years ago using parts of North Yorkshire and Durham.
Coun Harford added: ‘We shall not be campaigning for the survival of the county council.
We shall be campaigning for the survival of local government in Cleveland.’
But he said Cleveland would be best served with a unitary authority covering the current area.
But Middlesbrough council leader Michael Carr said they were opposed to the two tier system.
‘There is strong support for local government closer to the people, easily accessible and based on established and identifiable communities,’ he said.
North Yorkshire chief executive Ron Leyland said they were glad to be among the first  considered but felt the present system worked well.
Durham County Council deputy leader Bob Pendlebury welcomed the county's inclusion in the first round while Hilary Armstrong, Labour MP for North West Durham, expressed concern at the Government's motives.
She said the entire North-East should be examined.
‘It is abysmal that it is being done in this piecemeal way.
There is no account of the knock on effect initial changes will have,’ she said.
‘I hope they properly consult the public, local authorities and political parties.
After all, Labour won more than 50 per cent of the vote in Durham.’
Darlington Labour MP Alan Milburn said he would be pressing for the review to set up a unitary authority for the town based on existing boundaries.
Wear Valley Council Liberal leader Chris Foote Wood said they would be making representations to ensure the council survives as a local authority and warned against amalgamation with neighbouring Sedgefield District Council.
In London, Mr Howard pledged the programme would give priority to areas where there is a history of dissatisfaction.
The Association of County Councils welcomed the proposals.
TOP AWARDS FOR SCHOOLS IN CLEVELAND
Four Cleveland schools have won national awards for their work in the community.
The Schools Curriculum Awards are to go to Egglescliffe Secondary School, Bishopsgarth Secondary School in Stockton, Kirkleatham Hall School near Redcar and Easterside Primary School in Middlesbrough for establishing broad and balanced curriculums with activities both in and out of school.
In November representatives from the four schools will travel to London to receive the awards, sponsored by the Government, industry and educational foundations.
The Cleveland schools were selected for honours after they were visited by assessors.
They praised Bishopsgarth School for its many contacts with local industry, including British Steel and Tioxide, and also for raising £10,000 towards a five day residential course in Northumberland for every year seven pupil.
The assessors were impressed by the governors' sub-committee and staff task group at Egglescliffe School which make efforts to involve the community in the school.
More than 200 local employers are involved in work experience for Egglescliffe pupils and there was praise too for the school's conservation work at weekends.
The way local people used the facilities at Kirkleatham Hall School for pupils with learning difficulties impressed the assessors.
They praised the relaxed atmosphere of the school and the emphasis placed on parental involvement and links with outside organisations.
THE effects of heavy industry on the health of people living in Teesside is the subject of a major study starting tomorrow.
Researchers believe its findings could be of international importance.
The study, to be launched at Southlands Leisure Centre, Ormesby Road, Middlesbrough, is thought to be the first of its kind in the country and is being funded by the town's City Challenge.
Teams from Teesside, Durham and Newcastle universities are carrying out the research.
Speakers include Dr Sam Ramaiah, director of public health medicine at South Tees Health Authority, Professor Raj Bhopal, of the division of  epidemiology and public health, Newcastle University, Dr Ian Ruffett, medical director of Cleveland Family Health Services Authority and John Mann, chief public protection officer for Middlesbrough Borough Council.
THE fish and chip women of Barnard Castle have hit back at claims that ladies serving Britain's best-loved dish are traditionally fat and ugly.
The allegation was made last week by a company wanting to build drive-through fish and chip diners in the North-East.
Jonathan Hick, marketing manager of Hull-based Hudson Bay Clipper Company, told The Northern Echo that the new concept will ‘drag fish and chips into the 1990s’.
But his remarks about some of the traditional chippy staff have enraged workers in the region.
He claimed they have an image as being ‘large ugly ladies serving greasy portions of chips’.
Jean Moore, of the Middle Chip Shop in Barnard Castle, said: ‘I am neither large or ugly and my chips are definitely not greasy.’
And she said she spoke for the two other chip shop owners in the town in rebutting the charges.
‘Margaret, who has one shop, may be a little bit large but she is not ugly, neither is Jean, who has the other.
And the fish and chips from both of their shops are as grease-free as mine,’ said Mrs Moore.
‘I am absolutely fed up with people thinking that just because you work in a chip shop you are thick, which is what this Mr Hick seems to be doing,’ she added.
‘My daughter works in the shop.
And she used to work for the TSB bank.’
Hudson Bay is currently looking for sites in Newcastle and Middlesbrough to open up its drive-through operations.
The company expects to unveil the first one in the region in York at the Clifton Moor Retail Park within months.
TOP brass from the emergency and armed services inspected would-be uniformed recruits at a passing out parade in Teesside.
The military-style event took place yesterday at the Southlands Centre, Ormesby Road, Middlesbrough, where 80 students from the town's Longlands College came under the scrutiny of Divisional Officer J Doyle, training officer for Cleveland Fire Brigade.
All the students had successfully completed Longlands College's preparation for entrance to the uniformed services course.
Other visiting top brass included Col M J Ridlington, commanding officer of Catterick Garrison's 8th Signal Regiment, Chief Insp Ron Newsom, Cleveland Police head of training, Chief Supt Richard Cooksley of Durham Constabulary and Supt Bob Richardson of Cleveland Police, Middlesbrough division.
PARTY-time at home can seriously damage your health if you don't realise how much you are drinking, visitors to yesterday's Drinkwise Day exhibition in Middlesbrough, were told.
South Tees Health Promotion Unit was in the town's Cleveland centre to make shoppers aware that ‘shorts’ offered by generous hosts can be very large indeed.
‘The problem with home drinking is that, while in the pub you can be sure that a single whisky is one-sixth of a gill, when you're drinking at home how can you be sure?’ said Val Abbas, district health promotion officer.
One of the items available from the display was a simple measure to ensure that all spirits drunk at home are singles.
All colleges in the district have been given posters and leaflets as party time, especially 18th birthdays, are occasions where young people are likely to encounter problems with alcohol consumed outside licensed premises, said Val.
‘A series of questions recently asked of the general public found that nearly everybody drinks at home some time and that 47pc of people drink at home at least once-a-week.
She said although yesterday's Drinkwise Day was a focus to promote awareness of sensible drinking levels the campaign would be going on throughout the year.
The message was also pressed home in Stockton, where people were reminded that nationally, there are 13,000 drink-related accidents in the home every year.
North Tees Health Authority's promotion team took to the streets of Stockton inviting townsfolk to toast each other in vitamin high, but alcohol-free fruit cocktails.
A MAJOR study into links between heavy industry and poor health was launched yesterday.
The three year project has been set up by South Tees Health Authority, Cleveland Family Health Services Authority and Middlesbrough Council under the council's City Challenge project.
Dr Sam Ramaiah, director of public health medicine for the health authority, said it would examine the link between the environment, deprivation and lifestyle.
Research will focus on the people living in the estates in east Middlesbrough.
In Grangetown and South Bank, death rates among residents aged under 65 are 80pc higher than national levels, and the deaths from chest diseases even higher.
Leader of the research team Professor Raj Bhopal from Newcastle University said the study would look at the hidden features of deprivation, and people's lifestyles, and also look at the environment, particularly air pollution.
He said: ‘Middlesbrough has unusually poor health and one of the reasons could be that some of the people are socially and economically deprived.’
Dr Ramaiah said: ‘It may well be of international importance and create a blueprint for such studies in the future.’
THE new University of Teesside took to the air yesterday.
The former Teesside Polytechnic celebrated its name change by releasing hundreds of balloons into the sky above Middlesbrough.
Vice chancellor Oliver Coulthard said: ‘For the past decade, we have been a university in all but name but we were not accepted into the premier league.
Now we will be in name what we were in quality.’
Dr Michael Longfield, director of Teesside Polytechnic for 11 years, said the institution had come of age.
‘The change will have little immediate and obvious effect on our future plans.
The greatest change will be in the public perception of what part universities play in the education system.
‘For Middlesbrough, the presence of a university will bring great benefits to the community.
‘The University of Teesside will provide a focus for the further development of the cultural, social and economic life of the region.’
Students' union secretary Stuart Kahn called on the Government to ensure the new  universities were properly-funded ‘and not just universities in name’.
THE boss of a top North East hairdressing chain has claimed thousands of youth training places are in jeopardy because of a lack of Government cash.
Malcolm Hanson, managing director of Saks hairdressers, says many trainees are working for just £29.50 a week.
And he has warned the Prime Minister that some firms will soon abandon the Youth Training scheme if they don't cut red tape.
‘Unless more funding is earmarked for YT urgently and better organisation installed, this excellent programme will  disintegrate ,’ warned Mr Hanson.
Andrew ‘Will’ Williams, is 18-years-old and thinks he is lucky to have a Youth Training place with Saks, at Skinnergate, Darlington.
But Will, from Riverside Drive, Darlington, works long hours for just £36.50 a week.
Saks adds £7 to his Government-funded allowance of £29.50 per week but Mr Hanson claims many companies can't afford to contribute.
‘It is totally unrealistic to expect trainees to survive on that,’ Mr Hanson said.
‘There's a new expression for YT that trainees are using this year — they're calling it Slave Training,’ said Mr Hanson.
Saks has 40 trainees as well as 70 students at their own college in Middlesbrough.
Until a month ago when a trainee passed his or her exams, Saks immediately claimed money back for their training from Teesside Training and Enterprise Council.
But now they have to wait weeks or even months to claim back the money — forced to produce an exam certificate for each trainee before the TEC pays up.
‘The problems this causes is phenomenal and many training agents have had to carry expensive overdrafts  because of it,’ said Mr Hanson.
Driver fled after causing crash
A FORESTER drove the wrong way along a dual carriageway to escape police after hitting another car, Thirsk magistrates heard yesterday.
Christopher Todd, 19, of Boltby, near Thirsk, drove his Land Rover into the path of a car on the A168 near Thirsk, injuring two people.
Then he drove off, the wrong way down the dual carriageway, said Jane Cockburn, prosecuting.
Blood tests revealed he was almost twice the legal alcohol limit.
Todd yesterday admitted driving with excess alcohol and failing to stop and report an accident.
The case was adjourned for reports Hens raid: Thieves raided a hen house in Ripon.
They made off with nine birds worth a total of £180 from a house in Studley Road.
LOCAL government has a key role in making the world a better place, according to a Middlesbrough council official.
John Foster, the council's chief executive officer, was speaking in his capacity as chairman of the environmental panel of Solace, The Society of Local Authority Chief Executives.
Mr Foster said Solace welcomed opportunities, challenges and the raising of environmental awareness following the Earth Summit in Brazil.
He said a clear pathway to sustainable development had been mapped out but they were still at the start of the journey.
‘If we are to reach our destination and fulfil the objectives set out at the United Nations National Conference, we need firm and committed leadership,’ he said.
‘Local authorities are ideally placed to provide concerted action, through partnership with communities, businesses and voluntary organisations, to meet environmental challenges facing us all.’
But Mr Foster said local authorities must have the resources to meet those challenges and questioning the cost could lead to false economies.
‘Adequate resources for local and national government are needed if we are to make the vision outlined at Rio a reality,’ he said.
TEESSIDE Polytechnic students struggling to find industrial placements have set up their own hotline.
Only half of the 110 students on the BA (Hons) Business Studies course have found an employer willing to take them on.
The bite of the recession has made companies reluctant to offer placements so the students have set up their own action desk.
Michelle Tempest-Mitchell, 21, said: ‘Placements are a vital part of the course.
They can help companies by providing someone with a good knowledge of the latest techniques in management and business.’
Senior lecture Adrian Evans said it was ‘tragic’ that companies were failing to recognise the mutual benefits of taking on a student for a year.
The students are urging employers to ring them on  or , 10am4pm.
SMOKEBUSTERS North-East notched up its 10,000th member when Jodie Woolams, of Eston, Cleveland, joined the South Tees branch.
To mark the occasion the club presented her with a tracksuit and treated her to a slap-up lunch at a Middlesbrough restaurant.
Jodie, 12, a pupil of Gillbrook School, is keen on golf, gymnastics, running, and swimming.
At her parents home in Parkgate, The Grange, she said: ‘I don't intend to start smoking and I don't like being in the company of people who smoke, especially when we are on holiday abroad and people smoke at the table.’
Smokebusters is a nonsmoking club for young people between the ages of eight and 14.
It's aims are to encourage youngsters not to smoke, strengthen young people's defences against smoking, and have as much fun as possible.
South Tees branch spokeswoman Bridget Drury said: ‘Any young person aged eight to 14, living in the South Tees area can join Smokebusters North East as long as they are a non-smoker.’