

Pakamac to reign again
THERE was a time when a shower of rain produced a sea of plastic coated folk.
The Pakamac, a grey-black plastic coat which epitomised a confident post-war consumer society even though not the height of sartorial elegance, is to make a fashion comeback.
The lightweight, fold-up coat was not beneath the dignity of the Queen, and high society found one useful when caught in the rain at Ascot.
The first Pakamacs were made by a Manchester company in 1949.
Within 15 years, 60,000 were being sold a week, and they were exported to more than 60 countries.
But production stopped in the Eighties when they became unfashionable.
Now S Casket, the Manchester firm which bought the brand name in 1988, is unleashing a new version on the rained-upon British.
They have been redesigned and come in an array of bright colours.
They are made of high-tech coated nylon instead of plastic.
The general manager of the company Ian McCall said; ‘We have had a tremendous response already and we expect parents who wore them in the fifties and sixties to buy them for their children.’
They are available by mail order at about £15 and will be in shops in the next few weeks.
Editorial, Page 10
Chips on the menu for protein promotion
By James Johnston
CHIPS and cigarettes — those twin symbols of unhealthy living, especially in Scotland — are very much in the news this week, in contrasting contexts.
Today sees the start of National Chip Week, during which the Frozen Food Information Service will endeavour to persuade the British public that the humble chip is, in fact, an important part of a healthy diet and should not be condemned by would-be nutritional experts.
Meanwhile, in London today the Imperial Cancer Research Fund is hosting a conference entitled Strategies for Chronic Disease Control, which is essentially an 80th birthday tribute to Sir Richard Doll, honorary consultant at the ICRF's cancer studies unit at Radcliffe Infirmary in Oxford.
Sir Richard, whose 80th birthday was actually last October, is acknowledged by his peers as one of the world's leading cancer epidemiologists, but is probably most famous for demonstrating, together with the late Sir Austin Bradford Hill, that cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer.
In spite of his years, Sir Richard remains very active and will deliver one of the principal addresses at today's conference at the offices of the Royal Society in London.
Chips became part of the British diet during the 19th century and over the course of the next hundred years, according to the Frozen Food Information Service, fish and chips became not only a national institution, but also a vital source of nutrition for the working class.
In the last 15 years there has been an enormous increase in the volume of frozen chips being consumed, even although straight-cut chips for frying still account for more than half the chips bought.
According to Dr Juliet Gray, a leading nutritionist, quoted in the campaign beginning today, chips are an important source of protein and provide useful amounts of dietary fibre, iron and certain vitamins.
Dr Gray does, however, advise people to take chips out of the frying pan, when possible, and cook them instead in the oven, so reducing their fat content.
In Edinburgh today, the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, will deliver a keynote speech on the Scottish economy at Edinburgh University.
This will be the third in a series of five speeches by Mr Lang setting out his personal views on specific areas of policy and how they should be developed during the course of this Parliament.
On Thursday, the unemployment figures for December may show that the number of people out of work and claiming benefit in Britain has risen above three million.
With this in view, the Trades Union Congress will on Thursday hold a ‘Jobs Action Day.’
In Scotland, the STUC will hold a demonstration outside Old St Andrew's House in Edinburgh calling for the creation of real jobs and rejecting the concept of what it calls ‘forced labour for the unemployed’, or workfare, as suggested recently by the Prime Minister, John Major.
In one of his first big speeches since his inauguration, President Bill Clinton will on Wednesday in Washington address a joint session of Congress.
On Friday in Johannesburg, Nelson Mandela, president of the African National Congress, will open a three-day world apartheid conference.
The reigning world chess champion, Gary Kasparov, will demonstrate his prowess in London on Wednesday when he takes on 100 contestants simultaneously in a charity chess match.
The General Synod of the Church of England, which will meet in London this week, will debate a motion from Jonathan Redden, a consultant orthopaedic surgeon in the Diocese of Sheffield, proposing that the legal limit for a therapeutic abortion be reduced from 24 to 18 weeks.
The Duke of Edinburgh, patron and honorary fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, will attend the college's triennial dinner in Edinburgh on Friday.
The crew of the Carradale trawler, Antares, who were lost when their boat was sunk off Arran in November 1990, will be remembered on Saturday when a plaque to their memory will be unveiled at Carradale harbour.
The sculptor for the cast bronze was Gordon Lochhead, working for Hamilton & Inches, the Edinburgh gold and silversmiths.
The ceremony will be at 1pm.
This is one of the big sporting weeks of the year.
In football, Scotland play Malta in a World Cup qualifying match at Ibrox Stadium, Glasgow, on Wednesday.
On Saturday, in the Five Nations Championship, Scotland's international rugby team will play Wales at Murrayfield Stadium.
The Princess Royal, patron of the Scottish Rugby Union, will attend the match.
Meanwhile, on Friday, the third Test Match between India and England is due to begin in Bombay.
Horden's design blended innovation and massing
A tall story or a tour de force?
Brian Edwards welcomes the designs for a Glasgow city centre tower but wonders if it is the icon the city needs
TALL buildings can sometimes assume an iconographic importance for the city they serve.
Big Ben does for London what the Eiffel Tower and Manhattan skyline do for Paris and New York.
These icons of architecture are used by news broadcasters and marketing agencies anxious to sell their city.
ITN's News at Ten homes in on Big Ben as if it were the only part of London that mattered.
What then are we to do with cities without a memorable tower to flout?
The answer according to the Glasgow Development Agency is to have a competition to design a tower of no great functional content, but of considerable civic impact.
The Glasgow Tower Competition attracted 353 entries from across the world.
The objective of the competition is to give Glasgow a central skyscraper which would reflect the city's new vigour and status.
The site chosen at the river end of Buchanan Street was an obvious, though hardly inspired, choice.
The horizontal glass tent of the St Enoch Centre would certainly benefit from the vertical punctuation of a tower.
A more feasible and dramatic site may have been where the M8 crosses the Clyde near Anderston.
Here a skyscraper could rise to its full glory, act as a gateway from the west, take advantage of undeveloped land, and be reflected Manhattan-style in a widening river.
The competition brief called for a tower to act primarily as a landmark.
As such its role was mainly symbolic and the accommodation requested — viewing platform, high level restaurant, and new entrance to the St Enoch underground station — rather more token than real.
As a new focal point for the city, the tower had the task of expressing confidence and displaying a degree of technological prowess.
How towers are designed at the top and bottom is crucial, what goes on in between is largely irrelevant.
The tops of towers establish the silhouette of cities.
Canary Wharf, the tallest building in Europe, fails to shape itself adequately at the fiftieth storey and is dull as a consequence.
Shape and profile make good towers, and it is these qualities which most of the entrants exploited.
The winning design projects a needle into the sky from a circular cylinder which tapers to the ground.
Cuts into the cylinder reveal the structure by slicing off part of the engulfing glass and steel.
At the ground, tower design is equally critical.
Activity at the base enlivens the space in which the tower sits.
How the skyscraper grows from the ground, its degree of connection and the elegance of the structure are all important points.
Again the winning design by Richard Horden displays a refinement bred of this architect's interest in yacht design.
The mast-like main structure and angled jib have nautical overtones in keeping with the tower's proximity here to the Clyde.
Of the over three hundred entries, 30 short-listed by the assessors have been on display in Glasgow's Princes Square, and are being shown at the RIBA in London until 3 March.
The assessors, including the architect Sir Norman Foster, found Horden's winning design a blend of technological innovation and sculptural massing.
They particularly liked the way it was designed to rotate in response to different wind directions.
This element of technology transfer from yachting and wind generators was one of the strengths of the design.
The second placed designs by Atlas Architects of Amsterdam consisted of a simple sandstone needle designed deliberately to contrast with the glass bulk of the St Enoch Centre.
The use of stone, evoking the craft tradition of Glasgow, resulted in a tower of elegant, if unremarkable form.
Joint third prize was won by London-based Allies and Morrison, two Edinburgh University architecture graduates who a few years earlier won the Edinburgh Mound Competition: one short-listed design from Midlothian was that by Duffy and Batt which stood the Glasgow salmon on its tail.
Constructed in steel and glass, the design abstracts the salmon to the point where it is almost unrecognisable.
The image of a leaping salmon is perhaps an apt metaphor for modern-day Glasgow.
Sceptics in the city doubt whether the tower will be realised.
Glasgow certainly needs a modern landmark — something to deflect the eye from the miserable tower blocks of the 1960s.
Whether this moderate tower in St Enoch's Square will do more than brighten up a few central shopping streets remains to be seen.
The intended budget of £5 million could reap benefits in a city where tourist revenue is becoming a principal source of wealth.
But will it really be the icon modern Glasgow badly needs?
Winning design: Richard Horden Associates' mast-like tour which reflects Glasgow's link with sailing and the sea
Daleks on a mission to recycle
By Tom Morton
DALEKS are going to Skye and Lochalsh.
Their mission?
To save, rather than destroy the planet.
The daleks in question are not enraged alien beings with full metal jackets.
Instead, they are conical units which resemble Dr Who's favourite enemies, but use solar power to recycle domestic waste into planet-friendly fertiliser.
One hundred households in Glendale on Skye and Plockton in Lochalsh are to take part in a 12-month, £5,000 experiment jointly sponsored by Skye and Lochalsh District Council and the Leader European Rural Development Programme.
It was the district council environmental health officer, Norman Gillies, who first described the 5ft tall solar manure factories as looking ‘a bit like daleks.’
They are buried 18 inches into the ground, preferably in a vegetable garden.
Domestic organic rubbish is slightly heated with an added chemical and as it decomposes liquid organic fertiliser begins bleeding into the soil.
Shona MacLennan, leader field officer for Skye and Lochalsh, said local people were growing more concerned about waste.
‘These cones are environmentally friendly and reduce the pressure on existing landfill sites,’ she said.
The daleks of Skye and Plockton are not eternal like their televisual equivalents.
In three years they are full and have to be emptied and washed out.
Unlike that of the most vicious of television's robotic villains, their aim is environmental salvation for the earth.
Al Dente coming to Govan
By Alan Forbes
DOWN in deepest Nesbitt Land, war has been declared on the mushy pea and the greasy chip.
Rab C, that one-man marketing campaign for pie suppers which shed more oil than grounded tankers, might not be impressed to hear that his local hospital in Govan has begun a crusade to offer patients and staff a healthier diet.
The kitchen at Glasgow's Southern General Hospital provides enough meals for a small town.
On a busy day staff queue for about 1,400 meals while, if all beds are occupied, 3,300 more meals are served directly to patients.
Yesterday, Greater Glasgow Health Board announced that the Southern General and the other hospitals under its control must adhere to a new food and health policy.
The move is part of the board's campaign to achieve a 30 per cent reduction in Glasgow's notorious heart disease mortality rate and a ten per cent reduction in cancer by the year 2000.
Nutritionists and food industry representatives were invited to take their pick from a menu which boasted less fat and more fruit, vegetables and cereals, particularly wholemeal bread.
The experiment was not entirely successful.
Many guests told the board's chairman, Sir Thomas Thomson, that the veg had been overboiled, while this reporter encountered a high proportion of fat in his pork stew — and jolly tasty it was, too.
Ann Garvie, the board's quality assurance manager, vowed that things would improve.
She said that in the Southern General alone, £80,000 is being spent on new cookers which should guarantee vegetables that areal dente.
Mrs Garvie said: ‘The food is cooked under pressure in wet or dry heat.
This is faster than boiling so it is therefore cheaper, and you also avoid losing nutrients and turning vegetables to mush by overboiling.’
New menus will include dishes for vegans and, for the first time, halal meat and kosher dishes will be fully described instead of being advertised by a tick in a box.
Greater Glasgow hospitals provide a total of more than 15,000 meals a day.
The director of health promotion, Dr Phil Hanlon, said it was important that the board should set a good example to other organisations.
Eco-friendly power plant planned for capital's centre
By Auslan Cramb, Environment Correspondent
THE GREENING of Edinburgh may take a step forward with the creation of Scotland's first city centre combined heat and power system.
Lothian Region and Edinburgh District councils are expected to approve the scheme next month and it could be operational within 18 months.
The proposal will be considered by the regional council on 3 March and by the district council on 11 March.
The power plant — two gas powered engines and boilers — would be built at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary and supply electricity and heating to the hospital, Edinburgh University and the offices of both local authorities.
It would be one of the biggest CHP projects of its type in Britain.
CHP schemes save fuel and costs in production and significantly reduce the carbon dioxide emissions that contribute to the greenhouse effect.
A special steering group set up to examine the idea has chosen Citigen, a joint venture between British Gas and two French energy management companies, from six tenders for the system.
The first phase could be given the go-ahead in March, and a second phase might extend the supply into the New Town area.
While typical power stations are just 34 per cent efficient — converting most of their energy into heat lost to the air — CHP systems can reach 80 per cent efficiency.
They capture the heat produced in electricity generation and distribute it through underground pipes.
There are some combined systems in Scotland supplying business and industry, at Tate Paper in Aberdeen, for example, but no city schemes.
Throughout Britain there are around 450 small scale applications of the technology, but the UK lags behind its European neighbours.
In Denmark, 40 per cent of towns and cities are heated and powered by CHP plants and the whole centre of Stockholm uses the technology.
A new branch of healing
A substance found in yew trees may help cancer sufferers, reports Carina Norris
THE bonnie yew tree has an ancient history of protection.
It was planted for generations to supply the strong bows for archers but now appears to have a new role as a protector — in the fight against cancer.
Until recently, the cancer drug paclitaxel, from Pacific yew trees (faxus brevifolia), has only been used in patients whose cancers are well developed.
Now British scientists want to test paclitaxel on early-stage cancers, when the disease is less advanced, and are embarking on a huge research programme.
A licence has been awarded to drugs firm Bristol-Myers Squibb to use paclitaxel for treatment of ovarian cancer in women who did not respond to other treatments, but the chemical may also be effective against head, neck and lung cancers.
Paclitaxel's anti-cancer properties were discovered in the late Sixties, as part of a programme sponsored by the National Cancer Institute.
Over 35,000 plant species were carefully screened for anti-cancer properties, and yew bark extract was found to be effective against tumours in mice.
In the early Seventies, US researchers identified paclitaxel as the active agent in yew bark.
Then, at the end of the decade the chemical's anti-cancer mechanism was discovered.
Paclitaxel prevents cancer cells by binding to cell components called microtubules.
This can shrink the tumour, often sufficiently to allow surgery.
Trials have been encouraging, with a 30-35 per cent remission rate in over 200 ovarian cancer patients.
Unfortunately, the Pacific yew is extremely rare and slow growing.
Taking the bark to make the drug kills the tree, and up to 5,000 trees are needed to produce only 2lb of paclitaxel.
The bark from three whole yew trees, amounting to 60lbs contains only two grams of the chemical — scarcely enough to treat a single patient.
Bristol-Myers Squibb is funding a US government research programme to study the Pacific yew, including its genetics, biology, ecology and distribution.
The problems of reforestation, and how the tree can best be cultivated will also be addressed — following guidelines from the US Forest Science and US Bureau of Land Management.
The bark for the cancer drug is from trees harvested for timber, and loggers have to leave a 12 to 14 inch high stump.
Nearly 70 per cent of these stumps later resprout and grow once more.
Bark is stripped from trees by hand, or with high-pressure water jets.
Then, paclitaxel is extracted from the bark in a complicated process.
The drug companies are also investigating the possibility of using needles and twigs, obtained harmlessly during routine clipping, from other ornamental yew species.
Scientists are now trying to mimic natural paclitaxel, so the trees will not have to die.
Paclitaxel production by the yew tree is achieved by a combination of many enzymes.
To use genetic engineering techniques to produce paclitaxel, the genes for each of these enzymes would be needed and this is considered much too complex.
So scientists are turning to organic chemistry to try to synthesise paclitaxel with yew tree cells grown in laboratories.
The advantage of this work over Bristol-Myers Squibb is also trying to semi-synthesise the chemical from 10-DAB 111, the yew chemical.
They say that until now paclitaxel for human drug use has been from felled trees, but in 1993 sources other than Pacific yew bark will be used on a commercial scale, and by 1995 they hope actual trees will no longer be needed to produce the drug.
Dr Jenkins, from Leicester University, has been working on two compounds found in English yew and has recently been joined by Dr Nick Lawrence of Manchester University.
The scientists say they consider paclitaxel is too complicated to synthesise completely artificially and are experimenting with English yew leaf clippings.
Coping with burns
If it is a minor burn it is best to place the burned area in a bowl of cold water for at least ten minutes or until the child says the pain is easing, then cover with a clean, dry, non-fluffy cloth kept in place with a bandage or a clean scarf.
If you cannot get to water, use any bland, cold liquid such as milk or lemonade to bathe the area.
Do not break any blisters or put any lotions, potions or magic ointments on the burn.
And on no account add butter or margarine.
If you do, you simply make the burn fry.
In the case of a severe burn, that is one that is larger than an inch in diameter, the rule is the same: cool first, cover later, and in this instance start to cool as quickly as possible to prevent the burn spreading into the surrounding tissue.
A severe burn should always be checked in hospital and should be covered, with a clean cloth, cling film even a plastic bag, to keep germs out — once it has been cooled.
Never remove any clothes that have stuck to the skin and do not give the child anything to drink in case he or she has to go to the operating theatre.
Stop the bleeding
Whereas an adult can fairly ‘comfortably’ lose a pint of blood, a child losing the same amount may be drained of as much as a third or even half of her total supply.
If blood is pumping out of a wound, use a clean pad to press on the wound, or if need be your bare hands or the pads of your fingers.
You may have to squeeze the edges of the wound together if the sides are gaping.
In that instance, press around the sides as you do, rather than on top.
If blood keeps coming through the bandage, do not remove it; simply put another bandage on top.
Fire traps a child
What if your child is trapped in a smoke-filled room?
If the door knob is cool, tie something moist around your mouth and nose and keep your face near the floor.
If the door is shut and the door knob is too hot you are advised not to go into the room since it will be too late to save your child and you risk causing a fireball.
The ABC checklist for keeping your child alive
The ABC checklist for resuscitation can be used in various emergencies, such as choking, bleeding, drowning or extreme shock.
Before embarking on the ABC, check if there is any further danger to your child.
(If she has suffered an electric shock, push her away from the electric equipment with a broom handle before touching her, or by turning off the electricity mains.)
Then check A for airway — is it clear?
If there is a small object you can see, scoop it out if you can by doing a quick ‘finger-sweep’.
If, however, you can't get it out immediately, don't poke and don't stick your finger blindly down her throat or you risk doing more damage.
Turn the child over your knee and slap five times between the shoulder blades.
Check if anything comes out of the mouth.
B is for breathing.
If breathing stops, there is no oxygen getting to the brain and within three minutes the brains cells begin to die.
Look, listen and feel for breathing.
If you cannot detect even the shallowest of breaths, attempt artificial respiration making sure the chest starts to rise.
After giving the first five breaths into the child's mouth, or if the child is small, mouth and nose, go on to C for circulation.
Check to see if the heart is beating.
The best place to find the pulse in a child over one-year-old is the carotid artery which passes either side of the windpipe in the neck and can be felt by pressing two forefingers gently at this point.
It may be difficult to find the neck pulse in a baby because the neck tends to be short and chubby.
The easier one, therefore, is the brachial pulse which is found on the inside of the upper arm.
Practise on your own child since it is often difficult to find a pulse in an emergency.
If you cannot find a pulse, you must begin chest compression, also known as heart massage.
This means pressing the child's chest so that the blood — with its vital oxygen — is pumped around the body and up to the brain.
Hopefully the heart will then start to beat again by itself.
Continue breathing for the child and giving chest compressions until the ambulance arrives.
First Aid in safe hands
Parents should find a place at home for a new guide which deals with emergencies, says Jane Fowler
IF you are a parent, if indeed you look after children in any capacity, Linda Wolfe's Safe and Sound is a must.
A clear and comprehensive guide to first aid for babies, children and young adults, it is quite simply, excellent.
The statistics for childhood accidents are alarming.
Nearly 1,000 children die each year from accidents in the home which are avoidable and every single child will encounter some kind of accident before the age of fifteen.
Would you know what to do?
If, for example, a child suffered a severe burn, what, if anything, would you put on it?
Water?
Milk?
Butter?
A compress?
A bag of frozen peas?
Or nothing at all?
Your answer must be immediate.
When children injure themselves, it is important that you know how to give the right first aid treatment, quickly, quietly and with lots of reassurance to the child.
Linda Wolfe is, apart from being a trained children's nurse and midwife, a mother of three young children and two older step-children.
When her youngest child was a year old, she stopped breathing.
Being trained, Wolfe knew what to do but she was struck by the sense of panic that engulfs any parent when a child is suddenly threatened with pain or in this case, death.
When the life of a child can so easily hang in the balance, is there not a case for recommending that all parents attend a practical course in first aid, rather than relying on the printed page?
Yes, she says, that is exactly what every adult should do.
But given the reality that many do not, having at least some understanding of how to deal with accidents — and the book ranges far and wide, covering issues as diverse as electric shocks, febrile convulsions, fainting and cot death — is better than none.
It is aimed specifically at parents, teachers and carers.
It neither assumes a detailed medical knowledge nor adopts a patronising tone to those ‘who should know better;’ the balance struck is admirable.
There are helpful illustrations, photographs where necessary and distinctive orange pages at the end of each chapter which summarise the emergency procedure for the particular accident described.
The information and advice is endless: in the case of fire, ‘stop, drop and roll.’
In the case of a drug overdose, talk quietly, keep noise and light levels low and if a fit starts, don't try to stop it, don't try to move the youngster and don't put anything between her teeth.
This is now considered to be extremely dangerous — she could bite and break whatever it is and inhale the broken bit.
There are chapters dealing with absolute medical emergencies, such as a crush injury to the chest or what to do if your child is trapped in a smoke-filled room.
Certain key rules are repeated in different chapters throughout the book.
In that way, a parent may seize the guide in an emergency and be reminded at a glance of the relevant facts.
Better by far to learn this crucial information off by heart.
A copy of Safe and Sound should be given to all parents leaving hospital with their tiny shawl-wrapped bundle.
It is essential reading.
A sharp intake of breath
STEPHEN MANSFIELD
THE north-eastern corner of Glasgow city centre is home to many famous educational establishments — Strathclyde University, the Central College of Commerce and the colleges of Food Technology, and Building and Printing.
All aim to equip students with useful, practical skills.
But none teach any quite as basic or, some say, as vital to all our lives, as those offered by a far less well-known neighbour.
The Phoenix Centre, Scotland's only inner-city stress centre, teaches people how to breathe correctly.
While this may seem an unnecessary lesson — after all, most of us assume breathing is one thing we do know how to do — nothing could be further from the truth.
According to centre director Anne Shearer, a qualified psychotherapist and former social work committee chairperson, fear and anxiety, often rooted in childhood, leave us unable to breathe as deeply or as evenly as we once did, and this in turn means we cannot relax fully or enjoy really good health.
She explains: ‘Most adults’ respiratory pattern is upset.
The perfect example of how to breathe properly is the new-born child.
Nobody had to teach it — it knew already.
We stop breathing when we are frightened — in sudden fear of any kind we hold our breath.
By the time they are five or six, most children's breathing is going the opposite way of what nature intended.’
As the years pass, she says, without realising it we gradually lose the ability to breathe the right way.
The consequences are grave.
‘To deny ourselves breath is to deny ourselves life.
People do not realise how much lung space is unused.
Because the muscles are clamped against that area it becomes dried up and toxic, and the circulation to vital organs and to the brain is reduced.
I see things like senile dementia as being a direct result of restricted breathing over very many years — in 20, 30 or 40 years you can do to yourself the same sort of thing that happens in an operating theatre if oxygen is withdrawn.’
And if we don't breathe in fully, she points out, we can't breathe out fully either, causing still more harm.
‘Seventy per cent of the body's waste matter is eliminated through the respiratory process.
When it is not expelled it seems to backfill so the tubes get coated in thick white mucus.
This becomes very hard and makes it even more difficult to breathe properly.’
Until we relearn what we once knew, she maintains, we can never be truly healthy.
‘You've got to get the breathing back to how it was when you were first born.
There's no escape from that if you want to live to a ripe old age.
I've never known anyone suffering from a life-threatening illness who does breathe properly.’
Correct breathing, she says, has a part to play in preventing a wide range of illnesses, including cancer.
Research has shown that good oxygenation makes it less likely that any rogue cells will survive to form a life-endangering tumour.
With this in mind, Shearer and her assistant Heather Monteith, also a psychotherapist, offer clients, either individually or in groups, a combination of relaxation, breathing and counselling devised to suit their particular needs.
They place a great deal of importance on the power of positive thought.
Shearer says: ‘I'll probably get slayed for saying this, but I think we can attract misfortune to ourselves.
When we start to take responsibility for our thoughts and begin to see that every negative thought has a negative return, we realise we can use life like a beautiful game.
Life is all right— it is what people make of it that is the problem.’
She views the pursuit of power for its own sake, competitiveness and materialism as the three scourges of civilisation.
She is keen to emphasise the simple — and practical — nature of the work they do.
‘There's no technique involved, no forcing — it's just gradual encouragement.
The basis of our work is to teach people to help themselves.
When they first start breathing correctly again, they feel they're doing it wrong because what they were doing before felt correct.’
It is worth persevering though.
‘People come here aged maybe 50 or 60 and their blood pressure goes down to what it was in adolescence, they are no longer constipated, digestive problems seem to disappear, their sex lives improve, their eyes are shiny and they have a feeling of optimism instead of carrying a heavy load of despondency.
Sometimes in the process they decide to let go of old destructive relationships or to completely change their career.
The increasing confidence that comes about through this kind of work allows them to do so.’
The centre, which is housed in a former annexe of Allan Glen's School, is open to anyone including children — suffering from stress of any kind, regardless of financial status.
Several city GPs recommend it to their patients.
It is run by a charitable trust and so relies on grants and donations for its survival.
Clients in paid employment are encouraged to contribute what they can, others often pay in kind, helping with the on-going renovation work.
When the trust took over the four-storey building in 1987 it was virtually derelict.
It had been empty for several years and was dirty, damp and severely vandalised.
To save money, wherever possible Shearer, Monteith and a team of volunteers did essential restoration and decorating themselves.
Furniture and other equipment was donated by a wide range of supporters.
Today, although there is much still to do, it is bright and welcoming, with its blue and white tiled walls and corridors.
Monteith has painted several of the wooden floors with colourful designs, hung the doors with attractive plaques, and repainted many of the original desks and chairs in cheerful pastel shades.
A large measure of the centre's warmth, however, comes from Shearer and Monteith themselves — both have tremendous energy and enthusiasm for the work they do.
Once the dry rot attacking the building has been dealt with, they plan to create music, drama, craft and local history rooms on the upper floors to help clients explore and develop their creativity.
They already have a children's play room, an art room, conference space and are building up a library.
The centre incorporates two other important projects, the College of Childhood and the People's University of Health.
Shearer explains: ‘The fact that childhood has never been important enough to create an educational project around it shows how little thought is given to it.’
She believes that before any adult can reach his or her full potential, they must first turn their attention to healing the hurt child within.
Once they have done this, they will be ready to move on to the ‘university’ work for which she and Monteith are currently preparing a syllabus not, she says, with a view to any intellectual results, but ‘in order to turn out rounded human beings’.
Shearer also sees the centre as ‘working towards our own version of the Children's Charter — every child has a right to be able to breathe properly.
If that does not happen we ensure the continuation of the social and physical ills so prevalent in society today.’
She claims: ‘One generation of correct breathers would regenerate the race, and disease — mental and emotional as well as physical — would become a rarity.’
It is no small ambition, but Anne Shearer and Heather Monteith are determined to do what they can — how ever much work it takes.
Professor Thomas Gibson: plastic surgery pioneer
By Eric McKenzie
EMERITUS Professor Thomas Gibson, of Strathclyde University, a pioneer in plastic surgery, died on Saturday in the Western Infirmary, Glasgow, after a short illness.
He was 77.
After his schooling in Kilbarchan and Paisley Grammar, he graduated from Glasgow University in 1938.
He was a member of the Medical Research Council's Burns Unit at Glasgow Royal Infirmary (1942-44), and after serving with the Royal Army Medical Corps in north Europe and India he was appointed consultant plastic surgeon to the West of Scotland Plastic and Oral Surgery Service.
He was its director, based at Canniesburn Hospital, from 1970 to 1980, when he retired.
His knowledge and expertise in the field of plastic surgery was recognised by the British and overseas medical community.
He became president of the British Association of Plastic Surgeons (1970), and was editor of the British Journal of Plastic Surgery (1969-79).
He was elected an honorary fellow of the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons (1977) and of the Royal College of Surgeons of England (1987).
In the early Sixties, Prof Gibson became co-founder with Professor Robert Kenedi of the bio-engineering unit at Strathclyde University which applied the principles and techniques of engineering to surgery and medicine.
Prof Gibson is survived by his wife, Patricia, two sons, two daughters and 11 grandchildren.
In an appreciation, Emeritus Prof Robert Kenedi said yesterday: HIS pioneering initiatives, documented by his many publications, were in the areas of tissue immunology, burns, bio-engineering and various aspects of plastic surgery, including its history.
He will be remembered first and foremost for his creative individuality, warmth of personality and simple humanity.
He had an intuitive capability of bringing the best out in people.
Witness to this are the large numbers worldwide who came to Glasgow to work with him and who are now distinguished practitioners in their own right.
Learning of Gibson's pioneering insight, Peter Medawar came from Oxford to Glasgow specifically to work with him.
When, 18 years later in 1960, Medawar received the Nobel Prize for his work on the rejection phenomenon (of tissue transplant) he wrote to Gibson: ‘…
I do want you to know how clearly I understand my deep obligation to you for giving me my first insight into the real problem we were facing and my first understanding of the nature of clinical research’.
A gentle and kindly person, Prof Gibson will be remembered by all with respect, pleasure and affection.
Prof Thomas Gibson: ability to bring out the best in people
Stamps celebrate launch of maritime chronometer
FOUR stamps which go on sale today celebrate the invention which helped to make Britain ruler of the waves.
They mark the 300th anniversary of the birth of John Harrison, the first English clockmaker to make an accurate marine chronometer.
His inventions solved the problem of finding a ship's position in longitude — east or west — thereby pinpointing it on the map.
Harrison, a Yorkshireman, devoted his life to devising the instrument.
He won a £20,000 prize for the invention just a few years before he died in 1776 at the age of 83.
The maritime chronometer took Britain to pre-eminence in safe navigation and helped secure the empire.
The 28p and 33p stamps show the chronometer's timekeeping element, the 24p stamp illustrates its decorated enamel dial and the 39p stamp shows the pierced and engraved back of the movement.
The round-the-world yachtswoman Tracy Edwards launched the stamps at the Maritime Museum in Greenwich, London, yesterday.
Harrison's unique timepieces will be on display in the Observatory when it re-opens to the public in March.
Who can tame the might of the Tay?
After this winter's devastation, James Rougvie examines attempts to prevent flooding
AT REGULAR intervals over the past 200 years, the Tay has rolled with irresistible force over almost every man-made object placed in its path.
Fading newspaper reports from the mid-1800s stand testimony to the power of the river.
Succeeding generations of farmers built flood banks to create arable land out of a web of rivulets.
Then they watched helplessly as the Tay took the land back again.
On 15 January this year, it happened again.
Temperatures in the upper Tay valleys rose to an unseasonal 12C and in the high glens, millions of tonnes of fresh snow began to melt.
By the next day, flood warning computers built into the river banks along the 120 miles of the Tay were flashing yellow warning signals as placid tributaries dumped their overload into the river.
The Tay broke its banks, wreaking havoc all along its length.
But where had all that water come from?
How could one river cause so much damage and threaten the livelihoods of so many  farmers and landowners?
The wellspring of the river lies well to the west, at Tyndrum, and tumbles through gorge, glen and loch into the beginnings of the rich Perthshire farmland and the start of the spawning grounds for the Tay salmon.
It meets the River Lyon and the rivers pour in at a rate of 370 cubic metres a second.
This is where the river dubbed the ‘Mighty Tay’ really starts.
Furious rapids enclosed by narrow gorges guide the Tay through Grandtully, speeding the waters towards the flood plains at Ballinluig, where the Tummel joins the race.
But before that, to the north, numerous small rivers and tributaries — including the likes of the Bruar Water, the Banvie, the Tilt and the Fender Burn have all fattened the River Garry before it feeds into the Tummel and on down into the Tay.
Having swept south from Ballinluig to Dunkeld and on eastward towards Meikleour, the Tay takes on yet another gushing river.
A few miles south of Meikleour, can be found the point at which the River Isla adds its weight.
The Isla, which has drawn power from tributaries high in the Grampian mountains, then adds further strength from the likes of the Ardle and the Ericht before linking up with the Tay.
In the conditions that prevailed in mid-January this year, it is difficult to conceive just how much water was flowing through the Tay before striking south and on to Perth.
Estimates put it at 40,000 million gallons of flood water.
Dr David Gilvear, lecturer in environmental sciences at Stirling University, has studied the river's trouble spots.
Since the mid 19th century, he has found, Ballinluig and the scattered rural communities of Dalguise, Caputh, Spittalfield and Dunkeld have fought flood in 1837, 1839, 1847, 1868, 1894, and on into the present century.
‘We were seeking to find if the river always spilled at the same points, and the answer was yes.
Building started piecemeal in the 18th century, and became too many to mention, but there is a history of the major banks bursting.’
What happened was that farmers, seeking more land, encroached into the flood plain where the river had split into a number of channels.
As the land was reclaimed, these channels became isolated and the river returned to its full force as a single artery and became even more powerful.
Dr Gilvear's study found that most often the breaches in the embankments occurred where they overlaid old channels and were vulnerable to erosion.
‘Our conclusion is these weak spots have to be strengthened beyond belief or the embankments moved back.’
January's flooding was the second worst on record after the great flood of 1814.
Damage estimates vary wildly.
They could be £20 million, they could be £40 million.
What will not be done, probably cannot be done, is anything which will stop the snow, the rain, and a river equal to the Thames and the Severn combined trying to reclaim its natural course in time of flood.
More dams in the upper reaches have been suggested, sluice gates to stem the flow from vulnerable flood plains and dredging the river to deepen the channel, all of which ignore the fact they are absurdly expensive, would take years in the design and execution, and would certainly excite opposition from conservationists and environmentalists.
John Anderson, principal hydrologist with the Tay River Purification Board, is emphatic that any attempt to hold back the irresistible force of the Tay is doomed to failure.
‘There is not going to be a solution in trying to stop the water.
We have to make the floods less damaging.’
Ron Allcock, director of the board, agrees that huge, expensive works may not necessarily work.
‘We used up all of the flood plains before, so controlled flooding may not be the answer.
The Hydro Board were playing tunes with their dams, and did a great deal to lessen the impact by holding back as much water as they could.
‘If there is anything we can do at the dams, it may be that we can raise their levels by even two or three inches, but that has implications for the surrounding countryside.’
The most plausible and financially acceptable solutions concern the middle and lower reaches of the Tay.
Farmers may have to accept that grain and crop sowing on the valley sides is an unacceptably risky business and turn to grass which would bind the soil more firmly when, not if, the Tay is unleashed again.
Bankings which have been torn apart over the last two centuries and then rebuilt and rebuilt again may have to be moved back to take the sting out of the pile-driving force of the river in spate.
But according to Ron Allcock one thing is certain.
It will happen again.
‘What we have to do, and do now, is try to lessen the impact.’
Paying the price for those unheeded warnings
AS the January flood waters receded as fast as they had risen, many questions were left unanswered.
Why was there no comprehensive management plan, considering there had been a similar flood in 1990?
What could be done in future to tame the Tay?
After the 1990 floods, when farmland was submerged, many sheep were lost and Perth was inundated, the engineers Babtie Shaw and Morton were called in to draw up a preliminary study.
There were two main recommendations — a flood warning scheme should be established, but as important, an in-depth study should be carried out to create a hydraulic model for Perth and look for flood alleviation measures.
The first was carried out, the second was not, in spite of warnings from the engineers: ‘The preliminary study has highlighted the high damage costs  associated with flooding on rural and urban communities, and the very real possibility of more extensive and serious flooding of Perth occurring in the future.’
The warning was stark enough, but nothing was ever done.
While Tayside Region and Perth and Kinross District Council indicated they could afford only part of the survey, estimated at £80,000-£100,000, the Scottish Office reply was unequivocal.
For Lord Strathclyde, the then agriculture minister, his private secretary wrote: ‘Lord Strathclyde does not consider that it would be appropriate for the Scottish Office to be directly involved in the commissioning or management of investigations of the type suggested in the consultant's report.’
Events of January may have caused the Scottish Office to reconsider its stance.
In a debate in the House of Lords on 28 January, Lord Fraser of Carmyllie said: ‘Any flood prevention scheme proposed by the regional council and included in its future financial plans will be taken into account when the capital allocations are being set.’
So it looks as though the Government has given the council a cautious go-ahead to draw up a scheme if not to beat the Tay, then to lessen the disastrous effects another flood would have on the long suffering Perthshire population.
HI-TECH DETECTOR TO CATCHEM IF IT CAN
THE brutal murder of a child leaves a firm trace on the mind of a police officer like an indelible pen.
For Don Dovaston, assistant chief constable of Derbyshire police, a series of schoolgirl murders made that mark run deeper.
He was sickened by sifting through hundreds of case notes on crimes against children, desperately looking for clues.
The murders of 11-year-old Susan Maxwell, abducted near Cornhill-on-Tweed in 1982, of Caroline Hogg, five, abducted from Portobello in 1983, and of Sarah Harper, taken from Morley in 1986, filled parents across the country with equal measures of fear and loathing.
It was suspected that there must be a link between the murders and Dovaston set out to find it by devising a computer programme that could provide a statistical profile of who the murderer was likely to be.
CATCHEM emerged in 1986, four years after Susan Maxwell's murder and in the same year as Sarah Harper's.
Police realised that they could not afford to repeat mistakes made during the Yorkshire Ripper case when they interviewed Peter Sutcliffe a number of times before belatedly arresting him.
Standing for Central Analytical Team Collating Homicide Expertise and Management, the computer can help murder investigations hone possible lines of inquiry and suggest a profile of the offender.
Dovaston says that the computer contains some of the most sickening and horrific details imaginable.
Every murder case involving females aged up to 21 and males up to 16 is recorded for the last 33 years.
Every nauseating action, every violation, abuse and mutilation is meticulously rendered.
Often these details follow the same pattern.
Almost 4,000 cases have been examined.
All fresh cases are reported to CATCHEM and forces all over the country have to fill in a form with 230 questions devised by Dovaston.
Now the computer's resources are to be used to help point the finger at the possible killer of James Bulger.
Dovaston, who formerly worked for 25 years as a senior detective in the Liverpool area, explained that every fact that can be gleaned from the investigation into the boy's murder so far will be punched into CATCHEM.
‘We will go into the intimate details of the injuries that have been suffered by this poor child, which will not be apparent to anyone outside of the investigating team,’ he said.
Dovaston is currently using CATCHEM to help Merseyside police direct their murder investigation.
‘We identify positive lines that they should follow.
However, this is not just a case of ‘talk to me today and there it is’ it just depends on how the investigation flows.’
In the past CATCHEM's profiles have been startlingly accurate.
Dovaston is  unable to list them publicly because many of the crimes have been committed in recent years and a number are still sub judice.
‘The computer's first task is to see if there are any other crimes that might be associated or may be a series of offences.
It advises on these cases.
It will perhaps ask for further information’ said Dovaston.
‘It shows that investigations should not be based on the gut feeling of a particular officer — it has got to be more professional and CATCHEM is.
If it is successful the computer can begin to paint the offender's picture.
It will specify gender, age group, the area where the murderer is most likely to live, whether they have previous convictions, what these are likely to be and more.
This photofit may amount to 1 in 10,000 or 1 in 100,000.
At the moment CATCHEM is the baby of Derbyshire police force who bear the cost of its operation.
It is hoped that in the future the computerised detective will be used as a model for a national profiling scheme.
In January this year the Home Office promised £350,000 to help set up an offender profiling unit which will record not only child murders but serial killings and rapes.
It will emulate the FBI's behavioural science unit which describes its work as an odd mixture of detective work and psychology.
Agents there have interviewed some of the United States’ most notorious killers such as Charles Manson and Sirhan Sirhan to learn details of why and how they committed their crimes.
It is hoped that the British unit might do the same.
Meanwhile CATCHEM's knowledge continues to grow day by day along with its grim case load.
Audrey Gillan
New version of a vehicle with Second World War origins
Jim Dunn puts a motoring legend to the test over some very rough country
ON A rugged hill track overlooking the former car plant at Linwood, Scottish motoring journalists turned out in force last week to put the latest version of a motoring legend through its paces over some very nasty terrain.
And perhaps because of Chrysler's ignominious retreat from our only volume car manufacturing plant, we spared the cars nothing — never once gave them the benefit of the doubt in the sort of conditions which could tear a wheel off a less rugged vehicle.
Chrysler is back in the UK market with two variations on the old Willys Jeep theme as the prelude to what the company hopes will be a wide range of new models designed to exploit profitable niches.
The Jeep Wranglers receiving so much stick last week were the direct descendants of the vehicle which first surfaced in the Second World War when Ford mass produced the Jeep (GP from General Purpose) runabouts to take the invading allies to Berlin just as fast as the film crews could follow the generals.
But half a century on and the most basic Jeep will, according to UK importers TKM, be as much as an impulse, fashion buy as a Harley-Davidson motorcycle or, though on a slightly less grand scale, a pair of Ray-Ban Aviator sunglasses.
And with bright, almost gaudy colour schemes including bright blue and really bright red, the £12,500 Wrangler is certainly an eye-catcher, I confirmed after leaving the off-road track for a spin around Renfrewshire.
Whether the attention it received was due to its classic looks or the fast drying coating of mud which reached on to the roof was difficult to judge, though I suspect, it was the butch overcoat which caught so many eyes.
The 2.5 litre petrol engine fitted to the cheapest version is a mere toy by US standards but more than lusty enough to give the Wrangler real credibility against the Suzuki and Daihatsu offerings which inhabit this sector of the fast expanding 4X4 market.
Top speed is 94 mph with standstill to 60 mph available in 13.4 seconds — figures which are more than respectable at this end of the market, though owners may find that the 20 mpg thirst takes a lot of getting used to compared with the 30-plus of Japanese rivals.
Off road, where a bunch of still angry Scottish journalists might still feel so angry towards Chrysler that they would push the instructor in the lead vehicle far faster than he might prefer to go, the Wrangler can also hack it.
With low ratio, four-wheel-drive selected in preference to the rear wheel drive high ratios recommended for road use, a combination of brute force and good tyres allows the vehicle to be forced over terrain where few would attempt to walk.
In the off road mode, however, the Wrangler will rarely attract passengers for a second time as the ride is absolutely terrible, particularly for those in the rear bench seat, which is smaller and harder than some estate cars offer in their third row of seats.
Indeed, aside from power steering, the basic Wrangler is probably less well equipped than the wartime Jeeps which at least boasted folding shovels to help the drivers dig them out of trouble.
There is, of course, a heater and a heated rear screen and even a wash/wipe mechanism fitted to the hard top but once that has been removed, a five minute, two man job, the driver is at the mercy of the elements unless he is willing to pay extra for the folding soft top.
Those who could not consider such a utilitarian plaything, even for a joke, will have to hand over nearly £2,000 more for the four-litre version, which will arrive in the spring complete with typically American equipment such as air conditioning, electric windows and central-locking — plus standstill to 60 mph in under nine seconds and an even larger thirst.
The Jeep Wrangler: an eye-catcher that can go where few people would attempt to walk
Now Vauxhall opts for airbag as a standard
THE move towards making driver side airbags standard equipment on all United Kingdom cars continued this week when Vauxhall announced that every new Vauxhall Cavalier, Calibra and Astra GSi will be fitted with a driver side airbag from now on— at no extra cost, writes Jim Dunn.
While few doubt that the Vauxhall move is aimed at upstaging Ford, whose Mondeo goes on sale next month with a driver side bag as standard, the Vauxhalls will be fitted with the full size, US-specification airbag designed to save the driver in a frontal impact without relying on a seatbelt.
Thus, not only will the Cavalier beat the Mondeo to become the first medium-sized saloon to boast one as standard but it will, Vauxhall stressed, have the bigger (and by implication, better) US-style bag rather than the smaller (and, by implication, less effective) Eurobag.
The 80-litre US specification bag fitted to Vauxhalls, as well as Mercedes-Benz and other luxury models, deploys more slowly but fills a far greater volume than the 35-litre Eurobag.
That has inspired fears over potential damage to the occupants' ears due to the sudden pressure change within European saloons which tend to be smaller than those in the US, and also to worries about the ability to control the car in the unlikely event that the bag deploys accidentally.
Mercedes-Benz, which originally developed airbag technology and which fits the US size bag as standard to all its products in the UK, argues that even if the full size bag is triggered accidentally, the inflation and deflation cycle is over so quickly that the driver does not lose control.
Though there is no legislation governing the fitment of airbags to European cars nor is there any independent evidence available on how many fatalities or injuries are prevented by the use of an airbag in conjunction with seatbelts.
Volkswagen, which helped develop the smaller Eurobag specifically for smaller cars, introduced the Eurobag as optional equipment on the Golf last year and has now made it available on the Passat saloon as well.
This has forced other manufacturers to follow suit as the latest market research confirms that customers now put safety at the top of their list of desirable features in a car.
Some, like Ford and Vauxhall, have been able to respond quickly but Rover, which has a US airbag only on the top of the range 800 series, is having to undertake a major engineering programme to make them available throughout the range during the next year.
A Rover spokesman said,’ It is the German manufacturers which are forcing everyone else to follow suit just as the Germans forced catalytic convertors on the market as the answer to emission problems when most other manufacturers were developing lean burn engine technology to achieve the same result more effectively.’
Though Vauxhall acknowledges that the timing of the announcement was designed to take attention away from the Mondeo, production schedules and sluggish sales might mean that the Ford is, after all, the first medium sized car to become available with an airbag as standard.
A spokesman agreed yesterday that it could take a couple of months for dealers to clear stocks of Cavaliers.
He added: ‘We started producing CD and SRi versions with the airbag a few weeks ago so several customers will already have been pleasantly surprised to find that their new car has one fitted completely free of charge.’
THE THREAT TO SHELF-LIFE
IT is something of a cliche to say that the printed word has faced growing competition from new technology, but throughout the Eighties consumer spending on books did maintain a steady growth.
The last three years, however, have shown a market brought to a standstill, or even into real decline.
At its height, in 1989, retail sales of books in Britain were worth around £2.5 billion; this year the figure is likely to show an actual drop.
There is little dispute that books remain vital in our society; in education, research, business and even entertainment.
Since Gladstone's day, governments have accepted that literacy, learning and literature are worth more than the revenue from a tax on the product.
Now this exemption is threatened.
It is not simply about raising the price of a paperback; many more fundamental problems arise.
The effects in education cause immediate worry.
Though schools could reclaim VAT, universities and students could not, nor could parents buying books for children.
And education authorities (and publishers) would also incur administrative costs in dealing with the tax.
For academic and specialist subjects, the problems are even greater.
In comparison with other books, they can be expensive, as relatively low numbers are printed, so the basic cost of putting the book together must be spread over a limited number of copies.
If a price rise were to discourage even a small proportion of buyers, then that basic cost would rise yet further.
So begins a spiral of dearer books.
The Don't Tax Reading paper from the National Book Committee cites the costing process for a textbook, presently selling 5,000 copies at £17.95.
With VAT, this book could cost £20.95, a level at which 10 per cent of sales would probably be lost.
Thereby the publisher's final profit would drop some 50 per cent: so he would need to raise his price.
The book (with VAT) then might cost £23.50, selling perhaps only 4,000 copies.
At this, the author loses in royalties, the publisher's profit still drops by around 20 per cent— and the customer pays 31 per cent more.
(And no-one should believe that such sums as these would apply only to obscure text books; even the basic paperback novel could be thus affected.)
The academic book market is already in decline with the erosion of student grants; the spending on schoolbooks and on libraries has suffered in public spending cutbacks, and consumer cash in the current recession is clearly not plentiful.
All these  factors have made.
The past three years have been particularly harsh in both publishing and bookselling, with waves of redundancies and bankruptcies and, at best, a massive reduction in the profitability of the book industry.
In Scotland, the situation is acute; publishers struggle to keep authors, pulled by the call of London; Scottish-interest material does not have the sales potential of an international paperback best-seller.
Yet this country has a great diversity and quality of books, almost 100 publishing concerns and several hundred bookshops.
The ‘Kelpies’, children's paperbacks featuring many Scottish authors, are published by Canongate Press, whose managing director, Stephanie Wolfe Murray believes these books to be particularly ‘price-sensitive’ and doubts if the list could  continue to grow were VAT to raise the price.
Yet the books are of particular importance for Scottish primary schools.
Peter Mackenzie, director of Mainstream Publishing in Edinburgh, has no doubt that VAT would have a ‘highly detrimental effect’ on the book trade.
‘Imagine publishers all over the country repricing thousands of books which will end up being too dear to sell.’
Last October, the European ministers responsible for cultural affairs resolved to adopt a programme of development for ‘reading, translation and the book trade’, covering translation schemes, libraries, publishing and book distribution, as well as the more obvious encouragement of reading and literacy.
By last week the consultation process had fanned out to the Department of National Heritage, the Scottish Office, and all points of the book trade compass.
But nowhere in this fine plan did anyone cite the imposition of VAT as a measure to be avoided if literature, reading, writing, and books, are to flourish in the new Europe.
Why not?
Healing plants
I found the article ‘Old angle on modern ills’, by David Simpson (Business, 16 February), of considerable interest.
It dealt clearly with the many stages between the identification of plants which may have potential medicinal value and the eventual isolation of the active ingredient or ingredients for use by the pharmaceutical industry.
What he did not mention was the fact that Scotland has been involved in the processing of vegetable raw materials of medicinal use for some 200 years.
Today, the active ingredients of leaves, roots, gums, seeds, etc from many countries are extracted, purified and supplied to the pharmaceutical industry throughout the world by a factory not a million miles from Murrayfield rugby ground in Edinburgh.
It is an active and thriving business, well-suited to play a part in the scenario outlined by David Simpson.
Frank disappointment with Royal Mail technology
Your readers may or not be aware of the consternation currently being experienced in south-west Scotland following the installation of ‘improved’ technology at the Carlisle office of the Royal Mail whither our post has been taken for sorting for almost a decade.
This amazing £250,000 Japanese import is apparently so sophisticated that it is beyond its capability to frank more than one all-purpose hybrid place of origin on its postmark, viz ‘Cumbria’ occupying the whole upper half of the disc, with ‘Dumfries & Galloway’(nearly three times the length) squeezed into the lower half.
Thus the entire region of south-west Scotland is being relegated to the status of an English sub-county like Rutland or Westmorland.
Arrangements are being made, we are informed, for those of us who, oddly enough, prefer to have our correspondence marked with its specific place of origin, to deposit our post in a wee box up a close or in a back street away from the main mail collection points.
How far does one have to travel up the A701 or the A74 (soon to be renumbered M6) to ensure that our letters will bear their distinctive Scottish postmark without being made to feel like one of Ian Fleming's fictional foreign agents furtively searching for his allocated ‘drop’?
To complete our disgruntlement, this month here in Moffat we have witnessed the boarding-up of our familiar old, tastefully-designed bronze posting box recessed under the window of the post office and now replaced by one of those monstrous red pillar-boxes, concreted into the pavement immediately in front.
This fresh eyesore bears the (in Scotland) heraldically incorrect EIIR cipher, which caused so much aggravation when it first made its appearance in this country in the 1950s, and which, to the credit of the postal authorities, has since been omitted from all their vehicle livery, stationery, and other graphics.
As a lighter-hearted tailpiece it is, perhaps, gratifying to note that the dogs here are already doing their best to hasten the processes of corrosion against this latest disproportionate and obnoxious implant.
Rocard proving ‘big bang’ theory
MICHEL ROCARD'S gamble seems to be paying off.
By calling on his fellow socialists to perform the equivalent of a collective hara-kiri, he paradoxically appears to have given them back hope of a new life at the moment of their deepest despair.
For months the polls have been predicting an unprecedented landslide victory for the Right in next month's general election.
The socialists looked set to lose 200 or more of their 270 parliamentary seats.
A mood of total defeatism had set in.
Many of the party leaders appeared to have given up
Rocked by an interminable succession of scandals, shamed by its inability to stop the inexorable rise of unemployment to a record three million, and increasingly alienated from ordinary people after more than a decade in power, the Socialist Party was no longer simply ailing; it was moribund.
The latest scandal, this time involving the Prime Minister himself, Pierre Beregovoy, hitherto regarded as the very model of honesty and integrity, seemed like the last straw.
M Beregovoy may claim that he has nothing to reproach himself with, but his acceptance of an interest-free million franc (£125,000) loan from a shady businessman looks suspicious to say the least.
M Beregovoy says that he accepted the money from his ‘friend,’ Roger-Patrice Pelat, in September 1986 in order to help buy a modest, 100 sq m flat for himself in the fashionable 16th Arrondissement of Paris, costing 2.5 million francs.
He insists that no political favours were promised in return and claims that he has since repaid the debt, half of it in the form of old books and furniture.
No itemised list of the valuables has been produced, however.
M Pelat, an old friend of President Mitterrand from his days as a Resistance fighter, was charged with insider trading in 1988 after making a profit of more than £800,000 during the acquisition of the American Triangle Industries by Pechiney, the French state-owned aluminium and packaging company.
M Beregovoy is supposed to be joint leader of the socialists' election campaign.
The other supposed leader, Laurent Fabius, first secretary of the Socialist Party, is also severely incapacitated on account of his involvement in a scandal concerning the treatment of haemophiliacs with AIDS-contaminated blood, for which he is facing a charge of manslaughter.
Into this seemingly catastrophic situation suddenly rode Michel Rocard, Prime Minister from 1988 to 1991 and the man officially designated as the socialist candidate for the 1995 presidential election.
Since being ‘sacked’(his own expression) by President Mitterrand nearly two years' ago, M Rocard had virtually disappeared from the national political scene.
But last Thursday he made a spectacular return with a speech to party militants in Montlouis, on the outskirts of Tours, in which he called for a political ‘big bang’ in order to bring about the emergence of a new centre left party as part of a recomposition of the whole of the French political scene.
It was time for the socialists to make a complete break with their past in order to bring about a new renaissance, he argued.
What was now needed was a ‘vast, open, modern, outward-looking movement,’ comprising progressive-minded communists, ecologists, centrists, and human rights activists, as well as what remained of the socialists.
M Rocard's ‘big bang’ proposal has received a positive response from most socialist leaders, left-wing voters (73 per cent approved of the idea), and ecologist supporters (62 per cent approved), while several leading communist dissidents have expressed a cautious interest.
Ecologist leaders have tended to pour scorn on the idea in public(their private response has been warmer) and the centrists, who at present form part of the conservative coalition, have rejected it out of hand.
But this was to be expected just before a general election.
M Rocard is more hopeful about what could happen afterwards.
In the meantime, he has given the socialists a much-needed shot in the arm which might just save them from the total disaster they were expecting next month.
Blood supplies
With reference to Jim Brunton's letter (17 February), I would like to support Professor Ronald Girdwood's remarks in an earlier letter and to confirm for blood donors and other readers the facts about blood for private hospitals.
The Scottish blood transfusion service was established many years before there was an NHS and has always supplied blood for any patient who needs it.
The blood itself is freely donated and always freely passed on, although there is a charge to private hospitals to ensure that the full cost of collection, testing and processing is recovered by the NHS.
The charges are subject to independent review.
Our contracts specify that private patients, many of whom are themselves blood donors, are not charged for the blood itself.
We make every effort to provide information for donors about how their donations are used and we take positive steps to seek donors' views.
Annual reports and other donor information literature clearly state that blood donations are used for all patients in NHS and other hospitals.
We appreciate Mr Brunton's interest in these important matters and his recognition that the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service is one of the most effective in the world.
This success is unquestionably thanks to the goodwill and support of voluntary donors, to whom we are all very grateful.
A French first for capital's hi-tech learners
AN Edinburgh independent boys' school has become the first in Britain to plug into the French government's prestigious new technology learning centre.
Twelve pupils in lower sixth (S5) at Merchiston Castle School this month visited the Cite des Sciences et de l'Industrie in La Villette, north-east Paris, writes Education Correspondent Douglas Fraser.
As guests of the French government, they were the first British school group to learn at the 30,000 square metre, futuristic exhibition and learning centre — and did so entirely in French.
Ian Craig, the head of science and technology, said: ‘It is educationally valuable to take boys to France or to the science museum, but the unique thing about this was that it was both at the same time, and that was more than twice as valuable.’
The pupils concentrated on the science of light and colour, and how it related to art.
This was taught through watching and working the exhibits, and through a workshop on animation in one of the centre's classrooms, while the course was also linked to art gallery visits in Paris.
‘In places this size, you come away saying it would take more than a day to see them,’ said Mr Craig.
‘But in La Villette, we stayed a week and still didn't see it all.’
It is hoped that there will be an enthusiastic response to Jane Fowler's excellent and well-informed article on advanced driving.
Since there is a waiting list for places on the course for better driving, readers may be interested to know that groups affiliated to the Institute of Advanced Motorists hold such classes all over the country.
Our group is at present conducting a course of lectures and assessed drives at Stirling University.
Poor advice
Jack McKellar may be ‘one of the most highly-qualified drivers’ attached to The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (‘Motoring under a dangerous illusion’, Lifestyle today).
However, some of his advice to Jane Fowler looks like the utterings of someone who enjoys that elevated status rather too much.
‘Try to see five miles ahead on a country road’, he advises.
I'm very pleased that not a single motorist follows his advice, since if they did the old Hebridean tradition of driving on to the moors would spread to the mainland.
The National Farmers Union would certainly have something to say about that.
‘Engage neutral and the handbrake at roundabouts’: an interesting proposal for a road feature that is designed to speed the flow of traffic by advising road users to ‘give way’ rather than‘stop’.
Perhaps the Gogar roundabout in Edinburgh, with traffic lights every ten yards, is the thing of the future?
‘Don't drive over potholes’: as a cyclist, if I tried to avoid every pothole I saw, I would not be here to write this letter.
Most potholes can only be seen a few yards ahead, and cars swerving without warning hardly contribute to road safety.
Dams helped to reduce river's flow
I refer to James Rougvie's article today, ‘Who can tame the might of the Tay?’
The answer is that no-one can control or even forecast accurately the maximum flow of water that can be expected to surge down the Tay valley and through Perth.
The flood of 18 January was duly anticipated by the excellent flood warning scheme only recently installed, but not its maximum flow or the fact that breaches would occur in certain flood banks.
I am surprised that you should publish an article on the Tay floods with a meaningless figure.
Was the figure of 40,000 million gallons of flood water to which James Rougvie refers passing Perth in an hour, a day or during the whole period of the flood?
It was, of course, per day, roughly equal to the huge and terrifying figure of 2,000 cubic metres per second (cumecs, as units of water flow are conventionally called) as referred to earlier in his article.
No-one can say that such a flood or a greater one may not recur next month, next year or next decade.
Thanks to the presence of Scottish Hydro-Electric's storage dams in the hills, the flow passing Perth on 18 January was in fact materially less than it would have been without them.
Exactly how much less is impossible to state accurately as it depends on the rate of rainfall and consequent flows in different parts of the catchment, as well as on the water levels in the dams.
Scottish Hydro-Electric controls the water level in its dams using the latest information and forecasts available.
It is only thanks to this close control that maximum use can be made of the water available to generate electricity.
Ultimately, it is thanks to this efficient use of water that tariffs in the company's area are kept low.
If its role were to be changed to play the part of flood manager, it could indeed hold the level of water in its major storage reservoirs feet or even yards below the economic level.
However, this would be very costly and who would pay?
In addition, even this measure could not guarantee that recent flood levels would not be exceeded.
Landowners, farmers (and local authorities) naturally use the land they control to maximum advantage, so of course, they build flood banks to prevent flood damage and cannot be prevented from so doing.
Certain banks, often in the hollows of ancient river course, were not always well built.
Some were undermined and others, when the water came over the top, simply had their substance scoured away.
The flood banks will surely be rebuilt, hopefully made stronger by the use of wire mesh, gabions or even sheet-piling and not forgetting the use of natural vegetation to consolidate them.
The further downstream one goes, the higher and better the banks must be: skilful siting and engineering are obviously required.
This does not mean changing the character of the river, or turning it into a canal.
For the last century the Tay has been known not only as the largest, but also arguably as the best salmon river in Britain.
Long may it so continue.
The Scotsman title for high-speed locomotive
MEMORIES of the Flying Scotsman are likely to be evoked at Waverley Station today when one of InterCity's most powerful locomotives, the Class 91, is named after The Scotsman.
At a ceremony attended by Chris Green, managing director of InterCity, locomotive 91003 which operates on the high-speed East Coast route will be given the name of this newspaper which has been celebrating its 175th anniversary.
The nameplate, carrying the paper's title and emblem, will be unveiled by the editor, Magnus Linklater.
The train will then head for London, bearing amongst its passengers the winners of the Scotsman competition, details of which are in the previous column.
Salmonella test rules end
THE Agriculture Minister, John Gummer, last night ended the requirement for testing commercial egg-laying flocks for salmonella.
He disclosed, in a Commons written reply, that he is revoking the Poultry Laying Flocks (Testing and Registration) Order introduced in 1989.
He said last night: ‘This change will take effect tomorrow.’
It shouldn't happen, says a vet
THE long-held assumption that beef producers are today breeding better and more productive cattle and that farm management is of the highest order, received a setback yesterday at a seminar for veterinarians organised by Edinburgh University's veterinary faculty.
A Northumberland vet, Colin Barwise-Munro, put it in explicit terms when he said: ‘In 1921, the incidence of dystocia or difficult calvings in the European herd was reckoned in one survey to be no more than 3 per cent.
Today all the indications are that it's far above that level.’
Mr Barwise-Munro continued: ‘We've gone totally backwards and created a situation we should not be proud of — a third of all calf deaths occur at birth.’
The range of problems within breeds is, according to official figures, quite massive.
In the major terminal breeds, the Charolais fares worst with up to 17.3 per cent of difficult calvings in some herds.
Inevitably difficult calvings cause a whole range of problems and here Mr Barwise-Munro remarked: ‘Up to 2.5 per cent of first calving heifers involved in such circumstances die but with those which survive, many will suffer up to a 10 per cent drop in milk yield and consequently weaning weight of calves will be lower and of course there can also be major fertility problems in getting the cows back in calf.’
A  caesarean section is the ultimate answer to many calving problems but according to Mr Barwise-Munro: ‘It's still regarded by farmers as a last resort and very often by the time the vet is called, the cow has been left too long with the result that she has to be culled.
I would appeal to farmers to call on us much quicker.’
Mr Barwise-Munro felt there was still a great deal to learn about bovine obstetrics and he discounted the farmer's view that bulls were responsible for all problems, saying: ‘The bull is important but we also have to consider the pelvic area of the female.
If we set out to design the worst possible pelvis we could end up with something like a Friesian, Charolais or Belgian Blue cow.
That's the extent of the problem.’
However farmers may soon be able to select herd replacements with that factor in mind.
Mr Barwise-Munro added: ‘Pelvic size is highly heritable and there is work currently being undertaken on SAC farms on measuring individual animals.
We know that this can be done at about 12 months of age and in future it is quite possible that farmers will use these measurements in selecting their bulling heifers.’
A Scottish Agricultural College vet, Phil Scott, appealed to farmers to consider disease prevention rather than cures, saying that it was much cheaper to spend money on vaccines than have to spend perhaps £30 on treating a single calf which in any event was unlikely to match the performance of those animals which had been vaccinated.
The biggest factor in calf performance is the milk yield of the dam.
There Mr Scott was critical of some farm management.
Also taking that view was Dr Tony Andrews of the Royal Veterinary College in London, who said: ‘I know I have to be careful in what I say but in my view, the management in many herds as far as feeding regimes are concerned is little better than controlled starvation.’
With calf losses at or just after birth hovering around an average of 5 per cent, clearly the message from vets to farmers was — improve your management and liaison with the profession.
A Braemar vet, Ian Watt, said that he had long experience of co-operating with farmers and commented: ‘Many years ago, I was involved with the MacRobert Trust on a consultancy basis.
I well remember the late Dr James Durno saying to me: ‘Ian, look after the stock as if they were your own’.
It was sound advice which benefited everyone.’
Scientists ‘united on greenhouse dangers’
By Auslan Cramb Environment Correspondent
GLOBAL warming is the largest problem facing the scientific community, a world authority on climatic change stated in Glasgow last night.
Sir John Houghton said 100 leading scientists from 50 countries unanimously agreed that climate was likely to be affected by greenhouse gas emissions from industry, principally carbon dioxide (CO) released from fossil fuels.
He told a packed lecture chamber at Strathclyde University that the increase in CO emissions was now so large that even if there were a 1 per cent reduction worldwide from 2000, it would take 100 years for levels to stabilise in the atmosphere.
Sir John, chairman of the scientific group on the United Nations intergovernmental panel on climate change, and a former chief executive of the Meteorological Office, said: ‘Never before have so many scientists from so many disciplines been involved in scientific assessment.’
World statistics show that 1990 and 1991 were the warmest years on record, and there was now a strong consensus that global warming would produce sea-level rises, changing rainfall and changing extremes of weather.
However, he thought it would take another ten years of satellite measurements before the predicted temperature increases and climate changes could be confirmed.
At present, climate patterns — including the 0.3C to 0.6C increase in air temperature over the past 100 years — were on the same scale as natural variations.
There was general agreement, said Sir John, that the average temperature of the earth's surface — as predicted by computer models — would increase by 0.3C per decade because of emissions from industry and transport, coupled with the effects of deforestation and intensive agricultural practice.
That would be the largest temperature increase since the last ice age, around 10,000 years ago.
The greenhouse effect is caused when gases in the atmosphere let the sun's rays through, but then trap some of the heat that would otherwise be reflected back into space.
CO is man's main contribution to the greenhouse effect, responsible for 55 per cent of the warming; other important gases are methane and nitrous oxide, given off by burning fossil fuels and vegetation, and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), which also cause ozone depletion.
Methane is also given off by rice paddies and ruminant animals, including cattle.
Sir John, delivering the annual lecture to the Graduate School of Environmental Studies, said people and ecosystems would have difficulty adapting to the rates of change, but scientists needed to learn more about the likely effects before countries would know how to respond.
‘In view of the uncertainty what action is justified now?
Few in the scientific community would argue that the scientific evidence justifies immediate extremely drastic action.
However, the scientific community does see the problem as potentially very serious.’
Two types of action were needed.
He said measures should be taken within reasonable costs to limit CO emissions; many countries were planning to limit emissions by 2000 to 1990 levels, while developing countries were beginning to reduce the extent of deforestation.
He said agreement would have to be reached on stabilising atmospheric CO at some level before 2100.
Achieving that aim would have a profound effect on the energy industry — coal and oil-fired power stations are major sources of CO — and on forest management.
However, he concluded: ‘Having to tackle reductions of this magnitude should not be seen so much as a threat to our way of life but as a challenge and an enormous opportunity for the world's scientists, engineers and industrialists in both the developed and developing countries.’
Signs of better times ahead
Jim Dunn looks at how Scotland could be used to test the efficiency of the latest hi-tech aids to beating those traffic jams
SHORTLY after 9am yesterday, the owner of an ageing Lada saloon desperately tried to restart his stalled car as he waited at the lights which now control the exit from the M8 at the Newbridge roundabout on the western approaches to Edinburgh.
As he tried, several times, to restart his car before giving up and pushing it on to the verge to await rescue, traffic on the M8 from Glasgow quickly built up until there was a three-mile tailback.
That sort of short-lived, but expensive and frustrating delay, could soon become a thing of the past if ambitious plans due to be revealed by the Scottish Office today are given the go-ahead by the public and private sectors.
If suitable offers are received for the work being put out to tender today, Scotland will become the first country in the world with a fully-integrated national road management system using electronic roadside signs to warn and divert drivers on major routes and new, in-car navigation systems to beat urban traffic problems.
The road traffic management system, similar to that used by electricity companies to operate the national supply grid, will be built around an improved version of the CITRAC system currently used on the M8 in Glasgow coupled to the more advanced FEDICS system used around the Firth of Forth.
The latter system, which currently uses small electronic message boards to control traffic speeds and advise drivers of alternative routes around the Forth Road Bridge and on the M9 and M90, has already proved popular with drivers.
More important, it has begun to restore some of the credibility of traffic management systems eroded by the failure of the ageing CITRAC system used by police in Glasgow to control traffic on the M8 and its complex network of junctions in the city.
The new system, which could be in use before the end of the decade, would use much bigger and brighter signs to feed the driver with information supplied from a central control room.
A motorist entering Scotland via the A74(M) could, for instance, be advised if the A9 was closed or about to be closed because of snow, or if the Forth Road Bridge was affected by high winds.
Advice could also be given on the best alternative routes.
A commuter on the M8 would encounter a series of messages on the speed of traffic just a few miles ahead and, if that slowed, or the road were blocked, information on the most suitable diversion could be given in plenty of time to allow a driver to leave the motorway and avoid the hold up.
The information necessary to measure traffic speeds and give warning of delays will be gathered from cable loops fitted under the road surface to measure speeds and report to both local and national traffic control rooms.
Estimates of the cost of this system vary between £8 million and £25 million depending on the complexity of the technology adopted, but Scottish Office officials are currently negotiating with the Treasury on novel ways of financing the scheme.
The most likely method involves the leasing of the necessary hardware, and the Scottish case is strengthened by projected payback of well over 100 per cent a year from the savings to the national economy in eliminating or minimising congestion — estimated to cost up to £1.5 billion a year in Scotland.
One of the biggest potential costs is the building of under-road ducting for the speed sensors.
However the necessary ducts have already been installed with all new roads — such as the A74(M) — and to existing roads during overnight maintenance operations.
There are a number of in-car navigation systems available in prototype form, the most advanced of which are linked to global positioning satellites.
They guide the driver through towns using a dash top display unit and an electronic voice.
The costs to the motorist are believed to be broadly similar to those for a car phone, with a sliding scale of charges based on the level and frequency of use.
Scottish motorists, however, could receive preferential rates if, as expected, they are used as guinea pigs to prove that the theory of in-car navigation system can be made to work effectively on a national scale.
The pictures show an artist's impression of how the road signs of the future might look with the brighter display offering information about hazards ahead and how best to avoid them and a more traditional display, similar to existing road signs, for use in normal traffic conditions.
Pointing the way: A road sign of the future would be able to change from its normal wording (left) to give advice (right) on alternative routes in the event of traffic problems developing Cockpit-style driving: How a motorist could be able to beat the traffic jams by using an in-car display unit
Sexing a grape
DOWN under being the truly operative phrase, we hear of a stunning revelation about how our Antipodean cousins ‘sex’ a grape.
Rubbish, I hear all you wine buffs out there say.
There is no such thing as sexing a grape.
Well, there is, according to Steve Smith, a viticulturist at New Zealand wine producer Villa Maria, as he explained to a shocked audience of Scottish trade guests at a tasting at Samuel Dow's in Glasgow recently — based in a section of the dear, green place where sex, by tradition, is what coal comes in.
‘The way we sex a grape, or vineyard, in New Zealand,’ he began, ‘to ensure that there is the right amount of grape exposed to the sunlight, is to ask a friend to stand on the other side of the vine.
‘Then we ask our friend — who can be male or female — to drop their trousers.
If we can determine the friend's sex through the vine leaves, then we know there is enough sunlight coming through!’
He added, incidentally, ‘that depending on the sex of your friend, the process can take some time’.
I bet.