

GLYNN GRIFFITHS/THE INDEPENDENT THE FREE THINKER
‘The history of prison literature is distinguished.
Writers have produced extraordinary work in conditions more oppressive than mine.
Mine is a kind of open prison, and their example inspires me.’
On the fourth anniversary of the ‘fatwa’, Salman Rushdie talks to Literary Editor Catherine Lockerbie
THE prisoner is in positive mood.
It's not that the bars on his cell have loosened any.
Indeed, there are no bars on his cell: his particular purgatory is more amorphous, more encompassing, less obvious than that.
It's just that after four long, very long, years, a little light seems at last to be discernible through the gloom.
‘There has definitely been a change of attitude on the part of the British Government,’ Salman Rushdie is saying, in his cultured, impeccable tones.
‘I have felt for a long time that the only way this issue was going to be resolved was to have it fixed on a political level — that it wouldn't just fade away.
The Government took the opposite view; but now they have decided that it must be made high profile again.’
He sounds a little like a politician himself — a terrifically clever, clear politician, with a definite manifesto.
His manifesto, of course, concerns the small matter of his life.
The Ayatollah Khomeini may have died, the demonstrations may have dwindled, the book which precipitated the whole bizarre nightmare may no longer be burned in scenes of spine-chilling ugliness, but let no-one be in any doubt: Iran still wants Salman Rushdie dead.
Tomorrow, the fourth anniversary of the fatwa falls.
Condemned to death for a work of fiction, Rushdie still has round-the-clock protection, still lives a strange half-life of hide-outs, a hostage to hatred.
The price on his head is high — higher than ever, currently at a cool three million dollars — and the hit squads are alert and patient.
True, the man made prisoner by all this is testing the limits of his confinement.
He does manage carefully prepared appearances in public, he does see journalists (this interview was conducted by telephone, still his chief channel of communication), it does sometimes seem as if every second person on the London meeja circuit has sat next to Rushdie at some dinner party.
But the danger to his life is every bit as acute as it was when an aged cleric in a distant country first pronounced the fateful sentence.
His personal situation is, then, appalling; but the anniversary is as good an occasion as any to restate emphatically that this is about much more than one person's predicament.
It is about the most fundamental human freedoms, of speech and thought and belief: these are the things that in the end matter most, as Salman Rushdie himself knows, and stresses.
‘The reason people have been concerned about this case for so long is that it is about far bigger issues.
After all, the world is full of people in danger — look at Bosnia, many people there are in far greater immediate danger than I am.
But the point is that this is about really gigantic things: freedom of speech, universality of human rights, even the issue of sovereignty.
Iran has, after all, infringed British sovereignty by forcing it into massive protection for one of its own citizens.
It's not that distant from an act of war; at the very least, it's extremely unfriendly.’
Extremely unfriendly indeed.
A low-key approach towards Iran, linked in to the fate of the Lebanon hostages, now of course all free, does not appear to have paid off; and the Government patience does seem to be fraying slightly, to Rushdie's intense relief.
‘The Iranians have been given a lot of leeway in the hope that they would cease to have a terrorist agenda.
It hasn't worked, they didn't respond — look at the recent assassination of a Turkish journalist.
I now have a letter from the Foreign Office minister Douglas Hogg setting out the change in policy.
I also have a copy of a speech he made in Geneva to the United Nations, in which he referred to the fatwa as outrageous, and an abuse of the most fundamental human rights — really very strong language for the British Government!’
International pressure too is building.
Indeed, support for Salman Rushdie and all that his situation stands for has from the start been more vociferous and active abroad than in his own country, something he feels understandably bitter about.
He has managed an astonishing amount of travelling, visiting nine countries in complex  manoeuvres , including flights in military aircraft, to put his case and plead for rhetoric to be transformed into action.
‘There's growing attention in the international community, in part generated by my own wanderings around the world.
All kinds of political pressure can be brought to bear through such organisations as the UN, the G7 countries, or the Council of Europe.
I haven't had any contact yet with the new American administration, but I'm hoping for something positive from that quarter soon.
Economic weapons are already being used against Iran.
Germany has threatened sanctions if harm comes to anyone affected by the fatwa, Norway has blocked an oil deal, and Canada has refused a $1 billion credit line.
Of course, things happen in politics for more than one reason, but these things did happen shortly after my visits to the countries in question.’
That Britain is now a little more ready to join this hope-filled, rolling bandwagon is, not unnaturally, a matter of mild elation to Rushdie and to Article 19, the freedom-of-speech group which has been organising the campaign for his defence.
‘We hoped all along that Britain would lead the international commitment vigorously, rather than half-heartedly.
It's very nice that the home team has started to play,’ he says, in an unconscious and deeply ironic echo of Norman Tebbit's infamous metaphor for testing the patriotic allegiances of immigrants.
It was Tebbit, of course, who perpetrated one of the most breathtakingly vicious attacks of all on Rushdie, calling this most distinguished of writers, a British citizen for over 25 years, ‘an impertinent, whining guest, an outstanding villain’.
It's worth pausing to examine the peculiar animosity which Rushdie seems to arouse, quite unconnected with Muslim wrath at his supposed blasphemy.
His future freedom depends on the political will to act; the political will to act depends on public pressure; yet there's still a strange and deeply distasteful, unsympathetic undercurrent.
He does of course commit the triple sin of being ‘foreign’, rich and clever: unpardonable.
He hasn't been humble, he hasn't grovelled, he is deemed to be arrogant — if he is, it's probably that inner confidence which has brought him through his ordeal with such sanity and poise.
Everyone seems oddly ready to judge.
Three quite different and perfectly compassionate journalistic colleagues, on learning of this interview, asked if I found him ‘unsympathetic’, ‘slippery’, ‘obnoxious’.
(The answer to all these is an emphatic no.)
Salman Rushdie is painfully aware of this, and painfully aware of the underlying dangers of attention-diverting it entails.
‘There's a tendency to trivialise the issue by making it about me, about the rights and wrongs of what I have or haven't done, and about my personality.
It really doesn't matter if I'm a nice guy or not, or if I wrote an awful book.
Even nasty guys who write bad books don't deserve to be murdered by state-sponsored international terrorists.’
De-personalising the affair is of vital importance; Rushdie constantly returns to the broader ramifications.
‘I've always argued — though no-one seems to want to listen — that the correct context in which to understand the attack on The Satanic Verses is that of attacks on Arab intellectuals throughout Islamic countries.
It isn't that one writer did something bad and somehow called punishment down upon himself; it's that writers in Iran, Saudi, Egypt are being persecuted by the forces of fundamentalism.
Mine is not an isolated instance, it just happens to be the most famous, because it's the first time such persecution has been exported to a western country.
All progressive voices in Islamic countries know that this is their fight too, because look what happens if we fail.
If the entire resources of the western world can't prevent this fatwa, then what hope is there?’
The irony — ironies litter this affair — is that the mortal danger to Rushdie and his fellow-writers elsewhere remains just as acute, even when some of the fiercest original proponents of the fatwa have softened their stance since the fury of four years ago.
‘This is no longer about the book,’ the author points out.
‘The Satanic Verses has the good fortune of having become just a novel again, and I'm very happy for it.
For the mass of Muslims this is a non-issue — though I think British and European Muslim communities did themselves a colossal disservice in the beginning by failing to dissociate themselves properly from terrorist acts.
Now even Kalim Siddiqui is saying let's forgive and forget, when just a short time ago he was wanting me murdered, deported to Tehran, whatever would spill my blood.
The problem continues to be that a religious-fascist state wishes to hire professional terrorists to have me killed; that has always been the problem.’
So, despite the cooling of inflamed passions, despite the calming passage of time, Rushdie must still live his strangest of lives.
He's determined, despite the distortions of his daily existence, that his writing at least should be undamaged.
True, his work on a new novel has been disrupted, delayed, by his recent prodigious political efforts, but he is certain that his writing will survive, even when normality doesn't.
‘The history of prison literature is very distinguished.
Lots of writers have produced extraordinary work in conditions more immediately oppressive than mine — mine is after all a kind of open prison — and their example inspires me.
This situation is not a reason to stop doing one's job.
‘Where it's weird, though, is the difficulty of getting a real fix on what's happening in the outside world.
Of course, I have TV and newspapers, but there is definitely a displacement from reality, and I often have to ring my friends, just to find out what people are thinking.
‘It will take a little adjusting back.’
It's a touching moment of optimistic understatement.
When he does come to publish his account of the oddities of peripatetic life in hiding, it will be compelling reading.
For the moment, he's being enigmatic, humorous.
‘Don't assume I haven't been in Scotland.
One interesting side-effect of all this is that I've seen more of Britain than I ever did before, albeit through the windows of an armoured car.
I've been all over England, Wales and Scotland too — though not Northern Ireland…
‘The whole point about real life is that you can't make it up.
My life is so strange that it couldn't be invented.
I have kept a journal, which I hope one day to publish.
What's the point in having secrets, if you can't eventually share them?’
‘One day’; ‘eventually’; Salman Rushdie is not expecting to be released from his invisible chains tomorrow.
His resolve and optimism, tempered with caution, are none the less remarkable.
Crucially, the change of Government mood has galvanised his own mood.
‘It feels very good; I could become euphoric; but there's still everything to be fought for.
‘We've talked to the good guys, now we have to talk to the bad guys.
This is base camp; we still have to climb Everest.’
And this time next year?
Will there be a fifth anniversary, still in hiding?
He hesitates.
‘I always knew this was going to be a long haul.’
Youth and age balance in a lively still life
A precise, poignant production of the last play in John Byrne's trilogy impresses Joseph Farrell
STILL LIFE THE ARCHES, GLASGOW
THE most appropriate response to this production from even the most restrained of critics would be a cry of joy.
It is a labour of love by a cast which includes some of Scotland's finest and best known actors, and while being an expression of passion for theatre it paradoxically undermines the title John Byrne gave to the last of his celebrated trilogy.
For no work of art which is deeply embedded in the imagination can ever be still or dead.
It grows, matures and retains a capacity to surprise and enrich.
The company has taken excerpts from the two earlier works, and has put on stage two casts representing the younger and older selves, so that the audience is presented with both a direct view of past actions and a more mellow reflection on the aspirations of other times.
Andy Harris's set has the monumental angels from a graveyard standing alongside the benches in the workshop where young Phil and Spanky once blustered and bullied, inflicting and suffering pain.
Byrne's intention was to gather the group together firstly for the burial of Hector, who was their scapegoat, and then five years later for the funeral of Phil's mother.
The timescale in this staging is more complex, but the impact deeper and stronger.
In some ways, the new work becomes a poignant reflection on the very quality of thought and feeling, on instinctive actions as against retrospection as well as on the disappointment and frustration which are part of the process of ageing.
There is a quality of infinite tenderness and gentleness in David Hayman's performance as the older Phil.
His unassertive stillness as much as his occasional enraged outbursts forced the audience to view all the comings and goings through the eyes of this character.
Not that this production is in any way unbalanced.
With actors of the calibre of Gerard Kelly (as Spanky), Andy Gray, Alexander Morton and Barbara Rafferty that was never likely, but what was less expected was the ability of the actors in the parts of the younger Slab Boys to rise to heights, to produce the casual, offhand, muscular performances which are the ideal foil for the more reflective playing of their older selves.
Together, under Caroline Paterson's skilled direction, the company finds an idiom for a humour which is as sharp as an arrowhead and as hard as flint, and a style for an emotion which is shaped from the very  suppression and denial of feeling.
As a production, it is poignant and precise, with a thousand things to admire.
Although it is sold out for this week's run at the Arches, it moves next week to the Kings in Glasgow.
Scottish voices in New York
A member of the big apple's Grolier Club has put together an exhibition of Scottish literary treasures.
Cathy Meils reports
THE National Library of Scotland in Edinburgh has several conspicuous gaps in its collection.
The missing items have crossed the Atlantic and are on view until the end of next week at the Grolier Club in New York.
Entitled ‘Voices of Scotland’, the exhibition covers Scottish books, manuscripts and letters, supplemented by maps, prints and paintings from the 14th to the 20th centuries.
‘Nothing less than the national treasures of Scotland,’ is curator Janet Saint Germain's assessment of the manuscripts loaned by the National Library, Glasgow University and the City of Dundee.
‘I really can get very excited about this exhibition,’ she continued.
‘It's not I, but all the lenders who made it work.’
Her selective yet comprehensive exhibit draws from more than two dozen private and public collections, among them many of the United States's most distinguished libraries.
With the generous array of material made available to her, Mrs Saint Germain's selections were guided by her chosen theme.
‘I wanted to show Scottish literature as an entity in the context of its history,’ she stated.
In fact, she has succeeded in assembling a show and writing a companion catalogue both informed by history and informative as well.
From John Barbour's 14th century epic poem ‘The Brus’, on the life of Robert the Bruce, and Walter Bower's 15th century history book Scotichronicon through the 20th century Scottish Renaissance authors, ending with WL Lorimer's The New Testament in Scots, the exhibition provides the spectator with a view of Scottish history through its greatest pieces of literature.
Along the way, one is repeatedly reminded of Scotland's quest for independence in its politics, religion and cultural identity.
Confronted with case after case of impressive texts, one is hard pressed to single out highlights.
Nevertheless, it would be remiss not to mention The Bannatyne Manuscript of 1568 which preserved about 450 Scottish poems, in Sir Walter Scott's words, ‘saving the literature of a nation’; John Knox's major work, The First Book of the History of the Reformation of Religion within the Realme of Scotland of 1587; and a 1745 autograph letter from Bonnie Prince Charlie ordering the Duke of Perth to ‘surprise and seize the Castle of Stirling’.
But it was during the Enlightenment that the breadth and depth of Scottish thought was shown most brilliantly.
Edinburgh presses were publishing the masterpieces of the period, the very cornerstones of modern social sciences.
The display includes David Hume's A Treatise of Human Nature, Adam Smith's An inquiry into the Nature and Cause of the Wealth of Nations, Sir James Steuart Denham's fundamental work An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Economy, and Lord Monboddo's On the Origin and Progress of Language (anticipating Charles Darwin's theories by 50 years), Adam Ferguson's pioneering text on sociology An Essay on the History of the Civil Society, Sir John Sinclair's ground-breaking ‘The Statistical Account of Scotland,’ and the first edition of ‘Encyclopaedia Britannica.’
The late 18th and the 19th century selections present Scottish literature at its most popular and appealing.
Here James Boswell, Robert Burns, Sir Walter Scott and Robert Louis Stevenson vie for attention.
A pleasant watercolour of the Scottish highland town of Callander painted by Stevenson adds another note of interest.
The most delightful volume must surely be Sir James M Barrie's original autograph manuscript of Peter Pan.
With a title page that reads ‘Anon — a play’, a ground plan of the set on the next page, and correction and additions beginning with the cast list, this version is somewhat different from the published script, dated 23 Nov, 1903.
It is inscribed: ‘To Maude Adams.
This, the MS of Peter Pan from her humble servant and affectionate friend, J M Barrie.’
According to Kenneth Lohf, president of the Grolier Club ‘Until the current exhibition, there has been no comprehensive showing at the Club of the treasures of Scottish literature.’
Club Librarian Martin Antonetti described the Grolier Club as ‘the mainstay of American book collecting…since its founding in 1884,’ he noted.
‘Well over 600 exhibitions have been mounted.’
Mrs Saint Germain, a member of the Grolier Club, began collecting Scottish literature aged only eight, when a family friend gave her an 1832 copy of Robert Burns poems.
She started work on ‘Voices of Scotland’ four years ago and approached the National Library during a 1990 trip to Edinburgh.
‘When the National Library agreed to make some loans, that really got the ball rolling,’ she said.
Asked what omissions she regretted, Mrs Saint German admitted two: the dearth of female authors represented and an offer which came too late for inclusion — a manuscript of ‘Auld Lang Syne.’
Flabby, not furious
BBC SCOTTISH SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA STUDIO ONE, GLASGOW
It's curious that the Bloch Symphony for trombone and orchestra is rarely played — one would have thought that trombonists, starved of repertoire, would air it at every opportunity.
Perhaps the scarcity is of trombonists keen to seek the front of the platform — it may be more appealing to lurk at the back, menacing one's colleagues from behind.
At any rate, Bloch's work is exciting, with long singing lines for the solo instrument over a rich orchestral texture, well coloured by brass and percussive timpani.
Here, one felt that it was the orchestra which gave the work its verve.
Soloist John Kenny has a career which embraces a number of creative activities — composing, playing, acting.
Virtuoso trombonist he is not, though his efforts to expand the instrument's profile must be admired.
With David Robertson conducting, and certainly helping Kenny at every nuance, the solo line sounded shaky, not always cleanly pitched, and lacking in confidence, in contrast to the bold trumpet sounds which mirrored its music.
Robertson seemed less effective in Vaughan Williams's sixth symphony, a reluctant protagonist, perhaps, in music scathing, deliberately charmless and harsh.
Thus the performance lacked edges — Williams's nagging rhythms needed the rap of an insistent beat to sustain their tension, and at times the music seemed to wash past, flabby rather than furious.
But in the cold mesmeric last movement, the string sound froze into an eerie atmospheric whine, we shivered, as the oboe wrote the final poignant sentences in a fine, frosted line, and were left, as ever with this work, with a feeling of chill and uncertainty — and the burning urge to whistle a happier tune.
Mary Miller
Dance in the sunlight
COROLLA ANGELS MARGARIT NEW MOVES, GLASGOW
THREE giant poppies painted on creamy white canvas, a solid, rustic-looking stool, plates piled high with fruit, a red dress suspended in mid-air and a column of green curtain.
The scenic elements in Corolla, Angels Margarit's solo dance work which receives its British premiere as part of New Moves this week, are not in themselves remarkable.
Yet they have been chosen and are utilised with the utmost care.
Freeze-frame almost any moment in this visually striking piece and one would end up with an abstract and richly textured landscape evoking the bright southern light of Margarit's native Spain.
At the centre of the picture, Angels Margarit moves with an easy grace.
Her movements all spring from a curving line as she pivots her body, turning on an axis from foot, knee or hand.
Patterns emerge of circles within circles as she moves around the stage but although one admires the almost casually loose-limbed nature of her dance there are times when the images begin to blur and attention is apt to wander.
Margarit's attention is sharply focused, however, as she brings on stage a small mound of straw.
Wrapped up in it, like a cosy cocoon, she rolls around the stage, or strews parts of it across the floor only to sink to her knees in the middle of the pile.
Simple gestures, perhaps, but Margarit lends them a charming, almost poetic intensity.
At any rate, the evocation of Mediterranean sunlight and simple summer pleasures is more than welcome on a chilly Glasgow night.
Christopher Bowen
Cheers to a better beer era
THERE is one question to which you should always answer yes, provided you are in the right place at the right time.
The query is: ‘Would you like some gravy?’
The place is the Bow Bar in Edinburgh.
The time is just after you have ordered a Forfar bridie.
But it is not only bridies and gravy for which the Bow is famed.
No matter how tasty the gravy and flavoursome the meat and pastry, there would be no mention here were it not for the ale.
The refreshments at the Bow include a beer brewed specially for the establishment by the Caledonian Brewery.
Edinburgh Real Ale — simply described as ERA on the pump clip — is now sold elsewhere too.
Among ERA stockists — who may not always have it on every day — are the Bon Accord and Tennent's Bar in Glasgow; the Auld Hoose, Kinghorn; the Woodside Inn, Blairgowrie; and Betty Nicols, Kirkcaldy.
Among Edinburgh outlets are the Royal Ettrick and Navaar House.
The Bow, at 80 West Bow, Edinburgh, on the way down Victoria Street to the Grassmarket, is one of a small number of pubs which established the revival of real ale very firmly in the late 1980s.
Bill Strachan, its second owner, is keeping up the policy of good beer.
Now that so many other pubs sell cask ale, I feel it is worth reminding people to continue supporting those which pioneered the trend.
The Bow's added attractions are that all the ale taps are Scottish air-pressure tall founts, rather than the hand pumps more often used elsewhere now; and there is no canned music to hinder conversation.
IN the early 1970s, which some of us think was not so long ago, there were 11 pubs selling real ale in Edinburgh.
Now I hear there may be more than 300.
I say may be, because cask-conditioned beer is being reinstated so fast in so many pubs that it is becoming almost impossible to keep up with the total.
I find it in the unlikeliest places, many of which had not sold it for at least 25 years.
ERA is one of more than 50 new ales to come on to the Scottish market in the past year.
Many are English, about which I have no objection, but it would be nice if more Scottish pubs had at least one tap for an indigenous product.
(Although I shall have no shame in highlighting some of the best brews from down south in future.)
The ERA quality —‘quality’ being brewers' jargon for a beer type — is what I might term dark heavy.
It is a good example of the best traditions of ‘Scotch ale’, as the style is termed in parts of England.
Basically of 80/-strength, it has a ruby hue, a nutty aroma with a whiff of hops and a taste redolent of roasted barley and crystal malt.
It has good head-retention characteristics and looks well in a straight-sided glass.
Russell Sharp, managing director and head brewer at Caledonian, based the 4.2 per cent alcohol-by-volume ERA on an old recipe in the brewery records.
Some people don't like ERA, which is in its favour, because that means other people do enjoy it — and Bill says there are plenty of those in the Bow.
There is enough choice nowadays for those who prefer a different taste to find one that does suit them.
No brewer should ever be afraid of making beer with a distinctive flavour.
Harp lager, let it be recalled, was described by its original brewer as: ‘Designed to offend no-one’.
Follow that philosophy and we go back to the days of the bland leading the bland.
Meanwhile, things have been happening in Glasgow, where the CAMRA branch has awarded its beer-of-the-year accolade to another Caledonian beer, R&D Deuchars IPA, for the second year running.
This is the highest honour any beer in Scotland can receive, because it is the only one decided by a ballot of regular drinkers, based on their experiences in a range of pubs over 12 months.
Sound portrait of an artist William Burroughs, favourite uncle of the counter-culture is having to make room for his friend, Brion Gysin, finds Alastair Mabbott
PROVIDING musical settings for other people's words has always been a handy option when one's own muse is temporarily employed elsewhere.
Talking Heads' first foray into African rhythms was a setting of the Dadaist poet Kurt Schwitters's I Zimbra; Syd Barrett's Golden Hair was a James Joyce poem; and how could we forget An American Prayer, wherein Jim Morrison's poems were backed by posthumously written Doors music?
And in Dead City Radio and Seven Souls, respectively, tribute specialist Hal Wilner and New York band Material have done the honours for William Burroughs, the counter-culture's favourite uncle.
Burroughs's influence on left-field rock culture is, of course, incalculable and, like some seedy literary Camelot, Tangier has had a mythical significance to Beat Generation acolytes since he, Jack Kerouac, Allen Ginsberg and Gregory Corso briefly congregated there in the Fifties, in the vicinity of the great Paul Bowles.
Now, Brion Gysin, Burroughs's fellow denizen of Tangier, is getting his share of the spotlight.
Born in Buckinghamshire in 1916, Gysin lived in Kansas City, in Alberta, in Paris, and settled in Morocco when he fell in love with the pan pipe music of the master musicians of Jajouka.
He even opened a cafe in Tangier to hear them play every day, and took Rolling Stone Brian Jones up into the mountains to record them.
Gysin, who exhibited with the Surrealists at the tender age of 19, dedicated his life to breaking down the barriers between painting and writing.
Well-versed in esoteric lore, he wove spells into his art, and donated his discovery of the cut-up method of rearranging prose to William Burroughs.
The cut-ups, they believed, allowed new voices to arise from the text, revealing messages from the future.
Burroughs and Gysin practised their own form of sorcery using tape recorders, with results impressive enough to convince them they were on to something.
Gysin too has his disciples in avant-garde rock.
Genesis P Orridge of Throbbing Gristle (the original ‘industrial noise terrorists’) and later the more mystically inclined Psychic TV, befriended him and wrote tearful eulogies to ‘the master’ when he died in 1986.
Then in 1990, The Shamen, furthering their quest for mind-expanding experiences, endorsed an invention of Gysin's — The Dreamachine.
This was a cardboard cylinder with a light bulb inside, which rotated and sent out pulses which purportedly brought on a transcendental state.
The device was inspired by a bus journey taken by Gysin, when the sun flickered through a long avenue of trees.
‘An overwhelming flood of intensely bright patterns in supernatural colours exploded behind my eyelids,’ he wrote.
‘I was swept out of time.’
GYSIN's own voice can be heard on a new release, Self-Portrait Jumping, which is backed up by tracks recorded in the Eighties by numerous African and French musicians, with special appearances by jazzers Don Cherry and Steve Lacy.
The project was overseen and produced by Ramuntcho Matta, who has studied classical composition, Indian vocal techniques and the tango, and who met Gysin at the age of 15.
‘Every morning,’ he writes, ‘I left my mother's place and went straight to Brion's, we had a cup of tea and a puff and days after days I left for home at five…
A few years later I told him how much I loved his way of telling stories.
He said that words are made to hide thoughts, and that the real meaning comes through the rhythm.’
Self-Portrait Jumping contains ten tracks (although one, Dreamachine, is more than half an hour long).
Some are no more than endless rearrangements of a phrase — every possible permutation of the words ‘kick that habit, man’ or ‘junk is no good, baby’— notable only for the presence of the voice of the man himself, or a few choice trumpet parts by Don Cherry.
Elsewhere, thanks to Gysin's idiosyncratic vocals and a strong funky/African feel, it sounds almost like a buoyant Pere Ubu.
One song could even be the Tom Tom Club singing about rough Sapphic sex.
But — surprising omission — no pan pipes.
The musical flavour of that part of the world can also be heard in a related release, Sahara Blue, in which France's Hector Zazou brings the words of his countryman, symbolist poet Arthur Rimbaud, to life.
Familiar names abound, from Gerard Depardieu and Richard Bohringer (Diva, The Cook, The Thief…) to Bomb The Bass's Tim Simenon, Japanese keyboard player and composer Ryuichi Sakamoto, David Sylvian, John Cale and Khaled (formerly Cheb Khaled, superstar of Algerian rai music).
As one might expect of such an assembly of talent, Sahara Blue is a stately, tasteful listen, but only at its best captures the poet's urgency and potency.
‘He was so God damned drunk with the blood of baby dolls…
Rimbaud was a Rolling Stone,’ scrawls Patti Smith in the sleeve notes.
Zazou's reverent treatments beg to differ.
930214 
Avant-garde gurus: Bryon Gysin, left, at London's October Gallery in 1981, developed the Dreamachine, being examined by William Burroughs
Scots tongues join in theatre that explores east-west divide
By Tom Morton
GAELIC, Doric and English will come together theatrically for the first time later this month, when tri-lingual theatre makes its debut at Broadford, Skye.
The £100,000 project — including a Scottish Arts Council grant of £20,000 and funding from the Gaelic Television Committee and the National Gaelic Arts Project — is the brainchild of Alisdair MacDonald of the Aberdeen-based Invisible Bouncers Theatre Company and the Gaelic actor and writer Domhnall Ruadh, now infamous nationwide as the anti-hero of Gaelic' first soap opera, Machair.
Craobh nan Ubhal (The Apple Tree) is the first play ever to be written and performed in Gaelic, Doric and English.
It deals with the pressures placed on traditional life in both east and west coast rural communities by the necessity of earning a living from the oil industry.
Alistair MacDonald, the director, has seen the play germinate over the last 18 months from roots in the Gaelic Youth Theatre summer school in 1991 and an experimental workshop production at the Mod Fringe in Dingwall the same year.
‘The theme we identified then was communities in conflict, that traditional east-west thing — the point we want to make being that there need be no conflict, that we're all, if you like, Jock Tamson's Bairns.’
People from both Doric and Gaelic-speaking communities, where the pace of life focused on land and sea, were now being forced into the alien fortnight-on, fortnight-off rhythm demanded by life offshore.
‘We look at the effect on the individuals, on those involved, those left behind and the communities they come from,’ said Mr MacDonald.
The play would be comprehensible to anyone, he stressed, as the narrative thrust came not just from the script in Gaelic, English and the north-east's own dialect, but from music, dance, vision and conversation.
‘At any given point, if the audience does not understand what is being said, they will get the atmosphere of what is going on,’ he said.
‘It has a very strong structure and storyline.’
A huge and striking multi-purpose set, designed in tubular steel by Iain M Campbell, will bring each audience of an extensive Scottish tour into close contact with the eight-strong cast, five of whom are Gaels.
A 17-strong touring party, including the ceilidh band the Old Blind Dogs, will take the production from Benbecula to Bowmore and Tiree to the Tramway in Glasgow, transported by two minibuses, a car and Iain M Campbell's double-decker, Magnus the Art Bus.
‘It's bloody difficult,’ said Mr MacDonald, engaged in intensive rehearsals at the Findhorn Foundation's Universal hall.
Workshops in Strathdon, to expose Gaelic cast members to Doric, and in Skye, to acclimatise the Doric speakers, have been successful, but the director admits that the culture clashes of the script are sometimes being reflected in relations between the Gaels and east-coasters in the cast.
‘There is occasional conflict,’ he said, ‘but no trouble.
It is a very creative process, although very draining.’
The story of Dod, the Doric-speaking protagonist, and his encounters with Gaels and other inhabitants of the oil platform he works on, will be told for the first time on Saturday, 20 February, at Broadford.
‘Oil, if you like, is the white canvas on which we're painting our multi-coloured vision,’ said Mr MacDonald.
‘We want to make the process very accessible to the audience.
Theatre is about communication — and if no-one understands it, then we've failed.’
‘Theatre is about communication — and if no-one understands it, then we've failed.’
Alistair MacDonald
Anger over BBC plan for Orkney drama
By Severin Carrell
LEGAL action to prevent the BBC making and broadcasting a drama documentary about the Orkney child abuse controversy is to be considered this week by families at the centre of the affair.
There was a furious response yesterday from parents of the children involved after BBC Scotland confirmed that a programme dramatising the 18-month controversy is being considered.
An immediate appeal to the BBC's board of governors asking them to ban the programme is also to be made.
Last night, the families' actions won the unconditional support of the Royal Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children.
A BBC Scotland spokeswoman said that a draft script written by Michael Eaton, author of the controversial ITV drama Shoot to Kill based on allegations of extra-judicial killings of IRA members by the security forces in Northern Ireland, had already been commissioned.
She said initial research into the feasibility of the project was also under way in the BBC drama department.
But she stressed that the programme's development was at an extremely early stage, and a decision to go ahead with its production had still to be made.
The spokeswoman said it was therefore impossible to say if and when it would be broadcast, or how the production team would deal with the use of original footage or the identities of individual families or children, which is prohibited by law.
This row comes several months after the BBC current affairs series Panorama was banned from using extremely sensitive material on the Orkney affair in a programme investigating cases of alleged ritual abuse after an interdict was brought on behalf of the families and RSSPCC.
Last night, one parent said she was ‘horrified at the very notion’ of the current project.
‘It's not in the interests of my children.
They've been through a lot and want to put it behind them.
This is not going to help them do that; it's not in the best interests of the parents, or of justice.’
Unlike media reporting of the actual events, ‘I can't even see how it's in the public interest.’
Such coverage could only increase the likelihood the children would be illegally identified outwith the islands and exposed to further emotional strain.
Douglas Turner, of the RSSPCC, said key elements of the Orkney affair, such as the truth of the allegations, had never been properly investigated given the strict guidelines set for Lord Clyde's inquiry.
The BBC were thus putting themselves in a very difficult journalistic and legal position.
He said the RSSPCC would unconditionally oppose the programme ‘on the simple principle that this can do nothing except prolong the distress and damage of the children,’ regardless of the rights or wrongs of the authorities' handling of the case.
Dr Helen Martini, of the South Ronaldsay Parents' Action Group, confirmed that possible legal action and a direct appeal to BBC governors would be urgently discussed by the families.
‘I think they should be made aware of the opinions of the people central to the whole drama,’ she said.
Dr Martini predicted the BBC's plans would also provoke the complete opposition of islanders not directly involved in the affair.
‘It's just inhumane.
Does the BBC really want to be inhumane?
We don't want these wounds reopened.’
The BBC spokeswoman responded: ‘We're very aware of the sensitivity of the issue, and the moral and legal implications will be fully taken into account when we consider any development of the project.’
The Crown Office will not take any direct interest in the programme and the legal question of identification, at least until the BBC decides formally to  proceed with filming.
A Crown Office spokesman said last night it would be premature to do so at this stage.
Palladium faces a dark future
A CITY-IMPOSED curfew is forcing the Hollywood Palladium to shut down after more than half a century of entertainment ranging from Lawrence Welk to the Rolling Stones, officials said yesterday.
At least 33 shows have been cancelled and the music hall will be boarded up for good within three months, Palladium officials said.
Responding to a rash of violence, the Los Angeles City Council last week ordered a curfew requiring the 10,000-seat Palladium to close at 11 pm on Sundays, 1 am on Fridays and Saturdays and midnight the rest of the week.
‘I'm going out of business,’ said its manager, Mark Midgley.
‘Nothing like this has ever happened in the 53 years the Palladium has been open.’
The Palladium opened in 1940 to the mellow trombone of Tommy Dorsey and was once home to the big band sounds of the Lawrence Welk Show, was host to five presidents and featured entertainment from ballroom dancing to rap music.
The council's decision followed a Christmas night melee in which two teenagers were wounded by gunfire and more than 100 police were called in.
Joe Shea, a Hollywood community activist who had criticised the Palladium's security record, said he would prefer to see the landmark remain open.
He has asked its owners to find a way to work within the restrictions.
— Reuter
GRAHAM BARCLAY
‘Most people are not interested in the Hang Seng index at 6.30am.
What interest is that to someone from Dumbarton?’
The man who put the K-factor into TV They don't know it, but a group of Kilsyth women are helping shape our viewing.
They are the people in Liam Hamilton's mind as, amid all the fuss about tabloid television, sexual chemistry and the F-factor, he guides Britain's newest breakfast channel.
Gillian Harris met him
A LIVELY debate has broken out among the knot of people gathered in the GMTV studio concerning the future of Britain's newest breakfast television channel.
The problem appears to lie with the sofa: it is the wrong colour.
Not only that, but it is placed at the wrong angle.
The object of ridicule cowers beneath a dust-cover, revealing only a  tantalising glimpse of dusky-pink fabric.
‘The colour is fundamentally wrong,’ sighs Liam Hamilton, the programme's editor.
‘And the way it is joined is not right; it is at too much of a right-angle so the presenter has to shift like this to see who they are talking to.
I think we'll change that.’
Ironing out visual problems on the set is just one of the tasks that the 33-year-old Kilsyth-born Hamilton has had to deal with in the five weeks that GMTV has been on air.
He has also had to counter allegations that he is dragging  television down-market then listen to television pundits witter on about skirt lengths, sexual chemistry and the F-factor, under the guise of highbrow criticism.
On top of that Hamilton has been overseeing three and a half hours of live television in a time-slot littered with failed ventures.
It has not been easy on three hours sleep a night.
Hamilton is undaunted.
Despite onerous hours — he starts work at 4am and leaves the office about midnight having scanned the first editions of the next day's newspapers — he has faith in his product, although he cheerfully admits that it needs tweaked into shape.
‘There is room for improvement,’ he says, gazing across the River Thames from his fourth-floor office in London Television Centre.
‘In any new project there are things you will try which will not work.
But we have a very talented team of people here who will make the programme and the station better.’
Stepping into the space vacated by TV-am, GMTV inherited about two million viewers — breakfast television's biggest single audience.
Hamilton knew it would be foolish to abandon his predecessors' successful formula but he was keen to tamper and experiment with fresh ideas.
These have included Health for Hunks, with the former page-three girl Linda Lusardi, and Personal Ads, a slot in which viewers are put in touch with like-minded souls who share their bizarre predilections.
The direction in which Hamilton is steering GMTV should come as no surprise.
He was, after all, the man who brought Richard and Judy to the nation's screens when he worked on This Morning at Granada.
But he robustly defends his propensity for tabloid television.
‘Those people who criticise what I do, a lot of them have little perception of how ordinary people actually live their lives and what interests them.
Most people are not interested in the Hang Seng index at 6.30am.
What interest is that to someone from Dumbarton?
We are not on any great mission to teach people anything.
They are looking for basic information: a bit of news, some traffic, some weather.
They are not looking for some chopped-down Open University course.’
Liam Hamilton grew up in the mining village of Kilsyth.
He attended Kilsyth Academy before moving to Glasgow University to study history and politics.
There he became involved with the student newspaper and student television — for pleasure rather than as a grounding for his future career.
‘It was part of being involved in university life.
Not a well thought-out scheme at all.’
On leaving university, Hamilton cast around idly for work.
He had post-graduate study in Canada lined up for the following year and was looking for short-term employment.
His experience in student television earned him an interview at BBC Scotland,(‘A disaster.
I was interviewed by two men in suits.
We were from different worlds.’)
and Scottish Television, where there were no jobs.
However Scottish Television did get in touch when a trainee place became available.
Hamilton was based in the press office but seconded for three months at a time to other departments, including the news room.
‘Being a young, enthusiastic, naive sort, I volunteered to do extra shifts in the newsroom, including the late night shifts that none of the other reporters wanted to do.
Basically, I made myself invaluable.’
All thoughts of post-graduate study vanished.
Hamilton was enthralled by the world of television.
After two years he moved to Border Television in Carlisle where being part of a small team allowed him to dabble in all areas of production.
‘I got to do everything, editing, devising my own shows.
It was great fun.’
From there he went to Central TV's news room in Nottingham as a current affairs producer then on to Granada as the editor of This Morning.
The change of pace suited him: ‘I am interested in a range of subjects.
Like most people I can talk about the state of the world, sex and football in one conversation in the pub.
In dealing with subjects like that there is still a story to tell.
On a programme like This Morning, you have to think of an interesting way to put across a story about something like knitting.
It would be far easier to do a pull-together about a Stock Exchange crash or Bosnia.
I am a great believer in TV giving people what they want.’
When he envisages GMTV's audience, he thinks of his mother's neighbours in Kilsyth.
‘In some ways I have my mother in mind.
If she was not my mother she would be ideal but her views are coloured by the fact that she would watch anything with my name at the end of it.
So I look to her neighbours because they are the kind of people GMTV is aimed at.’
Hamilton's grandfathers were miners and he reflects on the gulf between their lifestyles and his.
‘I realise things are very different for me.
That is why I think it is good for me to go back to Scotland to remember that there is a world outside London and television.
There are Scots down here who could never go back north because they wouldn't fit in.
I would hate to be like that.’
However Hamilton's forays north are few and far between.
Work eclipses all other areas of his life.
He lives alone in a flat within two minutes walk of his office on the South Bank.
He describes himself as a ‘TV animal’ who switches on the set at home as soon as he walks through the door.
‘When I get this office sorted out I will have four or five sets in here, all of them on different channels,’ he laughs.
His taste is unashamedly low-brow: Beverley Hills 90210, Blind Date and Noel's House Party.
‘I may be 33, but I feel about 23,’ he confesses.
Hamilton's career has galloped along the fast track.
He has never stayed in any one place longer than a couple of years and prides himself on knowing when to go.
‘Take This Morning.
I loved the programme and the people but I made the decision to leave at the right point, before I could grow bored.’
As yet he has no plans to leave GMTV but acknowledges that the frenetic pace is hard going.
‘Breakfast television can be pretty destructive to normal life.
It is daily, just churning it out.
There is a factory element.
So far I have been lucky in that I have never had to work at getting the next job but there may be a point when I look up and there is no opportunity around the corner.’
A pure spirit of the theatre
Allen Wright applauds the excellent acting of Tom Courtenay in ‘Moscow Stations’ at the Traverse Theatre, Edinburgh, this week
IT'S a long time since I have seen a finer performance than Tom Courtenay is giving at the Traverse.
This penetrating study of a drunken drop-out, yearning for oblivion, is both ridiculously funny and painfully sad.
To achieve such a blend of the absurd and the tragic, the writing as well as the acting have to be of exceptional quality — and Courtenay has drawn his inspiration from a remarkable novel by Venedikt Yerofeev which has been adapted for the stage by Stephen Mulrine.
A seemingly autobiographical account of an alcoholic journey from the centre of Moscow to an outlying suburb, it could have a cast of thousands — so crowded with characters is the suburban train on which Venedikt is travelling, and so densely populated is his mind.
But, apart from a few voices off, it is presented as a monologue — an alcoholic aria to which Courtenay gives extraordinary expression.
For most of the time he appears amiably tipsy, but occasionally plunges into hidden depths — of agony and even some kind of distorted ecstasy.
Though the mood is very Russian and even Chekhovian, in its mixture of humour and profound regret, there is no suggestion of it being an attack on a particular social system.
Corruption there may be, and gross inefficiency, not to mention an epidemic of alcoholism, but Venedikt is more concerned with the spiritual vacuum in which he exists.
No observation that he makes is more bitter than his lament for ‘the silence of God’ and he uses metaphors which have a Biblical quality like his terrible description of the laughter of angels, which could be one of the darker Revelations of St John.
The production, on a narrow stage representing both a railway carriage and a station platform, has been very sensitively directed by Ian Brown with restrained use of sound effects and subtle lighting.
One of the few complaints which I would make is that the actor looks much too spruce for someone who is living rough in every sense of the word — forever dossing down in stations and trains and consuming endless quantities of the most vicious liquors.
Yerofeev, it is said, chose this way of life deliberately and was not forced into it by economic circumstances, but inevitably such a life style would induce a sense of infinite weariness and degradation — which Courtenay's appearance fails to convey.
That the Traverse concourse and bar should be bedecked with posters for a brand of vodka seems to be a peculiarly sick joke in the circumstances.
Tom Courtenay: Most of the time he appears tipsy, but occasionally plunges into hidden depths — of agony and distorted ecstasy
Powerful punch for Strindberg
Christopher Grier catches a new London theatre group with an enterprising production of ‘Miss Julie’
STRINDBERG'S Miss Julie ranks among the most tiresome female characters to have trod the boards over the last 100 years or so.
Perhaps the only thing to do is to make her dance as Elizabeth von Rosen so memorably did for the Royal Danish Ballet decades ago.
Nevertheless, here she is again a vociferous pain to the last in a gripping production by Charlotta Martinus for a new and enterprising group called Confederate Spirits in a pub-theatre in North London, the Duke of Cambridge.
We had been advised that its latest English translation by Eivor Martinus was more robust than versions of it generally current here — an unnecessary warning as things turned out.
More significant was the action's resettlement in the Ireland of 100 years ago.
That made perfect sense of Miss Julie's slightly tatty and irregular patrician origins.
As to that, Miss Julie herself is renamed Lady Julie, and quite right too.
For all her nostalgia, she rarely forgets her fiery aristocratic assumptions.
Jean is played by the young and excellent Irish actor, Dan Mullane, and Kristin, in a plausible Irish accent, by Selina Griffiths, newly graduated from the Central School and very promising.
Put across with maximum intensity on a tiny stage, it works capitally, the deflowering of Lady Julie represented by a couple of entwining dancers.
Late of the RSC and a habitue of the West End and Edinburgh Festivals, Jayne Boniface makes all too persuasive a Julie, whether in her arrogant, teasing, lustful prime and pride as at the beginning or in her subsequent grovelling, whingeing humiliation.
Hers is a chilling performance.
What emerges most strongly from this production is however less the drama's sexual thrust than its social or even sociological charge, Strindberg's bleak scrutiny of class-consciousness, of the outraged pride of the servants and the threat to their ingrained deference to their unworthy betters.
Powerful stuff.
Relax, and the wit will shine through
THE BIG PICTURE BRUNTON THEATRE, MUSSELBURGH
A WARM, sharply observed drama of female friendship, girlhood dreams and adult realities, Liz Lochhead's 1988 play (substantially revised by the author for this Brunton Theatre company production) is memorable for its affectionate understanding of the rich, funny and moving complexity of ordinary people's lives.
It tells the story of Deanna and Dorothy, best pals as girls in the nondescript central belt town of Staneyburn during the Fifties, meeting again in middle age after Dorothy's mother's funeral.
In a series of flashbacks, we follow the pair through their teenage years, their weekly visits to the dreamscape of the pictures, the real-life dramas of school, family, dances and boys, rehearsals with the Staneyburn Amateur Dramatic and Light Operatic Society (another fantasy-world) and the gradual intrusion of realities black-and-white in the technicolor of their aspirations.
Lochhead's script is a joy, depicting through its energetic vernacular dialogue the texture of small-town Scottish life in the period, when girls carried bottles of Evening in Paris in their knickers and were in love with Montgomery Clift; when the pictures cost 1/9d and the Locarno Ballroom on Sauchiehall Street was the place to be on a Saturday night, while at home fathers sat taciturn in armchairs, not listening to their wives.
Vivienne Brown and Ann Scott-Jones as Dorothy and Dienne bring the right mixture of exuberance and shrewd female pragmatism to their roles, deftly conveying a sense of life lived, half-knowingly on two levels.
Malcolm Murray's effective staging allows the time switches to take place with admirable smoothness, and Jimmy Chisholm as the narcissistic am-dram director extracts maximum comedy for the character without milking it.
The main problem, at least on the first night, was that too much of the dialogue was overplayed — Lochhead recognises that you don't need to soup up the Scots speech to make it funny, or poignant or significant: it's all already there in the words, but if they're spoken too self-consciously they end up sounding like rather forced one-liners.
If the cast will just relax and let their characters speak, it can only improve what is already a highly enjoyable, if somewhat uneven, production.
Sue Wilson
Menotti to the rescue
Mary Miller meets Gian Carlo Menotti, the new director of the financially troubled Rome Opera
Cresci knew, says Menotti wryly, that it was time for a dramatic gesture.
He phoned the Lammermuirs, and Menotti il Salvatore ‘SHALL we sin?’ he asks as we leave the dining room.
Momentarily, he looks quite wicked.
‘Coffee,’ he says, sniffing the air like a Bisto kid.
Gian Carlo Menotti is on a diet: coffee is forbidden.
Sin wins.
He has one small cup, and sighs.
At 81, he has taken over as artistic director at Rome Opera, where the exuberant administrative director, Gian Paulo Cresci, has run up a deficit of close to £25 million.
‘Completely irresponsible,’ says Menotti, ‘but he has style, and…’another sigh ‘…he's charming.’
In past times, Rome Opera was second only in stature to La Scala, Milan.
It saw the premieres of Tosca, of Cavalleria Rusticana, the Italian premieres of Pelleas et Melisande and certain Stravinsky works.
But, although the House had capital status, La Scala always had the advantage of having vital commerce on its doorstep.
In the 1960s, says Menotti, Rome Opera began to slide down hill.
Its artistic and administrative directors were government puppets, the building became shabby, and the audience, never one to leap at innovation, became increasingly sluggish.
The place had no style, no standards and precious few singers.
Into this mess, in the late 1980s, swept Cresci, his mind swirling with ideas, bank notes blistering his fingers.
He hired voluptuous, glowing rugs, and strewed them around the building as though sowing corn.
He refurbished dressing rooms, scrapped the rehearsal hall and built another.
Gaggia machines burbled on marble bars, new secretaries clicked across polished floors, uniformed valets twirled glass doors.
Everywhere was perfumed, frothy with flowers.
In the fumoirs, glossy mouths breathed chic and gossip, and success began to stalk the stalls.
There were, of course, problems.
Cresci said the orchestra was disgraceful, the chorus dire, the ballet impossible.
The unions shrugged and said they had to stay.
Basta, said Cresci, and promptly hired a fresh workforce.
The others, he paid to stay at home and practise.
He had more practical ideas; on Mondays, he invited the schools and booked his best musicians to talk, sing and play.
He used his star players to give chamber recitals, and others to play in the foyers before performances.
And he recalled those who had practised best, dressed them up, and sent them out into Rome's most fashionable streets in procession, to advertise his productions — Turandot he preceded with an enormous Chinese display, dragons, lanterns, fluttering silks and banners — all around the city.
The theatre was sold out, night after night.
Cresci booked the big stars — Freni, Giocomini, Zeffirelli to design — and rumours rumbled about under-the-table deals and suspect contracts.
As La Scala began to bitch, and Rome's success began to burgeon, Cresci lit spectacular bonfires in the street in wonderfully designed fireplaces.
TV cameras rolled, and the opera house glittered as the gold drained from Cresci's till.
But no-one seemed to care about the cost — Rome was too busy surfing on spumante, giddy with the success of its new plaything.
Then the bubble burst.
Riccardo Muti made a scathing denunciation from La Scala, news of the deficit broke, and Cresci's double cashmere coat began to let in the cold.
He had a production of Lucia di Lammermoor scheduled, and murder, surely, was in the air.
He knew, says Menotti a little wryly, that it was time for a dramatic gesture.
He phoned the Lammermuirs, and Menotti il Salvatore.
It was a shrewd move.
Menotti may not be the flavour of the 1990s in Britain (the 1980s too brought sour times) but in the States, and in his native Italy, his name is legend.
So Menotti spelt clout — and credit.
Every single day of the year, a Menotti opera goes on stage somewhere in the world.
And the royalties, Cresci hoped, would continue to roll.
There was little of the mainstream operatic repertoire (which Cresci, wisely, knew that he must stick to) which Menotti had not directed — with sets by Henry Moore, Cocteau, with Callas in the cast, no less.
Menotti il Salvatore said si, and started work in Rome, to try to patch up Cresci's season, with less than two months to put together Lucia.
He had left his home at Yester in the Lammermuirs in a blizzard, with pictures in his mind, and photographs in his pocket.
He knew how he wanted the last scene to look.
Cresci was doubtful — these gloomy hills and bruised skies looked far from spectacular.
Menotti stood firm.
That, he insisted, is what Lucia's Lammermoor looks like.
He had Lucia's father's body brought down a fiendish spiral staircase to centre stage — the singer was convinced that his bearers would drop him, so Menotti's secretary had to play the corpse — and the opera closed in a graveyard cloaked in drifting snow.
The sets looked beautiful, reminiscent of Turner's ‘January’ Scottish pictures, and Lucia was deemed an astounding success.
The papers screamed superlatives, and La Scala, sulking after a resounding flop with Don Carlos, scowled and spat.
So Cresci saved his skin, and Menotti flew home, blowing on his fingers.
Now, he says, the position is tricky.
He takes full control in November, but he still has no idea of his budget.
He's keen to open the minds of his audience — Janacek, he says, has hardly been heard in Italy, and he's determined to open his season with Der Rosenkavalier.
He wants another, smaller theatre for chamber works, and he's anxious to encourage young Italian composers.
Cresci, he can handle.
For Menotti, age is on his side, and patience is no stranger.
Rome, he well knows, wasn't built in a day.
Operatic hero: although Gian Carlo Menotti is not the flavour of the decade in Britain, in the United States and in his native Italy his name is legend.
He faces a major challenge as the new director of Rome Opera — the administrative director, Gian Paulo Cresci, has run up a deficit of £25 million
Portrait of pollution by artist in touch with earth and sea
Portrait of pollution by artist in touch with earth and sea Murdo Macdonald views paintings with an environmental theme and innovative European photography
THE paintings of Terry Setch, which can be seen at the Talbot Rice Gallery in Edinburgh, overwhelm the viewer with their large scale, drawing one into a visual world of pigment, wax, beach detritus and plastic.
In these massive works Setch is responding in detail to the pollution of the sea and the land of his adopted Wales (and by clear extension pollution everywhere else).
The west wall of the gallery is given over to a work 17ft high and over 20ft long entitled Touch the Earth Again, and the ecological sentiment implied by this title is crucial to Setch's work.
It is a deliberately confused image which works in close-up but only comes into real focus when viewed from far back.
Thus it acts as an exact metaphor for the necessity of a broad perspective in addressing any ecological question.
As the title suggests it is an appeal as much as a painting, an appeal for a re-establishment of the link between human beings and the rest of nature.
Here the most obvious human form is only an outline, blackened at the edges like the trace of a Hiroshima victim.
Other works use polythene sheeting, stretched across the surface; this acts as an almost unseen barrier to perception, further emphasising an over-industrialised distance from nature.
But there is another more intimate side to Terry Setch's work.
Many of the paintings displayed here are small in scale and are firmly situated in a tradition of seascape painting which includes Turner and Monet.
They act as a complement to his large works which are responses to a progressive environmental catastrophe.
Instead one finds in the small works a straightforward enjoyment of the sea and sailing which, while they are no doubt less important in terms of Setch's output as a whole, give a significant insight into his everyday appreciation of the coastal sea and weather.
This appreciation is of course an essential starting point for his larger works.
At the French Institute in Randolph Crescent, Edinburgh, is a display of innovative recent photography from the contemporary art collection of Lower Normandy.
This varied selection of international work gives an insight into the policies of cultural decentralisation in France whereby each region has a responsibility to create and make available a collection of contemporary work.
This is of clear benefit to French artists but as the present exhibition shows, other European artists gain also.
Typical of this is the inclusion of intriguing work by the Frankfurt-born Karen Knorr, whose photographic examination of the ambiguities of connoisseurship is a high point of the display.
Impressive also are the deserted, nocturnal, urban images of Frederic Bellay, which have the detached quality of dreams.
But this quality is balanced by the paradoxical notion that Bellay may be giving us a clearer view of what things are actually like, as though reality were an infinitely accessible enigma.
Good photography can also be seen at the Stills Gallery where the second part of Aqua Vitae, a collaborative project with Street Level in Glasgow, can be seen.
Although for the most part meditative, the topicality of this exhibition could not be clearer in Rory Donaldson's photographically transformed Hands Off Our Water poster, an image which figures in the newly-available catalogue for the show.
Brian Jenkins's Out of Depth — in which photographs of himself swimming are located within frame-like tanks of water — is a thought-provoking exploration of limitation and freedom.
The Stills show is completed by Kevin Maclean's evocative photographic following of a Highland river.
The other half of the show, which includes superb platinum prints by Martin Greenhalgh, continues at Street Level.
At the Collective Gallery in Cockburn Street are two interesting displays — Movements by Mary Scott and Equal Values by Paul Mason.
Both these artists work on a small scale but there the similarity ends.
Mary Scott's work has the elusive quality of a childhood memory.
She contrasts materials, symbolic objects and images in a way that begins to reveal hidden emotions and aspects of identity.
In contrast Paul Mason is fascinated by a quasi-scientific comparison of mathematics and the structures of life.
The shape of a nautilus shell is carved within a drawing of its mathematical equivalent, the logarithmic spiral, and the whole is contained within that harmonic joining point of art and science, the golden rectangle.
These displays are further examples of the excellent service to artists and the public that the Collective provides with its rapidly changing programme of exhibitions.
The big scene: Terry Setch's paintings, on show at the Talbot Rice Gallery, overwhelm with their large scale
Schumann reigns supreme
ROYAL SCOTTISH NATIONAL ORCHESTRA USHER HALL, EDINBURGH
OPENING with the puzzling Aurora by Iain Hamilton, Friday's concert was an occasion, one suspects, when audience expectations and actual realisations failed to coincide.
This monolithic structure of Hamilton's makes a powerful impression but seems to depend on the innate sense of tonality of the listener, to complete the part of the puzzle that's missing.
Such is the skill of the rhythmic pacing however, that the final chord seemed poised to continue.
Curious, therefore, that the reception was so desultory.
If listeners were just keen to get into the ‘real meat’ of the Brahms second piano concerto, then genuine Brahms lovers must have been disappointed.
There was little in this performance, with Stephen Kovacevich as soloist, for anyone to recall pleasurably.
The exceptional moment when the spirit of Brahms materialised came at the beginning of the andante where Pauline Dowse's cello solo evoked the inner stillness of the composer — all moonlight, warmth and swaying tree tops.
Otherwise, Kovacevich was well wide of the mark and if he respects this work he might contemplate putting it away for a few years before reconsidering its interpretation.
Without the distraction of a wayward soloist, Weller came into his own in the glorious fourth symphony of Schumann.
This is the peak of German romanticism: less florid than Mendelssohn; less diversionary than Brahms; fewer notes than Wagner.
Schumann has it all.
Division, the poetry, the clean musical argument: drama and tension are inherent not to mention the sheer exuberance of the dance.
Weller is the ideal interpreter of this music.
Rhythm was controlled over the long paragraphs; articulation crystal-clear.
Balance in the orchestra was strictly controlled yet the tuttis emerged with a muscular grip.
Those chords of searching bewilderment in the finale were timed to a microsecond and projected an awesome tingle of fear.
It was over too soon.
Mary Miller
SCOTTISH CHAMBER ORCHESTRA
QUEEN'S HALL, EDINBURGH
DUNCAN McTier, the first exponent of Peter Maxwell Davies's new Concerto for Double-bass and Chamber Orchestra (the seventh of the Strathclyde sequence being written for the Scottish Chamber Orchestra), coaxes the most prodigiously colourful, rounded and singing sound from his unwieldy instrument.
The long-breathed sonority of his style may to some extent be accounted for by the fact that he stands to play, and uses the German underhand bow-grip: mostly though, it's pure genius.
Maxwell Davies has written for him a 20-minute piece which makes full use of these strengths.
The new concerto, which received its Edinburgh premiere on Saturday at Queen's Hall, is intensely lyrical and reflective.
Its mood is mainly withdrawn and sombre, with flashes of piercing nostalgia and desperate gaiety.
Much of it seems to be haunted landscape poetry.
The protagonist is isolated: the conjunction of the solo double-bass with his orchestral doppelganger (SCO principal bass John Steer, for whom the work was originally planned, but who relinquished the opportunity after a severe hand injury some years ago) was eerie and troubling.
Here Scottish melody always seems very near the surface, and the characteristic dotted-rhythms also curiously conjure up the baroque.
Any tendency toward sentimentality is blasted out by the second movement's raucous and ugly woodwind and brass writing.
With the composer alert and bird-like on the podium, the SCO played the new piece in a dedicated and exemplary fashion.
The rest of the concert, also presided over by Maxwell Davies, was less  satisfactory .
It was probably a mistake to programme Judith Weir's Isti Mirant Stella (dedicated to Maxwell Davies, and written for the St Magnus Festival in Orkney some ten years ago) alongside the new work.
It needed much more refined and dynamically varied reading than it received here.
Nothing of the score's sense of awe and mystery (it depicts the appearance of Halley's Comet just before the Norman Conquest of 1066, as shown in the  Bayeux Tapestry) survived this rather brutal account.
The performances of Beethoven's Coriolan Overture and Haydn's London Symphony (no 104 in D) were both tired-sounding and unfocused, with flabby articulation in the fast music and less than perfect ensemble.
Neil Mackay
Arts Council freezing orchestra's grant
By Allan McLean
A FREEZE in the annual grant to the Royal Scottish National Orchestra was announced yesterday by the Scottish Arts Council when it released details of grants totalling almost £20 million for 1993-94.
The overall increase of 2.1 per cent— compared with 2 per cent in grants from the Arts Council in England and Wales — was said to have been achieved at the expense of the SAC's running costs, which will be limited to an increase of 1.5 per cent .
Less money would be available for one-off projects and schemes over the next year, William Brown, chairman of the SAC, said.
The organisation would be unable to respond positively to as many requests for financial help for the arts as it would have liked.
The grant for the RSNO has been held at £1.82 million, the same as in the current financial year.
No explanation was given in the SAC's statement, but it is understood that once the recent problems of the orchestra have been resolved the SAC may be prepared to consider other funding.
Glasgow District Council decided last month to release its £90,000 grant for 1992-93 to the RSNO after holding it back for almost a year.
Payment was finally approved after the council was assured that the orchestra's internal feuding had ceased and that changes were taking place in senior personnel.
Jim Dunlop, company secretary of the RSNO, said the orchestra was disappointed at not receiving an increase in the SAC contribution for next year.
A rise of at least 3 per cent had been expected.
He hoped the position could be improved and would await a letter of explanation from the SAC with interest.
Seona Reid, director of the SAC, said that priorities had been identified for the development of the arts in Scotland over the next three to four years.
The aims were to:
reward quality wherever it was found;
sustain the infrastructure of the arts against buffeting by the recession;
give as much assistance as possible to the individual artist;
initiate new developments, where resources permit.
The art form gaining the biggest overall percentage increase in yesterday's announcement is literature, which gets £900,000, a boost of 9.8 per cent.
Lowest is for music, with £7.976 million, a rise of 1.5 per cent.
Drama is allocated £4.197 million, a rise of 1.6 per cent.
Visual art gets £1.7 million, a boost of 6.3 per cent.
There is 2 per cent more for dance (£2.251 million) and 1.9 per cent for combined arts (£2.449 million).
The SAC welcomed a large increase in support for the Gaelic arts, saying that reflected its commitment to Scotland's traditional cultures.
The Scottish Baroque Ensemble gets 11 per cent less at £100,000.
Scottish Opera, the biggest single beneficiary, receives £4,460,000, a rise of 2.3 per cent.
Scottish Ballet gets £1.904 million, also an increase of 2.3 per cent.
The main grant for the Scottish Chamber Orchestra has been boosted by 10 per cent to £880,000 — although payments to the SCO from other SAC funds will be down by £40,000.
The biggest rise in percentage terms is 233 per cent for the Lemon Tree Arts Centre, Aberdeen, which gets £20,000.
The Fruitmarket Gallery, Edinburgh, gets £300,000, almost 10 per cent more.
Contributions to Scotland from the touring fund of the Arts Council of Great Britain are down by 19 per cent to £452,000.
Lorne Boswell, Scottish secretary of the actors' union, Equity, said there was alarm at the low levels of grant for theatre companies.
Tim Baker, marketing director of the Scottish Chamber Orchestra, said he appreciated the confidence in the SCO demonstrated by the 10 per cent boost in the main grant.
But reductions in other funding meant the overall gain was 5 per cent.
Lorraine Fannin, director of the Scottish Publishers' Association, said that the increases involved for literature were small in cash terms.
Orchestra players reject merger
By Eric McKenzie
THE proposed merger of the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra with the Scottish Opera orchestra is in doubt after it was revealed last night that the SO players have unanimously rejected the move in a secret ballot.
The result of the vote taken last week was relayed to SO management last Friday.
Meanwhile, the BBC SSO is holding fire on balloting its members until it receives more information about the merger to create a National Orchestra of Scotland, which would double as the orchestra for both the BBC and SO.
It is intended that the orchestra would be in place in time for the Edinburgh Festival in autumn.
Last night a spokesman for the SO players said they were unhappy with the proposals, although their ballot was not a reflection on the SO management, in whom they still had complete faith.
The timing of the decision, however, came as a surprise to Alistair Beattie, the SSO member of the merger committee.
He said that he respected the views of his colleagues at SO, but added that they obviously had taken their decision on the information they had, while the SSO was still in the process of getting information from the management about the proposal.
Loaded symbols Giles Sutherland reviews an exhibition of Philip Braham's landscape paintings and finds more to them than meets the eye
ACCORDING to Philip Braham, his painting is frequently misinterpreted.
This comes as no surprise because the works, which nearly always relate to landscape, can be read at a deceptively simple level.
‘Environmental’ is a common label — A Withered Forest becomes a depiction of acid rain; Flooded Farmland prophesies rising seas caused by global warming.
Other work can be seen as ‘pure’ landscape — stubble burning or fields of oilseed rape surrounding a standing stone.
But these are allegorical landscapes, rich in symbolism relating not only to the public domain of universally recognised codes but also to the artist's personal mythologies.
So the work raises questions of accessibility, and although Braham is keen to help decipher it, should art's meaning ultimately depend on personal contact with the artist?
Light, in combination with landscape, is Braham's main metaphor, and he has commented: ‘Traditional metaphors are so ingrained in all of us that one can never quite escape the suggestion that light represents good, darkness represents bad.
I'm trying to find new ways of interpreting the symbol itself so that it's not as polarised.
Within my darkness there's a certain amount of light and vice versa.’
In St Enoch Trilogy the symbolism of light is more conventional.
According to legend, St Enoch, mother of Glasgow's patron St Mungo, was cast adrift in the Forth after becoming pregnant out of wedlock.
Enoch's raft was carried by a shoal of fish to Culross where she was baptised by St Serf.
The trilogy represents raft, shelter and spires and moves from dusk through night to dawn.
As with most of Braham's work there is more darkness than light.
The condition of the Scottish nation is another preoccupation.
In Allegorical Landscape with Narcissus Mirror, a river divides a landscape of dense wood on the one side from a barren heath on the other.
The significance is fairly plain, although again personal meaning underlies this interpretation.
A set of four small pastel drawings depicting nothing more than burning leaves, haystacks, and a solitary tree convincingly carry nothing less than 400 years of European history — from the displacement of Catholicism, the enlightenment, the Holocaust to the decay of capitalism.
Braham's importance lies essentially in his ability to use mundane or ‘innocent’ objects as vehicles which carry the much heavier load.
Full of meaning: light in the context of landscape is one of Braham's favourite metaphors as illustrated in his 1992 allegorical work Sankowski's Vision
From magical charm to some doleful looks
Christopher Grier finds that two new London productions cheer and sober in equal measure
CIRQUE INVISIBLE RIVERSIDE STUDIOS
RETURNED to London after too long an absence, Le Cirque Imaginaire is back until 6 March in the Riverside Studios where it made its UK debut many years ago.
Although it has changed its name to the Cirque Invisible with most of its material new, its format remains much the same as before, created by the husband and wife team of Jean Baptiste Thierree and Victoria Chaplin (daughter of Oonagh) but not joined by their lithe acrobat son, James Spencer Thierree.
Their two-hour show glows with an extraordinary, gentle cultivated charm, a mixture of wit, instant visual gags, ‘magic’ and some longer extended routines, one involving bicycles and another a pile of garden chairs with a backing of a sophisticated choice of Satie-type music.
Animals?
Not really, save for six vociferous quacky-ducks, some tiny rabbits and a vast somnambulant white buck or roe.
Words are largely unnecessary for such universal humour.
Early in the evening, Jean Baptiste pulls off his wig of flowing white locks to disclose an identical head of hair beneath.
A beaming bonhomme, with the confiding smile of Harpo Marx, he produces a range of conjuring tricks and juggling, seemingly as surprised as us that they actually work, but so winning is his personality that nobody would worry if they didn't.
Victoria Chaplin has the persona of a grave and beautiful young girl, performing astonishing feats of illusion and imagination with inanimate objects.
Well worth a visit, only ten minutes walk from Hammersmith Station.
Delight guaranteed.
A heart-warming experience.
It appears that their marriage had been obsessional, passionate and stormy, their quarrels causing the neighbours to call the police.
What had been wrong?
Duras never really specifies.
Perhaps it was Anne-Marie's aloof self-sufficiency that so inflamed Michel's jealousy.
At one stage, she had fled to Paris, spending 36 hours in bed with a pick-up stranger.
On her return, Michel had been waiting on the platform with a gun in his hand but could not bring himself to shoot.
Duly divorced, they now meet again by prior arrangement in the lobby of a hotel near their former home.
The air is thick with embarrassment, with questions unspoken and unanswerable.
Should they, or even could they, come together again, although by then both are contracted elsewhere.
She of Hiroshima mon Amour and The Lover, Marguerite Duras is an expert chronicler and cartographer of close relationships.
She doesn't miss a trick in La Musica, weighting the balance, however, slightly in favour of Anne-Marie, the more adult of the two, Michel a sad, defeated soul cocooned in his self-absorption.
Clearly they can neither live together nor apart.
Harrowing stuff with emotions, hormones and nerve ends aching, but for all the quality of the acting and the script, it doesn't seem as moving as it ought to be but it is hard to define why not.
A tale of Country folk
Singer and guitarist Stuart Adamson talks ethnic Scottish rock with Alistair Mabbott
‘THE most disheartening thing is that I have always had a really strong idea about what I want the group to be and I'm not very good at relating to people who think that their version of what my group should be is more important than mine,’ complains Stuart Adamson, singer/guitarist with Big Country.
That includes the fans too, not just record companies and journalists.
If you're not making music for yourself, thinks Adamson, then there's no point in doing it.
‘At 13 years-old,’ he remembers, ‘I went to see bands and thought: that's what I want.
I want to be that guy up there.
Because I was a really shy teenager, and I thought it was a great place to hide; where you could talk about things and express these feelings that you had, but you could hide a wee bit too.
You could always stand back and say, ‘I'm not really going through all that angst and stuff, that's just my persona.’
But as time goes on, you begin to realise that all these things do tie in.’
So who's the persona now?
Have Adamson and his alter ego become one?
‘I think so.
Certainly, some of my work's autobiographical.
For some of it you try to put yourself in somebody else's shoes and write a story about that.
It's something I like to do because it's part of the folk tradition too, to storytell and to put characters into songs to document and record.’
Ah, yes, the folk tradition.
It's 11 years since Big Country announced their arrival with the bracing singles Harvest Home, Fields Of Fire, In A Big Country and Chance.
Immediately, a cliche was born.
Here was a band, it went, who played their guitars like surrogate bagpipes and probably herded sheep on their days off.
Since then, Runrig have become a national institution and Capercaillie look as though they're heading the same way.
‘Ethnic’ Scottish rock has had a good decade, something Adamson has mixed feelings about.
‘Well, yeah, it's obvious that Runrig had a good listen to the first Big Country album, you know?’ he remarks, archly, and it's hard to tell from his deadpan tone whether or not he's joking.
‘I think that nationalism for nationalism's sake is a mistake; it can get in the way.
It's important for me to understand my heritage and culture, but it's not what I want to go ramming down everybody's throats.
But I have to admit that in the past I have been offended by people saying that it's just formula for me to play melodies and structures that come to me very naturally.
I grew up exposed to folk and country music and I play from the heart.’
‘The fact is that groups aren't  embarrassed to play stuff that belongs to them.
And I think it shouldn't even have been a question for the Celtic connection to be there.
It's there because you grew up with it and you're exposed to it and it turns you on.’
It's not unusual to hear a band describe its brand new album as a ‘fresh start’, but this indeed seems to be the case with Big Country's The Buffalo Skinners.
It's their first since splitting with Phonogram Records and taking up with Compulsion (a new label started by the A&R man who had signed them to Phonogram in the first place), and shows the band in muscular form.
‘If we hadn't changed record companies, we really would have split up,’ announces Dunfermline-based Adamson, hailing it as ‘the best record we've done — if not ever then certainly since the first two’.
As an admission that, yes, they did go into a bit of a decline, the band has even included re-recorded versions of a couple of songs from their last album, No Place Like Home, a record whose only purpose appears to have been ‘to keep things ticking over’.
It also marks the return of drummer Mark Brzezicki, who quit in 1989, leaving Adamson, guitarist Bruce Watson and bassist Tony Butler in a sour relationship with their record company.
The Buffalo Skinners is brimming with the ‘loud, emotive slabs of guitar music’ that turn Adamson on so much.
The good ship Big Country is finally back on course.
‘We ended up spending so much time listening to people that it ended up diluting what we wanted to do,’ Adamson concludes.
‘Sometimes, it has to be like that.
You have to go the scenic route and learn things that way.’
The single Alone is released on 1 March followed by the LP The Buffalo Skinners on 22 March.
Big Country play Barrowlands, Glasgow on 22 March.
Gigantic talent dazzles
MICHEL PETRUCCIANI QUEEN'S HALL, EDINBURGH
MICHEL Petrucciani was quite simply dazzling.
The pianist suffers from ‘glass bone’ disease, and has had to surmount immense physical disabilities, but while his condition may have inhibited his growth, it has done nothing to stunt his artistry.
Using a special pedal-extension device, he faced up to the suddenly enormous-looking Steinway in something of a David and Goliath meeting, and triumphed.
His effervescent solo performance brought together material from his new album of music associated with Duke Ellington, jazz standards, and a lovely self-composed ballad written for his son.
He brought a distinctive musical conception to each, relentlessly inventive in the right hand, strong and varied in the left, and constantly musical in their combination.
A typical section began with a floridly imaginative scamper through C-Jam Blues, using the tune only as an occasional reference.
He then caressed his way through the lyrical, haunting melody of Monk's ‘Round Midnight, throwing in a couple of surprise twists in the closing bars.
A stride piano pattern in the left hand then underpinned exploratory, unresolved figures, which eventually evolved into Take the A-Train.
This particular train, though, headed for harmonic destinations never envisaged in Billy Strayhorn's original.
Each of these ultra-familiar tunes came up sounding fresh and surprising, and the entire set consistently delighted us with the unexpected.
He closed with a sparkling Satin Doll, returned with Rollins's exuberant St Thomas, and left us with the memory of a performance which fed the mind and sent the spirit soaring, while reminding us of how much he has had to overcome in finding his way to such radiant self-expression.
The return to action of the highly regarded John Rae Collective should have launched the concert in style, but they were decidedly lacklustre after an extended layoff, and showed only occasional flashes of the energy and invention which made them Scotland's best and most creative jazz outfit.
Italian connections
ALTHOUGH the name Castalian Band may conjure up images of something exotically Mediterranean, the ensemble has its roots firmly placed in Scotland, writes Carol Main.
Promoted by the Georgian Concert Society at St Cecilia's Hall, the contemporary Castalian Band has taken its identity from the poets and musicians of James VI in Stirling.
The band's programme, featuring violin, harpsichord, cello and soprano, centred round Scottish Baroque music and its Italian links.
The dregs of a flu virus resulted in the usual effervescence of soprano Lorna Anderson, being clouded over.
However, the lilting lines of Vivaldi's cantata Lungi dal vago volto and some traditional Scots songs gained interest from her gentle, restrained approach.
In a programme ranging in character from Willie was a Wanton Wag to the Englishman William Boyce's rather inadequate attempts to sound Scottish in A Scots Cantata, Anderson's understandable shortcomings could surely have been further compensated for by violinist Richard Gwilt, but inconsistent articulation coupled with a lack of incisiveness negated much of the music's subtlety.
Providing the all-important continuo were cellist Imogen Seth-Smith and harpsichordist Lucy Carolan, who showed an innate sense of style as she breathed her way through the ensemble numbers.
Yesterday's RSNO review was written by George Wilson and not Mary Miller as stated.
Treatment of mental illness
The article by Julia White and Hilary Patrick (Lifestyle, 2 February) opposing the idea of compulsory treatment powers in the community for some people with mental illness, contains a number of misleading suggestions.
It is implied that anybody with mental illness in the community who refuses medication might be compelled to take it.
This is certainly not the case in relation to current provision in Scotland or proposals being brought forward in England.
Compulsory treatment powers in the community are aimed at a small and highly selected group of people who, because of their illness, might pose a significant risk to their own health or safety or the safety of other people were they to remain without treatment, but who do not require to stay in hospital.
The views expressed by Julie White and Hilary Patrick leave out of consideration the unfortunate fact that some kinds of serious mental illness may be associated with lack of insight.
A patient who believes his delusional thinking may not be in a position to give an informed refusal of medication, because he does not believe he is ill.
Because of that, he should not be denied his right to receive care and treatment, aimed at allowing him to get on with life as normally as possible.
Neither should he be forced to remain in hospital when he could be treated in the community.
The article also seems to accept the fallacy that the provision of proper comprehensive facilities for treatment in the community on the one hand and compulsory power for treatment on the other, are alternatives.
They are not.
They are both required for a good comprehensive system of community care and the presence of the former will reduce, but not remove, the need for the latter.
As mentioned in the article, the Mental Welfare Commission has reviewed the use of leave of absence under the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 in Scotland.
The requirement in English and Welsh legislation that liability to detention must stop after six months of leave of absence is absent from the Scottish act, which allows for extension beyond six months.
Compulsory treatment in the community under leave of absence does not just involve drug treatment.
It allows specification of a range of treatment measures and the commission, in its monitoring of patients on leave of absence, tries to ensure in each case that an appropriate range of services is provided.
The commission supports the need for such a compulsory measure though its implementation could be improved, for example, by the requirement of the provision of a specially trained social worker in appropriate cases.
In 1991, out of about 30,000 discharges from psychiatric hospitals and units, 384 people in Scotland were discharged on leave of absence extending beyond 28 days.
Only around 80 people had their leave of absence extended beyond six months.
The commission visits everyone where leave of absence has extended beyond six months and regularly thereafter and has the power to discharge people from liability to detention should the grounds for this not be met.
Arrogant
Michael Conn's description of his ‘defensive driving’ skills (Points of View, 5 February) does nothing to earn the admiration he hopes for.
On the contrary, his attempted self-exculpation is breathtaking in its arrogance and sadly disturbing in its implications.
Thanks to his restraint at a pedestrian crossing, we are led to believe, a mother with child in a push-chair narrowly escaped death or injury under the wheels of his motor-cycle.
(She even had the ‘temerity’ to berate him for moving off while she was crossing.)
He concludes with a dark warning that she and her infant may not be so lucky the next time.
He cites the Highway Code.
Yet, when will he and others of like mentality realise that the first rule of the road must always be to give priority to unprotected people, whatever the circumstances?
Motor vehicles kill and mangle people, not the other way around.
Orchestras more in tune with sponsors
By Susan Dean
SCOTTISH orchestras are more successful in winning sponsorship than their counterparts south of the Border.
A survey of 19 youth organisations and professional orchestras in Britain shows that the two Scottish participants — the National Youth Orchestra of Scotland and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra — are way ahead of the field in raising  sponsorship .
In 1991, the NYOS earned nearly 60 per cent from sponsorship, compared to an average of 41 per cent for youth orchestras, while the SCO raised around 17 per cent of its income from the same source, double the national average of 8 per cent.
The survey, by financial consultants, Ernst and Whinney, showed that box office takings also formed a smaller proportion of income.
In 1991, only 50 per cent of the SCO's income came from the box office, compared to an average of 69 per cent.
It was also nearly twice as dependent on Arts Council cash, with nearly 30 per cent of its income from the Scottish Arts Council — double the average of 14 per cent.
Heavy dependence on sponsorship and arts council cash could spell trouble as the recession hits arts budgets, says the survey's author, Gerald Baker.
But the NYOS earned a pat on the back from Mr Baker for having by far the largest number of donors — 68 in total — giving sums under £5,000.
‘They are in a better position to cope if they lose one or two sponsors,’ he said.
Glasgow set to blossom as orchid show host
By Graeme Stewart
ONE OF the world's major orchid shows is to open in Glasgow in May, in spite of the event's having been dubbed a fiasco less than a month ago.
The district council then had to spend almost £250,000 to bail it out of a financial crisis.
The 14th World Orchid Conference and Show will be held at the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre from 26 April to 2 May.
The conference is held every three years and previous host cities include Bangkok, Dubai, Miami, Tokyo and Auckland.
Colin McNicol, convener of Glasgow's Parks and recreation committee, said: ‘It is quite a feather in Glasgow's cap to be hosting this event.
We anticipate around 1,300 delegates will attend and over 20,000 day visitors are expected.’
However, the show has not been greeted with open arms by everyone at Glasgow City Chambers.
A Scottish National Party councillor, Kenny Gibson, said the money would be better spent on the city's parks and the Militant councillor, Tommy Sheridan, said the expenditure was obscene.
The event ran into financial trouble when only 1,000 of the originally projected 3,000 delegates showed an interest and private sponsorship cash was almost non-existent.
Glasgow District Council agreed to give £248,000 to allow the event to go ahead.
But the organisers of the conference and show point out that orchid specialists from 17 countries will be coming to the city and pouring money into the local economy as well as adding to the prestige of Glasgow's Parks and Recreation Department.
The show will have exhibits of orchids from around the world, including spectacular displays from Japan, New Zealand and Brazil, Papua New Guinea and the Far East, home of some of the finest orchid species in the world.
Part of the show will draw inspiration from Glasgow's most famous architect, Charles Rennie Mackintosh, who favoured simple lines and plain colours, with black and white and muted tones of grey and brown much in evidence.
Exhibitions will be staged by the Royal Horticultural Society, the Edinburgh and Kew Royal Botanic Gardens, the Orchid Review, and Glasgow itself.
ALLAN MILLIGAN Flowers of spring: David Menzies, orchid specialist at Glasgow Botanic Gardens, inspects a possible contender for exhibition during the show
High on drug of applause
WE MEET Norman Maclean in a Glasgow pub at the start of A Talent to Abuse.
He is drunk, although a few stages short of rat-arsed.
He is being filmed to make a documentary about his fight against alcoholism.
You have to sit back and think about this for a moment to sort out what's going on.
Is he ‘acting’ drunk?
No.
Did the film team just happen upon him by chance in the bar as his meter ticked towards ‘maudlin’?
Unlikely.
Did they follow him on his pub-crawl, clinically waiting until he became suitably juiced before switching on the camera?
Also unlikely.
Did they take him there sober and ply him with booze until he reached the point specified by the director?
Unthinkable.
It is as baffling a production enigma as anything in Maclean's own life.
To somehow contrive Maclean's drunkenness would be completely at odds with the honesty — the cruelly bitter-sweet honesty — of last night's one-hour film, made by Grampian for ITV.
We saw Norman Maclean, the Hebridean Glaswegian, being lauded for his many-faceted talents.
He could have been the world's greatest piper, a significant mathematician, an international stage performer.
Instead he became an alcoholic (a ‘half-alcoholic’ he preferred to call it) who required to dry-out in hospital about 50 times over a 25-year period.
When he's dried out, he goes back on the road, an entertainer for whom the drug of applause and audience-love assuages his insecurity.
For a while.
But the history of his life so far shows (and he freely admits it) that old John Barleycorn lies in wait for him with implacable patience.
He can joke about it.
Drinking and drunkenness are a familiar theme of his bilingual stand-up comedy acts, and have made him a cult-figure among Gaelic-speaking lounge-bar audiences in the Western Isles.
This, of course, is another source of angst.
I think that this was one of the most powerful points he made.
In a part of Scotland where alcohol addiction is chronic, was a ‘half-alcoholic’ super-hero a worthy role model?
I have often felt an uncomfortable sense of voyeurism over Oprah Winfrey's machine-tooled confessionals.
There has been the feeling that the emotional outpourings she has drawn from her panellists have been inspired largely by the ‘glamour’ of television.
I had no such reservations with A Talent to Abuse.
Maclean's mother Peggy, his estranged second wife, also Peggy, and his daughter Temora, would no more have volunteered for an Oprah Winfrey panel than they would give this man a bottle of cask-strength whisky for his birthday.
Then there was the self-analysis in his own words, whose richness of colour and metaphor reached that distinctive pitch fuelled by the Gael's heritage of poetry and fatalism.
As we went on the road with him, to Rodel and Stornoway and (uncomfortably) to Inverness, I think we suffered and understood something of our own dark side.
X-rated movies
A new book criticising Hollywood's current output and accusing it of undermining traditional values has provoked fierce debate in the US.
The book is released in Britain tomorrow and Brian Pendreigh assesses its arguments and evaluates its conclusions
HOLLYWOOD has stopped being the dream factory and instead become the poison factory, challenging conventional notions of decency, undermining the family, ridiculing religion and promoting contempt for authority.
At least, that's the central thrust of a new book that has provoked fierce debate in the US.
Michael Medved is film critic and co-host of PBS's Sneak Previews programme, a sort of American Barry Norman.
In going ahead with the book, he ignored warnings that he would be seen as a traitor to the industry and could become the most hated man in Hollywood.
They weren't far wrong.
A review in the Washington Post is not untypical of liberal reaction in its dismissal of his book as ‘386 pages of bilge’.
But nobody is ignoring it.
The book is entitled Hollywood vs America.
But given the cultural overlap between Britain and the US, and the fact that the 20 highest-grossing films in Britain last year all came from America, many of Medved's arguments are equally applicable on this side of the Atlantic — if they are applicable at all.
Medved also examines values within television and popular music, which are largely controlled by the same giant corporations that run the film business.
Time-Warner defended Ice-T's rap song Cop Killer —‘bust some shots off, dust some cops off’— on grounds of freedom of expression; while the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences has allegedly encouraged film-makers to focus on the most degraded aspects of human nature, showering Oscars on The Silence of the Lambs, the story of two serial killers, one of whom skins people while the other eats them.
Medved's concern extends beyond such obviously controversial material to the general attitudes that run through film, television and music, from the pervasiveness of violence through the presentation of promiscuity to the idea that kids know best.
While adult movies present a menu of cannibalism, incest, vomit and violence, ‘family films’ promote the notion ‘that parents are corrupt, hypocritical clowns who must learn decency and integrity from their enlightened offspring’.
Hollywood glories in sadism and presents brutality as light entertainment, according to Medved, citing Danny Glover's comment in Lethal Weapon 2, when he kills two thugs by applying a nail gun to their temples: ‘I nailed 'em both.’
It may well be the case that the routine killings of the Lethal Weapon films should cause more concern than the genuinely revolting violence of The Silence of the Lambs and Reservoir Dogs.
At the other end of the scale,
Medved accuses Steven Spielberg of using his Peter Pan story, Hook, to advance his theme of kids being good and adults bad; while the storyline of Home Alone, about parents who accidentally leave their eight-year-old son behind when they go on holiday, promotes a picture of adult ineptitude and childhood self-sufficiency.
Kevin (Macaulay Culkin) manages to get the better of a couple of adult villains.
But kids have a long tradition of getting the better of adults, going back to the Famous Five and beyond.
But that's just part and parcel of a Hollywood attitude, according to Medved, that regards swearing and sex as normal activities for kids today.
The Famous Five didn't swear and, as far as we know, they didn't have sex.
Medved argues that at a time when most Americans continue to espouse traditional values, Hollywood is controlled by an intellectual elite clinging to the ‘freakiness’ of Sixties counter-culture.
He believes this conflict is responsible for the ‘crisis’ in film, television and pop, pointing out that the Sixties saw not only the easing of censorship but also a massive decline in cinema attendances.
However, Hollywood's ‘crisis’ must be kept in perspective.
Medved's own figures show that while weekly attendances fell to 17.5 million in 1969, they then levelled off and the figure for 1991 was 18.9 million.
Hollywood vs America is a thought-provoking polemic, but Medved's use of material is so selective that he's in danger of undermining his own credibility.
He tends to jump to conclusions with feats of illogicality worthy of Sir Nicholas Fairbairn.
While citing Home Alone as an example of ‘kids know best’ syndrome, he attributes its phenomenal box-office performance to ‘the public's powerful hunger for movies that portray reasonably well-adjusted, happy middle-class families’.
Many commentators would argue Fatal Attraction marked a dramatic return to family values, with the family defeating the menace of the predatory single woman.
One critic, reviewing Field of Dreams a few years ago, claimed Hollywood was now besotted with the family.
Medved makes the point that in Martin Scorsese's remake of Cape Fear, Robert De Niro's killer is a deranged Christian fundamentalist, whereas there was no religious dimension when Robert Mitchum played the role in the Sixties.
However Medved makes no mention of The Night of the Hunter, the classic and chilling 1955 film in which Mitchum plays…a deranged Christian fundamentalist, on the trail of two children whose mother he has murdered.
Psycho and Peeping Tom, both of which are more than 30 years-old and remain deeply shocking, are also ignored.
Medved regards A Clockwork Orange, Stanley Kubrick's ultra-violent 1971 film as ‘superb, challenging and highly original’, while taking a swipe at A Fish Called Wanda because of its irreverent attitude to death.
It was directed by Charles Crichton, a veteran from Ealing, the studio that made Kind Hearts and Coronets, which treated serial killing as a joke almost half a century ago.
And yet the incidence and nature of violence must always be a cause for concern and the subject of discussion.
One of the problems in the US is that the restrictions on children and teenagers seeing certain types of film have traditionally been looser than in Britain.
But at least there is some form of official control over the films children see in cinemas.
There are no such restrictions on television and records.
Many parents would be shocked by rap songs about men mutilating female genitalia, with graphic descriptions that we would not reproduce in reporting a criminal trial let alone an article on popular culture.
In films, an actor may present a degraded or violent character, but that character is just one element in a complex tableau, and will be judged in context; whereas a song will often be seen as a personal statement from the singer.
Madonna is a role model, Glenn Close's character in Fatal Attraction is not.
Medved is guilty of some distinctly muddled thinking on pop, which is less political than it was 20 or 30 years ago when Alice Cooper sang about school being blown to pieces.
It's much blander than it was when the Stones invoked Sympathy for the Devil.
One could argue pop has declined not because it has been infiltrated by a counter-cultural message, but because of the demise of the Sixties counter-culture.
There is another huge difference between pop and film, in that it costs little to set up a band, play in community venues, make a record and get it on local radio, whereas film remains largely the preserve of big business.
Medved is right in attacking Hollywood for double standards in its defence of sexist rap music as the music of the streets, just because it's made by blacks.
He wonders whether Time-Warner, the company behind Cop Killer, would have been as keen to give freedom of expression to a Ku Klux Klansman advocating the killing of black children.
Quite rightly there is legislation to stop material that incites race hatred.
And one of the songs mentioned by Medved was the subject of obscenity proceedings.
It's wrong to suggest all barriers have broken down.
Medved muddies the waters by treating cinema, television and pop more or less as a single entity.
But they do have something in common, as far as Hollywood is concerned — the profit motive.
Hollywood is the very pantheon of capitalism.
If wholesome, old-fashioned entertainment made money, somebody would be producing it.
The highest-grossing film in the US last year was the dark and sinister Batman Returns, followed by Lethal Weapon 3.
Basic Instinct, No 6 in the US chart, was top-grosser in Britain, ahead of Hook.
In Britain, cinema attendances have doubled in the past decade, and they were up in America last year.
The picture is more complex than Medved would have us believe, but his book does help stir a worthwhile and important debate on the nature and effect of Hollywood's message.
Medved makes the point that in Martin Scorsese's remake of Cape Fear, the killer is a deranged Christian fundamentalist, whereas there was no religious dimension in the Sixties
Medved says Hook, above, advances the theme of kids being good and adults bad; while Home Alone, promotes adult ineptitude and childhood self-sufficiency
Antony di Gesu: photographer
ANTONY di Gesu, a photographer known for his portraits of celebrated people from Truman Capote to Irving Berlin, has died at La Jolla, California, aged 79.
Di Gesu's subjects included authors, musicians, politicians, scientists and business leaders.
Between 1965 and 1970, he photographed numerous covers for Saturday Review magazine.
His work is known for its theatrical style and creative use of shadows.
Di Gesu, a native of Sicily, arrived in Brooklyn, New York, at the age of seven and began his career as a 14-year-old assistant to a theatrical photographer.
As a teen-ager, he took daily subway trips to the Metropolitan Museum to study the painted portraits that so greatly influenced his photographic style.
Years later one of his photographic portraits was purchased by the museum.
Di Gesu took photographs until just before his death.
In 1992, di Gesu's work was displayed in three concurrent exhibits in Beverly Hills, La Jolla and Tijuana, Mexico.
Realms of the senses
BRITTEN QUARTET QUEEN'S HALL, EDINBURGH
BRITTEN would surely have been proud of the quartet bearing his name.
It certainly showed considerable insight in its performance of the composer's second quartet at the Queen's Hall on Monday.
Sometimes, Britten seems to have written more naturally when he didn't have words to set.
The freedom thus offered allowed his ideas to expand intuitively and this could hardly be more gripping than in the concluding Chacony — a monumental structure of which the performers had the measure.
The menacing wraith-chase of the vivace — a movement eerie even by Britten's spectral standards — left behind a sensation of discomfiture reminiscent of his (later) The Turn Of The Screw.
As this work inspired the players to the most willowy, misty colours, so the sensuous Ravel quartet channelled the players into liquid, aquiline shaping and a flexible closeness of ensemble with the uncanny swiftness and unanimity of a shoal of fish.
Restrained but insistent sensuality — entirely appropriate to the music — exuded from every line.
The ability of this young quartet to present two works from such different worlds so convincingly, led one to expect that Dvorak's American quartet would be a powerful experience; but what might have been hot-blooded came over as an indoor gypsy — more pretty than potent.
Although excitement mounted in the last movement, it was induced rather than fermented.
George Wilson
Drawn to animal grace
Edward Gage tracks down an exhibition of art devoted to dog racing and finds a winning combination
THE Scottish Gallery in Dundas Street, Edinburgh, is presenting New Paintings and New Drawings by Brian Fojcik.
One congratulates the gallery in opening its stable doors to youth, but at 33, Fojcik has already proved himself amply equipped to enter senior playing fields and this outing augurs well for the future; it also challenges Glasgow's unique claims to youthful success, commitment and vigorous imagination.
Fojcik trained in Dundee at Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art.
Though not politically specific, his subject matter is democratic.
A perceptive observer, a sensitive and powerful draughtsman, his works here accrue from a year's study at Thornton Greyhound Racing Stadium, near Kirkcaldy.
A series of large, bold drawings — often in mixed media — contrast the awkward, stumpy dog handlers with the finely bred elegance of their charges, set against the floodlit drama of the track itself.
Fojcik's response to the hounds is especially remarkable for as Degas did with race horses, he conveys both their animal beauty and their potential energy as lean mean racing machines.
Maximum effects are created where taut line complements chiaroscuro.
One large oil painting Ash Grove Shadow features the burly backs of spectators facing the illuminated circuit disciplined by the geometry of cast shadows, while another synthesises selected elements in a semi-abstract design.
Intellectual command therefore, attends natural response.
With their echoes of Daumier or early Van Gogh, Fojcik's observations go far beyond mere study of sporting life to embrace a large measure of social commentary.
The gallery is also showing a group of work under the title The Borders in Watercolour.
Almost exclusively inspired by the essence rather than seduced by the charm of this region.
These vary greatly in approach — from Adam Bruce Thomson's light touch and heightened sense of intricate design (The River Tweed at Kelso) and (Cattle by the River Tweed) to William Johnstone's simplified near abstraction in sparsely annotated washes.
Historical interest lies in the unusually broad handling and use of gouache in The Haining, Selkirk 1902 by Tom Scott, Johnstone's childhood mentor.
THE Earl Haig also visibly researches abstract virtues especially in From Scott's View.
John McNairn's vision is bold in colour but similarly directed towards formalisation.
Fine works by Sir William Gillies include an atypical Winter Sun, Temple which has metaphysical hints of Paul Nash.
The most intense colour appears in Andrew Walker's Tweed Valley whose swift green recession below a blue/violet sky is punctuated by hawthorn bushes and dark distant copses.
These splendid shows run in tandem until 3 March.
Powerful huddle: Fojcik spent a year at a Fife greyhound stadium resulting in works such as Punters Before A Race
On screen gods and sods Popular movie images of men come under scrutiny in a special course.
Sue Wilson reports
DEBATES about cinematic treatment of women and femininity are now firmly established in mainstream film criticism.
Edinburgh Filmhouse is now offering a chance to examine the flipside of the gender coin with Gentlemen Prefer Bonds?, a ten-week course analysing celluloid representations of masculinity, using examples of different film genres.
Shiona Wood, Filmhouse's education officer, devised the course because of the burgeoning debate about masculine identity, fuelled by developments like the American ‘Wild Man’ movement and anti-feminist backlash figures such as Neil Lyndon and David Thomas.
Then there are the changing images of men — men with babies, semi-naked men portrayed as objects of desire — as seen in the media.
‘More and more people, including film reviewers and theorists, are starting to talk about the different representations of masculinity appearing in film and popular culture,’ Wood says.
‘I find I'm discussing all these issues with my male friends — How do you feel about being a man?
How have things changed with feminism?
Do you feel happy in yourself?
Do you feel insecure?— I think it could be one of the key debates of the Nineties.’
Sponsored by the Scottish Film Council, the course will comprise weekly screenings followed by talks from a wide variety of speakers, plus group discussion.
Films to be shown include The Wild Bunch; Raging Bull; Kiss Me Deadly; Rebel Without A Cause; New York, New York and New Jack City.
Among the speakers are film writer Richard Dyers, writer and cultural commentator Andy Medhurst, writer and lecturer Angela McRobbie and documentary film-maker Mark Cousins.
‘The programme concentrates mainly on Hollywood movies, because they're the ones most people see most of the time,’ Wood says.
‘Obviously it would be good to look at more examples from different cultures, but it's such a huge subject, in ten weeks you can only really deal with the tip of the iceberg.
Hopefully, though, it'll give people some kind of a handle on these issues to use in relation to other films.’
By examining changes in various genres, course participants will be able to trace how images of masculinity have reflected and/or affected developments in society at large.
‘Even if you take the example of the Western, and key Western icons like Clint Eastwood,’ Wood says, ‘you can see the films responding to social attitudes in the movement from the early spaghetti westerns to last year's Unforgiven, where you still have the recognisable Clint Eastwood character, but he's much more complex, more uncertain about things — about killing, about his motives, the whole notion of what constitutes a hero.’
Also under discussion will be the association between violence and masculine identity.
The legitimisation (or not) of violence as an integral part of ‘what a man's gotta do.’
The popularity of big budget action-adventure movies may, arguably be on the wane, but the success of current ‘new urban violence’ films raises fresh questions.
‘Some people claim that films like Reservoir Dogs, Man Bites Dog or The Bad Lieutenant are treating violence differently, showing how bad it really is,’ Wood says.
‘But there's a very seductive love and lushness about the way Reservoir Dogs is filmed, for instance, and when I saw Man Bites Dog the audience just laughed all the way through — it's a difficult, dark, disturbing film and if that's what people are finding funny, it's very worrying.’
Qualms aside, Wood sees the development of a wider debate around what constitutes masculinity as a healthy sign for both sexes.
‘I think it's good that men are now in this questioning mood,’ she says, ‘because it's only when things are questioned that there's any possibility of change.’
Detecting a lot of twaddle
SHERLOCK HOLMES AND THE CRUCIFER OF BLOOD THEATRE ROYAL, GLASGOW
A SONOROUS voice from some unseen depth wafts the audience back to the darkest days of the Raj where murky affairs were afoot, when life was cheap, gentlemanly double-dealing was routine and deeds could be done and curses uttered which would pursue a man back to civilisation and England.
The voice was mellifluous and smooth.
Had it been enraged and indignant, it could have been Conan Doyle's.
In his younger days, before modern copyright laws were introduced, he thundered against the theft and misuse of his character.
Now he is gone and the work is public property, Sherlock Holmes can legally be seen in this kind of twaddle.
Author Paul Giovanni only claims to have written a work ‘based on characters created by Conan Doyle’.
Real enthusiasts, were they unwise enough to patronise this type of show, would detect the outline of The Sign of Four, traces of other tales and echoes of celebrated lines.
They would also hear the ‘elementary’ which the detective never spoke, but see nothing recalling the panache and finesse of the famous works.
This production is neither send-up nor good, old-fashioned thriller, but a preposterous, flabby compromise occupying a marshland between the two.
The embarrassed cast is left posturing and declaiming, all the time frantically signalling to the audience their awareness of how ridiculous it all is, as if to say — we trust you will be benevolent even if we have no idea how to make this stuff funny or interesting.
Unfortunately, the cast is part of the problem, with Mark Greenstreet downright unconvincing as Holmes.
The sound effects man produces claps of thunder for the supposedly nerve-tingling revelations and soft music for the love affair between Watson (Michael Percival) and Miss St Clair (Susan Penhaligon).
The designer (Michael Holt) was given his head to create Indian forts, English country houses and boats on the foggy Thames — handsome in their own way.
The plot spins endlessly but few people are going to have the stamina to remain interested in the final turns.
Joseph Farrell
ANIMAL FARM THE TRON, GLASGOW IF, instead of the devious and callous Napoleon, animals purer in spirit but less imaginative had led the revolutionary masses of Manor Farm, would events down on the farm have turned out any better?
Orwell, concerned only to demonstrate that political will destroys the individual, offers no verdict on such refinements.
Greed, anger, mendacity (qualities which we unjustifiably ascribe routinely to animals) are his stock in trade.
But why do the other animals, seeing the pigs hoodwink them every time a commandment is altered, still accept their right to lead?
And how come the reader of Animal Farm accepts that they accept it?
The answer must be hope that things might just improve; that one day soon reality will match rhetoric.
This is why the final scene, when they look through the kitchen window and cannot tell pigs from humans, has such numbing force.
There is no hope: the future must therefore be the same as the past.
This version by Northern Stage rather downplays the shock value of that final betrayal, which is certainly a flaw.
But Alan Lyddiard's adaptation is strong on physical impact — the sheer effort involved in ploughing, the hunger and pain of the animals' lives.
To add verisimilitude, the acting area is covered in several inches of soft, loamy peat in which the seven-strong cast (with the notable exception of David Whitaker's psychotically fastidious Napoleon) wallow periodically in a choreographed fashion.
A filled bath also makes a handy dip for anyone not mucking in properly.
As this suggests, considerable dedication and team work were required from the cast.
They acquitted themselves with valour.
Often brilliantly executed it is doubtful whether this highly visual approach in fact penetrated close to the heart of Orwell's flinty masterpiece in the way that a more  transential approach might have.
Simon Berry
PARNASSUS ENSEMBLE
HOPE PARK CHURCH, ST ANDREWS
A HIGHLIGHT of the St Andrews Festival, which ends tomorrow, was the visit of the young Parnassus Ensemble, winners of the 1992 John Tunnell Award.
These musicians are fascinated by how the music they play is made.
Their performances revealed the sources of the composers' inspiration — in the Martinu Sextet the riffs and flourishes of the Parisian jazz cellar, the gypsy violin in the sombre Dumka of Dvorak's Op 48 Sextet, even the traces of gothic horror (Mary Shelley was a favourite bedtime read) in Mendelssohn's Quintet in B flat.
Their analytical style did not perhaps serve so well in Brahms's ethereal second Sextet, passion recalled in tranquillity, with its Agathe motif, tribute to the composer's one-time fiancee.
Brahms's extraordinary modulations require more precision than was possible at the end of a long programme played without a break.
But those more than hints of fine ensemble playing were amply realised the next night in the Dvorak, elegant and warm, crafted with care, and in Strauss's Serenade from Capriccio.
Gordon Macpherson's Prosen, a long arch of sound, eerie music from distant mountains with the instruments imitating and overlapping in echo effect, taught the ear to listen and prepared us for a fresh hearing of Tchaikovsky's Souvenir de Florence, ravishing but not cloying, spinning to a close in the exacting fugue which made the composer laugh when he first played it.
At the end the audience stamped and shouted, moved by music performed with such affection and such artistry.
Douglas Galbraith
TOP GIRLS
FIFTH COLUMN
BYRE THEATRE, ST ANDREWS
IN FIFTH Column's version of Caryl Churchill's Top Girls Pope Joan climbs on to the restaurant table, intones in Latin, crashes to the ground and is violently sick.
Gret, a Brueghel peasant in a breastplate filches food and cutlery and mutters the occasional curse.
Isabella Bird, the fragile Victorian traveller, twitters on about her angst and ailments.
There's a Japanese courtesan and an updated Chaucerian Griselda.
All are dinner guests of Marlene, the dynamic head of an employment agency, and the sort of women intended to give dramatic form and a historical continuum of herself and her office staff.
Back in the early Eighties as Marlene observes, a ‘stupendous era’ lay ahead for women and this prologue with its oddball assortment of characters is, one supposes, a disturbing reminder of women as sexually passive victims and a particularly ironic comment on the complexity of their relationships with men.
It is also dated, self-indulgent, idiosyncratic and devilishly difficult to marry to the central theme which revolves round Marlene's work, her rapport with her sister and her sub-GCE niece, Angie.
The student company makes a brave effort at tackling the multiple roles.
The colliding conversations are neatly synchronised but the main problem is that each part needs to convey a sense of tough experience with some firm characterisation which the self-conscious and rather tense cast couldn't find in this patchy production.
John di Folco
Bright and  pacy 
THE MAGIC FLUTE
KING'S THEATRE, EDINBURGH
SCOTTISH Opera's new production of The Magic Flute cannot be accused of being a routine stroll through Mozart's opera.
The pace is rumbustious (both on stage and in the orchestra pit), the sets bright to the point of kaleidoscopic, the costumes colourful, and the performances lively.
Both the production, by Martin Duncan, and the English libretto in a recent translation by Jeremy Sams, emphasise the comedy of the work without ignoring its more solemn message.
There were several changes to key members of the cast from the Glasgow premiere in December.
Richard Halton might have been felt to have the least enviable job in taking on Simon Keenlyside's much praised Papageno, but he did so with great panache and comic flair, and sang soundly as well.
Penelope Randall-Davies was a suitably alarming Queen of Night, while Neill Archer succeeded admirably in keeping the rather squeaky-clean Tamino on the right side of prim, while underlining his virtue.
Industrial dissent may be simmering in the orchestra pit, but the musicians played well enough under their musical director, Robert Dean, who replaced Nicholas McGegan but retained his forthright (and occasionally cavalier) approach to tempo and dynamics.
Gidon Saks brought an uncharacteristic menace (for the character, that is, rather than the singer, whom we have seen wonderfully menacing before) to the role of the wise priest Sarastro, and his decidedly unplatonic attraction to Susannah Waters's bright, pert, splendidly sung Pamina added an element of tension not envisaged in the original.
At times, though, the sheer weight and variety of stage props, moving sets, Masonic references (the priests of the brotherhood all sport costumes with one shortened leg), and rather frenetic activity threatened to undermine the essential point of the opera, and certainly distracted from the singing here and there.
A vibrant, interesting production, but one which falls short of being genuinely captivating.
Kenny Mathieson
Runrig top the Celtic rock bill
A summer extravaganza in Glasgow will feature Scotland's most popular Gaelic rockers, writes Alastair Mabbott
RUNRIG are lined up as the main attraction of the second Scottish Fleadh, a day-long celebration of Celtic music, to be held on Glasgow Green on 5 June.
It will be the top Scots rock band's first major Scottish appearance since their celebrated concerts on the banks of Loch Lomond and the esplanade of Edinburgh Castle in 1991.
The announcement was made yesterday at the People's Palace museum on Glasgow Green.
Speaking on behalf of the band, lead singer Donnie Munro said: ‘Runrig are very happy to support the Fleadh.
We feel it's important to establish a strong Celtic festival, and Glasgow has a strong attachment to both the Irish and the Scottish Celtic traditions.
Indeed, Glasgow is a unique city in cultural terms, and ideal for this sort of event.’
The Fleadh (pronounced Flah), which was launched in London's Finsbury Park in 1990, and has already spawned two related events in the United States, got off to a shaky start in Scotland last year, with a smaller attendance than had been hoped for and complaints about the shale surface on which it was held.
This year's festival is sited on a grassier area and Runrig's confirmation should leave the organisers, London's Mean Fiddler and Edinburgh promoter's Regular Music, with no worries about selling plenty of tickets.
Munro said: ‘We were looking at finding the right outdoor follow-up to our Loch Lomond concert of 1991, and were considering various options when the Fleadh approached us.
We didn't want to play an indoor stadium and we felt it was too soon to repeat Loch Lomond.
The Fleadh seemed to fit the bill, combining as it does a great outdoor site with such an appropriate city and a cause dear to our hearts.’
Runrig release their new album, Amazing Things, on 15 March.
The band's chief songwriters Calum and Rory Macdonald described it as their most outstanding to date.
Wild night: the Fleadh is the ideal follow-up to Runrig's huge 1991 outdoor concerts, says Donnie Munro
Foul language
Are you sitting comfortably?
Then Brian Pendreigh will begin and tell of political correctness in children's books which some authors now fear amounts to censorship
ONCE upon a time there was a postman called Pat and he lived in a village called Greendale, along with his black and white cat, Jess.
But Pat was a rather stuffy, bourgeois individual, not exactly on the cutting edge of popular culture.
So one day Pat was sent on a training scheme to London, where the people were very different.
There were punks and Sikhs and he went to work with a postman who was not a man at all, but a woman.
And that wasn't all, she was black as well.
Postwoman Val took Pat home, where her husband made him a Jamaican meal and Pat then went off to boogie to a steel band, like a rasta on ganja, exhibiting a sense of abandon never hinted at in Greendale.
One would hope most people would welcome authors' attempts to break down sexual and racial stereotypes, though such attempts can come unstuck if they undermine the credibility of established characters.
Encouraging authors to recognise that they live in a complex, multicultural society is one thing.
Banning books which don't conform to that ideal is another.
Enid Blyton and Captain W E Johns have been targeted by library authorities, but there are many others on the blacklists.
Lambeth Council in London banned a book, Midnight Circus, on the grounds that ‘most carers’ disapprove of circuses, and the presentation of an ape as the baddie not only raises issues of animal rights but has racial overtones — even though it turns out that the ape is really a white woman in disguise.
Huckleberry Finn has been proscribed by some American libraries because of its repeated use of the word nigger, even though it was written more than 100 years ago, it was set in the Deep South, and a central purpose of the novel was to challenge prejudices about the black man.
But it's not just these high-profile bans that are causing concern.
A survey of children's authors by the writers' group PEN suggests publishers are not content merely with encouraging authors to be politically correct, but are actually censoring anything they feel may be politically incorrect.
Of the 105 authors who completed PEN's questionnaire, 62 reported attempts to censor their work for reasons of political correctness.
But is it not desirable to encourage authors to recognise their social responsibility?
Is this really censorship or just part of the normal dialogue between author and publisher, who has to find an audience for the book.
‘I would call it censorship, certainly,’ says Ben Hooberman, chairman of PEN's censorship committee.
On one occasion a publisher simply changed the family in a short story from white to Asian.
Val Biro complained about being asked for a mix of races, gender, age and disability in stories where this simply wasn't appropriate.
But while there is tremendous pressure to get more black and Asian characters into stories, a publisher told PEN an author would not be allowed to have a black villain.
Stories have been rejected outright for the simple reason that they were ‘too middle-class’, though one editor was constructive enough to suggest the writer might want to replace ballet and riding classes with swimming and gymnastics.
Another ruled that a grassy lawn was politically incorrect on the grounds that not all children have gardens.
Books are also coming under pressure from Christians objecting to witches and magic, and Muslims objecting to the use of pigs as characters.
One writer had the initiative to check with Muslim organisations when his publisher asked him to remove the term ‘pig-out’.
He was told only a tiny minority of extremists would object.
It may just be an extremist minority within a minority that would take offence, but one company told PEN it would rather just take the easy way out and not have pigs.
HOOBERMAN is appalled by such an attitude and says something must be done to stop the ‘sanitisation’ of literature.
Authors are worried that Britain is moving in the same direction as America, where a wide range of groups have mounted campaigns to ban books from schools and libraries because they don't conform to their particular view of society.
Gillian Avery stopped writing children's books because of interference.
An American editor deleted a comment from one of her books when a father tells his daughter: ‘Don't bother about school because you're a pretty little thing and will make someone a good wife.’
The book was set in Victorian times.
Books must reflect the times in which they are set, and also the times in which they are written.
That's something which some of those who want to ban Huckleberry Finn don't seem to accept.
Random Century is currently reissuing Johns's Biggles books, without certain racial terms, even though the books were written during colonial times when attitudes were different.
It's easy to see this as simply one more case of the thought-police at work, on a par with Lambeth's ban on Midnight Circus and some of the ridiculous cases cited by PEN, but Biggles actually illustrates just how complex this issue is.
The words nigger and coon have been replaced, though Jap, Hun and Boche remain.
Caroline Thomas, editor of the Biggles books, accepts the books reflect their period, but makes the point that the changing perception of words actually leaves Biggles' use of a word like nigger open to misinterpretation by the modern reader.
‘Nowadays somebody who uses the word nigger is seen as racist, whereas Biggles is using it in a neutral sense that's no longer there.’
She says she tried to keep changes to a minimum — no more than ten words in any one book — and retained words like Boche because they are not as inflammatory as nigger.
She hopes in future it will be possible to restore the word nigger without stirring up racial tensions.
She maintains the changes were essential to get the books back into libraries.
Indeed, publishers told PEN they were under pressure from schools, libraries and local authorities to be politically correct.
Comments from a Lambeth spokesman bear out all PEN's worst fears.
‘Lambeth has stock selection guidelines…essential for the library service to take a coherent and consistent approach…
It's common practice in almost all library services to advise the publishers of the reasons for the decisions taken.
This dialogue can often lead to improvement in the quality of books.’
Scottish libraries appear to take a less totalitarian view.
Lindsey Fraser, executive director of the educational charity Book Trust Scotland, knows of no Scottish library which has banned books.
OF course libraries operate on restricted budgets and must make choices between books.
Maggie Corr is in charge of children's library services in Edinburgh and buys 35,000 new books a year.
She says she is open to a book on any theme and would be looking for stories to reflect the multicultural nature of society, where this is appropriate.
Edinburgh  libraries have bought copies of the new editions of Biggles.
The originals were never formally withdrawn, but have been out of stock for some time.
Corr says she would not have reordered the books if they continued to include the word nigger.
It's a moot point whether this is censorship.
Edinburgh continues to stock  Huckleberry Finn, on the grounds that it's aimed at older readers, better able to understand the historical context.
Thomas, Biggles's editor, puts the whole debate in a nutshell: ‘On the one side there's the accusation of censorship, on the other the accusation of racism.’
It is a tricky one, with high stakes on both sides.
‘I'm still not sure we've made the right decisions,’ says Thomas.
Lifestyle corrections.
Lindsey Fraser, executive director of the educational charity Book Trust Scotland, knows of no Scottish library which has banned books.
Of course libraries operate on restricted budgets and must make choices between books.
Maggie Corr is in charge of children's library services in Edinburgh and buys 35,000 new books a year.
She says she is open to a book on any theme and would be looking for stories to reflect the multicultural nature of society, where this is appropriate.
EDINBURGH libraries have bought copies of the new editions of Biggles.
The originals were never formally withdrawn, but have been out of stock for some time.
Corr says she would not have reordered the books if they continued to include the word nigger.
It's a moot point whether this is censorship.
Edinburgh continues to stock Huckleberry Finn, on the grounds that it is aimed at older readers, better able to understand the historical context.
Thomas, Biggles's editor, puts the whole debate in a nutshell: ‘On the one side there's the accusation of censorship, on the other the accusation of racism.’
It is a tricky one, with high stakes on both sides.
‘I'm still not sure we've made the right decisions.’
Orchestra voices worry over freezing of grant
By Allan McLean
CONCERN about the freeze on its annual grant is to be taken up with the Scottish Arts Council by the Royal Scottish National Orchestra, which had expected an increase of at least 3 per cent.
There are hopes that help may be forthcoming later, once the SAC has been convinced that the orchestra's recent problems have been resolved.
Jim Dunlop, company secretary of the RSNO, said yesterday that it would obviously be more difficult to balance its budget with a grant which was reduced in real terms because of inflation.
‘The recession is having its effect on ticket sales,’ he added.
‘We will have to come up with something.
Something positive has to be done.
We will be contacting the arts council with revised estimates showing the results of the grant standing still and with some views as to how the deficit can be reduced,’ Mr Dunlop said.
The SAC told the RSNO by telephone on Monday that its grant would be held at £1.82 million in 1993-94, the same as in this financial year.
A subsequent letter from the SAC has not explained the freeze, although the orchestra was asked for information on how its four-year plan is affected by the level of the grant as confirmed.
The plan was submitted to the SAC last October.
The SAC's calls to some other artistic organisations bore better news, with an increase of 2.1 per cent in total grants, and proportionately greater rises for the Scottish Chamber Orchestra, Scottish Ballet and Scottish Opera.
A spokesman for the SAC said: ‘It is normal practice for us to monitor our revenue clients on a regular basis and in particular to study their proposals under their four-year plan.
We do hold meetings between departmental directors or officers and clients on a regular basis.’
Expressions of discontent and low morale among musicians gained unwelcome publicity for the RSNO before changes in management were confirmed last year, when moves for the orchestra to become self-governing began.
An accumulated deficit of £235,000 by the end of next month was forecast last year.
The SAC issued a critical review, recommending a variety of changes in the way the RSNO — then known as the Royal Scottish Orchestra — was run.
Lord Goold announced his resignation as chairman of the orchestra last autumn.
The chief executive, Christopher Bishop, is to leave this August.
Last February the grant from the SAC was withheld until the company conducted a major review of its plans at the request of the SAC's music committee.
ENTERTAINING MR SLOANE
GREENWICH THEATRE, LONDON
…
AND so Ed and Kath decide to keep mum about Mr Sloane's murder of their father, preferring to share him, turn and turn about, six months at a time, Ed's turn first since Kath is pregnant with Sloane's child.
Raw stuff in 1964, nearly 30 years on Entertaining Mr Sloane still packs a punch, Joe Orton's target being the humbug and hypocrisy of suburban life, writes Christopher Grier.
Its revival at the Greenwich Theatre, the first for ten years, sounds and looks, however, a bit disappointing.
Orton's fault, or that of the staging by the multi-talented Jeremy Sams; some flaw in the characterisations, or simply the passage of time and our over-exposure to horrors?
Is not Janet Dale's Kath a mite too cosy and Ben Daniels's handsome, bi-sexual, psychopathic Sloane short on infernal charm?
But Ed though remains superbly played by Ian Gelder, an ageing, moustachioed boy scout with emergent tendencies, as is Christopher Hancock's fearful old dad who early on has rumbled Sloane, an Alf Garnett before his time.
In principle, the play should be more sinister and much funnier in its jet-black way than this version allows.
What we are left with is a disagreeable story tinged with Joe Orton's misogyny and urge to puncture the frail facade of petit bourgeois respectability.
Mayfest strives for quality not quantity
A ‘DYNAMIC new image’ for Mayfest, as it enters its second decade, was unveiled in Glasgow yesterday by its director, Robert Robson.
‘Mayfest is about people,’ he said, by way of explaining why a picture of man in a dinner jacket spouting out the letters MAYFEST had been chosen from a wide selection of designs submitted by eight agencies.
After the logo's dramatic unveiling on the stage of the New Athenaeum Theatre, there was a ripple of applause — and much muttering about the design, which may lose impact when it is scaled down for reproduction in newspapers and magazines.
Apparently the lone figure's formal attire has no elitist significance.
‘He looks like a character who has been chucked out of a Stephen Conroy painting for making too much noise’ was one of the more polite comments by the critics.
Stating that the 11th Mayfest would place greater emphasis on quality than quantity, Robson said the programme would strike a balance between new Scottish work and international attractions, while at the same time it would celebrate the talents of the local community.
The music programme may be stronger than usual, with a new piece of music theatre commissioned from James MacMillan, specially written for performance at the Tramway by the Scottish Chamber Orchestra, actors and dancers.
There will be a recital by the outstanding Armenian pianist Sergei Babayan, who won the Scottish International Piano competition in Glasgow last year, and a song recital will be given in the Glasgow Royal Concert Hall by Victoria de Los Angeles (soprano) and Nicolai Gedda (tenor).
Gospel Music will be represented at a special concert in the Pavilion Theatre where Clarence Fountain and the Five Blind Boys of Alabama will celebrate half a century of this legendary group.
The Pavilion will also be the setting for a concert by the Scottish rock group Wolfstone.
Theatre companies taking part in Mayfest will include the Traverse company from Edinburgh with Tom McGrath's new play Buchanan, Pigsback from Dublin with Gavin Kostick's play The Ash Fire and the Tron Theatre-Dundee Rep co-production of Macbeth with Iain Glen in the title role.
The Citizens' Theatre will present TAG Theatre's adaptation of Sunset Song by Lewis Grassic Gibbon, which forms the basis of A Scots Quair which the same company will present in the Assembly Hall during the Edinburgh Festival.
Mayfest exhibitions will include the first solo show in Britain by the notable German artist Wolf Vostell at the Transmission Gallery.
The full programme is to be issued next month.
Pleasing to the ear
EDINBURGH UNIVERSITY OPERA GEORGE SQUARE THEATRE
AT FIRST, it seemed that we were in for an evening at the Theatre of Cruelty.
Anglo-Saxons writhed on the stage, smeared with blood, singing words perhaps mercifully unintelligible, to brisk Purcellian strains.
EU Opera, tackling the music of Purcell's opera King Arthur interspersed with texts from Mallory seemed, initially, a little unsure about at which level to pitch their plot.
So, we had curious clothes, an odd mix of formal chorus movement, and roistering rabble, some splendid narration which brought welcome stability to proceedings, and a great deal of very pleasant singing.
If Alasdair Dinnie's production baffled, it showed sense in certain respects.
The movement, if odd, was well paced, giving the voices space in which to be heard, and the dance was fluid and convincing.
Gregory Squire, directing the music, had done well.
The chorus sounded bold and secure, and the orchestra, timid initially, sorted out its style, to produce some musicianly phrasing.
Purcell's word-setting is, of course, ravishing, this opera, Fairest Isle apart, offering some astonishments — a ‘frost’ aria, its  improvisationary qualities here beautifully explored, and a soprano duet of subtle melodic weaving.
Thus, one might have questioned the marriage of Mallory to such miracle.
But the texts lay together without much complaint, and, with the exception of a swerve into showbusiness Camelot at its conclusion, the evening intrigued.
Separate minds in harmony together
Mary Miller meets the Labeque Sisters, the solo pianists playing with the RSNO in the Usher Hall, Edinburgh, tonight
THE best known story of the Labeque sisters in Edinburgh tells of a post-concert reception at the Caledonian Hotel.
At the foot of the double staircase a posse of arts sponsors waited — serious persons in dark suits, with highly respectable wives in long dresses, bearing formidable handbags.
The Labeques appeared on the landing, giggling, wearing black leather and clinking with glittery chains.
They flittered down the stairs, Ginger Rogers a deux, and draped themselves round the nearest male, an elderly, pale faced banker —‘Allo,’ they purred, ‘'Ow do you like sex?’
The room, we're told, fell strangely silent.
The Labeques, practising in Glasgow — after tonight's Usher Hall concert, they have recitals in London and the Netherlands — look far from frivolous.
Black-clad, a little spidery, they are so mince as to be minuscule.
Marielle is practising a fiddly Ravel note cluster, Katia is pouting at a portable telephone, hired so that she can keep in touch with their mother (‘she is cardiac’).
The phone bleeps intermittently throughout their session, never quite achieving the same key as the pianos.
Listening becomes disconcerting.
They tend to work at entirely separate sections of the music, ignoring each other, but talking all the while.
Then, giving no outward sign, they click into gear, and the music fuses, as though an invisible metronome is ticking the beat.
We start with safe conversation and straight faces.
Marielle, quiet spoken and nervy — though, curiously, it is she who brings a greater rhythmical stability to their playing, and who calls the expressiveness to order — talks about their new work, a jazz influenced concerto by Michel Camillo, which they have recently premiered with the Philharmonia Orchestra.
Katia hoots into the phone.
Marielle continues.
They await a piece from Luciano Berio, this for two pianos, two singers and orchestra.
An earlier concerto, they already have in repertoire.
They have another piece on order, from the young Frenchman Jan Marez —‘He's rather behind with the commission, I'm afraid.’
She smiles apologetically, as though one might find fault, and looks anxious: clearly, she's dying for her sister to take over the conversation.
Katia reappears, the phone ceases its bleeping, and we have cursory conversation about Mozart and two piano performance.
She talks about the Labeque relationship, about how she and her sister trained separately at Paris Conservatoire, and how, in their teens, when they were both set on solo careers, they would never have dreamed of playing duets.
But once established as individual musical personalities —‘it seemed natural for us to work together.’
‘But you know, we never sacrifice our identities.
I believe strongly in our separate strengths — surely it should be so with all couples — that you give each other support, and character.
Really, our lives are very different.
Recently I've worked in jazz with John McLaughlin (her partner)— and Marielle she has her own projects.’
Music, though, binds them, consuming them both.
Katia says that she's profoundly irritated by artists who insist that they go home, shut the door, and become ‘normal’—‘What is this normal?
To say that sounds can be switched off, can no longer affect you, is not possible for a musician.
I wake up in the night — and always, its music or love: you can't imagine your life without them.’
We stray off course, to talk about glamour.
Does the somewhat aggressive marketing of the Labeque lustre — tousled hair, red lips and sultry sisterhood — become a tiresome pressure?
Not our problem, says Katia, and says, very reasonably, that an audience applauds for different reasons —‘maybe they are crazy about Mozart, or two piano music, or maybe they saw us on TV.
I don't really care.
I don't like those very specialist audiences, the kind that you get at festivals, where you can't possibly play a Scott Joplin encore, in case you offend someone.
I like the freedom of being able to wear a crazy jacket instead of the two of us stepping out, all long faces and big, sloppy dresses.’
By now, she's sitting on the floor, thoroughly chatty.
Marielle is still worrying at her Ravel.
Katia starts to talk about the special projects which they are planning in Japan, and groans about management with no sense of fun —‘Who's that guy we met, Marielle?— the big pompous one, who complained that I sang too much?’
She says some rude words about the English, some kind ones about the Scots, then the phone bleeps, to call her away.
So there wasn't time to ask if the best known tale of the Labeques in Madrid was true.
Most probably, that's just another story.
Katie and Marielle Labeque: ‘It is natural for us to work together’
‘We have the prospect of a large number of newspapers in serious difficulties’
Strapped for cash, the Government is considering a tax on newspapers, magazines and books.
However, it is a move fraught with problems as our writers explain How long can it be taken as read?
THEY called it a tax on knowledge and they were right.
The Government was deeply unhappy about criticism from the press, so it introduced a new tax on newspapers which forced many to close and cut the sales of others so that circulation was restricted to the better-off.
The Government could breathe a sigh of relief at the  disappearance of some of its fiercest critics.
The Stamp Tax was introduced in 1712 and kept newspapers out of the hands of the masses for more than 100 years until arguments about the role of the press in a free society forced its abolition in 1855, and the popular press really took off.
Now a government which is deeply unhappy about criticism and intrusion from the popular press is seriously considering the reintroduction of a tax on knowledge in a move that has implications not only for the viability of newspapers, but for the reading habit, for literacy and for dissemination and debate of detailed information in a democracy.
The Government is considering the extension of value-added tax to newspapers, magazines and books.
VAT is by nature a regressive tax.
Levied without regard to income, it hits the poor harder than the rich.
VAT of 17.5 per cent would mean an increase from 40p to 47p in the cover price of The Scotsman, Scotland on Sunday and the Radio Times would rise from 60p to 71p, Elle magazine from £1.80 to £2.12 and a £10 book would cost £11.75.
No-one is suggesting that the Government is trying to gag its critics, but the fact that relations between it and Fleet Street aren't as cosy as they once were perhaps makes it easier for the Government to introduce the tax at present.
The Government needs to find extra money from somewhere and has been considering all sorts of options.
The days of balancing the books are over.
Public sector borrowing requirement is forecast to rise from £37 billion this year to £44 billion next year.
That could well be an underestimate.
The obvious thing to do is raise income tax, but the Government pledged to reduce it in the election manifesto — just after the commitment to the exchange rate mechanism (ERM).
John Major was asked about VAT during the election campaign and said there were no plans and no need to increase the rate of tax or range of goods covered.
But according to well-placed sources, various radical schemes are now under consideration, including abolition of mortgage tax relief and the extension of VAT to all zero-rated goods, including new buildings, public transport, children's clothes and food, possibly at a lower rate of 5 per cent.
That would raise £5 billion a year.
But the Government may feel that as long as it is going to extend VAT it may as well slap newspapers for 17.5 per cent.
VAT of 17.5 per cent on newspapers, books and magazines would raise more than £1 billion, according to the Treasury's own estimates, which are produced as a matter of routine.
The Treasury will not comment on any possible tax changes prior to the Budget.
It's all speculation at present, however Britain is only one of two countries in the European Community that doesn't levy VAT on newspapers and the subject has been on the agenda for some time.
Nigel Lawson revealed in his memoirs just how close he came to introducing it when he was Chancellor in 1984.
It was not until the final pre-Budget meeting that it was dropped, at the insistence of Margaret Thatcher who felt it might sour relations with the press at a time when they would otherwise be enthusing over economic achievements.
Bill Walker, Conservative MP for Tayside North, says: ‘We cannot continue at the current level of borrowing, so some new source of income has to be found.
My view is there will have to be an increase in the breadth of value-added tax.
I think food is unlikely because food does affect the very poor, but the likelihood is there will be VAT on newspapers and books.’
He dismisses the idea that it is a tax on knowledge and an anti-competitive tax which would leave television news unscathed.
He points out there is VAT on television sets, satellite dishes and subscriptions.
‘People don't want us to cut spending on hospitals,’ he says.
Phil Gallie, Conservative MP for Ayr, would not like to see VAT extended and made representations, on behalf of the local press, during the current round of pre-Budget  consultations .
Some analysts have suggested the local press could be hardest hit and one recent newspaper report suggested VAT would be limited to those papers with circulations over 100,000.
That would not only reduce potential income for the Government, but would lead to anomalies.
The Scotsman would escape the tax, while the Dundee Courier and Glasgow Evening Times would be liable.
It would actually discourage expansion and seems too silly for the Government to seriously contemplate.
THE Treasury admits its figure of £1 billion income is hypothetical in that it assumes no loss of sales.
Grahame Thomson, director of the Scottish Daily Newspaper Society, expresses grave concern at the possible impact on sales, while accountants Price Waterhouse produced a report forecasting the closure of 245 local and regional papers and the loss of 2,500 jobs if VAT is imposed at 17.5 per cent.
Some newspapers are already running at a loss in the hope that they will move back into profit when the economic situation improves.
With the imposition of VAT, they may never see the upturn.
The figure of £1 billion extra government income doesn't take into account possible increases in unemployment benefit for newspaper workers thrown on the dole.
Dugal Nisbet-Smith, director of the Newspaper Society, an organisation representing mainly English and Welsh provincial titles, has said 17.5 per cent VAT would be a catastrophe for an industry already reeling from the recession.
Fred Johnston, executive chairman of Johnston Press, the Edinburgh-based group of local papers, reckons it would be a disaster.
‘I think we have the prospect of a large number of newspapers in serious difficulties,’ he says.
‘I regard VAT on newspapers as a tax on knowledge.
It's right back to the Stamp Acts which were so bitterly and rightly resisted in the early part of the 19th century.’
Brian Pendreigh
Happy artistic returns
Jon Hrolfur Sigurjonsson reports from Iceland on a festival of Scottish culture
EIGHTEEN concerts in 17 days, featuring contemporary music from six countries; music for orchestra, chamber ensemble, organ; jazz, folk, electro-acoustics; 40 premieres, music workshops, lectures; an Ian Hamilton Finlay exhibition, Scottish films, Scottish food — and more.
This was SkottiS, Scottish-Icelandic Cultural Days 1993, in Reykjavik for the last three weeks, as a follow-up to last summer's Breaking the Ice festival which gave a Scottish showcase to Icelandic culture.
The Society of Icelandic Composers has, since 1980, organised the Dark Music Days festival in February to celebrate contemporary music.
But by combining SkottiS — an exchange planned by the two countries' Music Information Centres — the scale of this year's festivities was unprecedented.
Though Scottish culture is hardly foreign to the people of Iceland, about the Scottish contemporary music scene, we knew little.
So SkottiS was an education — and a celebration.
So what did we learn?
First, we were privileged to hear excellent Scottish musicians.
Secondly, we were struck by the Scots' awareness of the beauty of their own culture and history, this well reflected in the music that they showed us.
The opening concert, where Gunther Schuller conducted the Icelandic Symphony Orchestra, began with Haukur Tomasson's Afsprengi, a tough piece on first hearing.
Then, with Tommy Smith's saxophone singing like a bird, we heard William Sweeney's An Rathad Ur, though the orchestra couldn't match Smith's relaxed  improvisationary feel.
But they played well in Sally Beamish's Sinfonia, a piece inspired by the old Scottish bagpipes — music beautifully and skilfully written, though not sounding particularly new.
After this, every concert offered excitement: the excellent Reykjavik Wind Quintet and String Quartet, Ian Quinn's magic on the new Hallgrimskirka organ.
And James Clapperton's piano recital astonished — here was real keyboard wizardry.
But there was more to come, with Scotland's Paragon Ensemble, and a programme of recent Scottish works — Dalby, Wilson, Gordon McPherson (a string quartet which merits further performance) and Judith Weir's fascinating music drama The Consolations of Scholarship, with vivid soprano Irene Drummond.
PARAGON also worked with our children, performing together with three schools, pieces composed in workshops with the young Scottish composer, Elaine Agnew.
But perhaps the last concert, when Paragon joined with the Caput Ensemble, outdid all the events.
Atli Heimar Sveinsson's Grand Duo Concertante was one of SkottiS's most memorable premieres, and, ending with Poulenc's Le Bal Masque, Paragon held us all enchanted.
Here in Iceland, during dark days filled with music, we've learned and listened and enjoyed.
After SkottiS, we hold the Scots in new affection.
Grit and grace pack punch
SANDER/NORTON CENTRE FOR CONTEMPORARY ARTS, GLASGOW
AS Glasgow's New Moves dance season enters its third week, ‘house full’ notices have become the norm.
: encouraging for Festival director Nikki Milican, and an indication that her vision in bringing less well-established but visually exciting performers to Scotland is more than paying off this year.
Currently playing at the CCA is a double bill of contrasting solo work.
To European eyes the brute physicality of Mehmet Memo Sander, a Turkish-born movement-performer now resident in California, is quite phenomenal.
This compact, chunky, self-declaiming HIV-positive homosexual performs in a style part gymnastic, part body-smashing, with a minimum of lighting, accoutrements, or clothing — one piece is danced naked, and little sound other than reverberation from the responsively miked dance floor, accentuating the heavy thuds of masochistic free-fall acrobatics.
The solos are short, packed with a powerful energy as if in defiance of his life-threatened status, or to demonstrate a total disregard towards it.
The very sound of the body's impact through the gravitational imperative is the abiding impression from the first four solos but in Single Space, caged within a six-foot open-backed box, Sander enters a new realm, imprisoned, but able to explore its every plane in a sequence of surrealistic space-contorting energies.
In Johnny Panic, Paul Selwyn Norton — the complete antithesis of Sander — creates a fantasy environment by using a wave of delicately suspended lights, carefully cued lighting, self-written lyrics, and the devices of rock star hero/chat show host.
His iconoclastic opening solo seems to incorporate the dexterity of rap performer with the controlled stillness of eastern Tai Chi, and is breathtakingly executed.
Thereafter, although a dazzling tour-de-force the performance style becomes too fragmented, in an attempt to define the anarchic  energetic presence of his anti-hero, who appears to have a penchant for fish and telephones, while gifted with a ‘good god smile’.
This latter feature is, however, radiantly bestowed on everyone by the charismatic Norton.
After this message
BUT first a word from our sponsors.
This editorial is brought to you by the Campaign for Press Censorship, dedicated to eradicating opinion, comment and — worst of all — ideas from Britain's newspapers.
Send off now for your Save Readers from Leaders T-shirt, your Bland is Grand drinking mug or your News not Views lapel button.
Good old CPC — the people who put the junk in injunction.
Unlikely?
We should certainly hope so.
But is it really any more implausible than yesterday's announcement of a record £12 million sponsorship deal for the English Premier League by Carling Black Label?
Of all the products in the world, it is hard to think of one with which English soccer has less need to be associated than lager.
It is not hard to see the sponsor's reasoning, of course.
The fans, having worked up a thirst hurling abuse, if not each other, from the stands, pause on their homeward journeys to take refreshment and, behold, ask for the first brand name that comes to mind.
But then think through the logic from the football authorities' perspective.
The reason soccer needs sponsorship is that gates have fallen.
Gates have fallen because of unruly behaviour.
Unruly behaviour arises, in no small measure, from the consumption of alcohol, particularly lager.
Solution?
Sponsorship by a lager brewer.
As sponsorship tightens its grip on British life, the combinations grow ever more incongruous.
Scottish football has been sponsored by the DIY chain at whose stores erstwhile football fans now spend their Saturday afternoons.
The speaking clock is sponsored by a watchmaker, raising the awkward question of how much of a future it can have if everyone buys watches.
On television, Inspector Morse and Rumpole, famous respectively for drinking real ale and claret, were sponsored by stout and port manufacturers.
And besides, pity the poor player who, having ballooned a penalty over the bar in the 90th minute, hears an entire stadium intone as one: ‘I bet he drinks Carling Black Label.’
KINGS CONSORT
QUEENS HALL, EDINBURGH
BEAUTIFUL, flexible sounds, delicately turned phrases, and the sort of energy which skips rather than strides — the King's Consort at the Queen's Hall reminded us that civilisation is not entirely destroyed.
Robert King's series of concerts and workshops are proving invaluable at a time when authentic performance, a long time in its coming to these northern parts, is fast developing its own passionate audience.
For,
With King and his Consort, we hear the highest standards, instrumental playing of a quality which lifts one far beyond quibbles about style or taste.
The tempi are always marvellous and the colouring, from a small group of strings, keyboard instruments and trumpet, is wonderfully subtle — Crispian Steele-Perkins's trumpet brought clear, clean edges to the sound but never bellowed its message, and David Watkin's cello continuo seemed to stream in long, elegant curves.
The disappointment, though, was soprano Gillian Fisher, who sounded ill-at-ease and out of pitch as though it hurt her to breath.
Her lines gusted, as though the scaffolding of her voice production was curiously insecure — and with such accuracy and fluency in her accompaniment, the imperfections couldn't be ignored.
We had begun with Mr Handel's Waterpieces — and to Handel we returned, with Let the bright Seraphim.
And here Fisher found form, as the audience found familiarity.
The Consort return in May, with workshops, woodwind and concerts not to be missed.
Bop popsters pop back
The B-52s play Glasgow in a new formation, writes Allan Campbell
IT'S well over a decade since the B-52s played their only Scottish show at Tiffany's discotheque, Edinburgh.
That venue has now been flattened and a similar fate almost befell the kooky four-piece from Athens, Georgia, in the mid-Eighties.
The death of key member Ricky Wilson in 1985 of Aids-related cancer, virtually grounded the band, who hadn't enjoyed anything like a hit since 1981's remix EP, Party Mix.
Wilson's last recordings with them, the LP Bouncing off the Satellites, did little to reverse their artistic and financial decline.
It seemed they would only be remembered for the effervescent day-glo Sixties pop which took popular root in Manhattan's late Seventies downtown scene, where the songs Rock Lobster and Planet Claire first became free-spirited party anthems.
But Fred Schneider, Kate Pearson, Keith Strickland and Wilson's sister, Cindy, decided to try again, eventually entering the studio with producer Don Was to create the upbeat LP Cosmic Thing which contained a Motown-fuelled afterthought called Love Shack, the song which would relaunch their careers.
Success hasn't solved all their problems — Cindy Wilson has taken time off to be temporarily replaced by David Lynch's protegee Julee Cruise — but it has put the bounce back into the bouffant bop from which their name is derived (a B-52 being a hairdo).
As producer Don Was says, this is ‘folk music indigenous to an exotic land’.
Hair my song: the B-52s' surviving core is boosted by Twin Peaks singer Julee Cruise
ROYAL SCOTTISH NATIONAL ORCHESTRA
USHER HALL, EDINBURGH
THE Labeque sisters project a glamorous and pleasingly unorthodox image, but it is backed up by their ability to deliver in musical terms.
They have built much of their reputation on contemporary repertoire and arrangements of jazz and ragtime music, but demonstrated once again that they can play canonical repertoire with great musicality as well as flair.
Their performance of Mozart's Concerto in E flat for two pianos was beautifully judged and finely controlled, fiery and dramatic in the virtuoso display sections of the opening Allegro, delicate and ornate in the slow movement, and thrillingly accomplished in the brilliant Rondo.
Katia is the more physically exuberant and mobile, darting and pouncing on the keyboard, while Marielle is all elegance and concentration.
It is a highly rewarding partnership, and they were helped in no small measure by the playing of the orchestra under conductor Takuo Yuasa.
The withdrawal of Raymond Leppard meant an earlier than anticipated RSNO debut for Yuasa, and he seized the opportunity with some distinction.
The opening piece, Respighi's symphonic poem Fountains of Rome, was subtly characterised and sensuously played, but the real fireworks were reserved for the second half of the concert.
They did more than justice to the varying moods of Prokofiev's Romeo and Juliet Suite No 2, although there were odd moments when the orchestra were not precisely together, notably at the start of The Young Juliet section.
The Montagues and Capulets theme strode menacingly, the Dance was superbly energetic, and the closing Romeo at the Grave of Juliet passage was strikingly tragic.
Ravel's La Valse could have been anti-climactic after this, but it was never allowed to be remotely so.
Yuasa urged the orchestra to a marvellously energised, expressive reading of this curious compendium of waltz themes, but also maintained the strict control of tempo and dynamics essential in Ravel.
Allan Campbell
Fest of the best as well as the rest
Douglas Young reports from the Berlin Film Festival on several exciting discoveries he made among this year's entries (and some he wishes he hadn't)
THE obstacles facing any film-maker are so large and so numerous that you might imagine only the best reach the screen.
If only this were so.
Emir Kuristica's Arizona Dream is a case in point.
A second-league cast of Faye Dunaway, Jerry Lewis and Johnny Depp stumble through a meaningless directorial mish-mash that takes an American context and tries to make a European art film.
Or Le Jeune Werther, in which half a dozen miserable teenagers mumble for two hours about the mysterious suicide of a friend in a ghastly unintended parody of Goethe's original by Jacques Doillon.
The mystery is how this was ever made.
Erik Gustavson's The Telegraphist tries to repeat a well-tried Scandinavian formula of sexuality at the turn of the century frustrated by laces, girdles and religion, but fails to establish the nexus of characters that sustained Fanny and Alexander, for example.
It seems only the Spanish at present can make films with sex, politics and comedy in equal measure.
Belle Epoque is set in 1931 at a turning point as the monarchy gave way to the republic.
Fernando (Jorge Sanz) is a deserter who fetches up at the country home of Manolo, a lazy old artist.
He is about to leave when Manolo's four wild, vivacious, beautiful daughters arrive from Madrid.
They range from about 17 to 30 and all but Violeta have experience of life and men — which they are only too keen to pass on to Fernando.
 Boccaccio's Decameron and a thousand porno movies may have said it before, but director Fernando Trueba has made an enjoyable comedy full of sunlight and incident out of wry eroticism and some excellent acting.
After Danny de Vito showed his skills as a director in Wars of the Roses he used his leverage with the money-men to bankroll a long-cherished project which has finally come to the screen as Hoffa.
James Hoffa was a union boss who used Mafia muscle to beat the owners in exchange for cheap loans from the union pension fund.
He disappeared from a parking lot while waiting for a Mafia contact, from where flashbacks of his past are reconstructed.
Hoffa is played by Jack Nicholson, an actor who, like Brando and Hoffman, has boiled down his performances to mannerism and make-up but carries the part nonetheless.
De Vito treats Hoffa as a tragic American hero but, despite the possibilities of a Godfather-like plot, there is a hole at the centre of the film where scriptwriter David Mamet has failed to supply a reason why Hoffa was the exceptional man he undoubtedly was.
The black director Spike Lee has made a similar mistake in Malcolm X, not so much in characterisation but in allowing awe of the man who challenged white authority in America to come in the way of good film-making.
As JFK was white America's attempt to come to terms with its violent history so Malcolm X tries to do the same for a black martyr.
At over three and a half hours, the film starts entertainingly enough in the ghetto, with a $40m budget plain to see.
But soon the facts crowd in and the film spirals into hagiography.
The ending is a cinematic cop-out using newsreel photo-montage and a walk-on by Nelson Mandela.
THE American penchant for sentimentality is given full reign in Jack the Bear, directed by Marshall Herskovitz and starring Danny de Vito.
Herskovitz created Thirtysomething and now knows exactly where the emotionally richest fault-lines of family relationships lie.
De Vito plays a madcap horror-TV show host whose children are threatened by a weird neighbour.
Making the child molester a Nazi as well is perhaps overstating the point about the monster within us all but this is a cleverly made film that hits the middle market spot-on.
Even so, it pales beside Accidental Hero, a Hollywood spectacular from the British director of Dangerous Liaisons, Stephen Frears.
Dustin Hoffman plays Bernie La Plant, a small-time hustler who happens to arrive at the scene of an air crash and against his better instincts rescues everyone and then disappears.
The passengers include Geena Davis, an  ambitious TV presenter who wants the whole story.
Andy Garcia is somewhat under-used as the man who claims the fame and million-dollar reward as the ‘hero of Flight 104’.
Since the world seems to be rerunning the economics and politics of the 1930s why not the films too?
Accidental Hero is pure Frank Capra: a brilliantly told comedy about something wonderful happening — its humanism sharpened by a huge dose of cynicism just right for the television age.
The rags-to-riches plot takes a swipe at homelessness in an America wreathed in the rags and tatters of Reaganomics, but this is Hollywood entertainment at its peerless best.
Hoffa minute: Jack Nicholson plays Hoffa and below, Geena Davis in Accidental Hero
Old tale of corruption as pretty as a picture
DORIAN GRAY CITIZENS, GLASGOW
THE VISUAL richness of Philip Prowse's stage for his adaptation of Oscar Wilde's novel is such as to make it the theatrical equivalent of one of those packed galleries in the Louvre, so pell mell with works of art that the task is to know where to fix the eye.
Symbols and echoes of celebrated canvases vie with original designs and lush flourishes to create an aesthete's garden of earthly delights.
Sybil Vane (Andrea Hart) is attired like a Pre-Raphaelite madonna; Dorian for his portrait poses against a cross like a Saint Sebastian while Lord Henry, in cream suit and fur coat, is the fin de siecle decadent in miniature.
Time's winged chariot, complete with skeleton and scythe, is converted during the play from being a trivial ornament in an artist's studio to a darker symbol of Dorian's decline, and the whole drama unfolds under a vast sundial, bedecked with clouds but surrounded by Roman numerals for the hours.
If, as a designer, Prowse has adhered to aesthetic standards, his adaptation has a multi-layered seriousness, or even a spiritual dimension, which alters and enhances the original.
Nihilism, however patrician, and aestheticism, however gilded, jar today, so that rather than provide an essay on art for art's sake, or a game on life succumbing to art, Prowse emphasises the morality tale, the Faustian parable, the meditation on degeneracy and corruption.
While there was no real social context to the biography of Dorian Gray, who entered a pact with an unseen devil to have his portrait carry the weight of his ageing and guilt while he maintained the freshness of youth and innocence, in this version the victims gather round like Banquo's ghost, gazing at the decline which is merited and tangible.
In its style, the work recalls some of Prowse's Jacobean productions, and when at the end a backcloth spattered with blood covers the wall and the line from Marlowe, about Christ's blood streaming in the firmament, is spoken, Wilde's belief that a work of art could be neither moral nor immoral has been overturned.
Time wreaks it own wasting on Lord Henry.
From his first appearance as the languid young aristo to his final entrance as a surgical case in a wheelchair, Rupert Everett makes the character as much Harlequin as Mephistopheles, and the magnetic allure with which he endows him balances the brittle cynicism and affectation of a man who measures every word for effect.
If he is a corruptor of youth as Henry, Ian Cusick's Dorian is a youth waiting to be corrupted.
Both are remarkable assured performances in an intellectually bracing and beautiful production.
Joseph Farrell
TRELAWNY OF THE WELLS
ROYAL NATIONAL THEATRE, LONDON
FOLLOWING so closely on the heels of a ‘commercial’ version, featuring Sarah Brightman and Sir Michael Hordern, the Royal National Theatre's Trelawny of the Wells invites comparisons.
These, however, need neither be invidious nor  odiferous .
The earlier one concentrated upon fruity characterisations, particularly of Rose's thespian colleagues, gathered to say goodbye on her engagement to Arthur, a toff, and leaving the stage.
Also no less upon the starkly oppressive menage of Arthur's grandfather, Sir William and his purse-lipped great-aunt.
In this production, Helen McCrory's Rose is no vulnerable young ingenue but already quite an assured operator able to stick up for herself under adverse circumstances — as they duly become on her moving on approval to Cavendish Square.
Robin Bailey plays Sir William as a crusty old Scots judge, with an unexpected Achilles heel.
On learning that Rose's mother had acted with Edmund Kean, his resistance to her dissolves as he creakily re-enacts some of Kean's great moments.
John Caird's opulently staged direction of Pinero's multi-layered drama makes much of the bones and sinews of this play about players, stressing the crisis which overtook the older, hammier generation of actors in the 1880s, one signalled by the presence of Tom Wrench (Adam Kotz) as scrutineer, bit-part actor and embryo playwright of the naturalistic new wave.
Sentimental, yes, but ultimately very touching.
Thanks to the gruff benevolence of Sir William, Wrench's play is mounted at the end with Rose in the lead, in it reunited with her true love, Arthur (Ben Miles), who has himself become a rogue, vagabond and gipsy, in those late Victorian days a separate caste altogether.
LOUIS FLOOD
ENTERPRISE MUSIC SCOTLAND
MILNGAVIE MUSIC CLUB
ENTERPRISE Music Scotland, after 18 months of negotiation, had its launch on Friday, most appropriately, at a Scottish music club.
For the company, a project spawned from a Scottish Arts Council initiative, has, as its objective, the support and development of live music in Scotland, through the nationwide network of music clubs, societies and arts guilds.
EMS has a full-time director, Ronnie Rae, an office in Aberdeen, and a board of directors which includes music club officialdom, business people and musicians themselves.
While nourishing the health of Scotland's music clubs and helping to develop audiences, EMS is also committed to the performers, hoping to encourage emerging artists, ensembles and composers.
Aberdeen District Council, represented on the EMS board, have contributed generously to the core costs of the company.
This year, the SAC has pledged substantial funding to EMS, who will award grants to music promoters, to assist with the cost of bringing live music to areas of limited audience potential.
Sponsorship and additional funding will be sought, to enhance company activities.
So, at Milngavie Music Club, a cello and piano recital and the promise of interval victuals lured enthusiasts to celebrate EMS's birth.
Though the programme — Beethoven, Faure, Rachmaninov was hardly innovatory (EMS, one suspects, will work hard to encourage music clubs to risk a less well trodden path)— in the town hall's rather unintimate acoustic, large, lush tunes fared well.
The Beethoven worked less happily the F major sonata opening with nervy, whispered questions, which here sounded too indistinct, the rest of the work suffering slightly from stylistic impositions, which emerged more as mannerism.
But into the shimmer of Faure's Op 117 G minor sonata, both cellist William Conway and his pianist Peter Evans seemed to settle, the slow movement Cello Aria sighing over stalking piano chords.
The Rachmaninov Op 19, too, begins with questions, these posed more boldly than Beethoven's and answered in a first movement of easy confidence.
The work is enormous — comparisons with the second piano concerto are entirely justified, as familiar melodic and rhythmical thematic material pounds in the ears — and Conway and Evans brought to it a satisfying feel of sonority and stature.
Mary Miller
BBC SCOTTISH SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA
GLASGOW ROYAL CONCERT HALL
SURPRISINGLY conventional fare from the BBCSSO with a popular classical programme prefaced by a short piece by Henze.
Rather a waste too, of the undoubted talent of conductor Markus Stenz who, as music director at Montepulciano, the festival Henze founded, brought much to the British premier of the composer's own reworking of two scenes from his 1950's opera The Stag King.
Where Markus Stenz led, the orchestra followed as best they could although some wayward ensemble, especially from the woodwind, dulled the edges.
Sombre, though with a pacy, filmic sequencing he whipped up the orchestra to a marvellously stylish finale.
Ever demonstrative, Markus Stenz clearly aimed at the dramatic in Beethoven's Symphony No4 and digging deep, uncovered hidden orchestral reserves bringing a satisfying degree of tension and thrill to the first movement.
But overall, the effect was patchy, the Scherzo lacklustre and the Adagio aimless.
Haydn's Nelson Mass may have overt marshall overtones, but this was surely little excuse for what, at times, descended to little more than an inglorious romp.
Lynne Dawson, carrying the weight of solo work, never seemed entirely at ease, adding a frantic, nervy quality to even the stillest passages.
There were only rare moments of poise and calm as in Henry Herford's Qui Tollis or the choruses opening Sanctus.
However, much of what the new Scottish Festival Singers did was disappointing.
Perhaps hindered by the unflattering acoustic of the concert hall, the result was all too often lost in a welter of sound and over-stressed consonants with all the control of a recalcitrant Sunday school outing.
Stephen Strugnell
DINOSAUR JR
BARROWLANDS, GLASGOW
SUCH is the alarming speed with which pop trends are assimilated into the mainstream these days that one moment you can be an underground guitar hero from Seattle, next you're on The Clothes Show.
So it is with J Mascis, touchstone for all things ‘grunge’.
He and his group Dinosaur Jr have come to epitomise the check flannel shirts and guitar-amps-to-11 movement, even although they are far superior to their increasingly unimaginative clones.
Tonight, bassist Mike Johnson is making a stand for individualism; he sports short, silver hair instead of de rigueur long locks and wears collar, tie and fetching brown cardigan.
Mascis himself hides behind a curtain of hair, uttering barely a word to the audience all evening, letting his guitar do all the squealing and screeching, but always with a suggestion of melody.
Mascis is a cool cat, but in a Nineties ‘slacker’ kind of way.
He staggers around the stage in half darkness, apparently playing only for himself; a guitar hero without any self-congratulatory heroics.
Two thousand heads nod vigorously to Out There and their sub-metal hit Start Choppin' while the front stage area becomes a seething mass of arms and legs for the trio's encore, the ground-breaking Freak Scene.
Just before monotony might set in, the band close, recognising the art of knowing just when to leave a party — and not spoil a fine evening.
Allan Campbell
Check the checks: Dinosaur Jr, ‘grunge’ touchstones and far superior to their clones, set 2,000 heads nodding
REVIEWS
Sending the right signals
Much that was written for architectural order in the mid-18th century resonates as much today, says Charles McKean
THERE was a tremendous stushie 20 years ago when they wanted to put up an office block tower by Haymarket.
They flew barrage balloons, commissioned perspectives and held a public inquiry.
Ostensibly, the furore was over the possibility that the offices would obscure one of the famous views of the castle.
It was concluded that they would, and the project was abandoned.
The underlying question, however, was not just a matter of views.
They had done that earlier, in London, around St Paul's with notorious lack of success.
Although Wren's celebrated dome was not, in fact molested, the high-rise guidelines focused solely upon picturesque views and not upon symbolism; with the result that St Paul's is no longer the crowning achievement of the city, but dwarfed to seeming like a pimple upon a buttock.
The underlying question, however, was not just a matter of views, but the feeling that Edinburgh's primary symbol — one of history, endurance and nationhood — would be diminished by speculative offices.
It was surprising the battle was won, for cultural and social symbolism has taken rather a knock in our rootless ‘can-do’ free market society.
What buildings should matter?
In that Italian town of towers, San Gimignano, no person was permitted to build his tower higher than that of the town hall.
If he did, it was lopped off.
In the plans of Renaissance European cities, you can invariably tell, by the spaces and formal disposition, which is the principal secular area, and which the principal religious area.
Everything else is subordinate.
For architecture can reflect and reinforce social patterns.
It provides signals: fear, threat and oppression (castle); absence of fear (Renaissance villas); culture (libraries and theatres); grandeur, exploitation, achievement, and so forth.
Even when architecture followed a single language — the classical language — the deployment of detail and use of the Orders conveyed messages.
The early Pauper Palaces in Edinburgh, for example, like the RSA, were rigidly Doric.
Instruction was awaited within.
Ionic, like the National Gallery or Aberdeen's Music Hall, was always more feminine, associated with the Arts, and more curvaceous in character.
Corinthian came less frequently to Scotland.
For a start, it was more expensive; but it was also a sign of conspicuous consumption, its enrichment slightly too ostentatious for a country with a preference for strong mass and modelling rather than upon lavish detail.
Good architects are equally careful about the signals they convey in details.
The great neo-classicist, Sir John Soane, for example, vehemently opposed the use of a pediment upon a building which was of neither sacred nor great civic importance.
It devalued the coinage of the pediment and, by inference, cheapened those  masterworks of the past in which the pediment has made its first noble appearance.
It also led to a confusion between those buildings with a social or civic importance, and those without.
When you consider the ghastly, tricksy little triangles of thin aluminium section which erupt pseudo-picturesquely along the parapet line of many an otherwise lumpen modern block, you can see Soane's point.
Dignity must mean something — else it becomes undignified.
These reflections are prompted by a translation of the architectural sections of the French Enlightenment's famous  Encyclopedie , in a collaboration between Edinburgh University, the Architects' Registration Council and the French government.
The Encyclopedie intended to encapsulate and communicate the entire body of (mid-18th century) human knowledge in a structured way.
So what was the Enlightenment, humanist view of the importance of architecture?
Of all buildings, churches ‘should reflect the greatest grandeur, dignity and majesty’.
Next, public buildings ‘reflect the opulence of cities, the grandeur of nations and the benevolence of princes’.
They should contribute to the ‘embellishment, the utility and the safety of towns’.
Each building should have a scale appropriate to its function and to the size of the town in which it is set.
‘The architecture should display nothing trivial, but be of simple but noble arrangements, solid construction…and dignified aspect.’
ARCHITECTURAL hierarchy should reflect the social: palaces should have a noble character and imposing magnificence; royal residences merely grandeur and attractiveness; and the arrangement of the residences of people of different rank — clerics, army offices.
government ministers etc should reflect the ‘superiority or inferiority of their different estates’.
An army officer's house should be Doric (military) a cleric's Ionic (reflecting affability) and a government minister's Composite.
Since Composite was otherwise restricted to fairgrounds, Diderot was telling us something of his opinion of politicians.
Lastly, the Encyclopedie warns against the use of classical orders in private houses because the client would be unable to afford a building of sufficient size to be adequately grand in scale for such elaboration (never mind it implied someone getting above themselves).
Exactly the same point was made by Soane 30 years later when attacking the application of grandiose Egyptian detail to tiny shops.
When next affronted by speculative brick houses aggrandised by wrongly scaled and detailed plastic ‘classical’ columns, you might ruminate that the Encyclopaedists got it right.
Our social orders have changed and we now dislike such vivid evidence of hierarchy.
Churches (save ancient ones) no longer hold prime importance.
Yet, much that they wrote then resonates as much today: it is simply that we do not comprehend it.
Screen out loud
THINK of modern prints and it is highly probable Andy Warhol's ubiquitous 1967 screenprint of the immortal Marilyn will spring to mind.
Even after 25 years of world-wide exposure, the Marilyn continues to make its impact and it is included in the impressive exhibition of American screenprints from the collection of Reba and Dave Williams which fills the Hunterian Art Gallery of Glasgow University.
There are some 80 examples on show by nearly as many artists which reflect the development of the medium from the early Twenties to the zenith of Pop Art in the Sixties; from the rather mundane Swans of Leopold Krumel to Roy Lichtenstein's Sweet Dreams, Baby, which characterises his creativity and remains to this day an image in his art that bridges the gap between the commercial and the fine.
Equally striking and individual although aesthetically remote from the Lichtenstein, Falling Figure of 1947 by Stanley William Hayter who remains one of the most under-rated figures in the realm of modern art although recognised as the father of printmaking and creator of Atelier 17 in Paris and then in New York.
Inevitably, perhaps, Jasper Johns's renowned Target is here and undeniably yet again succeeds in making its mark.
Harry Sternberg's Riveter of 1935 evokes, in thick heavy forms, the world of reality known to all, while Joseph Vogel in a work entitled Forward Pass, dated 1939, has over-indulged himself in Picasso.
A rewarding exhibition that must be visited.
Also to be recommended is Valentine, at Roger Billcliffe Fine Art in Blythswood Street, Glasgow, though not every contributing artist celebrates the romantic significance of 14 February.
An extremely varied and immensely pleasing exhibition, it is undoubtedly rendered substantial by still-life oils by David Donaldson.
His St. Philomena (in statue form a background to fruit and flowers) could serve to all indifferent artists as a free lesson in how to wield paint and handle a difficult concept.
There are one or two other Donaldsons that continue these lessons.
His study Sally (the lady sits at a table and looks straight ahead at the viewer) possesses painterly values of real distinction.
The invaluable John Bellany produces a Still Life with Lovebird that does much to substantiate his already considerable reputation, and Sylvia von Hartmann is represented by a very beautiful mixed-media creation that fully justifies the remit.
Gordon Mitchell's admirable technical accuracy involves the eye, but the lyricism innate in the best of Brenda Lenaghan's work makes greater appeal.
Collectors' items surely are John Cunningham's Claret Jug, Flowers and Fruit, and Fruit with Carnations, and Archie Forrest's overt devotion to his wife should intrigue those not devoid of humour.
Elsewhere, on the stairs and upper floors, are fine examples of the art of William Gillies, Robin Philipson, Henderson Blyth and others of the recent past.
Emilio Coia
In print: New Yorker Harry Sternberg's Riveter of 1935, which evokes in thick heavy forms the world of reality known to all
Three have designs on award
THE countdown to the 1993 awards given by the Association for Business Sponsorship for the arts begins this morning as a distinguished panel of judges select the winning design for the seven awards.
writes Ruth Wishart.
Three designers were commissioned to produce work for consideration, and The Scotsman has again agreed to sponsor the creation of these awards.
Assessing the final line-up will be Timothy Clifford, director of the National Galleries of Scotland, Julian Spalding, the director of the Glasgow Arts Galleries, James More, managing director of the Edinburgh Tapestry Company — one of the prime movers behind the new Association for Applied Arts in Scotland — and Miles Dickson, head of The Scotsman's graphic design team.
The brief given to the three craftworkers approached this year emphasised that what they produce must qualify as a high quality art object in its own right, preferably of a contemporary nature, and suitable to be displayed in the offices or boardrooms of this years ABSA award winners.
The seven awards created from the chosen design will be presented at a gala dinner at the Kelvingrove Art Gallery in Glasgow on 29 April.
As always they will go to businesses and organisations whose support for various aspects of the arts throughout 1992 has most impressed the ABSA judges who get down to the business of sifting through hundreds of entries early next month.
This year's judging panel will be chaired by Angus Grossart and includes Juni Meek of BP Scotland, Sandy Orr, chair of Scottish Opera, Janice Forsyth of Scottish Television's NB arts programme and Bill Nolan of ProScot.
The three designers whose work will be scrutinised today have all produced significantly different concepts.
Sam MacDonald, who works out of Orkney, has submitted an unusual metalwork sculpture.
Edinburgh's Douglas Watson, who has already won a major award in the US for his three dimensional illustration work has created his study from a clay panel.
And in contrast, Michael Lloyd, a chaser in silver and gold in Galloway has produced a hand-raised and faceted vessel in a freehand interpretation of an octagonal design.
The techniques he employs, he says, give him more flexibility than a potter and allow him maximum flexibility with malleable qualities of the metals he employs.
He recently completed a commission for the banqueting suite at 10 Downing Street.
Traditionally the seven awards have always been deemed to have been of equal value, but the interesting possibilities suggested by all of these short listed designs is the building in of individuality to awards which will closely resemble each other without being formally identical.
The ABSA awards are now in their sixth year, and United Distillers has also continued its major sponsorship, with additional funding from Tayburn Design.
He tried, says, for a sculpture which would suggest a monolithic stone image, with the inscriptions and Celtic symbolism adding both theatrical and Scottish ingredients.
Funding of film and crafts bodies
The Edinburgh International Film Festival would like to express its appreciation of the role played by SALVO (Points of View, 13 February) in successfully campaigning for more adequate funding from the Scottish Office for film and crafts organisations in Scotland.
The Scottish Office is to be congratulated for its insight in identifying the growth potential of film in Scotland.
Edinburgh has yet to achieve parity core-funding with the younger London Film Festival.
As the world's longest-running film festival, we hope that our event can fulfil its role in Scotland and internationally in a city that film-makers and audiences from across the world want to visit.
Tongue stifled
Sir Andrew Gilchrist (Points of View, 13 February) offers a Gallic langue in cheek to counter Peter Totty's fears of a Gaelic linguistic checkmate.
We do not have to go quite so far afield to find another language which still plays a considerable part in our daily conversation.
It was spoken in Lowland Scotland for many centuries and generated our first literature, indeed, Europe's first literature outside Latin and Greek.
I am referring, of course, to that P-Celtic cousin of Gaelic, and twin-tongue to Welsh, known in the north as Cumbric.
It gave us such household names as Glasgow, Linlithgow, Lanark, Bathgate, Dalkeith, Stirling, Perth, Aberdeen, Arbroath, the Tay, the Clyde, the Forth etc, as well as our capital's Edin, and the famous burn's Bannock.
It also gave us, our many Brydens, Bretts, Waughs and Wallaces.
Our tongue, sadly, was stifled, but her sister still lives on.
To the early Welsh, southern Scotland was the land whence heroes sprang; they looked to ‘the men of the North’ to bring salvation once more from their many oppressors, one day.
Pharisees' law
John McKay (Points of View, 15 February) writes that Father James Morrow ‘like the Pharisees, forgets that the laws he follows were made for man/woman and the social circumstances have to be considered when applying them’.
According to the Jewish historian, Hyam Maccoby, the Pharisees forgot no such thing (A History of Judaism in the First Century).
What, according to Maccoby, distinguishes the Pharisees, particularly from the Sadducees (the aristocratic priestly Jews), is their insistence on the oral law, and the need to interpret the written law according to circumstance.
Thus, in the example of the punishment of a one-eyed man who had struck out the eye of another person, the Pharisee would not approve of striking out the remaining eye of the offender, unlike the Sadducee, who would.
Art of selling oneself
MEANWHILE, American publishing firm Loompanics have produced a new title from their author, Jim Hogshire.
The intriguingly named Sell Yourself to Science: The Complete Guide to Selling Your Organs, Body Fluids, Bodily Functions and Being a Human Guinea Pig, retails at the modest price of $16.95.
In fact, the cost of investing in a copy should just about be covered by a ‘human genetic material’ donation or two (men only), don't you think?
Lizzie Higgins: Scots ballad singer
THE RENOWNED Aberdeen ballad-singer, Lizzie Higgins, died on Saturday in her native city at the age of 63.
Lizzie was the daughter of a very famous mother, the late Jeannie Robertson, who after her ‘discovery’ in 1953 was acclaimed internationally as the outstanding ballad-singer of modern times.
Lizzie's father was the prize-winning piper Donald Higgins, whose influence on her musical development complemented that of her mother.
On both sides, therefore, she came of gifted ‘traveller’ stock, and was the lucky inheritor of a song tradition second to none in Europe for artistic brilliance and enviable magnitude.
It is little short of tragic that she has been cut off, while still at the peak of her singing power.
Born in 1929, Lizzie grew up in the ‘evil decade’ which was heading for war.
Although born in the city, she enjoyed from earliest childhood the spring and summer excursions when the yellow was on the broom, and she could accompany her mother on hawking expeditions ‘up the Dee and doon the Don.’
Some of her happiest memories were of campfire ceilidhs at Alford, Banchory and Strathdon, with glorious piping not only from her father Donald but also from ‘Seely’(her Uncle Isaac, also an outstanding piper), and folk music on melodeon and whistle from the other campers.
Unlike many other ‘traveller’ children of her generation, Lizzie had an ordinary city-child's education in Aberdeen, and was a bright and attentive scholar; she enjoyed English lessons, and was chosen to represent her school in a poetry-reading competition.
However, it was from her mother Jeannie and her grandmother Maria Stewart that she absorbed the song-treasury which was to be the dominant love of her life.
Leaving school at 15, she got a job as a fish filleter, and stuck gamely to this hard darg for many years.
However, the burgeoning folk revival of the 50s and 60s offered her a welcome release, and eventually she won a respected place in the circuit of folk festivals and folksong clubs, singing material not only from her mother's repertoire but also from a personal ‘collection’ gathered when hawking, or working at the tatties.
She also picked up a number of recently composed ‘revival’ songs, like Andy Hunter's Up and Awa wi' the Laverock.
Although it is true to say that Lizzie felt at the start very much under her mother's shadow and in any case was naturally of a rather shy disposition — she was coaxed into recording quite early on in her career; indeed, her voice can be heard (singing Far Over the Forth) on the same 1953 School of Scottish Studies tape devoted to her just-discovered mother.
But gradually she developed a markedly different singing style from Jeannie's.
There were several discernible influences at work here — one was undoubtedly her father's piping, which suggested decorations to the melodic line at North-east songs not always accustomed to such, and the other was acquaintance with young English revival singers who had incorporated into their singing styles something of the sean nos tradition of the West of Ireland.
Be that as it may, she eventually worked her way through to a most impressive and distinctive personal singing style; the various stages of this development can be observed on two excellent LPs: Princess of the Thistle (1969), which has useful and perceptive notes by Peter Hall, and What a Voice (1985), with sensitive notes by Stephanie Smith-Perrin.
There are also her masterly contributions to the school's double LP of classic ballads, The Muckle Sangs, now re-released on CD.
Just before the onset of her fatal illness, Lizzie recorded a superb rendering of the North-east witch ballad Alison Gross, got from her father for the Grampian Television film Journey to a Kingdom.
This has been referred to as ‘one of the most memorable examples of classic ballad-singing of all time.’
Lizzie was twice married.
After divorce from her first husband, she married Brian Youlden, who has been a tower of strength in these last sad days.
The hearts of all who have been moved by Lizzie's singing go out to Brian in his loss.
Lizzie Higgins: was still at peak of her singing power
Hamish Henderson, of Edinburgh University's School of Scottish Studies, pays tribute to one of Scotland's most gifted exponents of classic ballads of the countryside
Audience with a stylish blues king
ERIC CLAPTON ROYAL ALBERT HALL, LONDON
ERIC Clapton closed his blues night with a touching version of a Bessie Smith classic, but as he sang ‘Makes no difference what I do/Some folks will criticise/I'm gonna do just what I want to do’, it seemed as if he was anticipating his reviews.
Clapton is a graceful, authoritative performer, even sitting down, and his ten acoustic country-blues tunes made the 6,000 seat Royal Albert Hall seem like a club.
Nevertheless, it was a great relief when the band stood up, plugged in, and launched into some Muddy Waters.
Eric's guitar sounded like two steel rail wagons clanging together in a Chicago freight yard at 4am.
Although drummer Richie Hayward powered them through Blow Wind, Blow Wind, and the evergreen Key to the Highway, I began to think that Keith Richards' X-Pensive Winos were a better band.
Then, on Blues Leave Me Alone, the voice, rhythm and sparse arrangement gelled into a menacing heavy groove.
Hayward really came into his own on two Howlin' Wolf songs, and as Freddie King's Love Her With a Feeling spiralled up into an overwhelming sonic orgasm, Clapton's playing drew applause during a song for the first time.
He lifted it again with scalding, skullbusting licks on Born Under a Bad Sign; Hear Me Calling even sounded like Cream.
After 29 songs, he earned a rather subdued standing ovation.
Ultimately the gig lacked magic because the crowd wanted to hear him play some Eric Clapton numbers.
It was like George Michael singing his favourite soul songs; he did them well, but he is more exciting on his own stuff.
The fans wanted to be moved by Layla and Wonderful Tonight, songs about Eric Clapton's life and suffering.
This two-hour concert was just a competent, well-structured history lesson by the king of the Armani blues.
Shock of the new
HEBRIDES ENSEMBLE QUEEN'S HALL, EDINBURGH
A HUGE performance of a huge piece — James Clark and Peter Evans playing the Schnitke first violin sonata produced a range of sounds which fairly shocked ears anticipating a chamber work, writes Mary Miller.
Schnitke's language seems to lunge from outburst to tranquil apology for his own excesses — simple, melodic threads he untangles from demonic cackle and sheer noise.
But some of the astonishment was that we had Clark here resident in Edinburgh to show us in magnificent playing, the possibilities of this music.
With the Hebrides Ensemble and the remarkable soprano Lucy Shelton, more revelation was to follow.
Shostakovich's seven Alexander Blok settings embrace a bleak, uncomfortable musical language, even when expressing some sort of serenity.
Shelton has an enormous emotional range but here she showed restraint, as though choking back the extremes of expression with which these dark poems ripple.
Ravel's Chansons madecasses, though the music sweats with sultry southern heat, does not bathe one with the swirling sounds of his orchestral timbres.
More of his writing slithers around the passion of his text, the instruments chaffing the solo voice, the singer herself weaving restless melodic lines.
Shelton showed us arid, earthy colours, her voice curving from a glowing directness to a snaking near scream.
One felt her skill — here, one was but testing the water in a musical reservoir of immeasurable depth.
The reward, for those who had spent the evening feeling uneasily close to the edge was Faure, the sunny, satisfying C minor piano quartet, whose climbing lines seemed to settle again and again on to a ledge of happy serenity.
Division adds up to few rhythmic pluses
BILL WELLS OCTET TRON JAZZ CELLAR, EDINBURGH
THE Bill Wells Octet has been exploring some unusual stylistic directions in the context of the Scottish jazz scene, but this appearance did not live up to expectations.
The opening set in particular was something of a disappointment.
The band began as an octet, but spent most of the set in various sub-divisions, from quartet through to septet.
The general effect was distinctly lacklustre, and Wells's complex, genre-hopping arrangements seemed to be causing the players no small amount of difficulty, judging by the near desperate scrutiny of charts and occasional wayward phrasing and intonation.
Rhythmic impetus was surprisingly low, given the presence of Tom Bancroft on drums and Josefino Cupido on percussion, but that improved notably after the interval on two extended (if often rather directionless) pieces which juxtaposed to good effect the four-horn front-line of John Longbotham on alto and Russell Cowieson on tenor saxophone, Robert Henderson on trumpet, and John Kenny on trombone, with Lindsay Cooper switching from bass to tuba, and Wells from keyboard to bass guitar.
They were at their strongest when all eight figured in the opening set as well, notably on Illuminations, which mixed bop-derived figures with much freer playing.
The final impression, though, was of a band with a lot of good ideas which still need considerable working out.
Kenny Mathieson
A night worth sharing
PARAGON ENSEMBLE RSAMD
THE PARAGON Ensemble offered another excellent concert by four Scottish composers on Sunday.
Judith Weir's The Consolations of Scholarship — a music drama in the form of a 13th to 14th-century Chinese Yuan opera.
Irene Drummond was ideally cast as the soprano soloist/narrator with wonderfully clear declamation.
Only occasionally did the accompanying instruments — which frequently had to use the speech rhythms of the voice — overshadow the words to the detriment of the story.
Performers and listeners alike had to concentrate fiercely, for Weir's style is so compact that with one blink the thread can be lost.
Songs My Mother Taught Me, by Martin Dalby, opened the concert and this may have been a planning mistake, for its moony, relaxed idiom with little rhythmic excitement might have fared better later on.
Gordon McPherson's String Quartet No 1 has an animal magnetism which makes the audience listen.
Relentless hammering laid naively alongside delicate dialogues made a striking impact.
Ideas were thrust into relief with considered wildness.
The performance of Thomas Wilson's Chamber Symphony was nothing short of wonderful.
The work has a masterly sense of proportion, an elegiac richness of palate and a spiritual far-sightedness which lent a radiant depth to the work's mythological tapestry.
Performers warmed to the lustrous colours and the audience knew that a special experience had been shared.
George Wilson
A polished Pasquale
CO-PRODUCED with Opera North, ENO's new Don Pasquale is a polished, classy affair, which should beget many revivals in subsequent seasons.
It sounds well, looks well, for all its updating to more or less modern times.
Don Pasquale himself cuts a supremely English figure in his pinstripes and specs — he could be a branch manager of the Pru — but his champion, Andrew Shore, is a highly experienced actor as well as a splendid baritone.
Too often, Alan Opie finds himself fobbed off with supporting roles, but here he gets to play Dr Malatesta with conspicuous verve, allure and vocal agility.
In young Rosemary Joshua (who so distinguished herself recently in Princess Ida) this production finds a capital Norina, sprightly, stylish and with an exceptional command of coloratura, dead accurate, expressive and always easy on the ear.
Significantly enough, her party dress for her opera outing at the end was exactly right for an ambitious Roman matron anxious to make bella figura, an elegant example of haute couture and the work of Joe Vanek, the designer, whose sets were also of a high standard, especially the backcloths.
The quartet of soloists is completed by Adrian Martin's likeable Ernesto, overcoming an earlier vocal malaise and wholly admirable in his Act 3 Serenade.
Associated in the past with Welsh National Opera, the conductor Andrew Greenwood proved a card-carrying Donizettian and the director, Patrick Mason, although no newcomer to opera, is best known for his brilliant staging of Dancing at Lughnasa.
The chorus scenes were especially telling, rather as one might have expected.
All in all this new production represents excellent news.
Impressive Mr Brook
Renowned theatre director Peter Brook is back in Glasgow to mount his fourth Tramway production, reviewed last month in Paris by Mary Miller
IT HAS been said that Glasgow only really welcomes an incomer if they have built a ship.
For director Peter Brook, perhaps, an exception has been made.
He is, after all, the man who brought The Mahabharata to Scotland — and with it new theatrical inspiration, ingenuity and passion.
And he prompted the discovery of the Tramway, so establishing a permanent performing space.
The rest is history and this week, Brook is at the Tramway to make more.
At yesterday's launch of Brook's Impressions de Pelleas, his reworking of Debussy's opera, Robert Palmer, Glasgow's director of performing arts, introduced Brook as ‘one who had brought to the Tramway the hallmark of excellence and established there a benchmark for others’ achievement.’
Brook, small, breezy and soft-spoken had already been padding among the assembly, shaking hands with a grip curiously flabby for one whose theatrical identity is so startlingly defined.
So we sat in the creamy splendour of the Glasgow Hilton — with Erdman Lewis, the hotel group is sponsoring the production.
Tramway, Brook mused, had come to mean not just the bricks and mortar of a disused tram shed, but a place for human beings to create.
He introduced his team, designer Chloe Obolensky; Marius Constant, who, in distilling Debussy's score, had realised the two-piano version with which for many years Debussy had entertained his friends; representatives of Brook's three casts, and three of four pianists.
Given press reaction to his production — Debussy specialists have howled ‘what, no harp!’, establishment opera critics have retreated, snarling, to their corners to blow on scorched fingers, while others (this critic included) have searched for appropriately fresh superlatives — the questions to Brook and artistic colleagues were strangely tame.
Brook, amiable and not in the least intense in his explanations, elaborated on the need for triple casting.
He had been determined to produce the opera as though it were a straight play, with long and detailed rehearsal allowing the artists to explore and deepen their own work in constant conditions.
He had long deplored the grand opera house tradition of stars turning up to slot into ready-rehearsed productions, and recalled the awful theatre tale of a famous Lear/Hamlet/Othello turning up to greet a cast of strangers, saying ‘Whatever you do, don't get in my way…‘
But with Pelleas, Brook said, the singers had settled into teams, and although these had in no way developed a style in one mould, they had aimed to fuse through the exchange of actions and ideas ‘the practical and the sublime’.
But was it still an opera?
The question elicited perhaps the broadest of Brook's smiles.
‘What's in a name?’ he replied.
‘If you love opera, then you use that name.
If not, you find another one.
But all real theatre should be a music dance drama.’
CONSTANT talked about Debussy — about the failure of Pelleas et Melisande to find public success, and its exclusion from mainstream repertoire.
He talked about repetition in fin-de-siecle opera, necessary because audiences then took so long to grasp a musical point; and about Debussy's hasty orchestration of the work after years of private piano performance.
To Constant's ears, the scoring is ordinary — not comparable to La Mer or Iberia — and Maeterlinck's text too submerged by thick texture.
The two-piano version, he claimed, had far greater harmonic and rhythmic clarity.
Here Brook interrupted, to make a dangerous claim that all 19th-century music was riddled with unnecessary repetition which current composers had had the sense to discard.
(The company laughed, musicians present pursed their lips.)
Several valuable Strathclyde educational enterprises in which Brook and his cast will share were announced.
The cast talked about singing Debussy's truth and about Glasgow being miles better, and Brook beamed.
All very comfortable, very ordinary — and the very opposite of Peter Brook's astonishing Impressions de Pelleas which opens at the Tramway tonight.
Innovator: Paris-based Peter Brook has already brought international productions of The Mahabharata, Carmen and La Tempete to the Tramway, setting a benchmark for theatre there
PAUL REID
Plaid pattern for success on a plate
A one-off idea sowed the seeds of a flourishing ceramics business for a Scots couple.
SUSAN NICKALLS looks at pottery which has become a smash hit
Using different colours can change the scale and shape of things and tartan is a natural progression from this
SOMETIMES it can be the off-the-cuff ideas that spark innovative business ventures, rather than a painstaking attempt to find that elusive gap in the market.
For Scottish couple Annie and Lachlan Stewart, what started off as a fun Christmas exhibition in their London home has led to a flourishing tartan ceramics business and the relocation of their company, ANTA, to the north of Scotland.
Far removed from the usual tartan kitsch, the Stewarts have combined creativity with a flair for design to produce top-of-the-range products that now sell worldwide.
In London, Lachlan worked as an architect while Annie made silks and tartans for Harrods and designed fashion fabric collections for Jasper Conran, Katherine Hammnet and Paul Smith.
She also astutely spotted the highly versatile tartan's potential for interior design.
‘At that time there was no-one using plaid checks in furnishing fabrics, so they were a huge success.
In an inspired moment, Annie decided to ‘tartan’ up a dozen plates for a casual ‘Gifts frae Scotland’display to match the plaid clad furniture and fabrics in the house.
‘American House and Gardens came to photograph the house and asked if we could provide 350 of these plates for their best advertisers.
These of course were the big New York stores, so from a casual one-off batch of 12 hand-painted pieces, the pottery really took off.
No-one had thought to put tartan on ceramics before.’
ANTA is still the only company producing tartan ceramics and from their unprepossessing, scruffy but spacious ex-wartime buildings near Fearn, the Stewarts produce their wares using a complimentary fusion of creative talents.
‘As an architect, Lachlan is interested in 3-D design and, being a painter, I'm interested in flat pattern and what colour can do to the illusion of space.
Using different colours can change the scale and shape of things and tartan is a natural progression from this.
Although the pattern in the warp is the same as the one across, where the two colours cross you get a secondary colour, and that's what makes a successful plaid.’
The Stewarts employ just over 20 people, but with the recent acquisition of weaving looms, they can now weave on-site, as opposed to putting work out, and more people are likely to be taken on.
As part of this expansion, the company is adding a contract range of plain fabrics to its collection, aimed more at architects than interior designers for the hotel and office markets.
But the fabric side of the business is nowhere near as labour-intensive as the pottery, where the 28 different shapes of ANTA's Balloneware, designed by Lachlan, are all handthrown and still handpainted.
‘These are available in 14 different tartans, some after real plaids, along with colour co-ordinated striped pottery which looks like yachting colours.’
Annie is also developing a range of Scottish plant designs for the more conservative home market.
‘The British want flowers no matter what.
We can sell geometric designs everywhere else except here — the English in particular really like their flowers.’
Foreigners, though, remain tartan addicts and visitors to Scotland will have a chance to sample the ANTA experience once refurbishments at Edinburgh's Sheraton Hotel, using the company's fabrics, are complete.
‘I do think visitors to this country like to know they're in Scotland, especially in a large hotel like the Sheraton where you could be anywhere.’
The Stewarts are also keen to get their oven-to-tableware products, such as breakfast sets, into hotels.
Although the combined turnover of both businesses has doubled in the past two years to £500,000, ANTA's American sales have fallen because of the fall of the dollar.
The Japanese, however, lovers of all things Scottish, are still major buyers.
‘Another reason for moving here, apart from outgrowing the London pottery, was the Japanese.
They won't buy what they perceive as Scottish products that are made in England.’
Along with orders to France and Scandinavia, exports make up 75 per cent of ANTA's business.
Annie also wants to introduce the tartanware to Germany and improve the home market which now includes Jenners and Wrap in Edinburgh, as well as Harrods and their own wholesale shop and retail outlet in London.
Keen also to expand into the kitchen shop market, the company has recently produced a new range of ceramic tartan tiles.
Hand-painted in ten different colourways to match the china, the tiles are proving popular not only for the floor and fireplace surrounds, but for brightening up the area around kitchen Agas.
On the fabric side, ANTA's new plaid carpet cloth is also selling well.
‘With the current revival in the use of brass stair rods, the carpet made from black-faced Scottish wool is ideal for this purpose as it's very hard-wearing and much cheaper than the traditional Brussels weave carpets.’
The Stewarts' continual forays into pastures new with their distinct designs well suits their company name.
‘ANTA comes from an architectural term for a pillar that doesn't conform to classical rule,’ explains Annie.
‘No-one's supposed to know what it means — most people think we've done something odd with the word tartan.’
As well as being a success business-wise, ANTA's move north has also fulfilled a burning ambition for the Stewarts.
‘As students at Edinburgh College of Art, we always said we would buy a castle and do it up, but when it came around to it most of them had been restored, but Lachlan knew of Ballone Castle near Portmahomack which was still derelict and persuaded the farmer to sell it.’
Currently being renovated, once restored, Ballone Castle will function as both a home and an elegant showcase for the company's products.
Although ANTA's new location can make it difficult to get raw materials in and finished product out, the Stewarts are convinced the move north was a good one geographically.
‘Export is a nightmare because of the paperwork and expense of transporting the pottery, but we've never had it so good up here and Easter Ross is really no further from Tokyo than London.’
Tradition colours view of design
THE secret of ANTA's success with its tartan products lies in a combination of traditional design with simple shapes.
According to Lachlan Stewart tastes seem to fall into two different camps.
‘Some people like the ceramic products because they are modern and contemporary looking, others buy them because they are typically Scottish and traditional.’
The best sellers are small gift items like mugs and bowls but tartan preferences also vary.
‘The most popular tartans are the more classical blue and white ranges which tend to match existing tableware colours.
The traditional MacLeod tartan also looks good on the simple shapes, as the more traditional the tartan, the more lines there are which makes the ceramics look less bland.’
If you've always fancied your very own tartan, the Stewarts can now offer exclusive tartan designs now they have their own textile manufacturing plant.
‘Once Annie has come up with a tartan design it can be used on many products such as bags and logos, not just carpets and furnishings.
There is no limit to the amount of tartans we can create.’
Although more expensive than the normal range of tartan carpets, an increasing number of people are having their own tartans designed.
‘It's the classic green and reds with a simple check that prove the most popular and we often recolour tartans in various forms.
The important thing is to get the relationship right between the horizontal and vertical colours as they produce the third colour when they cross.
If that relationship is wrong you get a muddy tartan, if the mixtures are right it works very well.’
National title for Scotsman photographer
IAN RUTHERFORD, a staff photographer with The Scotsman, has won the highly-regarded Regional Photographer of the Year title for 1992 in the Nikon Press Awards with a portfolio including these pictures.
Rutherford, 38, was in London last night with his wife, Cathy, to collect the award and a cheque for £1,500.
Born in Hawick, he was a late starter in photography, having worked for several years with a water board, but his eye for a picture has brought him distinction on numerous occasions.
Morning roll: Britain's youngest trainer, Jackie Rae, 20, allows Gloriole his head on Dunbar sands before the serious work starts Happier days: The Queen enjoys a light moment at the Royal Highland Show, Ingliston Uncertain future: Miner David McIlwane showers at Monktonhall Colliery near Edinburgh Snap happy: Prize-winning Scotsman photographer Ian Rutherford captured in a relaxed moment
Martin Bell journalist of the year
THE BBC foreign correspondent Martin Bell was last night named journalist of the year by the Royal Television Society for the war coverage which nearly cost him his life.
Mr Bell, 54, still has shrapnel in his stomach after being hit by mortar fire while covering the civil war in Sarajevo last August.
He was RTS television reporter of the year in 1977, when the award was first introduced, for his coverage of a mercenaries' trial in Angola.
The veteran of 11 wars, including Vietnam, was seen by millions of television viewers when he was hit but returned months later to file more moving reports from the war zone.
He received his award last night from Bill Cotton, president of the RTS, at a dinner at the London Hilton hosted by fellow BBC journalist Moira Stuart.
‘The winner is no novice, indeed he has consistently patrolled the world's troublespots for three decades.
He has never flinched from the job in hand,’ said the judges.
‘His style is always crisp and to the point; his command of the language a constant reminder that good television journalism lies in words as well as pictures.’
He was awarded an OBE in last year's birthday honours, shortly after he was wounded, and was this week also nominated for a BAFTA award for his news coverage.
The international news award was shared by ITN's Penny Marshall, for coverage of Serb-run detention camps in Bosnia, and the BBC for their work on the Somalian famine.
ITN's Ian Robbie was cameraman of the year for his footage from Somalia and of the Bisho massacre in the South African homeland of Ciskei where he carried on filming through heavy gunfire.
— PA
John O'Loan, head of Sky News, received the judges' award because they ‘noted the increasing significance of Sky News as a contributor to the journalistic mix’.
Sports coverage: BBC for Olympic Grandstand.
Regional daily news magazine: Central News West.
Sports news: ITN for Olympic Drug Scandal.
Home news: BBC Nine O'Clock News for Black Wednesday.
International current affairs: Channel 4 for Mother Russia's Children.
Regional current affairs: Yorkshire Television for The Candidates election special.
Regional sports: BBC North (Leeds) for Close Up North White Rose in Africa.
Home current affairs: BBC Panorama for Unsafe Convictions.
Project award: Yorkshire Television for Cold Blood The Massacre of East Timor.
Programme award: BBC Nine O'Clock News for The September Currency Crisis.
— PA
Martin Bell; mortar shrapnel still in stomach
David Thomson: pioneering Borders farmer
BY THE DEATH in his 87th year of David Thomson of Cessford, Kelso, the Borders area has lost a fine gentleman and a great pioneer farmer, in many instances ahead of his time.
So much so that ‘Thomson of Cessford’ became a byword in the realms of progressive farming.
The son of a dentist in Glasgow, he started farming in 1920 at Carneil, Dunfermline, but moved to the Borders in 1948 to take over the tenancy of the 1860-acre farm of Cessford.
As a ‘first-generation farmer’, he was not fettered by tradition.
He had a keen regard for the classical elements of production — Land, Labour and Capital — and was never afraid of adopting new techniques or of changing his farming policy to achieve the most efficient and profitable blend of these elements.
Decisions on change were not based on whim or fancy but were the result of keen study of the meticulous costing records which were always a prominent feature of management at Cessford.
Second only to the family, his chief love was for the North of Scotland and in the mid-fifties he realised a life-time ambition by becoming the owner of a 26,000-acre estate in Sutherland and, typical of the man, here he turned this unit into a sound agricultural business as well as a sporting estate.
He gave freely of his services over a wide field of interests.
He served for many years on the boards of the Animal Diseases Research Organisation and the College of Agriculture.
He was a highly respected member of the panel of arbiters and was the founder chairman of the Kelso Agricultural Discussion Society.
At all times generous in giving help and wise counsel when sought, it was with great modesty that he proffered opinion or advice.
He was a great lover of country sports — but only after seeing that his business was running efficiently did he allow himself to relax and seek pleasure with his gun, his rod or on horseback.
Foremost a family man, he supported with admirable devotion his late wife, Helen, through many years of ill-health.
Although he handed over the active management of his business some time ago to his son, Bill, his keen interest in the affairs of Cessford and in the welfare of his family never flagged.
He is survived by his daughters, Sheila and Anne, his son, Bill, and nine grandchildren.
Now for something completely different
At one time 7:84 might have baulked at attempting the classics.
Joseph Farrell reports on the theatre company's change of direction with Sophocles's ‘Antigone’
Over the last decade the political dynamic of our society has changed so much, the social fabric has been so profoundly ravished that a different form of theatre is called for
IT may surprise many theatre-goers to hear that the latest production by 7:84 Theatre Company is Sophocles's Antigone.
Once it would have been greeted with disbelief, and even now it is bound to jolt those who watched the original, anarchic troupe of strolling players perform works like Joe's Drum or Wee Red Hen in community venues or miners' welfare halls, and who followed with greater or lesser sympathy John McGrath's attempts to identify a Scottish theatrical idiom for the mixture of radical politics and popular culture he aimed to put on stage.
McGrath recently expressed reservations over the current direction of the company and suggested that it would be appropriate to accompany the change of course with a change of name.
The current artistic director, Iain Reekie, agreed that a broad redefinition of 7:84 was underway but denied that there was any break with the past, preferring to describe the new direction as ‘a progression made out of necessity’.
He continued: ‘One of the problems I have is that people talk to me of political theatre and non-political theatre.
I find it hard to divide the two at any time.
I understand John McGrath's sentiments but over the last decade or so the political dynamic of our society has changed so much, the social fabric has been so profoundly ravished that a different form of theatre is called for.’
The changes in question do not involve the political space the company occupies, nor the audiences they hope to attract.
After it it seen this week at the Tron Theatre, Glasgow, the company will be taking Antigone to the Mercat Theatre in Drumchapel and to the Gorbals Unemployed Workers' Centre, where Reekie expects that the ‘strong, accessible storyline’ of the play will appeal to an audience who respond to exactly such elements when they are presented in the form of TV soaps.
It is in the switch from a applied politics to the area of principle that, Reekie agreed, the most substantial change for 7:84 had occurred.
‘Agitprop can sometimes be effective, but the problems facing us today are so wide that the only way to engage people and pose dilemmas is to key into matters which are universal.
Antigone still strikes a chord.
We have not answered the questions it raises, and they still need to be confronted.’
There is an undeniable gulf of philosophy between political theatre which dedicates itself to featuring everyday concerns such as poll tax or unemployment, and one whose politics are expressed more elliptically through the histories of Thebes 2,000 years ago.
Antigone may be the first of all political plays and is surely the greatest.
Iain Reekie confesses to entertaining an ambition to stage it ever since his days at college when he played the part of Creon the king, and perhaps this background makes him hostile to any interpretation which would see in Creon a proto-Nazi.
‘It is not our job to impose a concept on the play.
The audience should see both sides of the argument.’
Royal hues with views
THE Palace of Holyroodhouse in Edinburgh is packed with portraits of men and women who have sat on the throne, and others like Prince Charles Edward Stuart who have laid claim to it, but this week, for the first time, Holyroodhouse is holding an exhibition of pictures painted by the heir to the throne.
About £1 million has been raised for charity by the display and reproduction of the watercolours which the Prince of Wales has painted in recent years but the exhibition which opens to the public today is his first one-man show in Scotland.
It will also be his first show in a Royal residence, though Balmoral, Windsor and Sandringham are among the subjects of his paintings.
It is however landscape which holds the greatest interest for the Royal artist and Deeside, the Yorkshire Dales, and Norfolk are among the areas where he has roamed with sketch-pad and paints.
The 35 watercolours in the exhibition span about seven years, and over that period a spectacular improvement in technique is noticeable.
Last year's View from Invercauld and a painting of Wensleydale from Gunnerside in 1991 are of exceptional quality, while there is a particularly fine, and possibly historically significant, painting of Hong Kong seen from the afterdeck of Britannia, with the White Ensign hanging limply in the foreground.
Guests at a reception for the Prince's charitable trusts attended a private view of the exhibition at Holyroodhouse last night when the prince was present.
The exhibition, which marks the reopening of the palace for the first time since the European Summit conference was held there, runs until 28 March.
Admission £1 (free to those who pay to visit the State Apartments).
Top: Colonel JDC Wickes, the superintendent at the Palace of Holyroodhouse, who retires later this year, viewing the Prince of Wales's watercolours, while (below) the prince at work in 1991
A sack of mail
ELVIS COSTELLO AND THE BRODSKY QUARTET
ROYAL CONCERT HALL, GLASGOW
SO, who was schmoozing who?
Was Costello simply upping his profile as a serious performer by hanging out with egghead musicians whose forte is Shostakovich rather than Chuck Berry?
And were the Brodskys simply slumming it for the sake of a little pop action?
Well, neither, really.
Arguably the fivesome's new work, The Juliet Letters, is the first real symbiotic collaboration between rock and classical musicians.
That is, if you have to stick labels on the package.
If not, then what we have here is simply a bunch of chamber songs performed with string quartet and with a patina of pretension.
What has led Costello to play to the balcony, then?
Answer; Romeo and Juliet.
Somewhere in Verona, apparently, there is an academic who answers all correspondence sent to the imaginary, dead woman Juliet Capulet, which is just the kind of ironic nugget Costello would seize on and enlarge to a 20-song opus.
A  little OTT, but hey, Elvis has now earned the right to do what he wants, as I'm sure he'd tell you himself.
Given this starting point, Costello and the Brodskys then delivered a sackful of mail; an eccentric aunt replying to a scheming nephew's begging note, a young man detailing his estranged lover's faults…and so on.
Thankfully, part two part sparked.
The propulsive string motif of Jacksons, Monk and Rowe solicited warm applause as did the political recriminations of This Sad Burlesque.
But, despite all the cleverly wrought curlicues, the combo's most successful material was the most conventional; the simple, undulating rhythm of their first encore, King of the Unknown Sea, as yet unrecorded, was one of the evening's simplest and most persuasive offerings.
Ultimately, this was not the major artistic success Costello had hoped for, but a tiny triumph.
For those shouting for Oliver's Army, it was doubtless disappointing.
Allan Campbell
Glorious setting for Pelleas
A rapturous reception capped another Glasgow triumph for Peter Brook, one of the world's most gifted directors.
Allen Wright was in the Tramway audience
IMPRESSIONS OF PELLEAS
TRAMWAY, GLASGOW
YEARS ago Peter Brook held up Debussy's Pelleas et Melisande as an example of an opera that could be condensed without being harmed.
He noted that despite the fact that its glory lay mainly in the nature of the orchestral score ‘one could start afresh with a version for piano and still do a Pelleas of great vitality’.
That is precisely what he has done though ‘vitality’ is a curious word to apply to something as still and emotionally stifling.
When The Scotsman's music critic reviewed this production in Paris last month she was overwhelmed by its beauty but others have taken the view that two pianos no matter how superbly played can never be as effective as a great orchestra.
But it is extraordinary how one of those pianos prominently placed on stage almost becomes part of the action.
At first the family gather round it and at the end as the actors steal away into the darkness it is the piano which makes the final sounds.
As it happens there is one sound in this production more dramatic than any of the music — and that is the sound of a knife being tossed into a pool of water after it has been plunged into the heart of Pelleas.
Water features on stage in most of Brook's productions but I can't remember it ever being used to more powerful effect.
Little remains to be said or sung after that — except for the brief but exquisite requiem with which Arkel brings the opera to an end.
Discouraged and exhausted by all the struggles of orthodox opera production Brook abandoned the opera house circuit a long time ago but first with Carmen and now Pelleas he has reached into the heart of operas, purifying them without  diminishing them.
This is not a pocket edition of Pelleas, a cut price version for touring, but rather does it reveal the passion and the pity in the music.
In a programme note Brook points out that Debussy told the cast at their first rehearsal ‘forget that you're singers’.
But fortunately his own cast have not taken such advice and under the musical direction of Marius Constant they soar above the lugubrious libretto based on Maeterlinck's play.
Written 100 years ago it is performed here in the costumes of that period.
Last night the leading roles were sung by Jean-Francois Lapointe, Jungwon Park, Vincent le Texier and Roger Soyer and the pianists were Vincent Leterne and Jeff Cohen.
Two other casts will be heard this week.
This is the fourth of Peter Brooks productions to be staged in the Tramway and like its predecessors was received in a hushed silence followed by rapturous applause.
Glasgow has developed a very fruitful relationship with one of the world's most gifted directors.
Record £11m for Turner painting
A TURNER painting owned by the University of London is to be sold to the John Paul Getty Museum in California for a record £11 million.
The sale — the highest paid for a work by an English artist — is subject to the granting of an export licence.
‘Van Tromp going about to please his masters, ships at sea, getting a good wetting’, painted in 1844, belongs to Royal Holloway college, situated on the edge of Windsor Great Park.
The college want to make the sale, sanctioned by the Charity Commissioners last summer, to set up an endowment fund for maintenance, restoration and refurbishment of Royal Holloway's Founder's Building, as well as for the upkeep and security for the remaining pictures.
The picture depicts a number of ships on a storm tossed sea.
Getty museum director Dr John Walsh said his institution were ‘very pleased’ to at last have a work by one of Britain's greatest artists.
To help with their endowment fund, the Royal Holloway also hope to sell a Constable and Gainsborough from the remaining 76 works decorating their walls.
The previous highest price for a painting by a British artist was paid in 1990 for Constable's The Lock.
A collector in Switzerland paid £10.78 million.
— PA
Eldorado voted ‘worst’ TV
SURVEY: Readers' feelings on £10m show was in little doubt
ELDORADO, the BBC's £10 million soap, was today named the Worst Show on TV and the Biggest Disappointment of 1992.
The awards came in a survey conducted among readers of TV Quick and TV Weekly.
A spokesman for the magazines said: ‘The result was in little doubt.’
The show has failed to appear in any TV popularity charts and eight of the original cast of virtual unknowns have been axed since it began last summer.
Creator Verity Lambert has gone on leave and former BBC1 controller Jonathan Powell, who vowed to support the series, has left the Corporation prompting speculation about its future.
Viewers also voted Terry Wogan the most overrated performer for the second year in succession and Jeremy Beadle as the person most likely to make them switch off.
Darling Buds of May star Catherine Zeta Jones was voted most Beautiful Woman and GMTV's medical expert Dr Hilary Jones, the most handsome man.
Best soap Coronation Street also retained its title as ‘the programme I can't live without’, David Jason's A Touch of Frost was best new show and Inspector Morse was best detective.
The BBC's Sunday night hit One Foot in the Grave was best comedy ahead of Birds of a Feather.
Casualty was best drama.
— PA 
BEAUTY: Buds of May star Catherine Zeta Jones was voted most beautiful.
Royal eye for art Paintings to go on show at the Palace
THE first exhibition in Scotland of watercolours by the Prince of Wales opens at the Palace of Holyroodhouse tomorrow.
Prince Charles arrives in Edinburgh tonight for a reception at the palace and a private viewing of the paintings.
The exhibition marks the reopening of the palace after the European Summit in December.
On show are 35 watercolours, dominated by mountains and castles, painted in Scotland and England and during the Prince's travels in Turkey, Italy and other countries throughout the world.
Seven of the paintings have never been seen before by the public.
Proceeds from the display of his work — estimated at £1 million — will go to the Prince's Trust.
Artist John Ward has said of the Prince's work: ‘He works for the love of it; seriously, modestly, with much thought as well as appetite.’
TWO WATERCOLOURS: Scenes from Scotland on view tomorrow at the Palace exhibition
ON DISPLAY: Allt na Giubhsaich, one of the views painted by Prince Charles while at Balmoral in 1985.
BEN ARKLE: A scene captured by Prince Charles in Sutherland in 1991.
It will be on show in the Palace from tomorrow.
Royal art on show
ART lovers will tomorrow be able to view more than 30 watercolours painted by Prince Charles.
The exhibition features landscapes of Balmoral and Deeside and images of Spain, Turkey, Egypt, Oman, Botswana and Hong Kong.
The Prince of Wales' Charity Trust will benefit from sales of a limited edition of four lithographs and of his book, HRH The Prince of Wales' Watercolours.
The show marks the reopening of the Palace of Holyroodhouse after the European Summit in December.
The exhibition moves to the Museum of Garden History in London next month.
Capital film fans get TV chance
WOULD-BE Barry Normans in Edinburgh are being given the chance to appear on a new movie review TV programme.
Channel 4 are looking for four Capital-based film fans between 18 and 25 to take part in an edition of Moviewatch.
Casting will take place at the Carlton Highland Hotel on Friday, March 5, and the successful applicants will appear on screen later in the year to take about the cinema.
Moviewatch will come from a different city or town every week, with the series covering the length and breadth of the UK and Northern Ireland.
Applicants should apply in person only at the Carlton Highland between 2.30pm and 8pm and ask for Mark Linnane in Training Room 329.
BARRY NORMAN: Host of popular TV programme.
Hopkins' day to be a knight
PALACE DATE: Queen honours Silence of the Lambs actor
SERIAL killer Hannibal the Cannibal — alias Sir Anthony Hopkins — was at large in the corridors of Buckingham Palace today.
Sir Anthony, who won an Oscar for his chilling portrayal of man-eating doctor Hannibal Lecter in the hit film Silence of the Lambs, was receiving his knighthood from the Queen.
Alongside him, picking up MBEs, were Olympic golden girl Sally Gunnell — who won the 400 metres hurdles at Barcelona — and swimmer Nick Gillingham, who shrugged off injury to take bronze in the 200 metres breaststroke final.
But attention was expected to centre on Sir Anthony, currently enjoying one of the best periods of his distinguished acting career.
A self-confessed alcoholic, equally at home on stage and screen, he is starring in two top box office films.
He plays an evil father in the Oscar-nominated British film Howards End and the vampire killer in Bram Stoker's Dracula, both currently on general release.
-PA.
OSCAR ROLE: Sir Anthony Hopkins, above, in his award-winning role as Hannibal Lecter in Silence of the Lambs and left, as himself.
Current release Howard's End, in which he plays an evil father, also has been nominated for an Oscar.
Today the actor was receiving his knighthood.
HONOURS: Receiving MBEs were Nick Gillingham and golden girl Sally Gunnell.
Corsie cruise
by Gordon Dunwoodie BOWLS REPORTER
EDINBURGH star Richard Corsie became the third Scot to reach the quarter-finals of the £140,000 Midland Bank world indoor championships yesterday, following in the wake of Graham Robertson and Jimmy McCann.
Prestwick-based David Gourlay led 6-4 in the opening set and lay the shot he needed to take the set before Corsie produced the shot that swung the match in his favour.
A brilliant last bowl removed two of Gourlay's woods from the head to give Corsie the three shots he needed to take the set 7-6.
‘It was an amazing first set and winning it gave me a big boost and seemed to have the opposite effect on David,’ said Corsie later.
Eight ends later, the 26-year-old Edinburgh postman had clinched victory by taking each of the next two sets on a 7-2 scoreline.
Irvine's Jim Muir bids to his fellow Scots when he lines up against Tony Allcock — twice a former world champion — later today.
‘I've played Tony five times now and he's just ahead leading by three wins to two.
I'm looking forward to the clash and certainly won't be overawed by it,’ said Muir.
Also through to the quarter-finals for the fifth successive year is England's Gary Smith who beat Jeff Rabkin 7-6 7-4 7-3.
In the only pairs match played yesterday, Australia's Cameron Curtis and Ian Schuback stormed back from two sets down to beat New Zealand's Peter Belliss and Gary Lawson 1-7 6-7 7-0 7-1 7-2.
Fair wares
TUNNELL TRUST CELEBRITY RECITAL
QUEENS HALL, EDINBURGH
WHEN Raymond Leppard, prone to roar ‘no Max Bruch!’ at those whose Baroque style he regarded as over fulsome, withdrew from Tuesday's Tunnell Trust concert, the shrewdest move, perhaps, might have been to change the programme.
The Brindisi String Quartet, left to shoulder a hefty shoal of 18th century outpourings, are excellent players — but this is not their speciality, and it was unfair that through Vivaldi, Albinoni, Marcello and Bach, they should have had to bow.
For graciously though they shaped much of the music, the sounds were too lusty, too robust — and ultimately, much of the individual composers' character was lost.
Direction, one felt, was needed, and up to a point, with soloists Neil Black and William Bennett, it did make some impact.
Black's Marcello, the D minor Oboe concerto, had tremendous dignity, long tenderly ornamented lines floating over the string sound.
William Bennett, too, seemed to charge the ensemble with a fierce voltage — the B minor Bach suite's dances emerged all heels, pointed toes, and powerful, deliberate curves, and the Vivaldi G major concerto seemed to pour from an instrument more mighty than the fragile flute.
But, delightful though it was to see Wendy Tunnell herself join the quartet and harpsichordist Clifford Benson for Albinoni's A major Sonata a Cinque, the string pieces worked less well, as though the timbres of such distinguished winds prompted over projection — and the Brindisis, of all musicianly young ensembles, have no need to oversell their wares.
Mary Miller
Scary price of stardom
HOW sad that one of the perils of stardom is the kind of fans you attract.
In much the same way you can choose your friends but not your relatives, famous people are pestered by devotees gripped in varying degrees of obsession; ranging from the mildly brain-damaged to psychopaths of the most dangerous order.
For example, some really hard cases write adoring letters to Judith Chalmers and should obviously be banged up in solitary confinement without a moment's delay.
Whatever you do however, don't spare a moment's sympathy for loathsome Mick Jagger.
This week, the ageing lothario was horrified when a cloth-capped pensioner pursued him down a street, wreathed in smiles and waving an autograph book, The Rolling Stone coldly ignored him, appalled at being associated with a gummy grandad and perhaps being all too forcibly reminded of his own advancing years.
Had the plea come from a budding starlet or perhaps an Italian supermodel, Jagger would have tripped over his lips in an effort to scrawl his name — and perhaps his phone number — in her book for posterity.
Fans? you can't live with them, you can't shoot them, On the contrary, they have an alarming habit of shooting the objects of their obsessions.
The ultimate obsessional tragedy, of course, was John Lennon dying at the hands of superfan Mark Chapman outside his New York apartment building.
He was signing an autograph for his killer at the time.
Don't try to tell me that life is fair.
Maybe not, but some Hollywood stars are forced to live in genuine fear of their lives, who could fail to give a shiver at the predicament of actress Sharon Gless — star of Cagney and Lacey — who was tormented for years by an obsessional lesbian fan.
After a barrage of love letters and phone calls, Gless was horrified to discover that the woman had been living under the floorboards of her house for at least six weeks.
She is now locked up in a mental institution — and only strength of character probably stopped the same fate from happening to Gless.
The list of loonies goes on.
Madonna was followed for three years by a 19-stone man who camped outside her New York flat and Julia Roberts was forced to employ an armed guard after a man began trying to visit her home.
It happens over here too.
Actress Helena Bonham Carter is the latest victim of obsession, she is asking a court to protect her from a fan who is making her life a misery.
She has given the High Court in London a map marking out an area of several hundred yards around her home from which she wants the man barred.
She also wants him to stop phoning her at home and for him to be banned from entering or trespassing on her property or on the actual road.
Bonham Carter said she had resorted to legal action as a last resort.
Her admirer had already been bound over to keep the peace after being arrested on her doorstep, and his unwelcome attentions had been going on for over six years.
I have every sympathy for her.
You don't have to be rich and famous to be pestered by lunatics.
Apart from all the weird letters I get from Scotsman readers, there are continuous phone calls to my house, maniacal voices who scream hoarsely about deadlines and copy.
I always hang up promptly and go out for a nice cup of coffee to cheer myself up.
However, on a more serious note, I do understand what it is like to have unwanted admirers.
For years, I, too, have been hounded by a strange man and am currently following Bonham Carter's example by marking out a map excluding him from my life.
The demarcation begins at Berwick and stretches almost all the way to John O'Groats.
The scary thing is that I hardly know him.
We met at lunch, once, and since then he has been bombarding my house with letters and phone calls.
I have become expert at avoiding him, but on the unlucky occasions when I am forced to talk to him, he foams at the mouth and talks gibberish.
Does anyone else have this problem with their bank manager?
Quite honestly, I think the whole species should be locked up, or banished to a penal colony in the South Seas where they could all shout at each other to their heart's content and charge each other £32.6O for writing a letter.
Such is the price of fame, as Madonna, Julia, Sharon, Helen and I have found to our cost.
Still, I've accepted advice from my film star chums, who are more used to this than I am, I now have my mail and phone calls intercepted.
That should stop him.
Opera purified, but not diminished
IMPRESSIONS OF PELLEAS
TRAMWAY, GLASGOW
YEARS ago, Peter Brook held up Debussy's Pelleas et Melisande as an example of an opera that could be condensed without being harmed.
He noted that despite the fact that its glory lay mainly in the nature of the orchestral score ‘one could start afresh with a version for piano and still do a Pelleas of great vitality’.
That is precisely what he has done, though ‘vitality’ is a curious word to apply to something as still and emotionally stifling.
When The Scotsman's music critic reviewed this production in Paris she was overwhelmed by its beauty, but others have taken the view that two pianos, no matter how superbly played, can never be as effective as a great orchestra.
But it is extraordinary how one of those pianos prominently placed on stage almost becomes part of the action.
At first the family gathers round it and at the end, as the actors steal away into the darkness, it is the piano which makes the final sounds.
As it happens there is one sound in this production more dramatic than any of the music — and that is the sound of a knife being tossed into a pool of water after it has been plunged into the heart of Pelleas.
Water features on stage in most of Brook's productions but I can't remember it ever being used to more powerful effect.
Little remains to be said or sung after that — except for the brief but exquisite requiem with which Arkel brings the opera to an end.
Discouraged and exhausted by all the struggles of orthodox opera production, Brook abandoned the opera house circuit a long time ago but first with Carmen and now Pelleas he has reached into the heart of operas, purifying without diminishing them.
This is not a pocket edition of Pelleas, a cut-price version for touring, but rather does it reveal the passion and the pity in the music.
In a programme note, Brook points out that Debussy told the cast at their first rehearsal ‘forget that you're singers’.
But fortunately his own cast has not taken such advice and under the musical direction of Marius Constant the singers soar above the lugubrious libretto based on Maeterlinck's play.
Written 100 years ago it is performed here in the costumes of that period.
Last night the leading roles were sung by Jean-Francois Lapointe, Jungwon Park, Vincent le Texier and Roger Soyer and the pianists were Vincent Leterne and Jeff Cohen.
Two other casts will be heard this week.
This is the fourth Peter Brook production to be staged in the Tramway and like its predecessors was received in a hushed silence followed by rapturous applause.
Glasgow has developed a very fruitful relationship with one of the world's most gifted directors.
Works of art
Had any ancestor of mine been minded to donate works of art to a national institution, he would have chosen a museum or art gallery and assuredly not a university.
Edinburgh's Chambers Street has quite enough museum provision already, and the primary responsibility of Edinburgh University's Court is the administration of its educational facility.
To the extent that the execution of this function may now be inhibited by financial constraints, it is the clear duty of the court to seek redress by whatever method is least likely to reduce the standard and breadth of education.
By running a £5 million overdraft, the court could in a way be construed as borrowing money to invest in works of art.
As a stockbroker, I discourage clients from borrowing money to buy shares and there is an oblique parallel here.
If the incumbents of high office on opposite sides of the city's Royal Mile succeed in blocking the proposed art sales, they will place themselves under an obligation to produce an alternative solution to the financial crisis.
Or do Cain and Abel and The Banks of a River make a greater contribution to the provision of education in Edinburgh than, say, the Chair of Scottish History?
Censorship
In his article today, headed ‘Foul language’(Lifestyle), Brian Pendreigh raises an issue of crucial importance in our society: the desire of some individuals to censor the publication of political opinions with which they disagree.
Some years ago, I was censured following a public reading of a play I had written because of the behaviour of a female character in it.
Her language and conduct in the play were taken to be an indication that the author was obviously ‘a male chauvinist pig’, whatever that may mean.
When I protested that the play was based on a folk fairy tale, and that such stories are not concerned with projecting politically approved attitudes, I was not understood.
This is a highly dangerous trend, because there is no telling where it will end.
It is only a short way from this position to punishment of artists whose views are seen as heretical, a tendency which led in medieval times to burnings at the stake and, more  recently , to the horrors of the Maoist ‘cultural revolution’.
Already, stories for children about Little Black Sambo are no longer available.
Billy Bunter is suspect and Baa Baa Black Sheep is taboo material in some London boroughs.
It is paradoxical that this kind of censorship is really based on the belief that to be black or disadvantaged is something to be ashamed of, so that any references to such conditions have to be suppressed.
It is disturbing to learn that books for children's libraries in Edinburgh are selected on the political basis that the stories ‘reflect the multi-cultural nature of society’.
If the state of affairs in Bosnia reflects the nature of a multi-cultural society, this policy is open to question.
A yarn with sect aplenty
SOMETIMES you find the footnotes in a history book rather more interesting than the heavy stuff upstairs.
The footnotes tell you what happened to people, rather than to nations or governments or monarchs.
With Mr Wroe's Virgins (BBC2 last night), a footnote developed into an acclaimed novel by Jane Rogers is now a four-part television drama, with the author writing the screenplay.
A good footnote can go a long way.
For latent but (as yet) sexless sexuality, the story of John Wroe is hard to better.
Anything with ‘virgin’ in the title hints at being a sexy yarn, illogically enough.
He was (fact) the charismatic leader of a Lancashire sect called the Church of the Christian Israelites, active in Ashton-under-Lyne, Lancashire, in the mid-19th century.
So we're dealing with the shade of a real, evangelistic geezer.
And because the story is interesting, in a disgraceful sort of way, you start asking questions about the squidgy marshland between fact and fiction.
We assume that the writer has used the basic historical framework for her story — Wroe's demand that his flock should provide his household with seven virgins (female, although this was not specified) for his ‘comfort and succour’: and that not terribly long afterwards, he was put on trial by his church for alleged naughtiness with two of them.
We assume the flock supplied a majority of largely unmarriageable daughters (basically cruel times, those).
But from that point onwards we are lost.
Were the characters of these seven young ladies exactly as shown by the writer or have they been…massaged slightly for novelistic and televisual variety?
So long as we don't confuse faction with history, perhaps we shouldn't agonise too much over such matters.
For this piece with the sunken-eyed Jonathan Pryce as Wroe is well-acted and well-directed, with a script that is intelligently underwritten (if that's the right word), not suffering from the frequent histo-drama fault of over-embellishment.
In our cynical era, we might not be so easily bamboozled by ‘the prophet's’ assertion that God, who is presumably on permanent nightshift, speaks to him in his sleep and has commanded the supply of seven frails.
From that point onwards, it is hard even to hope that Mr Wroe gets off with a ‘not proven’.
But the four episodes are being written from the point of view of separate virgins, so maybe we have a lot to learn.
The first, the tough nut Leah (excellently executed by Minnie Driver) is a virgin with a phenomenal sex drive.
I like the attention to period detail.
They seem to be using repro-antique furniture: and remember that an 1850 sideboard looked like a repro in 1850.
I love the out-of-control beards of the elders like ‘Moses’.
But how difficult is it to tell basically the same story four times?
Like the Christian Israelites, I will retire to consider my verdict.
Arts grants
It is with a sense of shock and disbelief that I studied the details that the Scottish Arts Council has released concerning its distribution of funds for 1993/94 (reported, 16 February).
As someone who enjoys all forms of the arts, I should like to know what reasoning was entered into before the distribution of grants was made?
I note that the biggest single beneficiary is Scottish Opera with a 2.3 per cent increase for the coming year; likewise, Scottish Ballet attracts the same increase.
Now these companies have large grants already and a 2.3 per cent increase is a very large sum of money compared with, for example, a small theatre whose grant is half this increase and whose subsidy has been frozen for 1993/94.
This, to me, smacks very much of elitism.
Some of the larger theatres have had their grants increased too.
The Royal Lyceum in Edinburgh, I believe, had a recent £200,000 deficit, but has been awarded a larger grant.
This makes a mockery of one of the aims demonstrated by Seona Reid, director of the Scottish Arts Council for the development of the arts in Scotland, when she says that quality was to be rewarded wherever found.
Smaller theatres striving to balance budgets and improve quality in marketing and production, etc will now have greater difficulty than before because their grants have been frozen for another year.
Let us not forget also that some of these theatres have afforded splendid opportunities to new Scottish plays and playwrights, and with other agencies have striven to promote the life and culture of Scotland.
We must sustain the infrastructure of the arts in this time of recession by spreading the funds available to all forms of the arts and not to a select few with a special clout.
ANTIGONE 7:84
THE TRON, GLASGOW
THE timeless fascination of Sophocles's Antigone has many explanations, not least in its ability to present in dramatic form many of the most delicate, painful questions concerning government and politics, and with the uncertain ability of human beings to co-exist in society.
Some have seen in the clash between Antigone and Creon a parable of the demands of individual conscience against social imperatives, others in the encounter between Ismene and her sister a dramatisation of the need to temper conviction lest it degenerate into fanaticism.
Others again have taken as the play's essence the need to reconcile not truth and falsehood but competing truths.
Regrettably, neither these nor any other conflicts emerge with any conviction from 7:84's dull and disappointing production.
It is hard to know exactly what the company were aiming at or were attempting to say, but after a couple of scenes the audience found itself tussling with one question only.
What on earth is to be done to stop these unpleasant, bad-tempered people shouting and snarling so much?
As Creon, Alexander West, after a blustering, bellowing, finger-pointing performance, had the veins standing out so prominently on his forehead that we feared the explosion of blood.
This unbalanced, choleric individual is a mad dog who should be shot and not given command of a kingdom.
Antigone (Pauline Knowles) curled her lips and spat out her words as though they caused her to think, and when she faced Ismene (Daniela Nardini) for their crucial, opening encounter the pouting, petulant meeting between the two had the tone of a stairheid brawl rather than an exchange between thinking beings.
There are other ways of expressing pain and feeling, but the tentative, half-hearted approach which characterised the whole production was perfectly illustrated when, after the catastrophe, the books arranged around the playing area were scattered and the tall bookcases overturned.
Presumably this act was meant to signify the unleashing of chaos, except that instead of being summarily tossed to the ground, the bookcase was lowered as gently as delicately as if it were a fragile ceramic from antiquity.
Joseph Farrell
A way in through the stage door
ACTORS Russell Hunter and Una Maclean raise the curtain on an open day at two of Edinburgh's theatres this Saturday, the Royal Lyceum and the Traverse.
It is an opportunity to meet actors and find out what goes on behind the scenes with backstage tours, costume and make-up workshops, play-readings, and activities for children.
On from 11am-5pm, the event is free.
Regal setting to hear Carreras
JOSE Carreras and Montserrat Caballe are to star at a new summer classical music festival at Hampton Court Palace.
A 2,500-seat auditorium with stage space for a 60-piece orchestra is being built within the palace courtyards for the 10-day festival in June.
Carreras appears on June 18 at a £65 a head concert attended by the Duchess of Gloucester, and Caballe will give a £35 a head concert two days earlier.
Golden oldies giving out good vibrations
GOOD ROCKIN' TONITE!
KING'S THEATRE, EDINBURGH
YOU'VE been tuning into Lipstick on Your Collar, collecting the K-Tel classics of the Fifties and Sixties, and loved the musical Buddy.
Now you can enjoy the latest nostalgia blitz, Jack Good's storming rock ‘n’ roll trip through the late Fifties and early Sixties.
No quiffed greaser icon is left unturned as a succession of characters — from Bill Haley to Eddie Cochrane, Gene Vincent to the Beach Boys — is paraded.
The storyline, which is really a thinly disguised device for ‘rock, rock and more rock’, depicts writer-director Jack Good's rise from wannabee serious actor to successful producer of the BBC TV teenage magazine Six Five Special in 1957, and successive rock programmes.
In its conception the show has glaring problems.
The central character, the archetypal Englishman Jack Good, comes across as little more than a pantomime figure.
Yet, the musical execution is slick and the production bursting with energy.
The vocalists are without exception strong, some sounding very close to the stars they are imitating, and the band is tight.
As long as they kept on churning out those classics the packed house followed the example set by the 40-plusers in the front row, whooping, clapping, and dancing in the aisles.
Continues until tomorrow.
Robert Alstead
No longer cast aside
Ex-prisoners are given a new lease on life by an unusual theatre group, says Sue Wilson
THE closed world of special hospitals has been exposed to unusual public scrutiny since last year's outcry over conditions at Ashworth, Merseyside.
The experience of women confined to ‘specials’, often for years, is the subject of a new play, Head-Rot Holiday, on this week at the Traverse in Edinburgh.
Written by Sarah Daniels, it is being performed by Clean Break, a theatre company mounting professional productions performed by women who have been through the criminal justice system, including ex-prisoners, ex-probationers and those committed at some time to secure observation and psychiatric units.
Head-Rot Holiday, written after detailed research including interviews with with patients, nurses and psychiatrists, explores issues such as the differing criteria applied to men and women for ‘abnormal’ behaviour.
It is a fairly typical project for Clean Break, whose productions always address issues specific to women's imprisonment and are based on real-life accounts.
Founded in 1979 by two women in Askham Grange prison, Clean Break has grown into an organisation which, in addition to producing high-quality touring shows commissioned from leading playwrights, also operates an extensive theatre training programme for women ex-offenders.
This offers the opportunity to develop a range of practical and social skills, as well as giving some a leg-up into an acting career — five Equity cards were awarded within the company last year.
‘The first and most basic thing we offer people is an opportunity to be creative, to explore their imaginative and creative talents which in prison, obviously, are largely stifled,’ explains Alex Ford, Clean Break's director.
‘We also place great emphasis on the confidence-building which comes through theatre and things like self-presentation, teamwork, personal responsibility, working to dead-lines — we've seen some fairly amazing changes in many of the women we've worked with.
What we try to do is help them to stop being victims.’
Such an approach is not only humane and constructive, Ford argues, it is also cost-effective.
‘We give very good value for money,’ she says.
‘About two years ago I worked out that it cost about £1,000 a week to keep a woman in prison.
We work with about 60 women a year, and I know many of them would genuinely say that at the start they were unemployable, that they could have gone back to drugs, ended up back in prison, but they didn't because Clean Break was there at the right time for them, to give them the opportunities they needed.
We get some of our funding from the Home Office, but we certainly don't cost them £1,000 a week — nowhere near.’
Clean Break's work invites comparisons with Jeremy Weller's Grassmarket Project, particularly given the broad similarity between the subject matter of their current show and Weller's last Edinburgh production, Mad.
Questions have been raised by some people as to the theatrical validity and ethics of Weller's methods — putting people on stage to recreate their own real-life experiences.
Do such points — exploitation in particular— arise for Clean Break?
‘I'M very suspicious of people who take other people's lives and make them into what they call theatre,’ Ford says.
‘I don't think it is theatre, and I also think that potentially it's extremely destructive to the individuals involved, though you can argue that it's their choice.
When we're researching our shows we explain the whole process very carefully to each woman who agrees to be interviewed; they get paid for talking to us, they give feedback at all stages of the writing process — it's very much done as a contract.
We also always try to involve a related organisation — this year we're working with WISH, Women In Special Hospitals — who can give us insight into the difficulties the women might have in talking about their experiences.
Then all that is made into a play, performed by actors, which I think establishes a sufficient distance.’
Story of a post-war requiem
Kenny Mathieson meets Matthias Bamert preparing to conduct the RSNO in the Scottish premiere of a little-known work
THE Scottish premiere of a new work is no unusual event but it adds an extra air of intrigue when the piece is less than freshly minted.
That is what conductor Matthias Bamert has in store for the audience tonight when he leads the Royal Scottish National Orchestra in Paul Hindemith's When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd.
The work, a large-scale choral requiem with the subtitle ‘Requiem for those we love’, dates from 1946 and was first performed by the man who commissioned it, Robert Shaw, in Atlanta that year.
Ironically, Shaw is a former colleague of Bamert's in Cleveland, but he was not aware of Shaw's connection with the piece at that time.
Hindemith fled Nazi Germany in 1938, and settled in America in 1940.
This will be the first time Bamert has conducted the work —‘the RSNO think I suggested it, and I think they did’— exactly ten years to the month since he made his debut with the then Scottish National Orchestra.
He has had a solid connection with the orchestra and the Scottish music scene ever since, and has been responsible for bringing some unusual works to the concert platform in the past.
This massive requiem sets Walt Whitman's great, wordy poem When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd to a sensuous orchestral accompaniment —‘Hindemith can be a little dry, but not in this work’— with solo roles for the dark-timbre voices of mezzo soprano Ameral Gunson and bass David Wilson-Johnson.
It is a multi-layered work, setting a poem written to commemorate the death of Abraham Lincoln, but dedicated equally to all the dead of the American Civil War and written in the immediate aftermath of the death of Franklin D Roosevelt and the end of the Second World War.
‘You must think what that means to a German composer who has just become an American citizen in the aftermath of the war,’ Bamert says.
‘It is a very complicated work, and the singers have a great deal of text to cope with, without the benefit of the usual repetitions you would find in a conventional requiem.
I see the piece very much as a seamless, flowing whole, with very little division between its 11 sections.’
Although emotionally loaded, the work does not have, as Bamert acknowledges, the direct appeal of earlier requiems, which may be one of the reasons it is seldom heard.
The difficulties involved in learning it may also discourage the largely amateur choirs which accompany professional orchestras from adding it to their repertoire.
If it requires a little effort from the listener, then, it is an ultimately rewarding experience, tightly and skilfully constructed, and containing passages of great beauty and spirit.
Bamert, of course, is known as something of a champion of 20th century music in any case, arguing that if we choose to play only the great works of an increasingly distant past, then we ‘turn the concert hall into a museum, and ignore the fact that music is a living tradition’.
As director of the Lucerne Festival, and principal conductor of the London Mozart Players, as well as a regular guest conductor with orchestras all over the world, he is well placed to promote the cause.
He has words of praise for the RSNO Chorus, which he says has ‘sounded better than I remember in a long time’ in the initial rehearsals of a work new to all concerned.
Follow the leader: Bamert sees the requiem, setting for a poem by Walt Whitman, as complicated but seamless
Stand-up comedy
THE comedian Johnny Beattie was slightly perplexed at the recent annual dinner of the Benevolent Society of the Licensed Trade in Scotland.
While acknowledging the murky depths of the recession in Scotland, he asked his audience of publicans and drink suppliers: ‘Why are all you guys so glum-faced about the state of the economy?
After all, the present recession must be driving people to drink.’
Things are so bad in Glasgow, he added, traders are now  putting up signs saying ‘Pre-Fire Sale’.
New artistic blood
AMONG the bizarre exhibits at the Young British Artists II exhibition, currently causing controversy at London's Saatchi Gallery, is ‘blood head’ by a 29-year-old sculptor, Marc Quinn.
The portrait bust of the artist himself is made out of eight pints of Quinn's own blood, frozen for the occasion in a specially constructed vacuum chamber.
Now an Edinburgh College of Art student, Alison Hall, 21, has contacted The Scotsman's arts desk asking for help with her own conceptual work.
Alison's plan is to get 1,000 letters, make them up into parcels, cover them in wax, and then exhibit the resulting installation at the college's degree show.
Note that not any old ‘junk’ letter will do, but only personal letters addressed to School of Drawing and Painting, Edinburgh College of Art, Lauriston Place, Edinburgh EH3 9DF.
So here is your chance to get involved in a real-live ‘happening’.
Tomorrow the world
OXFORD Street was possibly sealed up yesterday.
No, not the usual boring bomb scare, but a cultural occasion of enormous significance.
Richard Demarco, ‘the well-known artist, patron and impresario’, was due to deliver his inaugural press conference as Kingston University's Professor of European Cultural Studies in a nearby hotel.
Prof Demarco (as we all must get used to calling him) outlined ‘Kingston University's participation in: the Atlanta Cultural Olympiad, the Budapest Spring Festival, the European Youth Parliament, the Venice Biennale, the Aberdeen International Youth Festival, the Edinburgh Festival and the Tate Gallery, Liverpool, the Beuys International Conference’…and, no doubt, Tomorrow the World!
Don't laugh.
Kingston University is headquartered at the sinisterly-named ‘Millennium House’.
Just what the doctor ordered
Dr Finlay, the popular Sixties television series, makes a comeback next week.
But there have been many changes, as Fordyce Maxwell overheard
'JANET!
Janet!
Have you seen what they've done to Tannochbrae?’
‘Yes, Dr Cameron.
I thought it was quite an improvement.’
‘But Janet — have you seen the new Dr Finlay?
He doesn't look like the first one at all.’
‘He's had a long, hard war, Dr Cameron.’
‘Haven't we all.
He's going bald, Janet.
And very nearly an English accent.’
‘There, now, Dr Cameron, I'm sure those nice people at Scottish Television know just what they're doing.
We've moved on a long way from the original version.’
‘But Janet — Dr Finlay's not an easy man to deal with at all.
He's only back from the war two minutes and he's put the Medical Officer of Health's nose out of joint.
Not to mention the bank manager's.’
‘Well, Dr Finlay was always one to speak as he found, Dr Cameron, as you well know.’
‘But Janet — the bank manager, when our finances are not what they might be?’
‘You're not what you might be yourself, Dr Cameron.
You're a little out of sorts?
Are you unhappy with the way you're portrayed by Mr Ian Bannen?’
‘Not at all, Janet, not at all .
A capital choice.
Capital.
A scene stealer every time.
But what about yourself, Janet?’
‘Annette Crosbie's a gem, Dr Cameron.
A gem.
A little more lilt in ‘Arden House’ when she answer's the phone, but otherwise just right.’
‘But Janet — the chemist?’
‘Miss Crosbie and the chemist have an understanding, Dr Cameron.
Just an understanding.
And quite so, too.
A fine woman like that.’
‘I have grave doubts that Barbara Mullen would ever have had an understanding, Janet.
With anyone.
Least of all the chemist.’
‘Well, well, who knows, Dr Cameron?
I hardly think it will lead to anything in six one-hour episodes.’
‘Not like our district nurse, Miss Maitland, eh, Janet?
A sad blow for David Rintoul's Dr Finlay, her taking up with that American army sergeant.
Not a thing for a man to come back to, Janet.’
‘You mean her telling him the way she did?’
‘Aye, Janet.
That meeting on the moors.
The walk towards each other.
Too much like Heathcliff and whatever her name was in Wuthering Heights.
The weakest part in the whole episode.
A pity Janet, a pity.’
‘Maybe, Dr Cameron, maybe.
But don't make a fuss over a little thing like that.
Everything else was just fine.
Just fine.’
‘But Janet — they've changed everything.
The last setting was 1931 and now it's 1946.’
‘And very careful they've been too about period detail, Dr Cameron.’
‘Yes, yes, Janet.
Quite so.
But Tannochbrae was Callander and now it's Auchtermuchty.
Auchtermuchty, Janet!’
‘Callander, Dr Cameron!
Would you go back to Callander now?’
‘You have a point, Janet.
You have a point.
But we have David Rintoul instead of Bill Simpson.
Ian Bannen instead of Andrew Cruickshank.
Annette Crosbie instead of Barbara Mullen.
No Doctor Snoddy.
In comes this young Doctor Neil.’
‘A very good reason for those changes, Dr Cameron — the originals are all dead.’
‘Quite so, Janet.
Forgetful of me.
I'm not feeling too well myself.
And they're going to nationalise the health service.
O tempora!
O mores!
Janet.’
‘Quite so, Dr Cameron.
And you've forgotten the biggest change of all — it's STV, not BBC.’
‘They've made an excellent job of it, Janet.’
‘For three and a half million pounds, so they should, Dr Cameron.’
‘Aye, Janet.
What would we do without you?’
What's up doc?
In the modern version of AJ Cronin's tale, David Rintoul plays Dr Finlay