

Children to enjoy high life while mother climbs Everest
Tom Morton meets a family looking forward to the adventure of a lifetime
THE HIGHEST creche in history will be established next year in the Himalayas.
Kate and Tom Ballard will be four and six respectively by the time their mother, Alison Hargreaves, attempts to become the first British woman to ascend Everest; by next August they should be used to life in the British Mount Everest Medical Expedition base camp.
Yesterday, Alison, her husband Jim, Kate, Tom, and other members of the first UK medical expedition to the world's highest mountain, gathered near the Nevis Range chairlift, on Aonach Mor, near Fort William.
An imitation Everest base camp had been pitched there for the benefit of press, potential sponsors and team members in need of some high-altitude practice.
The aim of the expedition, as the research co-ordinator, Dr Andy Pollard, stressed, was not to climb Everest ‘because it is there’.
Extensive experiments relating to the effects of altitude on health will be carried out, with possible benefits to sea-level sufferers from asthma and bronchitis.
Another effect of long-term altitude exposure is reduced intelligence, although Dr Pollard pointed out that any such differences would be neither noticeable nor measurable.
Ms Hargreaves, 32, from Derbyshire, will be at the sharp end of the project.
As well as being the first UK woman to climb the mountain she intends to be the first female ever to make the ascent without oxygen.
‘I've been climbing ever since I was a child, and I suppose Everest has always been a dream for me,’ she said.
‘To do the climb without oxygen, to prove it can be done, is a real challenge.’
Having the children with her at the Everest base camp on the Western Cwm ice fall would not be a problem, as dad was coming too to look after them.
For the next 20 months the entire family will be living mostly under canvas during altitude acclimatisation in the Alps and in Canada.
‘By the time this is over, Tom will have missed a year of school, and I wouldn't like that to happen again, so this will probably be the last lengthy expedition we go on.
It's difficult to know what the kids think of all of it — they're really too young to say.
For them a week in a tent is the same as six weeks.’
The children would be taken straight off Everest at the first sign of any altitude sickness or ill effects, Ms Hargreaves stressed.
Asked if she would abandon her attempt if they became ill she replied that she could not say in advance, and pointed out that there would be eight doctors, including one paediatric specialist, immediately to hand.
The expedition administrator, Mark Hoyle, was yesterday encouraging potential sponsors to come forward.
‘We reckon this will cost about £250,000 in total,’ he said.
‘We urgently need one main corporate sponsor — but we'll take anything anyone wants to give that might be useful.’
Novel approaches to funding will include photographs taken of products, company flags or banners, on top of Mount Everest for ‘a price to be negotiated, probably in the hundreds of pounds’.
The legendary Scottish mountaineer, Hamish McInnes, said he felt the work of the expedition was important, and could lead to possible breakthroughs in the treatment of mountain sickness.
There would be no funding from pharmaceutical companies, said Dr Hoyle, due to General Medical Council rules.
Ms Hargreaves admitted that one potentially lucrative source of sponsorship had dried up two days previously, when two-year-old Kate stepped out of nappies for the last time.
‘I'm sure the nappy manufacturers would have been interested,’ she said.
DONALD MACLEOD Summit meeting: Alison Hargreaves and Charles Hornsby reach the top of Aonach Mor during yesterday's practice
GLASGOW
Wallaces rally to set up clan seat
MEMBERS of the Wallace clan were out in force yesterday on Glasgow Green for a morning of traditional dance and music, to help raise funds to establish a new clan seat.
The Wallace Clan Trust for Scotland hopes to raise £1 million to purchase an area of land in the West of Scotland, to be used as a new clan seat.
A series of events have been planned for the weekend, culminating in a ceilidh tomorrow night.
The trust, which is a registered charity, was founded in 1986 by Seoras Wallace.
It has video and photography departments as well as various research sections.
The work carried out is in demand from film and television producers.
Storms hit Orkney treasures
ARCHAEOLOGISTS believe that priceless information about the past has been lost in the severe storms which battered Orkney earlier this year.
An assessment is under way of some of the most important coastal sites and already widespread damage has been found.
Julie Gibson, Historic Scotland's monuments officer for Orkney, said yesterday that many archaeological treasures had taken a ‘hammering’ from a combination of hurricane-force winds and the highest tides in living memory.
Of particular concern is the damage the storms caused to one-and-a-half miles of coastline on the island of Rousay.
Along this short stretch of the shore can be found archaeological sites dating from 3,000 BC through the Viking period to the Highland clearances of the last century.
Mrs Gibson described it as a living history book.
The area, known as the Westness Walk, is archaeologically of national importance.
It is also the island's main tourist attraction.
But the storms smashed away parts of the coastline, pushed back the shore by up to eight feet in places and hurled rocks and boulders on to some of the sites and the path walked by visitors.
The Westness Walk is now an arduous trek.
‘This shore took a hammering,’ Mrs Gibson said.
‘No site has totally disappeared, but great bites have been taken out of a selection of them.’
Among those damaged are the remains of two Viking nousts or boathouses.
Their discovery showed that Rousay had been an important centre of power for the Vikings.
Mrs Gibson estimated that a third of the site had been lost.
‘The boat nousts have been taken back by the sea about six or eight feet,’ she said, and stones had been piled on top of them.
‘Stones have also been piled on top of them making them far more difficult to see.’
The storms have also left the remains of a medieval church perched perilously close to the sea.
Huge buttresses built in the last century to protect St Mary's Church now stand on the edge of the shore.
‘It is very frustrating to see sites being literally eaten away,’ Mrs Gibson said.
‘All of them are vulnerable to coastal erosion and are being nibbled away by the sea.
‘This time, a far bigger bite was taken and even those which have been relatively stable for a number of years have been damaged.
‘We have lost a significant amount of information that could well have been valuable if money had become available in future to carry out further digs along the shore.
‘What is important now is to collect as much information as possible before the sites retreat still further — and before any are washed away in the next big storm.’
Scattered stone: Julie Gibson at the damaged 17th-century St Mary's Church on Rousay
Ramblers seeking legal right to roam
By Auslan Cramb Environment Correspondent
DEMANDS for a legal right of access to Scotland's countryside have been made by the Ramblers' Association, and by former senior officials of the Countryside Commission for Scotland.
The access group wants a new law by the end of the century which would enshrine the freedom to roam, providing no significant damage was done to land management or conservation.
In its response to a Scottish Natural Heritage (SNH) consultation paper, the RA has also proposed setting up a network of footpaths around local communities, and financial support to farmers and landowners — through reform of the Common Agricultural Policy — to help them provide better access to their land.
The recommendations are similar to comments from Roger Carr, former chairman of the Countryside Commission (which has since merged with the Nature Conservancy Council to form SNH), and John Foster, ex-director of the commission.
Mr Foster says the consultation document fails to acknowledge the tradition of free access to mountain and hill country.
He urges new procedures to protect rights of way and suggests that Scotland should follow in the footsteps of Swedish law, giving the public a general right of access over all uncultivated, unfenced land, subject to the protection of residential privacy and ‘reasonable management needs’.
In response to the SNH access paper, he adds: ‘While this might be opposed by some landowners and managers, it nevertheless offers an opportunity, as yet untried, for SNH and government to work out an acceptable scheme for appropriate legislation and test it publicly.’
Mr Carr has told SNH it is essential that a statutory, general right of access is established, subject to necessary safeguards.
‘At the moment, a great deal of local access is frustrated because there is no compulsion to provide for it.’
Dave Morris, the Ramblers' Scottish officer, said the Government had already accepted that it needed to look to Europe for future ideas for the countryside.
He added: ‘We welcome this approach.
New legislation, based on the experience of Norway, Sweden and other European countries, will ensure that opportunities for public enjoyment of the countryside are secure in Scotland.’
Housewife takes top curry title
TWO British housewives beat hundreds of professional cooks to pick up first and second prizes in the Indian Chef of the Year contest.
After the finals in Edinburgh yesterday, the new champion, Lali Nayar, 45, said: ‘In the end, it boils down to home cooking.’
Mrs Nayar, from Newcastle-under-Lyme, Staffordshire, won with a menu that included pan-fried chicken seasoned with coriander, green chilli, chilli sauce, ginger, garlic and yoghurt.
Second was Mrs Nirmala Reddy, 39, of Balerno, Edinburgh.
The competition was staged by the Edinburgh restaurateur Tommy Miah.
Star turn: housewife Lali Nayar puts the finishing touches on her championship-winning entry — just ‘plain home cooking’
An enthusiast who enhanced the lives of others
David Gilmour pays affectionate tribute to his grandmother, Mary, Duchess of Buccleuch, who died on Wednesday, aged 92
WHEN my grandmother celebrated her 90th birthday at Drumlanrig Castle in the autumn of 1990, every one of her descendants was present.
Her three children, her 15 grandchildren, her 23 great-grandchildren (as well as many in-laws) had all come, several from abroad, to honour a remarkable personality whose influence on our lives had been palpable and enduring.
In the Fifties and Sixties, when her descendants could still fit around the same table, we gathered for Christmas at Bowhill, near Selkirk.
It was exciting to travel up on the night train and to find Granny waiting beside the fire in the hall, as exhilarated by the festivities as any of her grandchildren.
She used to say that Christmas Eve was her favourite day of the year, and her enthusiasm added to the delight of anticipation.
Enthusiasm was one of her most prominent characteristics.
She never did anything half-heartedly.
An expedition to admire a view, a tour of one of her houses, a game of racing demon or canasta, were all undertaken with an almost passionate commitment.
She never tired of seeing a sunset or a flock of geese, and even in her nineties she still marvelled at the beauty of the sea or the quality of light in Dumfriesshire.
Holidays with her were thus a very full as well as a very rewarding experience.
Born in the last months of Queen Victoria's reign and brought up in the Edwardian era, she encouraged her grandchildren to spend their childhoods much as she and her contemporaries had done before the First World War.
Outdoor pursuits, especially walks, were promoted at all times, reading by oneself only when it was raining, and television not at all(although in old age she herself became a tireless watcher of ‘the News’).
After lunch, between the morning ride and the afternoon expedition, she read aloud and in the evenings she enjoyed playing cards and various acting and paper games.
She read the classic children's novels wonderfully well, so well indeed that books like The Scarlet Pimpernel were often a disappointment when re-read by us in private afterwards.
Among her large and varied number of friends were several of the most distinguished historians of our time.
She enjoyed their company, although she did not read their books as closely as they might have wished, for she had a strong and idiosyncratic sense of history, particularly of the Stuart period (like my grandfather, she was a descendant of Charles II, in her case from Nell Gwyn, in his from Lucy Walter).
As she increasingly became a historical figure herself, people found her a fascinating source of history for the inter-war period.
So fine was her memory and so good were her stories about everyone from Mrs Simpson (‘so angular, all elbows and knees’) to Stanley Baldwin (‘a terrible old humbug about the countryside’) that it was a great pity she refused to write her memoirs.
She was a splendid mimic and story-teller and loved to imitate Winston Churchill.
In 1938, she asked him where Neville Chamberlain should stand to deliver a speech on her lawn the following week, and she captured Churchill's tone perfectly as she recalled his advice: ‘With the shun in hish eyes and the wind in hish teeth.’
As with other strong personalities, people were seldom neutral about her.
Most were attracted by her intoxicating combination of beauty, wit and charm, but others were cowed.
She had little time for the slow-witted and the unenthusiastic, and just as she exaggerated the talents of those she loved, she tended to magnify the defects of those she disliked.
Yet her intolerance was attenuated by a fundamental and rather unexpected liberalism.
My second brother and I, self-conscious teenagers of the Sixties, were sometimes embarrassed when she wound down the window of her car and addressed a shepherd or a forester in her clear, carrying, Edwardian accent.
We should not have been, for she was deeply loved throughout the Buccleuch estates.
She visited everyone, knew all the children and the dogs, and sympathised with illnesses and other problems.
I did not fully appreciate the extent of their regard until her declining years when the numerous and persistent inquiries about her health, the genuine regrets, the reminiscences of old times, revealed the strength of feeling and loyalty.
They realised, as all her friends and relations also realised, that she was an inspirer, a life-enhancer, a vital and radiating influence.
‘End of an era’ is a phrase too often used to lament a death, but in her case it is appropriate.
Our lives will be less colourful, as well as sadder, without her.
Prof George Montgomery: pathologist
PROFESSOR George Lightbody Montgomery, emeritus professor of pathology in the University of Edinburgh, died in Edinburgh on 5 February, aged 87.
Sir Alastair Currie writes: George Montgomery was nationally and internationally respected for his distinguished contributions to pathology and medicine.
He was professor of pathology in Edinburgh and pathologist to the Royal Infirmary (1954-71) and previously St Mungo (Notman) professor of pathology in the University of Glasgow and pathologist to Glasgow Royal Infirmary (1984-54).
Born in Glasgow, he was educated at Hillhead High School and Glasgow University where he graduated in medicine in 1928.
After a short time as assistant pathologist at Glasgow Royal, he was appointed lecturer in clinical pathology in the University of St Andrews in 1931.
He graduated PhD in 1937 and returned to Glasgow as Gardiner lecturer in pathology of diseases of infancy and childhood and pathologist to the Royal Hospital for Sick Children.
Throughout the war, he served with the Royal Army Medical Corps and his appointments included Deputy Director of Pathology in the Central Mediterranean Force and later DDP in South-East Asia.
He had a distinguished war record and on demobilisation in 1945 he became an honorary colonel, Army Medical Service.
In 1948, he was appointed to the St Mungo (Notman) chair of pathology in the University of Glasgow and consultant pathologist to Glasgow Royal Infirmary, where he spent six happy and productive years — at a critical time for the NHS — before accepting the invitation to the chair of pathology in Edinburgh.
Prof Montgomery graduated MD with honours in 1946 and was a Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Glasgow, the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh and the Royal College of Pathologists.
George Montgomery made significant research contributions, especially to cardiovascular pathology.
He was a very popular teacher and a highly respected head of department, who was always ready to support, guide and encourage his staff — he was not a ‘dictator’, he was a good ‘chief’.
In his early years in Edinburgh, he spent much time in reorganising and rationalising the pathology service in the Royal Infirmary and associated hospitals and he laid a sure foundation of academic pathology in the Medical School.
Many of his junior colleagues in Glasgow and Edinburgh subsequently filled senior academic and hospital posts in this country and overseas and he is remembered by them with much gratitude and affection.
Since he had outstanding gifts of tact and diplomacy and great skill as an administrator — and a delightful pawky sense of humour — he had many tasks added to his departmental load, including: chairman of the Scottish Health Services Council (1954-59), Dean of the Faculty of Medicine in Edinburgh (1955-57), chairman of the Edinburgh Postgraduate Board for Medicine (1966-71), and Curator of Patronage of the university.
He was vice-president of the Royal College of Pathologists and of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and he served on many university and Health Service committees as chairman.
He was an influential figure in the founding of the Royal College of Pathologists and did much as secretary of the Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland to create and foster links with sister European societies, especially in Holland and Norway.
He was elected to honorary membership of the Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland and in 1960 he was made a Commander of the British Empire.
George Montgomery was a man of many fine personal qualities, who had wide and varied interests.
It was a great source of pleasure for him, an able and talented keyboard musician, to be a member of the Faculty of Music in Edinburgh.
He enjoyed gardening and hill-walking in the Pentlands and loved walking his ‘Westie’ round the block in the Grange, where he was a kenspeckle figure.
After retiring in 1971 he spent two very enjoyable years in an advisory position to the Faculty of Medicine at the University of Malaysia in Kuala Lumpur.
For a few years after his return to Edinburgh he prepared anatomical and pathological demonstrations in the Department of Anatomy, but latterly he withdrew from public affairs.
He is survived by his wife, Margaret Forbes, whom he married in 1933, and who contributed to much to his many spheres of activity, and by a son in Australia and a daughter.
Brian Inglis: broadcaster, author
GRANADA Television last night paid tribute to the veteran broadcaster Brian Inglis, former presenter of All Our Yesterdays, who died on Thursday, aged 76.
A spokesman said: ‘He was a much-respected and much-loved broadcaster.
‘His death concludes a very sad week for Granada, following as it does the deaths of Lord Bernstein and Bill Grundy.’
Brian Inglis died at his home in Hampstead, north London.
He presented the first edition of What the Papers Say for Granada in 1956, going on to present 160 programmes.
He was also the moving force behind the newsreel programme All Our Yesterdays for 14 years.
Mr Inglis edited the Spectator from 1959 to 1962 and was the author of many books on parapsychology, the paranormal and alternative medicine.
Brian Inglis: presented All Our Yesterdays
Scot leads in Nigeria
SCOTLAND's Gordon Manson added a 68 to his opening 65 to take a four-stroke lead after the second round of the Nigerian Open at the Ikoyi Golf Club in Lagos.
Manson is well placed to complete a Scottish double on the Safari Tour, Eyemouth's Craig Maltman having won last week's Kenya Open in Nairobi.
Maltman is not playing in Lagos, but Perth's Garry Harvey is also in the top ten at the halfway stage, though he had a disappointing 73 yesterday.
Richards faces ‘non-trier’ rap
TRAINER Gordon Richards and jockey Neale Doughty face the Jockey Club's disciplinary committee on Monday to see whether they are in breach of the rules governing ‘non-triers’.
The inquiry will investigate the improved form of Thistle Monarch at Carlisle on 26 November, compared with his running at Ayr 13 days earlier.
Making his seasonal debut at Ayr, Thistle Monarch drifted to 10-1 (from 7-1) and lost touch from the fourth flight, finishing seventh about 21 lengths behind the third, JP Morgan.
At Carlisle, Thistle Monarch was an easy winner and finished seven lengths ahead of JP Morgan.
— PA
Prosser is still out in front
WENTWORTH's Sally Prosser retained her eight-stroke overnight lead when she added a 71 to her opening 64 in the second round of the JAL Malaysia Open at Rahman Putra in Kuala Lumpur yesterday.
With a nine-under-par total of 135, Prosser leads from Sweden's Maria Bertilskold.
Helen Wadsworth from Wales and an American, Lisa DePaulo, are one stroke further behind.
Cathy Panton-Lewis led the three Scots who all made the cut.
A 74 left her on 149, three strokes ahead of Gillian Stewart, while Julie Forbes, over her bout of flu, matched the former's 74 to finish on the qualifying mark of 155.
Prosser, now a clear favourite to complete a maiden victory as a professional, had a slight hiccup when she found sand to lose a shot at the short second before birdies at the third and sixth carried her to the turn in 35, one under.
Two more birdies coming home compensated for the bogeys she had at the fourteenth and sixteenth holes.
Last-hole birdie saves Seve
TROUBLED Spaniard Seve Ballesteros birdied his last hole to make the cut in the Hong Kong Open yesterday, but was still 12 shots behind the halfway leader, American Brian Watts.
European Ryder Cup player David Feherty made a charge on the lead with a six-under-par 65 for a 36-hole total of 137, five behind Watts, who had rounds of 63 and 69.
Canada's Ray Stewart was alone in second place on 136 while the defending champion, Tom Watson, was eight off the pace after a second-round 68.
‘There was a lot of pressure to make that birdie as I knew I was near the cut,’ said Ballesteros, who is battling to emerge from a spell of wretched form.
‘I played better today than yesterday which was a struggle.
The crowd were pulling for me to do well.’
Veteran Japanese player, Isao Aoki, originally penalised two strokes after the first round for grounding his club in a bunker, disqualified himself from the tournament before the second round.
The 50-year-old, winner of 61 tournaments worldwide, said that his interpretation of the rules was that he should have been disqualified for signing an incorrect score card.
‘We have found it was our error,’ said a tournament official.
‘Mr Aoki's offer to disqualify himself has been accepted.’
— Reuter 
Curtis Strange, seeking his first win in three years, finished birdie-birdie for a seven-under-par 65 and a one-stroke lead after the second round of the 90-hole Bob Hope Classic at La Quinta, California
FitzGerald launches new mission
By Isobel Cunningham
YORKSHIRE trainer Jimmy FitzGerald (right) continues his series of southern raids when he saddles Native Mission in today's Tote Gold Trophy Hurdle at Newbury.
These raids from FitzGerald's Malton yard were spearheaded by the novice chaser, Sybillin, in the £32,000 Victor Chandler Chase at Ascot on 16 January.
Stablemate Nijmegen nearly made it a double when beating all but the shock winner, Tomahawk, in the £22,500 Bic Lanzarote Hurdle at Kempton Park eight days later.
But, undaunted, FitzGerald was back on the right track again last Saturday sending Trainglot out to easily win the £20,000 Tote Jackpot Hurdle at Sandown Park to add to the remarkable haul so far this year.
Native Mission was unlucky in Ireland a month ago when jockey Mark Dwyer allowed him to hit the front too soon in the Ladbroke Hurdle at Leopardstown and was only caught within strides of the winning post.
They won't make the same mistake today, although the Irish-based winner on that occasion, Glencloud, is again in today's field.
The same Irish track plays host tomorrow to the Hennessy Cognac Gold Cup and though there are no FitzGerald raiders this time, Yorkshire is again holding the ace hand with Jodami, second favourite for the next month's Cheltenham Gold Cup.
Jodami proved he is a top-class performer when winning the Newton Chase at Haydock last month, but this race is no walkover and although Martin Pipe's Chatam may not be the force he was when winning Britain's Hennessey Gold Cup equivalent at Newbury in 1991, he should never be totally written off.
The one to be really wary of in this valuable contest, however, is the Irish-trained Cahervillahow who won and then was subsequently disqualified from the Whitbread Gold Cup at Sandown two years ago and is an even more formidable opponent on his own side of the Irish Sea.
Jimmy FitzGerald: another southern raid at Newbury
Livingston poised for second place
LIVINGSTON can move into second place behind City of Edinburgh in the Scottish Women's League first division when they host Dundee at the Forum tomorrow in a repeat of last Sunday's Scottish Cup final, writes Sandy Sutherland.
The Taysiders gave a surprisingly good account of themselves at Meadowbank, but the champions will still be favourites to leapfrog RH Dunedin who are one point ahead, but have no game this weekend.
City of Edinburgh are the only unbeaten team in the division having already accounted for Livingston, who, in turn, exacted their revenge in the cup semi-final.
But they must beat Edinburgh Royals at home at the Jewel & Esk Valley College tomorrow to stay on top.
Glasgow City Brightsiders are the only one of the leading men's sides in action and they can overtake Edinburgh Burger Kings at the top of the men's first division if, as they should, they take care of the young Cumnock team at Cumnock Academy tomorrow.
Meanwhile, England retained the Dobbing Cup when they defeated Scotland 83-34 in the British Gas-sponsored under-17 schoolgirls international at Musselburgh Sports Centre yesterday.
The experienced England team led 46-18 at half-time.
Keegan keeps low profile
KEVIN Keegan (right) went into quarantine yesterday, but it was more than a niggling flu bug which persuaded him to lock himself away from his Newcastle players before the FA Cup fifth round tie at Blackburn.
Keegan is refusing to co-operate with the hype-merchants focusing on his reunion with Kenny Dalglish to the detriment of their managerial charges.
Kings of the Kop they once were — the two greatest players ever to wear Liverpool's No 7 shirt — but neither man can see the relevance of their past to today's game.
‘The boss has refused to appear on television's Football Focus because they are angling it as Dalglish v Keegan and, in reality, it's all about the 22 players,’ said Keegan's assistant Terry McDermott.
‘He wants to play his own part in it as low-key as possible and that's quite correct.’
Keegan's bout of flu will not keep him from Ewood Park (or spoil his 42nd birthday on Valentine's Day) when Newcastle will use north-east rivalry to combat Blackburn's expensive strength.
Sunderland's achievement in reaching the FA Cup final last year is motivating Newcastle, and McDermott said: ‘We are only three games from Wembley and there is no reason why we too can't go all the way.’
Both sides' form has dipped but Newcastle might just be the more resilient, with McDermott adding: ‘We are used to this — when you are a club the size of Newcastle and runaway leaders in the first division, every game is a pressure game.
Dalglish looks set to revert to a tried and trusted defensive formula after the 4-2 midweek defeat by Sheffield Wednesday in the Coca-Cola Cup semi-final first leg.
Veteran Republic of Ireland skipper Kevin Moran could replace Swedish international Patrik Andersson who struggled against Wednesday, while David May is in line to win back his right-back spot from Norwegian international Henning Berg.
Semi-final places assured
THREE teams on four wins out of five — Aberdeen, Stranraer and Lockerbie — are sure of places in tomorrow's semi-finals of the Bank of Scotland Scottish Women's Championship at Kirkcaldy, writes W H Kemp.
Jackie Lockhart's Aberdeen and Nancy Murdoch's Lockerbie won all three of their games yesterday.
In what some believed to be a dummy run of tomorrow's final, Jackie Lockhart's team beat Christine Cannon's Stranraer 8-7 in the third round.
BOXING
Jacobs gives up British title
GARY JACOBS, of Glasgow, the newly-crowned European welterweight champion, yesterday officially relinquished the British title to concentrate his efforts on a planned world challenge early this summer.
Nicky Piper, of Wales, re-launches his world title campaign at Manchester's Free Trade Hall tonight when he meets Argentina's Miguel Maldonado.
MOTORSPORT
McRae in second place
SCOTLAND's Colin McRae made an excellent start to the Swedish Rally yesterday, slotting into second place behind Didier Auriol.
The Frenchman, in a Toyota, led McRae's Subaru by a mere six seconds after five stages.
Plans to turn the site of a former explosives factory at Annan, Dumfriesshire, into Scotland's top rallying centre outside Ingliston were put forward yesterday by the Wigton Motor Club which is based in Cumbria.
SAILING
Shark scare for ENZA
CO-SKIPPER Peter Blake saved ENZA New Zealand from a collision with a giant shark, which had a fin more than three feet high, on the catamaran's round-the-world voyage.
ENZA, co-skippered by Robin Knox-Johnston, is now off the coast of Brazil and is still ahead of schedule in her bid to circumnavigate the globe in 80 days or less.
SHINTY
Finalists at full strength
LOCHABER and Kinlochshiel meet in the final of the Glenmorangie Qualifying Cup today at Kiltarlity, with both teams reporting full strength squads.
In the south, Kyles Athletic reshuffle their side for a tough away game against Glenorchy in Division I of the Marine Harvest League.
SKATING
Witt ready for Olympics
DOUBLE Olympic figure skating champion Katarina Witt was reinstated as an amateur yesterday and given the go-ahead to compete in next year's Winter Olympics.
SKIING
Double success for Perth
JANE RHODES, of Perth Academy, a member of the Scottish KPMG national B squad, won the Ryden Scottish Schools Girls’ Championship and led her school to their first-ever team title at Glenshee yesterday.
SNOOKER
White reaches semi-finals
JIMMY WHITE continued his quest for the Benson and Hedges Masters' title with a 5-3 quarter-final victory over Steve James at Wembley Conference Centre yesterday.
He now meets James Wattana or John Parrott.
TABLE TENNIS
Plea comes to sticky end
A MOVE by the English Table Tennis Association to persuade European nations to enforce an immediate ban on toxic glue to fix rubbers to bats, failed yesterday in Copenhagen.
This means that at the European Top 12 tournament, which started in Copenhagen yesterday afternoon, players will still be able to use many types of glue — but probably for the last time in a major European event.
TENNIS
Maclagan loses to top seed
MILES MACLAGAN bowed out of the British Satellite tournament at Eastbourne yesterday when he was beaten 6-3, 6-1 by the No1 seed, Chris Wilkinson.
Menzieshill have no margin for error
TORBREX Wanderers have done much to keep the Scottish Indoor League championship race open by beating fellow Dundonians Menzieshill for the first time in the league last month.
Menzieshill still enjoy a three-point advantage with two games to play, but there is now no margin for error as they meet their main contenders, Kelburne, in a final game tomorrow night at the McTaggart Centre.
The Dundee venue will house all the matches but the contest that will surely carry most interest will be that between Menzieshill and Indespension at 4pm.
A point in that game for Menzieshill would almost certainly give them the trophy on goal difference.
It is most unlikely that Kelburne can erase a 21-goal deficit in their outings against Menzieshill and MIM.
Indeed, Kelburne's tussle with MIM one hour earlier than Menzieshill's opening game might decide the championship.
The Edinburgh side are now at full strength which is bad news for Kelburne whose international players, David Fowler and Michael Starling, have to readjust to the indoor set-up after their trip to Cairo last week with the Scottish outdoor squad.
In the relegation battle, the Edinburgh pair, Grange and Inverleith, who were both promoted last year, appear the most vulnerable.
Indespension could also be in trouble were they not to pick up some crumbs from their engagements with Menzieshill and MIM.
Touche Ross's position is also in the balance, but they have sufficient talent to decide their own destiny.
Prost and Williams cleared
MAX MOSLEY, the president of the International Motor Sports Association (FISA), yesterday said that the Frenchman, Alain Prost, and the Williams team would take part in this year's Formula One world championship.
Mosley, speaking after a meeting of the Formula One commission of FISA at a Heathrow hotel, said he had taken action to sort out the confusion after weeks of chaos.
He also made it clear that motorsport's ruling authority would be introducing a range of far-reaching changes to the sport over the next two years.
But all these changes, and the Prost and Williams issues, still need to be rubber-stamped by a meeting of FISA's world council in Paris on 18 March, four days after the season-opening South African Grand Prix.
Mosley said that this year would see reduced free practice and qualifying time on the track, and a reduction in the number of tyres permitted to be used by the teams.
This would mean considerable cost savings for the smaller teams and help them survive during a difficult economic period.
Mosley further explained that 1994 would see the introduction of a ban on all the electronic technological devices which helped to sweep Nigel Mansell and the Canon Williams Renault team to the championship last year.
Mosley said: ‘We've been listening long enough and the time has come to do something about it.
We can't go on like this.’
He said Prost would almost certainly be granted his super licence, but said his behaviour in using ‘insulting terms’ in his criticism of FISA would still need to be considered by the world council next month.
Mosley's comments suggest that he has managed to supervise a compromise deal in the corridors of power involving Frank Williams and Flavio Briatore, the boss of the Benetton team, who had firmly opposed Williams's late entry for the championship.
Watt could be back soon after operation to restore balance
By Graham Law
ALAN WATT, the 25-year-old Glasgow High-Kelvinside forward, hopes to be given the all-clear to resume training on Monday.
Watt, who had to withdraw from the loose-head prop berth for last weekend's Paris international on account of a ‘viral complaint’, has had a series of tests under the care of the SRU's honorary surgeon, Donald MacLeod, and they will continue when he sees another specialist on Monday.
Watt, however, has had some minor surgery on his ears in an effort to improve his balance and last night said he was feeling much better.
His club, one of three teams on the six-point mark, have been dealt a further blow in the lead-up to today's vital league meeting with Edinburgh Acads at Old Anniesland.
Another of their international squad forwards, Shade Munro, will also be absent suffering from flu.
His place is taken by Kenny Wilson.
GH-K are the only club in the relegation zone with a positive points differential: indeed, only league leaders Melrose have scored more points than them this season.
That, however, is of scant consequence to coach Brian Gilbert, who ruefully reflected: ‘At this late stage of the season it should be about polishing off moves, not going back to the drawing board.
That, as a result of injury, is largely what we have been forced to do.’
Acads had cheerier news on the casualty front, when Rob Wainwright, their international back-row forward, attended training on Thursday, though he is not yet fit to play.
Selkirk — also on six points but having played one game more than both GH-K and Stirling County — snatched two points at Riverside Park a fortnight ago and followed up with a Border League success against Kelso last Friday in which they scored four glorious tries and were further heartened by the return from serious injury of Rodney Pow and Graham Marshall.
Pow, in spite of taking a knock on the knee, will be at stand-off for today's home encounter against Watsonians, who are on eight points but still embroiled in the relegation issue.
It was in the corresponding match last season that Marshall sustained the knee ligament damage which threatened to put him out of the game.
The Selkirk coach, John Rutherford, anticipates an open contest and noted: ‘When you see the Watsonian back division it represents a great challenge for our boys.
How many club sides in Britain can boast three British Lions (the Hastings brothers and Roger Baird) in their backs?’
Heriot's, on four points with four games to play, simply must beat fellow-toilers Stirling County at Goldenacre if the vultures are not to begin their descent.
The visitors have lost centre John Wright (groin) and enlist Matt McGrandles.
Mark Ballantyne (flu) is doubtful for Gala's meeting with Currie, who report no late changes.
Lastly, a reminder that the Jed-Forest v Melrose match at Riverside kicks-off at 2pm, with the others an hour later.
England take lunch — the safe way
THE England tour manager, Bob Bennett, turned chef in Madras yesterday to make sure the cricketers had a filling — and safe — lunch in the second Test.
Helped by the physiotherapist, Dave Roberts, and the Rev Andrew Wingfield-Digby, the official England team pastor, Bennett produced a wide range of foods in the dressing room.
On Thursday, England began the Test with Graham Gooch out with food poisoning, and both Mike Gatting and Robin Smith unable to field because of more stomach trouble.
That came after the unlucky trio ate Chinese food in the team hotel the night before — an unavoidable accident of fate in the eyes of the England team.
But at lunchtime on Thursday, England's management were horrified to see that the cooked food provided for their players at the ground was already cold and in need of reheating.
Bennett and Roberts said No to that and England's players — fielding and bowling in high temperatures — had to make do with nan bread and corned beef sandwiches.
Bennett said: ‘The food provided on Thursday was not up to standard so we decided to provide our own.
We have been sensible and responsible about food throughout this tour.’
Tinned foods had been brought out to India by various visiting Test and County Cricket Board officials and spectators and at lunch yesterday England's players were able to choose from tuna, boiled ham, corned beef, baked beans, vegetable soup, chicken pate, tea, coffee and boiled rice.
Everything was cooked on primus stoves by Bennett himself in pots and pans that had been thoroughly cleaned and rinsed with boiling water.
This arrangement will continue for the rest of the Test.
One England player said later: ‘The food was excellent — they are good cooks!’
One corner of England's dressing room may have resembled an Army field kitchen but this arrangement will now continue for the rest of the Test as England battle for a draw and try to stay fit and well.
England's management are unhappy about the publicity given to Gooch, Gatting and Smith's illness because they feel they have taken every precaution necessary so far on this tour — as yesterday's events prove.
— PA
14-club Premier Division mooted
Relegation on hold in bid for compromise
By Mike Aitken
SCOTTISH football legislators are giving serious consideration to scrapping relegation this season and agreeing to set up a 14-club Premier Division next term as a temporary measure before returning to a top tier of ten teams in 1994-95.
The subject will be discussed when members of the Super League meet again on Wednesday.
While representatives of the leading clubs would prefer to move immediately to a Premier Division of ten, there is also an acknowledgement on their part of the need for compromise.
Ironically, a 14-club league was vetoed by nine of the members of the Super League as recently as last month.
However, with agreement due to be reached soon between the Super League and the Scottish League about the arrangements for a return to the top ten formula the season after next, there is now set to be compromise over a 14-club league on a one-off basis.
The major clubs are looking sympathetically at any scheme which will reduce the number of matches to be played next season.
A division of 14 clubs would work as follows.
All teams would meet on a home and away basis.
After playing 26 fixtures, the league would then split into two tiers of eight and six.
For the top teams in the group of eight this would mean a total of 40 league games as opposed to the 44 matches which will have to be fulfilled if the 12-club division continued for another season.
Those in the lower group of six would play a total of 36 matches with the first two teams keeping their place in the Premier Division while the rest would be relegated in 1994.
There is a general acceptance that any stepping stone plan for next season must accommodate the two clubs which earn promotion from this year's First Division.
Since there is little support for a temporary return to a Premier Division of 16 — this arrangement, of course, would deny the city clubs income generated by extra matches against Rangers and Celtic — a league set-up of 14-12-12 is on the cards for 1993-94.
Thereafter, the long-term future of the game could be resolved by a 10-10-10-10 formula which would stimulate interest at the lower end of the league as well as at the top.
More immediately, at a stage of the season when Rangers are running away with the championship, there may be a reluctance to go public with an announcement confirming that the relegation issue is also a dead duck.
Nevertheless, it's probable that all 12 Premier clubs plus the winners and runners-up in the First Division will be involved in next season's championship.
One issue that won't be affected by any future plans for the re-organisation of the league is the quest for places in next season's UEFA Cup.
After the calamity of their Tennents Scottish Cup defeat at Falkirk last week, Celtic travel to Aberdeen today aiming to put that disappointment behind them.
Liam Brady, the Celtic manager, made the point that the time for cliches and excuses was past.
‘We must have a positive attitude and do our  damnedest to get a result,’ he said.
Without Tony Mowbray, Gerry Creaney, Joe Miller and Peter Grant, Brady will bring Brian O'Neil back into his plans.
Aberdeen, who bounced back from the disappointment of losing to Rangers with a deserved Cup win over Dundee United on Sunday, are likely to be unchanged.
However, Willie Miller has brought Graham Watson back into the first-team squad after paying tribute to the youngster's courage and perseverance.
Watson has already suffered three leg breaks in a career strewn with misfortune.
While aware of Celtic's recent problems, Miller stressed: ‘This game is as important for us as it is for them.
Celtic will be even more fired up than usual after the events of last weekend and it's up to us to make sure there's no backlash.’
The appearance of Justin Fashanu for Airdrie should add interest to the match at Ibrox.
Apart from the return of Dave McPherson, Rangers have given their youngsters a boost by including Gary McSwegan, Neil Murray and David Hagen in today's squad.
Ian Ferguson will make his comeback with the reserves and Ian Durrant is back from a short holiday on Monday.
Hearts parted company with their vice-chairman, James Gulliver, yesterday.
Gulliver wanted to step down in August because of business commitments but was asked to carry on by chairman Wallace Mercer until the club had made a decision about a new stadium.
Now that Hearts have decided to remain at a re-developed Tynecastle, Gulliver has resigned from the board.
Gulliver, the former Argyll Group chief who was brought in to raise revenue, made little impact during his 16 months with the club.
He attended few matches and Alex Jones, the spokesman for the Hearts' Supporters Federation, said: ‘It's fair to say he'll not be missed.’
Hearts meet Falkirk in a league match today which will provide a preview of the forthcoming Scottish Cup tie between the sides.
Kevin Thomas, a 17-year-old striker who has scored eight goals during the reserve team's 14-match unbeaten run, could make his debut for the Tynecastle club.
It remains to be seen whether or not Darren Jackson will recover from the stomach injury which kept the striker out of Hibs' Cup win over Cowdenbeath.
Pat McGinlay, with four goals from midfield in his last six appearances, is likely to offer Hibs their best chance of a goal at Motherwell.
Gordon Durie, the Tottenham striker, was withdrawn yesterday from the Scotland squad to face Malta on Wednesday at Ibrox after the player broke down in training.
There are no plans to call up a replacement writes Mike Aitken.
With five other forwards named in the original squad — John Robertson, Duncan Shearer, Ally McCoist, Eoin Jess and Pat Nevin — Andy Roxburgh is well covered.
Two members of the Under-21 squad — Forbes Johnson of Falkirk and Craig Burley of Chelsea — have had to pull out of next week's game against Malta at Tannadice.
Tendulkar leads Indian blitz on tourists
ENGLAND were in trouble again in Madras yesterday as their second Test hopes dwindled, with Sachin Tendulkar's teenage genius, plus important knocks from both Praveen Amre and Kapil Dev, rubbing salt into their wounds.
Tendulkar hit 165, the highest score of his precocious career to lead India's charge to 560 for six declared.
By the close of a wearying second day, England were 19 for nought at the start of their quest for a draw.
Needing 361 to avoid the follow-on, England find themselves in a similar but even tougher position than in the first Test at Calcutta where they lost by eight wickets.
Once again England's front line spinners suffered heavily as Tendulkar took charge.
Phil Tufnell, fined £500 last weekend for losing his temper, at least kept his cool amid the carnage, yet finished conceding 132 runs from 41 wicketless overs.
The leg-spinner, Ian Salisbury, proved the most expensive, conceding 142 runs from just 29 overs, though he did end up with two wickets including that of Tendulkar.
Once more it was the under-rated offspin of Graeme Hick that commanded most respect from the Indian batsmen.
The loss of Chris Lewis with a thigh injury left a big burden on his fellow pacemen, Devon Malcolm and Paul Jarvis.
Jarvis initially responded in the morning with the wickets of Navjot Sidhu, out after adding just two to his overnight 104, and the Indian captain, Mohammed Azharrudin.
But Malcolm was savaged, first by Tendulkar who resumed on 70 and raced to his century with three fours in four balls off the fast bowler, and later by Kapil.
Kapil smashed Malcolm over mid-off for six during a 75-ball unbeaten 66 that also included eight fours.
Amre, who helped add 118 in 38 overs for the fifth wicket with Tendulkar, made 78 from 154 balls before holing out to long-off.
Jovial James leads in Tenerife
MARK JAMES, the 39-year-old Ryder Cup player who seems to thrive in tournaments on exotic islands, yesterday moved into a one-shot lead at the halfway stage of the Tenerife Open.
Last month he won the Madeira Island Open and now he heads the field after two fine rounds over the tricky Golf Del Sur course.
James, who shot a second-round 69 to add to his opening 71 for a four-under-par aggregate of 140, is one stroke ahead of South African De Wet Basson and Dutchman Chris Van Der Velde — and very happy with his golf.
This was a shade different to his mood three days ago, when his clubs were left at Heathrow Airport and did not arrive in time for him to compete in Wednesday's pro-am.
‘If they had not arrived by Wednesday lunchtime, I'd have been off home,’ he said.
‘I had a flight booked and was ready to go but I'm glad they turned up, I'm quite enjoying myself.
‘My baggage didn't arrive on Tuesday, either, but the airline provided me with red shorts and a red tee shirt.
I'm not at my best in red, so you could say I was not on top of the world.’
James was in a very jovial mood yesterday, however, after battling through the wind to shoot five birdies and only two bogeys on his card — at the sixth and the twelfth, both of which he three-putted.
‘These greens are very difficult,’ he said, ‘and I've had seven three-putts over the two rounds.
But I can't complain — I'm hitting most of the greens and coping with the putting pretty well.’
Basson, who owes his unusual first name to a famous Boer army general, had three birdies and a superb eagle 3 at the long tenth, where he finished three feet from the flag with his 7-iron approach shot.
His round of 70 was marred only by a double bogey at the twelfth and a bogey at the thirteenth.
Van Der Velde, playing with great consistency, had four birdies in his 69 and only one bogey — at the ninth.
The same could not be said for the pre-tournament favourite, Jose Maria Olazabal, who added a 75 to his opening 76.
The 27-year-old Spaniard said: ‘I'm not hitting the ball well and have no confidence in my game.
But I'm still putting well.’
Mike McLean, Eamonn Darcy and Christy O'Connor, jun, who were the three leading players after the first round, had differing fortunes yesterday.
O'Connor, jun, starting the day three under, hung on to finish on 142 for fourth place — still two under despite having a disastrous double-bogey 7 at the ninth in his 73.
Darcy, who also began three under, did not play consistently enough and his 76 took him to a one-over-par 145 — but McLean had the worst fortune.
The Kent man, who had led overnight on 68, began at the tenth and, though he was not at his best, he was still two under with five holes to play.
But then he double bogeyed both the fifth and sixth to finish in 77 and join Darcy on 145.
Alison makes the grade for Scotland
By Graham Law
THERE will be another feather in the cap for Stirling County's pioneering youth policy this weekend as a stand-off makes the grade at the highest level.
Craig Chalmers, however, can rest easy.
We are talking here about 20-year-old Alison McGrandles, who will be in the vital pivot berth as Scotland's women play their first international — against Ireland at Raeburn Place, Edinburgh, tomorrow (2pm).
Alison, a PE student at Brighton University, emerged from the same mini-rugby structure at Bridgehaugh as Kenny Logan — who was capped at full-back for Scotland in the second Test against Australia last summer — and last season's Scotland Under-21 No 8, Gareth Flockhart, who has recently been honing his skills, both sporting and agricultural, in New Zealand.
Logan certainly has fond memories of those days.
‘She was a good player, quite hard, and, if I remember rightly, used to play hooker.
I was one of her props though eventually I got moved into the backs because I was so good looking!’
Bit of a shrinking violet, our Kenny.
Alison recounted: ‘I started off at Stirling when I was seven, played until I was 12 and helped out with coaching for a year after that.
The boys were quite chuffed they had a girl in their team.’
Alison attended Morrison's Academy and hockey became her consuming interest.
She represented Midlands Schools around 20 times and played for Scottish Schools Under-16s in a European tournament at Largs in the 1986-87 season.
Yet she never quite lost the rugby bug, understandable since her brother, Matt, has already appeared in the Stirling County first XV at centre and is in the Scotland Under-19 squad, while another brother, 11-year-old Barry, can count on her assistance at occasional training sessions.
It was not until she began her studies in Sussex three years ago, however, that she resumed participation.
A women's team was launched at her university and this season they seem destined to be the top student side in the UK as they are currently unbeaten and through to the semi-finals of the students' cup competition.
Having previously played at centre, Alison appreciates her move to stand-off may revolve around the fact that she can kick off both feet ‘just like my brother.’
One trusts, though, that she will not overdo that against the Irish.
‘No way,’ she responds.
‘That's the way the English play.
I've already been warned by my dad.’
S-word's bonkrupt cliches
William Parente on celluloid sex scenes too posed to be passionate
CONSIDERING the vast worldwide market that exists for sexual material of all kinds, it is remarkable just how bad mainstream cinema has been when it comes to portraying sexual passion.
Although apparently straightforward, the depiction of the sexual act on film is uniquely problematic.
Sex is something with which the vast majority of any audience will be intimately familiar in one form or another, and this places the performances of the actors under unusually close scrutiny.
Kenneth Branagh may or may not make a convincing Hamlet, or Henry V, but his interpretation is unlikely to be dissected by an audience of Scandinavian princelings or British monarchs: when it comes to imagining how such exotic beasts behave, the performer has a head start on his audience.
One might say the same about portrayals of American disc jockeys, leukaemia victims, Martians, cowboys, millionaires or the Last of the Mohicans.
Not so with sex.
When it comes to the S-word we are all experts, whatever Margi Clarke may say, and we defy even the great Ken Branagh to impress us.
(It is true that we are all equally well-versed in the tedium of everyday existence; but, unlike sex, this is an area the cinema generally avoids).
Another problem is the intimate nature of the experience.
An actor may portray a cabinet minister making a speech, or talking with his mouth full, and a merely technically accurate imitation of reality will suffice.
The same is not true of the sexual act.
For one thing the performance must be emotionally convincing, if it is not to be ludicrous; a requirement rendered even more urgent by the technical impossibility, in mainstream cinema, of showing the act itself.
The cinema can show us eyes being gouged out, heads blown off, and aliens bursting from John Hurt's entrails: when it comes to counterfeiting the mechanics of sexual congress, however, it admits defeat; nor, in general, are performers willing or able to remedy this deficiency.
(This is not true in the pornographic industry: the legendary organ of John Holmes — aka ‘Long Johnny Wadd’— estimated at between 11 and 15 inches long, earned him parts in over 2,000 blue movies during a 20-year career).
Louis Malle is not the man you would choose to overcome these difficulties.
Although he is a versatile director, the emotional notes he specialises in teasing out tend to be of a more subtle nature than the full-blooded chords of sexual ecstasy.
From Les Amants to Pretty Baby he has often seemed to be using sexual subjects to make films about something else entirely, and in as much as sex and the life force are connected, his two sexiest films remain Viva Maria and Zazie dans Le Metro, which have nothing to do with sex at all.
In Damage, from Josephine Hart's novel, he gets more or less everything wrong from the word go.
Seemingly unrestrained by their director, his principals, Juliette Binoche and Jeremy Irons, indulge in a perfect orgy of, in actor-speak, ‘playing the result’: their first meeting, before they are even introduced, is a wild farrago of fish-like glances, tortured swallowing and interminable silences, and Malle follows suit, equipping his female lead with a get-up — black leather, gloves, fags, sunglasses, four-inch heels and an Eton crop to make a Brazilian transvestite blink, never mind a research assistant at Sotheby's, which is what she is meant to be.
THE sex in the rest of the film, otherwise the usual rather silly collection of schematic cliches by David Hare, follows a similarly leaden pattern.
There is the bonk on the floor, the bonk on the table, the bonk in the bed; lace-top stockings are discreetly displayed, elegant bodices are ripped tastefully.
Like Irons's immaculate body, which looks as though it has spent too long in the gym, it is all very pretty, and attractive, and unsurprising.
And this, for a film dealing with intergenerational sex and multiple incest, is rather strange.
This is where, in spite of its admirable qualities — namely three minutes of astonishingly truthful acting by Miranda Richardson — Damage veers towards the truisms of pornography rather than genuine depiction of sexual emotion.
For most non-specialist pornography depends on satisfying our preconceptions: potent men, attractive women, flattering clothing, seductive backgrounds.
Serious cinema's attempts to portray sexual passion have generally succeeded best according to the extent they have ignored this temptation: think of Brando, obese, with straggling grey hair and face plastered with pan-stick, howling obscenities as he floors Maria Schneider; or Dennis Hopper, jumping on Isabella Rossellini like a mad dog with velvet, scissors, and mask.
It's not what you'd expect, it might not even be what you like.
But it's a good deal more convincing than Damage's empty posing.
Malle practice: Juliette Binoche and Jeremy Irons show off their immaculate bodies in Louis Malle's Damage
Viaduct for sale — only £1.
No bridging loan necessary
PETER KEMP
Quids in: The £1 price tag put on the Shankend Viaduct sounds tempting enough — except that the buyer will be responsible for upkeep.
Two other viaducts on the Borders railway network are also for sale, on the same terms.
The unused viaducts — all listed buildings — are among 50 redundant structures being advertised by the British Rail Property Board, hoping to attract interest from wealthy enthusiasts or environmental groups and is offering £70,000 contribution towards initial maintenance costs.
The Shankend, like the Riddings Junction Viaduct is on the Waverley Route.
Teviot Bridge near Roxburgh on the former St Boswells-Kelso-Tweedmouth branch line.
Concerns have been raised by environmental and heritage groups that British Rail will seek permission to demolish bridges which cannot be sold.
Rescue close for historic mill
Dangerfield Mills at Hawick was once famous for its tweed.
Now, Andrew Collier reports, its only hope of survival is as a tourist attraction
A HISTORIC woollen mill in the Scottish Borders containing the oldest working textile machinery in the world is expected to be rescued from the threat of dereliction within the next few days.
There have been fears for the future of Dangerfield Mills at Hawick since the spinning operation went into liquidation nearly 18 months ago.
Money set aside by Borders Regional Council to keep the delicate equipment mothballed and in a state of good repair runs out next month.
However, an outside developer has expressed a serious interest in taking over the A-listed building and running it as both as a commercial mill and as a tourist attraction.
A detailed rescue proposal is expected to be presented to Borders Regional Council later this month.
If the plan proceeds, then Dangerfield is set to become the first significant tourist facility to commemorate the history of textile manufacturing in the Borders.
The most important feature of the mill is its working 120-year-old machinery, believed to be the oldest of its kind in existence.
The equipment, which is driven by belts, was originally powered by steam but is now operated by electricity.
Dangerfield has earned itself a distinguished place in the history of British textile production.
Its other main claim to fame is that it is credited with inventing the word tweed to describe the famous cloth first made in the area.
The coarse, heavy fabric was originally known as tweel.
But, in the early days of production on the site, an order sent off from the mill to London was accidentally read and returned as tweed.
The company then running Dangerfield, Watson's, realised the title's possible attractions, given the closeness of the river and the popularity of the Borders novelist, Sir Walter Scott, at the time.
The name stuck and prospered, and remains to this day.
Until now, the future of Dangerfield has caused local historians and conservationists considerable worry.
Historic Scotland listed it as being of international importance, but the National Heritage Memorial Fund decided not to support plans to preserve it.
Borders Regional Council has mothballed the site over the winter at a cost of £6,000 for heating, supervising and maintaining the machinery.
The money runs out next month, and there is no guarantee that it will be available for next winter.
The authority has already warned that ending maintenance will probably lead to terminal deterioration, leaving a decaying structure full of rusting machinery.
The region's conservation officer, Jim Souness, said that new parts would be needed if the equipment were to fall into disrepair, making the possibility of someone taking it over even more remote.
While refusing to name the firm interested in taking over Dangerfield — it will only say interest has been expressed by a British-based private company — the region hopes the sale will go ahead.
‘The receivers, who still own the building, are open to offers, and we are now very hopeful of a firm proposal being received in the next few days,’ said Mr Souness.
‘The building needs repair work but, if necessary, it could produce wool again next week.
‘Morale is now quite high because this approach does seem to be serious.
We really feel that it now has a future.’
Biography by a lucky chap
SIR Maitland Mackie, father of National Farmers Union of Scotland vice-president Maitland Mackie, has published his autobiography, A Lucky Chap.
Sir Maitland, son of an Aberdeenshire tenant farmer went on to farm extensively himself and become Lord Lieutenant of Aberdeenshire.
Two of his brothers ended up in the House of Lords.
Described by publisher Charlie Allan as ‘an extraordinary catalogue of achievement’, the book is available from Ardo Publishing, Methlick, Ellon, Aberdeenshire, price £12.50.
Chalmers sits out Scots squad session
By Graham Law
CRAIG Chalmers took no part in the Scotland squad session at Murrayfield yesterday in preparation for Saturday's Royal Bank international against Wales.
The Melrose stand-off was suffering from ‘bruising to his right thigh,’ a consequence of his club's narrow, last-ditch league win over Jed-Forest.
Following hard on his ongoing problems with shin splints, it is an unfortunate blow for Chalmers, though the Scotland manager, Duncan Paterson, stressed he was ‘not overly-concerned’ with the injury or any of the others which affected Scotland players.
Both Iain Morrison (hamstring) and Ian Corcoran (ankle) took a limited part in the training stint, which lasted over two hours, while captain Gavin Hastings (Achilles' strain on his left leg) merely completed the warm-up, a course of action described by Paterson as ‘just precautionary.’
Chalmers's half-back partner, Gary Armstrong, was absent as his son, Darren, had been taken to the Borders General Hospital after an asthma attack.
Happily, he was released after treatment.
Derek Turnbull arrived at Murrayfield, but was sent home suffering from flu.
His finger injury, however, has been given the all-clear.
Peter Wright, who missed Boroughmuir's friendly against Hawick as he was resting a knock to his left shoulder which he had aggravated when he tripped at work, completed most of the session and is confident he will be 100 per cent for the heavy scrummaging routines on Wednesday night.
Murrayfield was a hive of activity yesterday as there were also sessions for the under-21s, under-19s and under-18s.
Stewart's-Melville tighthead, Gordon Rigby, missed the under-21s' practice on account of a leg muscle knock, but the medical opinion was that he would be fit for Friday's match at Myreside against Wales Under-21.
Meanwhile, the Welsh centre, Mike Hall, missed Cardiff's 18-13 defeat by Llanelli at the weekend as he is troubled by a groin strain.
‘If it's the same this week, then there is no way I  could play but I hope it will improve,’ said Hall as a programme of intensive treatment was arranged.
Scotland injury-list grows as McCall and Gough drop out
By Hugh Keevins
SCOTLAND's preparations for the crucial World Cup qualifying tie against Malta at Ibrox on Wednesday bordered on the farcical yesterday when Rangers' Richard Gough and Stuart McCall were forced to withdraw from Andy Roxburgh's squad and Ally McCoist was given less than a 50-50 chance of playing.
The national coach has been forced to treat withdrawals as a way of life since taking over the job six-and-a-half years ago.
Only once has he named the same team twice in succession (against the Netherlands and Germany during the European Championship finals last year), but the latest spate of trouble is exceptional.
Ian Ferguson, of Rangers, who has not played a competitive match for six weeks, was last night called into the squad in response to other doubts surrounding the fitness of Leeds United's Gary McAllister, Eoin Jess (Aberdeen) and the Hearts pair, John Robertson and Alan McLaren.
Scotland must win the Malta game by a convincing margin, yet Roxburgh could be without McCoist, the scorer of 41 goals for Rangers this season, and Gordon Durie, who was withdrawn last week because of injury.
Gough has, because of injury and suspension, not played since Scotland lost to Switzerland in Berne in their opening Group I tie.
The groin injury he suffered against Airdrie on Saturday opens the door for Aberdeen's Alex McLeish, who has not played an international match for two years.
‘Alex is 34 now but everybody knows he is a youth at heart,’ said Roxburgh.
‘At a time like this, McLeish's leadership qualities could be of crucial importance.’
The loss of McCoist opens up the possibility of Jess playing his first full international from the start, having been used as a substitute against Italy.
Jess's Pittodrie team-mate, Duncan Shearer, is also in Roxburgh's squad.
He had a quiet game against Celtic at the weekend and was eventually substituted.
Afterwards, though, he admitted he could hardly concentrate on Celtic for thinking about Ibrox.
The game at Rangers' ground could begin to dominate Shearer's thinking at a time when the only other striker available to Roxburgh, Hearts' John Robertson, is carrying an injury from Saturday's win over Falkirk.
It is possible that Dundee United's Duncan Ferguson, whose exile from the first team at Tannadice was ended at the weekend, could even be seconded from Scotland's Under-21 squad as emergency cover for Ibrox.
Ferguson scored against Partick Thistle on his return from a month of inactivity caused by discipline problems at Tannadice.
‘Anything is possible at the moment,’ said Roxburgh, who will finalise the composition of his drastically revamped squad this morning before Scotland begin training at St Johnstone's McDiarmid Park.
The withdrawal of Rangers' Stuart McCall could lead to the re-emergence of Celtic's John Collins in midfield for his tenth cap.
‘He is still vertical,’ Roxburgh observed after having had a significant portion of his squad put on horizontal hold.
The coach will not dwell on his difficulties, however.
‘I see it as part of my job to patch up squads and re-organise as best I can.
After all, I don't run a team, I run a squad,’ he said.
‘I do not want to view any of what has happened in a negative light, though it goes without saying that I could have done without the loss of our first-pick forwards for a game of this type.’
Roxburgh could probably name the Maltese team even this far in advance of Wednesday night's kick-off.
It is now certain that Malta's coach, Pippo Psaila, could not predict what Scotland's team will be, for the simple reason that even Roxburgh does not know the answer to that one yet.
Scotland have taken only two points from their first three games in their qualifying group and trail Switzerland, Italy and Portugal.
‘I see it as part of my job to patch up squads and to re-organise as best I can.
After all, I don't run a team, I run a squad’ Andy Roxburgh Ian Ferguson: called into the Scotland squad
‘Granny’ ruling may offer lifeline for young Scots
THE Scotland Under-21 team manager, Craig Brown, will try to use the ‘granny dimension’ now open to him as he addresses the problems of call-offs before tomorrow's game with Malta at Tannadice, writes Hugh Keevins.
Six players, one third of Brown's original squad, pulled out yesterday.
Gary Bollan (Dundee United), Brian O'Neil (Celtic), Phil O'Donnell (Motherwell), Craig Burley (Chelsea) and John Henry (Clydebank), were lost through injury and Falkirk's Forbes Johnston will miss out because he is sitting a university examination.
Brown, like Andy Roxburgh, is now entitled to choose players whose grandparents come, or came, from Scotland.
Luton's Paul Telfer has already told Brown of a team-mate who comes into that category and the manager admits that exercising the latitude recently agreed by the SFA is necessary because it is a formidable task to replace six players in that age group.
‘Andy and myself like to think we have our fingers on the pulse of what is happening in Scotland and England, though, and on this occasion it looks likely that there will be one or two surprise selections,’ said Brown.
Scotland's plight is such that Clyde's goalkeeper, Scott Howie, will play against the Maltese in the afternoon (the game has a 1.30pm kick-off) and then turn out for Clyde in their Second Division match with Queen of the South at Douglas Park at 7.30pm.
Chris Reid, of Hibs, will be on the Scottish bench and then driven to Glasgow, where he will play from the start against Partick Thistle in the Premier Division.
Roxburgh is also likely to show his understanding of Brown's situation by releasing Stephen Wright from the full squad to join the young ones in their time of need.
‘I recall the under-21 team finding Scott Booth, from Aberdeen, in an emergency like this one and look at the player he turned out to be,’ said Brown.
‘This may be the opportunity for another young man to appear from nowhere and make a name for himself.’
Hendry makes the Masters his own
STEPHEN HENDRY was crowned the king of Wembley again last night as he won the Benson & Hedges Masters title for the fifth time.
Hendry, who defeated James Wattana 9-5, captured snooker's biggest prize of the season so far, a cheque for £110,000, as well as being given the gold-plated trophy as a memento of his outstanding record at the London venue, where he stretched his unbeaten record to 20 successive victories.
His prize money more than doubled Hendry's seasonal earnings, which stood at £92,950 from the nine events leading up to his week's work at the London venue.
The first seven frames had never quite pointed to such a convincing victory but once Hendry had forged clear at 6-3, the writing was on the wall for his Bangkok challenger.
A break of 107 was the highest of the final and Wattana's only century of the week but at this juncture, Hendry increased the tempo, firing in breaks of 52 in the 11th frame and a 62 and 65 to lead 8-4.
He had now put together 19 half-centuries and five century breaks in 26 frames of snooker, prolific scoring from the world champion.
The opening session of seven frames came to an end with Hendry 4-3 ahead.
He lost the first frame quite easily but when Wattana had made 42 in the second, the 23-year-old Thai tried an ambitious plant which only let in Hendry for a clearance of 96.
The world champion took the third frame, but with Wattana winning the fourth everything at this point suggested a tense final.
Hendry, however, won two of the next three frames, compiling a break of 67 in the seventh to lead by one at tea.
The first frame last night was as crucial as any, but Hendry won that with breaks of 54 and 55 before opening up a lead of three with an 81 which proved to be his highest after the interval.
Wattana's century followed in the tenth frame but he was able to win only one more as Hendry well and truly took control.
‘I love playing here, the atmosphere is fantastic and second to none,’ said Hendry.
Wattana, the leading money-earner this season received £56,000 to take his total prize money to just under £300,000.
ANDRE CAMARA/REUTER My ball: Tottenham forward, Nick Barmby (right), and Wimbledon's Roger Joseph clash at White Hart Lane
Bruce's penalty miss seals Manchester United's fate
Sheffield Utd 2 Manchester Utd 1
MANCHESTER United's FA Cup hopes ended in controversy yesterday after their captain, Steve Bruce, missed an 84th-minute penalty in a thrilling fifth-round tie at Bramall Lane.
Bruce's team-mates claimed there were players in the box when his kick, awarded after Mitch Ward pulled back Paul Ince, hit the post.
But referee Mike Reed, who had turned down two Manchester penalty appeals in the first half, refused to sanction a retake.
Dave Bassett's team had to resist a late siege to ensure a place in the quarter-finals.
Even the goalkeeper, Peter Schmeichel, came right upfield for the last of Manchester's 14 corners.
A superb Glyn Hodges goal was enough to dispatch the competition favourites.
They looked to be on their way out, however, when the sparkling Ryan Giggs rewarded Manchester's early supremacy with a cracking goal on the half hour from Brian McClair's pass.
But Sheffield, who had survived two spot kick claims against goalkeeper Alan Kelly and full-back Ward, simply redoubled their efforts.
And within three minutes Jamie Hoyland burst from midfield to claim his first goal of the season, bundling the ball past Schmeichel when the Danish keeper was left helplessly unprotected against an inswinging Hodges free kick.
Five minutes before the interval, 29-year-old Welsh international Hodges struck a cool chip over Schmeichel.
The home side at times pulled almost everybody back in the second half to withstand the threat of Giggs and the equally elusive Lee Sharpe, although Sheffield also forced chances of their own.
Brian Deane, elevated to the full England squad for Wednesday's World Cup clash with San Marino, pounced on some dithering by Bruce to fire a shot that was narrowly deflected for a corner.
And winger Franz Carr ruined two promising build-ups with poor crosses when Deane and Hodges were lining up for clear strikes at goal.
Even before Bruce's penalty miss however, Mark Hughes should have saved the game for Manchester when heading a great chance wide in the 67th minute from another Giggs cross.
Tottenham 3 Wimbledon 2
NICK Barmby and Darren Anderton steered Tottenham into their 19th FA Cup quarter-final with performances full of rich potential at White Hart Lane yesterday.
Anderton scored in the 26th minute after Barmby had headed Neil Ruddock's cross back across the goal, delivered the corner that Teddy Sheringham converted after 44 minutes and then crossed for Barmby to score late in the first half.
Hendry makes Masters own with fifth successive victory
STEPHEN HENDRY was crowned the king of Wembley again last night after winning the Benson & Hedges Masters title for the fifth time.
The 23-year-old Scot silenced a growing band of critics with an impressive 9-5 victory over James Wattana.
Hendry pocketed a first prize of £110,000, took his unbeaten run in the tournament — since 1989 — to 20 matches and claimed the antique gold trophy for keeps.
Victory also brought the curtain down on a barren spell for Hendry, whose last success in Britain came in the Matchroom League 8 months ago.
It was also perfectly timed, for only last week Hendry was overtaken by Jimmy White at the head of the provisional world rankings — the first time since May 1990 that he has been removed from top spot.
Even the bookmakers lost faith in the world champion who began the event without the status of favourite for the first time in three years.
He said: ‘It's nice to prove people wrong, but first and foremost I wanted to win for my own satisfaction.
I don't think five wins on the trot here will ever be done again.
‘It's nice to know I can be a winner again.
Before Christmas, at the UK Championship and World Matchplay, I was playing very poorly.
This has given me extra motivation for the rest of the season.’
Hendry, who has now earned over £200,000 during the 1992-93 season despite his relatively poor run of results, added: ‘When you believe that you're the best player in the world it's very depressing when you keep on playing like an idiot.’
Hendry was nowhere near his best in the afternoon session but with Wattana, who beat Jimmy White in the semi-finals also making mistakes, Hendry was able to go into the interval with a narrow 4-3 lead.
However, when play resumed Hendry came out with all guns blazing and thumped in breaks of 54, 55 and 81 to establish a 6-3 lead.
‘I thought there was no way back for James from that point.
All day I felt in control and after those breaks there was no way I was going to let it slip,’ said Hendry.
Wattana did pull one frame back with a run of 107 in frame 10 — his first century of the tournament — before Hendry regained control.
He compiled breaks of 52, 62 and 65 in the following two frames to lead 8-4 while Wattana, by now looking ragged, managed to aggregate only 13 points.
The Thai, who captured the World Matchplay title in December, stayed alive with decisive breaks of 38 and 36 in frame 13 but Hendry then prevailed in the 14th.
Valiant fight for victory enough to leave struggling Dundee on a high
Dundee HSFP 23 Kelso 16
IT probably won't be enough to save them from relegation to Division II, but Dundee HSFP reproduced some of last season's promotion-winning style in regaining much lost pride at Mayfield on Saturday.
They were made to battle all the way by Kelso who fought back bravely after flanker Clive Millar was sent off for stamping just before the interval.
Referee Jimmy Johnston had given a general warning about foul play only a few minutes earlier.
The home side had turned 15-10 up, Andy Nicol and Mike Cousin finishing off planned moves and Jon Newton adding a penalty and a conversion.
John Jeffrey had charged over for Kelso's try with Graeme Aitchison converting and adding a penalty.
Behind, away from home and down to 14 men, Kelso ought to have been down and out, but Jeffrey rallied his men in typical fashion and the visiting pack dominated the first 25 minutes of the second half.
Aitchison managed to put over two of four kickable penalty chances in that period to push his side in front and, 16-15 behind, it looked as if Dundee High might be heading for their third single point defeat of the league campaign.
However, a 72nd-minute break by the powerhouse centre, Paul Rouse, produced the opportunity for Cousin, a late replacement on the left-wing for Adrian Astley-Jones, to dart in for his second try.
Although Newton missed the conversion, he added a penalty five minutes later.
Townsend sharpens appetite for Scots call-up
Gala 47 Currie 13
GREGOR Townsend found the Midas touch, scoring two tries, four conversions and three penalties as Gala overwhelmed Currie at Netherdale.
The young stand-off's outstanding performance must take him a step closer to that elusive first cap, and his personal tally of 27 points kept Gala's league hopes very much alive.
Townsend oozed confidence from his first kick to touch, and he agreed after the match that being part of the Scottish squad had done much to sharpen his game.
But, while Gala coach Peter Dods was full of praise for Townsend's contribution, he was quick to point out that the victory had been a team effort.
Dods had his men down for extra training during the week and that had made all the difference, he said.
Up front, Ian Corcoran and Gary Isaac showed they had also benefited from the Scottish training, while John Laing and Graham Shepherd cleaned up at the lineout.
Mark Ballantyne and Neil Crooks were prominent in the scrums, which Gala controlled throughout.
The home side's tireless support play ensured they were rarely troubled.
Brian Swan was first to the ball when Townsend's penalty came off the right-hand post and Swan was also in support of the stand-off when he touched down for his first try.
Currie were not helped by injuries to Darren Clarke and Ian Russell, who hobbled from the field in the second-half, but they were always prepared to run the ball and were enterprising in everything they did.
Gala's other tries came from Mark Moncrieff, Brian Learmonth and Chris Dalgleish.
Ally Donaldson kicked two penalty goals for Currie and converted a late try by Dean Mack.
Gregor Townsend: a step nearer to his first cap
Hastings' toil means relative safety
Selkirk 16 Watsonians 19
By Graham Law
JOHN RUTHERFORD was in no doubt.
The Hastings brothers, he concluded, had made the significant contribution for the city team as their victory eased them to the sanctuary of ten points in the McEwan's First Division.
For his own charges, the escape from the relegation quicksand now depends on success in their remaining two games — away against Edinburgh Acads and at home to fellow toilers, Stirling County.
‘It is still,’ he ventured, ‘in our own hands.’
Saturday's Philiphaugh contest was full of ebb and flow and attracted a large crowd, buttressed by a touring English school side who delighted in a game of ‘spot the internationalist’.
The Hastings fraternity attracted the bulk of their attention.
In the first half, Gavin hit the rich seam of kicking form which all Scotland yearns will be reprised at Murrayfield against the Welsh.
Angle and range were immaterial as he landed five out of five.
‘What a relief,’ he volunteered.
In the second-half he appeared to be on a mental walkabout, at one point kicking direct into touch from a free-kick, forgetting that he would get no territorial gain.
His role, however, had been invaluable.
His younger brother, Scott, took over in the second period with a series of his extra-special, last-gasp tackles which reminded one of Victorian melodrama.
You know the sort of thing: the damsel in distress chained to the railway line as the express thunders towards her.
You're convinced she's about to become mincemeat when the hero appears, dissolves the chains, disarms the villain and effects a daring rescue.
Twice, in the space of a minute, Scott clawed down Alan Linton in one-on-one situations.
The first followed Scott Nichol's dynamic burst off a slack pass from Jeremy Brett; the second, from the resultant scrum, doused with immediate finality the prospects which Iwan Tukalo's intrusion on his wrong wing had fired.
Tukalo, as Selkirk captain, also had cause to reflect on his decision to opt for a tap penalty when the Soutars trailed 6-12 in the first-half.
Having been stung in a similar situation in their last league game when Gregor McKechnie called their bluff over a kickable penalty and scuttled in for a try, Tukalo tried to do likewise after Joe Munro had been caught offside in the Watsonian 22, as Scott Hastings was called to arms to police Linton.
Tukalo —‘he would have been a hero,’ noted Rutherford sympathetically — did not enjoy such fortune and was engulfed by the visitors' defence who pirated possession to clear.
The plaudits — which indubitably would have been bestowed on Tukalo had a try materialised — were further erased as Watsonians claimed a try three minutes later.
The game had already been enlivened by a sumptuous Derrick Lee break-off scrum ball (and a neat assist by Andrew Garry), therefore it was little co-incidence that the stand-off, who had enjoyed an adventurous afternoon, was instrumental in the first try.
From a free-kick for foot-up at the scrum, Sonians set up a ruck from where Scott Hastings, at stand-off, chipped through.
Lee hacked on and collected a favourable bounce to dot down at the posts.
Gavin Hastings' conversion, allied to his four earlier penalties, pitched Watsonians into a 6-19 advantage into which Selkirk could make no dents by the interval, Jeremy Brett mis-timing two penalties as he sought to build on his initial brace.
Watsonians' pack — where Murray Rudkin won important two-handed ball stationed at two, especially at defensive lineouts — faded a bit in the second-half, though in Scott Aitken's case there was legitimate excuse.
He had pulled a hamstring during his warm-up and had done well to patrol as relentlessly as he did for an hour.
His opposite number, Graham Marshall, was caught out in the lineout for use of outside arm by referee Jim Fleming — who dashed off post-match to prepare to officiate at the England v Wales women's international yesterday — but he lasted the pace more comfortably than another of Selkirk's national league comeback men, Rodney Pow, who can be expected to make more individual thrusts in the weeks to come.
Pow, mark you, needed additional threat wider out where the only hint of penetration came from Scott Nichol, whose scalding acceleration really ought to attract the attention of the national selectors.
Brett's third penalty on the hour raised Selkirk hopes and they were further fanned by Marshall's try from his own lineout pouch, Keith McConnell's support and tilts by Bill Gentleman and Cammy Guntley.
Brett converted but Sonians remained resolute.
Selkirk, at least, can look forward to enlisting David Hunter, their speedy full-back in the challenges ahead.
Hunter, 25, who had to have a spleen removed after a tackle by a Japanese player during the Student World Cup in Italy last summer, is back in full training and is over a bout of  tonsillitis .
Happy Heriot's quick to grab chances
Heriot's 24 Stirling County 7
By Harry Pincott
THE sight of a disconsolate Kevin McKenzie trudging from the pitch and pointing an imaginary pistol to his head sums up perfectly Stirling County's day at  Goldenacre .
The Bridgehaugh men had come in search of two safety points and in spite of a highly commendable forward effort, spearheaded by the dynamic hooker, they left empty-handed.
Their own shortcomings behind the scrum, and a Heriot's XV who defended heroically when they had to and then snapped up every chance that came their way, saw to that.
Stirling had about 65 per cent of the play, yet Kenny Milne, the Heriot's captain, admitted that never at any stage during the game had he felt his side were not going to win.
‘We soaked up a great deal of pressure, but then hit them on the break,’ he said.
At the end of a torrid first half, Heriot's led 5-0, though they had paid only a few fleeting visits to the Stirling 22.
The try came after good work by Gordon Lawrie and then a blindside move featuring Mike Allingham and Andy McRobbie which allowed Russell Adam to go over at the corner.
But poor tactical kicking, especially by Jimmy Stewart, and stout Heriot's defence, meant no more scores before half-time, though an out-of-sorts Kenny Logan dropped a scoring pass when in the clear and Brian Ireland had the ball knocked from his grasp as he dived over the line.
In the 50th minute Logan made amends when he burst on to Stewart's pop-up pass and touched down at the posts for the stand-off to convert.
Then came the turning point of the match.
For some reason, known only to himself, Stewart tried a quick drop-out, after Lawrie had missed a penalty, an alert David Stoddart charged down the kick, gathered the ball and was over the line in a flash.
To their credit the Stirling pack roused themselves to greater efforts, but after four pushover attempts by them had been repulsed, Heriot's countered and it was Stoddart who ran through some weak tackling and put Henry Murray in for try which Lawrie converted.
Just to complete the amazing change in fortunes, Mike Allingham ripped on to a short lineout throw from Kenny Milne, who then took his scrum-half's pass and bullocked his way over from about ten metres out, Lawrie adding the two points.
With Selkirk and Glasgow High-Kelvinside also losing it was a good day for the Goldenacre men and with spirit high and confidence spreading through the team, they look more than capable of winning another couple of games to reach safer waters.
While their forwards were outplayed, though Andy Macdonald won the occasional good lineout ball, Heriot's competed gamely and the arrival of young Lawrie has made a huge difference to their back play, and especially to centres Stoddart and McRobbie, who appear much more confident than earlier in the season.
As for Stirling it was, as their coach, Alan Armstrong, lamented, ‘the same old story.
We just can't convert pressure into points’.
Centre Ian Jardine made some good breaks, but poor passing and handling negated any advantage.
One felt sorry for players like McKenzie and Ireland who put so much into the game and took nothing out.
For the first time Stirling are well and truly embroiled in the relegation area and unless they can start scoring points they are going to continue to struggle.
Watching their efforts on Saturday was former Scotland B prop, George Graham, who revealed that he is now back in the Carlisle side after injury, but could be on the move to a bigger rugby league team.
He is also leaving the army next month and will settle in the Stirling area.
How his old club could do with his services now!
Chalmers inflicts ultimate suffering on Jed
Jed-Forest 16 Melrose 19
AN INJURY-time drop goal by Craig Chalmers kept Melrose on course for their second national league title in a row but it was a match that neither side deserved to lose and both could have won.
Jed's puzzling ploy of playing wing-forward Kevin Liddle in the three-quarters was vindicated as ‘Lids’, as he is affectionately known at Riverside Park, contributed greatly to an entertaining and enthralling 80 minutes of open rugby from both sides.
He also scored the second of the home side's tries early in the second period, forcing his way over on the right to put Jed 13-5 ahead and raised the rafters on both grandstands at Riverside.
Jed had led 8-5 at the turn, with Gregor McKechnie having set the scoreboard in motion after only two minutes with a penalty and Melrose responding after a period of sustained pressure from the home side, through a try by Gary Parker whose turn of speed caused problems for the Jed defence.
Andy Douglas, however, ensured the Melrose revival was delayed by crossing on the right after his colleague Liddle had been thwarted by a well-executed Ross Brown tackle.
The second period saw no let-up from either side with both still determined to play 15-man rugby.
Michael Yule was prominent on the left wing for Jed while Parker and Shiel were always in the thick of the action when Melrose were on the move.
Liddle's try was swiftly followed by a Parker penalty then hooker Steven Brotherstone brought the sides level with the try of the match and possibly the try of the season.
Forwards and backs combined as Melrose charged for the Jed line from well inside their own territory with Gary Parker managing to evade Liddle before feeding his front row colleague who went over for the try.
Melrose sneaked ahead through a Chalmers drop goal in the 65th minute only for McKechnie to nullify the effort in similar style barely a minute later.
The closing stages then saw both sides strive, apparently in vain, to get the score that could settle the match which had been finely balanced throughout.
The last word came from that man Chalmers, though his Scotland colleague Gary Armstrong had a foot in it.
His clearance from a drop-out went directly into touch and, from a scrum, the chance came for the Melrose stand-off to inflict Jed's second successive injury-time league defeat.
Melrose have still to face Currie at the Greenyards and Gala at Netherdale in the final league match of the season.
Both of these sides will have to bring out something special if they are to come as close as Jed to upsetting the championship applecart.
Galwey fills gap
MICHAEL GALWEY, of Shannon, will fill the vacancy left at No8 in Ireland's team to play France in Dublin on Saturday.
The vacancy was left when the team were announced last week so the selectors could assess the fitness of Brian Robinson, of London Irish.
He injured a knee early in December and, although he played for his club on Saturday, the selectors are not convinced he is ready to return.
Also out of the team is blindside flanker Phil Lawlor, of Bective Rangers.
He damaged a shoulder in a club match on Saturday week, and the injury has not responded to treatment.
Lawlor's place goes to the experienced Pat O'Hara, of Cork Constitution, who will be winning his 12th cap.
Injury kept O'Hara out last season's championship, and he also missed the tour to New Zealand last summer.
Galwey, who will be winning his tenth cap, last played for Ireland against the All Blacks last summer.
The French selectors have stuck with the team which beat Scotland in Paris.
Guy Laporte, team manager, said: ‘Our match against Scotland revealed a number of weaknesses, but the performance was still more positive than negative,’ he said.
‘The players need to feel confident and secure in their positions and we are counting on those players who did not come up to expectation against Scotland, to make up for it against Ireland.’
The main discussion concerned the position at left wing where Pierre Hontas of Biarritz was under some pressure after mediocre performances.
‘We are giving him another chance, but the pressure is now on him to show us what he is capable of,’ said Laporte.
Acads pick up the pieces as GH-K start to fall apart at the seams
Glasgow H-K 13 Edinburgh Acads 22
ANOTHER disjointed performance by Glasgow High-Kelvinside at Old Anniesland saw them slip further into the relegation area.
They are now one of four teams on the six-point mark, two ahead of bottom-placed Dundee HSFP.
A try-count of 3-1 in favour of the visitors was a fair reflection of the run of play and, if the Acads had had more finishing power, it might have been more.
Even without their two biggest forwards, Alan Watt and Shade Munro, GH-K competed well in the forward exchanges where brothers Fergus and Murray Wallace excelled, though their efforts were matched by the whole-hearted David McIvor.
Acads' back play could have been more direct, but at least they contributed two cracking tries in the first half, the first by Simon Burns, with help from Ford Swanson, who then helped himself to five points as he finished of a Rowen Shepherd break.
After the interval, all they could manage was a forwards' try, by McIvor, and it was left to the home scrum-half, Tony Devlin, to notch the only touchdown — in the last minute — with a fine individual effort.
But it was too little and much too late.
Acads' other points came from Shepherd (two conversions and a penalty) while George Breckenridge landed two penalties and Cammy Little a conversion.
The Edinburgh team thus consolidated their third place spot in Division I, but the title now looks well beyond them.
Jockey Club ruling whips up a storm
Isobel Cunningham reports on the latest controversy over the use of the whip on racehorses in the wake of a new clampdown
ROY'S DREAM returned to the winners' enclosure at Kelso 11 days ago with blood  oozing from one of the several whip marks on him.
The local stewards, appointed by the Jockey Club, suspended the jockey, Colin Hawkins, for six days — from 14-19 February — for misuse of the whip but as there is racing in the north on only two of those days, Hawkins feels he has not been harshly treated.
Roy's Dream had won the Town Arms and Ladhope Inn Novices' Chase, so his owner pocketed £2,788 prize-money and presumably did not feel harshly treated either.
There was a bet of £1,500 to win £18,000, so someone also came out on top there and will no doubt be feeling far from harshly treated.
In fact, only Roy's Dream and racing were losers.
It was an irony that the incident came four days before the Jockey Club clamped down even further on its rules for the use of the whip.
From 5 July only five strokes will be permitted before local stewards consider holding an inquiry into the rider's performance.
However, as it was impossible to know whether it was blow one or blow ten (the maximum number permitted at the moment) which drew the blood on Roy's Dream, it did serve to underline that though the Jockey Club may be moving in the right direction, its pace of reform is still too slow, leaving it too open to criticism.
Since the new rule was rubber stamped last Monday, the blows raining down upon racing's legislators in Portland Square, London, have come from fairly predictable sources.
The Jockeys' Association secretary, Michael Caulfield, said he heard the news of the rule change with ‘horrific disbelief.’
He added: ‘If the Jockey Club thinks it is making progress it must believe the moon is green.’
But the Jockey Club's director of public affairs, David Pipe, said: ‘The jockeys fail to realise that in this day and age, public opinion is fairly powerful and they are in danger of becoming the subject of private cruelty prosecutions if they are deemed to have broken our rules.
That would do racing an immense amount of harm.’
Reforming such practices as throwing Christians to the lions, putting children up chimneys and down mines and even until quite recently beating them in school, no doubt also met scorn.
And the Jockey Club cannot be accused of headlong  profligation of its long held principals, though Caulfield accuses them now of handing the rule book straight to the animal welfare groups.
It was in 1989 that I first became aware of Scandinavian racing's revolutionary change regarding use of the whip when profiling their four-times champion jump jockey, Tom Luhnenschloss.
‘We were stunned five years ago to find the use of the whip was banned after the last fence or hurdle, or in the final furlong of a flat race,’ he said.
‘We had to keep our hands on the reins at that point in the race though we were still allowed to carry the whip and use it to prevent horses running out, refusing, or causing accidents.
We thought it was the end of racing but looking back now it was the making of us as riders.
‘We had to lengthen our stirrup leather and sit down and ride out the horses.
I can honestly say now I do not feel I have subsequently ever lost a race I would have won had I been allowed to use the whip.’
Repeated many times over, the words of Luhnenschloss finally came to the notice of the RSPCA last year and were used as part of further discussions it was on the point of entering into with the Jockey Club in the hope of further reform.
The RSPCA has always been in favour of whips being carried for the reasons outlined by Luhnenschloss, but its assistant chief veterinary officer, Alastair Mews, said: ‘Future decisions can no longer be left to tradition, habit, or hearsay but must be based on good science.
Behavioural aspects of the horse before and after being whipped must now be studied.
‘It is also difficult at the moment to know whether in the heat of a race the horse actually feels the whip or merely reacts to the noise made by it.
However, we do know from having spoken to stable staff that the horse is certainly tender when being groomed on the side which has been hit, for some time after the race.
So investigation into the actual design of the whip is also on the agenda.
‘Cutaneous injury to tissue and muscle, even when there are no outer marks on the horse, has already been established as taking place from research now underway and further development along this avenue must be explored.’
John Reid, the jockey who won last year's Derby on Dr Devious, sees things differently.
‘There wasn't any need for a change to the rules,’ he said.
‘I sat in on the Jockey Club working party that drew up these latest proposals Their idea was to bring down the number of strokes and they did not seem very interested in what we, the jockeys, had to say.
I hope this will not lead to the whip being banned.
I am sure that the more sensible people in racing and in the Jockey Club would not want to see that.’
This is the fear uppermost in the minds of the jockeys who predict racing would become slow and uncompetitive.
However, would it?
Scotland's Olympic three-day event double silver medallist, Ian Stark, has not been nicknamed the ‘Flying Scotsman’ for hanging about on a cross-country course.
Yet no mental picture comes to mind of Stark, or, indeed, any other of the world champions in that sport, using a whip in the crucial race to the finishing line.
‘Oh, we carry whips alright,’ said Stark.
‘In fact exactly the whip the jockeys use, but it is there to stop our horses running out or refusing.
‘When it comes to speed, there are horses who will go faster when hit but they are in a minority.
For every one of them, there are a dozen who will shy away from the whip and lose vital seconds.
It is exactly the same in racing.
You see it best in the head-on shots on TV.
Time and time again horses shy away from the whip and lose races.
‘But I don't envy the position the jockeys are in at the moment.
Having to count how many times they have hit the horse and then decide to give it one more is ridiculous.
A clean cut ‘you can't do it’ rule would be kinder to them.
‘They would sit down and ride the horses out like we do and I seriously doubt if the public would notice much difference.’
JOHN GILES/Press Association
A necessary evil?
Whips are clearly in evidence at the finish of last year's St Leger at Doncaster.
From 5 July only five strokes will be permitted before action may be taken
Aitken's hunger tempers Aberdeen's frustration
Aberdeen 1 Celtic 1
By Hugh Keevins
ON A DAY when sources of enthusiasm were scarce at Pittodrie, the performance of Roy Aitken for Aberdeen was a commendable exception.
It was the first game Aitken had started since the Skol Cup final four months ago, though his display belied such sparing use of his talents.
The opponents at Hampden in October were Rangers, against whom, while working for the other half of the Old Firm, Aitken spent many years being either revered or reviled.
Playing against Celtic, however, is generally supposed to be difficult for someone who formerly captained the club and could not say that his regard for them ended on the day he was transferred.
It would be a brave man who would accuse Aitken of cheating on his present club to protect his first senior team, however, and a foolish one who continued to harbour the notion after watching his display of honest professionalism.
There were tackles which brought the Aberdeen support to their feet in acclamation, and aroused different emotions in the rest.
When Celtic equalised, bringing about a result that caused Aberdeen to lose ground in the championship race, there was that involuntary twitching movement, spreading from Aitken's head to his toes, which signals that he is on the verge of doing someone a mischief unless he gets a satisfactory explanation in a very short space of time.
Whatever the rest of the season may hold for Aberdeen, they have on their side a ferocious competitor whose appetite for the fray has gone undiminished by time.
‘I said when I came to Pittodrie that I wanted to go on playing for as long as possible,’ Aitken said afterwards.
‘It is up to the manager to decide how often that is, but I would like to continue from the start in our next match.’
By then, Aitken's pulse rate had decelerated enough for him to give a rational appraisal of the day's events.
‘It was frustrating from the point of view of losing an opportunity to move closer to Rangers at the top of the league table,’ he said.
‘We still have them to play twice and reducing the nine-point gap would have maintained the element of doubt about the outcome of the championship.
‘There is still a long way to go, though, and nobody at this club forgets that, two seasons ago, Aberdeen made up a ten-point deficit and took Rangers to the last day of the season before they (Rangers) won the title.’
It was, as it turned out, a day for lost causes at Pittodrie.
Aberdeen went ahead towards the end of the first half after Duncan Shearer chased a ball to the byeline that some would have given up for dead, and made the cross from which Mixu Paatelainen bundled the ball over the line.
Celtic's problems on and off the park then looked like assuming the proportions of a Shakespearean tragedy until some uncharacteristic defensive laxity afflicted Aberdeen.
Tom Boyd, proving that Celtic might be better served by more crosses, placed the ball on the head of the substitute, Andy Payton, who scored with no defender near him.
Liam Brady's choice of more or less the side who lost to Falkirk in the Scottish Cup the previous weekend — Rudi Vata was replaced by Brian O'Neil — was not so much a vote of confidence as a challenge to those players to prove they could not be so bad again.
John Collins, again an outstanding contributor, summed up Celtic's attitude: ‘We were so low after Brockville, it was not hard to play better than we did there.’
It is now open season on Collins.
His contract is up at the end of the season, and there will be the traditional periodic reports of other clubs' interest in him.
Arsenal's is the first name out of the hat, but Collins is unaware of any movement on that front.
‘I have only just begun discussions with Celtic over renewing my contract and it has not got to the stage of the manager making me an offer,’ said the player whose ability to impose himself on the opposition might be thought worthy of international recognition.
Collins tired of life on the margins of Scotland's squad and was not taken to the European Championship finals in Sweden.
But the time must be at hand to see if he can do for Scotland what he is doing for Celtic, and not simply because of injury to others.
Thomas is quick to underline potential
Hearts 3 Falkirk 1
By Mike Aitken
SINCE Alan McLaren broke into Hearts' first team, the production line of promising young players at Tynecastle has stalled.
It's taken the club a couple of years to get its youth policy back on track, but all the signs now suggest that the current crop of teenagers is the most promising since John Robertson, Gary Mackay and David Bowman came through the ranks in the early Eighties.
Hearts are top of the reserve league, and against Falkirk on Saturday, Kevin Thomas, a 17-year-old former Scottish Schoolboys internationalist, became the first of the new breed to earn his spurs in the senior side.
The young striker was on the pitch for just five minutes before he made his mark.
It appeared as if Thomas had muscled aside John Robertson — a man with more than 200 Premier Division goals to his credit — in the six-yard box, to mark his debut with an opportunist goal.
Later, Robertson revealed that he'd clashed not with Thomas but John Hughes, the Falkirk defender.
Nevertheless, the Scottish internationalist conceded that the last thing young Thomas lacked was self-belief.
‘He's a lad with bags of confidence and was quick to let me know that he'd scored on his debut and I hadn't.
My response was to say that the only way he can go from here is down!’ quipped Robertson.
‘That was the first time I've played with Kevin.
He's quick and strong and is the type who will get on the end of things rather than play a big part in the build-up.
In that respect he is like Duncan Shearer.’
Joe Jordan kept the teenager away from the media after the match, indicating that he'd sent Thomas home ‘to celebrate with a glass of milk’.
The Hearts manager is happy with the quality of players coming through the ranks, but will only blood them when he feels the moment is right.
‘We have one or two players of that age breaking through and Kevin was the one who got the opening,’ Jordan said.
‘He didn't look out of place against Falkirk and scored a goal which gave him and us a boost.
I didn't want to put any extra pressure on him, and when he went on I told him to keep it simple.
‘There's no doubt that young men like Kevin represent the way forward for Hearts.
They have the talent to make an impact but the game has to be right and the circumstances have to be right to bring them in.
They're only 17 and it will take time.’
Hearts hadn't scored three goals at home in a league match since August and, apart from the introduction of Thomas, it was thanks to one of their brighter performances in midfield that they defeated Falkirk with something to spare.
Tosh McKinlay, who scored once and forced Taylor to concede an own goal, Gary Mackay and Derek Ferguson all made a creative contribution to an enjoyable match.
With the internationalists McLaren and Robertson also outstanding, Hearts were much better balanced than a Falkirk side which is now paying the penalty for a lack of urgency in defence.
Jim Jefferies, the Falkirk manager, lambasted his players for lack of conviction.
‘There are too many losers in the team,’ he said.
‘We don't have the determination required.
The situation has gone on too long and I'll have to make changes.
Whenever we lose a goal we look like losing two or three.
If we want to avoid going down, then we will need fighters in our team.
‘Whatever you say about Airdrie, their players compete and play for each other.
When we go to Ibrox, we lose 5-0.
They go and compete and get a 2-2 draw.
Against Celtic in the Scottish Cup we fought like Trojans.
But it's not enough to play like that once every ten weeks.’
STANLEY HUNTER
Kids' stuff: Kevin Thomas, Hearts' 17-year-old debutant, acclaims his goal, scored minutes after coming on at Tynecastle on Saturday.
Falkirk's David Weir can't hide his disappointment
Old boy has the measure of Rangers
Rangers 2 Airdrie 2
By Ian Wood
IT IS typical of the contrary nature of things that just as the impression grows that Rangers will progress inevitably to a higher plane and leave lesser sides to their own devices, along come Airdrie, all skint knees and sweat, to sow a couple of doubts.
Not that Airdrie's football is the sort that would pack out stadia on a regular basis — the bulk of the near-40,000 who went along to Ibrox on Saturday were there to see ritual slaughter — but in the context of this confrontation with the glitzy Rangers, the Broomfield side's special brand of grim resistance was undeniably compelling.
Airdrie are anchored at the foot of the Premier Division, but with only a couple of points separating the bottom three clubs, they are not yet adrift, and a good run could yet make them safe.
Their manager, Alex MacDonald, an old Ranger himself, is clear about what his side can and cannot do: ‘We work hard and harass and make it difficult for the opposition.’
He is also shrewdly aware of what the Ibrox support, grown sleek on a diet of success, expect of their team.
‘If we can keep them out long enough, maybe the crowd will turn against them a bit and frustration will set in’— which is more or less what happened.
It may not be the philosophy of a bright, new dawn, but it fills the bill when the task is to pit a bargain-basement outfit against a multi-million-pound juggernaut, and it served MacDonald well on Saturday.
A good example of Airdrie's dogged persistence came when Alan Lawrence, looking far too frail to survive amid the Rangers defence, somehow wriggled clear of Oleg Kuznetsov on the right and flew the ball to the head of Owen Coyle, who headed high and away from Andy Goram as the goalkeeper twisted to his left.
That was Coyle's second goal, the first coming when he took a perfectly angled pass from Lawrence, and from the classic inside-right position stroked the ball to the net via the base of Goram's right-hand post.
The rest, as far as Airdrie were concerned, was the recipe a la MacDonald, though they went forward just enough to show that the incongruously exotic Justin Fashanu could be a real asset.
The result was a stutter of no consequence for Rangers, who had done enough to win several games before Coyle struck for the second time.
Ally McCoist missed an early sitter and then equalised with a beautifully flighted chip after Mark Hateley had set things up.
Rangers went ahead when a superb ball from John Brown allowed David Robertson to go down the line on the left, and McCoist was on the spot to whip home the cross.
Thereafter McCoist had two ‘goals’ disallowed — one inexplicably — and he might have done better immediately after the break when Hateley, the most dominant attacking figure on the field, crossed to the head of the striker after an excellent run down the right.
Silence of Lambie at Thistle decline
Partick Thistle 0 Dundee United 4
By Mike McLean
IT'S difficult to be objective about a match that was as one-sided as a two-headed coin.
Did Dundee United play out of their skins, or were Thistle just diabolical?
John Lambie declined to comment; his assistant, Gerry Collins, described their team as ‘a shambles’.
We couldn't argue, for Thistle's chance of taking anything from this game lasted all of 58 seconds.
That's how long they managed to compete, realistically.
At that point, Martin Clark felled Paddy Connolly and once the preliminaries were dealt with, Scott Crabbe converted the penalty.
Connolly, incisive and dangerous throughout, scored twice in the second half, and only referee Les Mottram can explain how he failed to complete a hat-trick.
On the stroke of half-time, a Duncan Ferguson header was scrambled off the line.
Claims that the ball was over the line were curtailed as Connolly slammed the ball against the stanchion and back out.
To everyone's amazement, and United's disbelief, the referee failed to award the goal.
It mattered little in the end, however, as United treated the fans to a second-half football exhibition.
Thistle's early season promise has evaporated, and debutant Julian Broddle must be wondering what he's let himself in for.
United's second goal came when Connolly chased a hopeful punt down the left.
Andy Murdoch raced to the corner of his box to challenge, and was sweetly lobbed.
The third came from another defensive clearance which found Connolly in his own half inside the centre circle.
With not a Thistle player between him and Murdoch or within ten yards of him, he turned and raced through, flanked by three colleagues, to pick his spot.
Ferguson marked his return by latching on to an Alan Main clearance to beat Murdoch to the jump on the edge of the box, and head in the fourth.
The controversial striker took time to settle, but might have had a hat-trick, missing the target when clean through in either half.
Wasteful Motherwell have to rely on Dykstra to save a point
Motherwell 0 Hibs 0
By Martin Dempster
IT'S NO good playing attractive football when all it earns you is the odd pat on the back.
Just ask Falkirk, who have produced some great stuff this season yet look increasingly likely to be playing their football in the First Division next season.
So, too, could Motherwell if they continue to create what manager Tommy McLean described as ‘pretty patterns’ but lack the finishing touch which prevented them from taking full points from this entertaining encounter at Fir Park.
In the first half alone McLean's men created enough chances to win a handful of games, yet such was their lack of confidence in and around the box that Chris Reid, the young Hibs goalkeeper, did not have to do anything out of the ordinary to keep his side in the game.
Indeed, it was the man at the opposite end of the park, Sieb Dykstra, who had the busier afternoon as he produced three crucial saves, the middle one — he was backpedalling as he acrobatically tipped over a superb Pat McGinlay shot — being the pick of the bunch.
Dykstra started the season behind Billy Thomson in the pecking order at Fir Park, but even though the former Dundee United man was recalled for a game after Dykstra let in ten goals in three matches, the roles have now been reversed.
Bought from Roda JC at the beginning of last season, the 6ft 5in Dykstra not surprisingly likes charging off his line to gather cross balls.
He has kept five clean sheets in his last seven outings, a feat which is down to his own ability and the fact he ‘now has a good understanding with the defenders in front of me’.
Though Dykstra is confident Motherwell will avoid relegation —‘we have too many good players in the side to go down’— his manager was disappointed they had taken only one point.
‘We should have won out of the park,’ commented McLean.
‘In the first half I thought we played some great stuff, but football is all about what happens in front of goal and we were disappointing so far as that was concerned.’
The Hibs manager, Alex Miller, was also disappointed, because leading scorer, Darren Jackson, had failed to shake off the stomach injury which had seen him miss the Scottish Cup victory over Cowdenbeath earlier in the week.
‘It is a concern,’ he admitted, ‘because Darren is such a big loss to us.’
If Keith Wright's performance in this match was anything to go by, then he will certainly be glad when Jackson is back riding shotgun with him in the Hibs attack.
Exactly a year ago, Wright, who has a paltry six goals to his name this season, was playing well enough to be making his full Scotland debut against Northern Ireland, but here he looked leaden-footed and posed little threat.
On a brighter note for Hibs — this was the Easter Road side's first point in three matches — 20-year-old Steven Tweed, playing only his second game for the club, produced a solid performance alongside the impressive Gordon Hunter in the centre of the defence, while another youngster, 22-year-old David Farrell, also earned praise from Miller for succeeding in keeping the evergreen Davie Cooper relatively quiet.
Stainrod can't afford to leave himself out Dundee1 St Johnstone0
DUNDEE's player-manager, Simon Stainrod, may have to reconsider his on-field role after yet another ‘talisman’ contribution towards Dundee's consolidation hopes in the Premier Division.
The flamboyant Englishman hurried back into his own plans on Saturday after completing a four-game suspension, and how this paid off, as Dundee continued their push clear of the relegation zone.
Stainrod, whose early-season thoughts tended towards quietly edging away from the playing side to concentrate on management matters, has since rediscovered his scoring touch.
In only his fifth start of the campaign on Saturday, he bagged his fifth goal — and it proved to be the match-winner.
Dundee defender, Steve Pittman, latched on to a defensive error by John Inglis to race down the left flank.
When his telling cross arrived in the danger area, Stainrod stole in on the blind side of the Perth defence to power the ball home first time from 12 yards.
This clash between the old rivals seldom got off the ground in terms of entertainment value, but the more adventurous team won the day.
Success stretched Dundee's much-needed unbeaten league run to three games, from which five points have been gathered.
Fifers make move
DUNFERMLINE leapfrogged over Kilmarnock into second-top spot in the First Division with a deserved 2-1 win over bottom club, Cowdenbeath.
Two fine headed goals from Paul Smith and Scott Leitch wrapped up the points in a hard-fought derby match at Central Park which saw Cowdenbeath's Billy Herd ordered off early in the second half for a foul on Neale Cooper.
Herd was shown the red card only three minutes after Nicky Henderson had grabbed an equaliser for Cowdenbeath.
Leitch netted the winner 18 minutes from time.
Leaders Raith Rovers have a seven-point lead at the top following their 2-0 win over Stirling Albion.
Kilmarnock went down by the only goal of the game at Dumbarton, where several hundred fans were evacuated from the main stand just minutes before the game was due to start.
A fire in the roof space above the directors' boardroom was to blame for the match being delayed 40 minutes, but the fans did not panic as police and fire service personnel ensured there was no danger.
Jodami wins Irish thriller
JODAMI remains a best-priced 4-1 for next month's Cheltenham Gold Cup after a thrilling win over Chatam in Ireland's most prestigious steeplechase yesterday at Leopardstown.
The Irish have won the Hennessy Cognac Gold Cup just once in six runnings and were never in with a shout of improving that record.
The British raiders had the race to themselves from the final turn as Jodami overhauled his chief rival in an exciting duel that was only decided on the line.
Chatam, running for only the second time this season, went a length up as the pair jumped the last together but Mark Dwyer, riding with hands and heels, forced Jodami a head in front at the post.
Ireland's General Idea was a distance back in third.
As a trial for the Cheltenham Gold Cup, the outcome of the race caused few ripples in the ante-post market, although Chatam has shortened to a best priced 10-1 (from 16-1) with Ladbrokes.
The Fellow, who had conceded weight to both when third in Newbury's Hennessy Gold Cup in November, remains 6-4 favourite.
Jodami's trainer, Peter Beaumont, said: ‘He went very well on perfect jumping ground.
It would help us if it's a bit softer at Cheltenham which may also hinder The Fellow.
Strictly on form we can't beat The Fellow, But Jodami can improve on that.
There's still a little more to work on.’
— PA
Murray's new mile record signals return to form
By Sandy Sutherland
YVONNE MURRAY set a UK all-comers record of 4min 32.0sec for the mile in the Great Britain v US Vauxhall International at the National Indoor Arena in Birmingham on Saturday.
But the victory left her still undecided about whether to bid for a place in the British team for the World Indoor Championships in Toronto next month.
‘I've still to make my mind up,’ said Murray, who runs in a special 2,000 metres race in next Saturday's TSB Invitation meeting in Birmingham before leaving the next day for three road races in California; a 5K, 10K and 5K.
‘It's the first time I've run the distance indoors for six or seven years and the object of the race was to hurt myself,’ said the 28-year-old Lucozade Motherwell club member.
‘I cleared out with four laps to go,’ said Murray, whose time was almost identical to that she set outdoors in Belfast last August, the last time she ran the distance.
Her best time is 4:23.08 set in 1986, and it must be admitted that the indoor mark she broke on Saturday was a soft one.
Murray's club-mate, Tom McKean, has set his store on the World Indoors but first he has a personal score to settle with his GB team-mate, David Sharpe, who pipped him on Saturday to make it 1-1 between them indoors this winter.
McKean narrowly failed to catch his Jarrow rival with a late run for the line.
Edinburgh Southern's Elliot Bunney was less happy with his form in the 60m, finishing fifth and third Briton (behind Jason John, 6.73sec, and Jason Fergus, 6.79), in 6.83 after picking up a false start.
He is waiting to see if he receives an invitation for the TSB event or whether he will run for Scotland against Wales on Friday night.
Meanwhile, Sally Gunnell yesterday outlined her dream of becoming the first British woman to win a unique ‘grand slam’ of major championship gold medals.
Following her win in Birmingham, she revealed her two-year plan to add the World, European and Commonwealth crowns to her Olympic one-lap hurdles title.
‘I'm right at the peak of my career now, and it's my ambition to go for the ‘grand slam’,’ said Gunnell, after winning the 400m, her first race in Britain for five months.
Even though only about 80 per cent fit, the first fruits of her new training regime were reaped when she outpaced a mediocre field to win in an unspectacular 53.38sec.
Next Saturday, she will hope to lower that time by a second on the same track in the TSB Invitation.
Steve Smith, star of the show as Britain's men and women both earned comfortable wins over their sub-standard US opposition, looks poised to extend his indoor season to the World Championships in Canada next month after his latest record-breaking high-jump feat.
The 19-year-old Liverpudlian, who set a new British record of 2.36m in Wuppertal eight days earlier, soared over a UK all-comers best 2.35m with such ease that it will surely persuade him to take his soaring talent to Toronto.
The European Indoor champion, Matthew Yates, has ruled Toronto out of his plans.
After winning his debut 3,000m in superb style just 36 hours after returning from a training spell in South Africa, he insisted: ‘It's a waste of time.
I'll be concentrating all my energies on Stuttgart.’
BASKETBALL
Capital side still on top
CITY OF EDINBURGH women stayed on top of the Scottish League first division yesterday with a 99-48 win over an Edinburgh Royals side containing at least four players who have represented Scotland.
Glasgow City Brightsiders went back to the top of the men's first division with a 117-67 away win over Cumnock.
With the other top teams not in action, Brightsiders have a one-point advantage over Edinburgh Burger Kings.
BOWLING
Corsie opens title bid
THE two-times former winner, Richard Corsie, is one of the Scots in action on the opening day of the £140,000 Midland Bank World Indoor Championship in Preston's Guild Hall.
Corsie lines up against South African Bill Moseley.
BOXING
Piper calls the tune
WELSHMAN Nicky Piper hardly had to take a punch in beating Argentinian Miguel Maldonado to win the WBA Penta-Continental title at Manchester's Free Trade Hall.
James Toney captured the IBF super-middleweight title from Iran Barkley when the doctor halted their bout in Las Vegas after the ninth round of their scheduled 12-rounder, while Markus Bott, of Germany, won the WBO cruiserweight title when he outpointed American holder Tyrone Booze over 12 rounds in Hamburg.
FENCING
Dutch success for Chalmers
STIRLING's John Chalmers, the 26-year-old Scottish Open champion, won the Epee title in the Donar International in Groningen, the Netherlands, overcoming strong opposition from an entry of 90 world-class fencers.
Chalmers has already qualified for the Challenge Martini in London on 6 March.
HOCKEY
Hat-trick for Menzieshill
MENZIESHILL secured the Division I title in the Scottish Indoor League for the third successive year when old rivals MIM beat second-placed Kelburne 7-6 at the Dick McTaggart Centre in Dundee.
Inverleith retained their place in the top flight with a dramatic 7-6 victory over Touche Ross in the final game.
On the women's front, Scottish Universities received the ideal boost for their defence of the British Universities title in Northern Ireland at the end of next month by retaining the Celtic Students Trophy at Stepps yesterday.
OLYMPICS
Backing for beach volleyball
THE International Olympic Committee president, Juan Antonio Samaranch, said yesterday that beach volleyball was worth a place in the Olympic Games.
‘I think it deserves to be in the Olympics if possible in Atlanta, if not in the year 2000,’ he said after watching the final of the Brazilian leg of the world beach volleyball championship in Rio de Janiero.
RALLYING
McRae third in Sweden
SCOTLAND's Colin McRae finished third in the Swedish Rally behind home winner Mats Jonsson.
McRae, who had led in his Subaru Legacy on the first day, was 28 seconds behind Jonsson — winning for the second successive year.
Frenchman Didier Auriol, who was leading for much of Saturday, was disqualified for receiving unofficial help on the second of the day's seven special stages while lying fifth.
SHINTY
Lochaber lift trophy
LOCHABER lifted the first silverware of the season when they beat Kinlochshiel 2-1 in the final of the Glenmorangie North Qualifying Cup.
Colin Fraser opened the scoring for Kinlochshiel but Angus Morrison and Michael MacIntosh replied for Lochaber before the break.
In the south, David McPhee scored four as second division Ballachullish beat Kilmory 7-2 after extra time to clinch a place in the Glenmorangie Qualifying Cup final.
SKIING
Seizinger strikes gold
GERMANY's Katja Seizinger won the women's super-giant slalom at the world championships in Morioka, Japan, yesterday.
Seizinger, winner of the women's downhill World Cup last season, finished 0.16sec ahead of Austria's Sylvia Eder.
Norway's Astrid Loedemel was third.
The men's super-giant slalom was cancelled after snow fell heavily on the Kotakakura piste.
SWIMMING
Record double for Foster
ENGLAND's Mark Foster wrote his name in the record books for the second successive day when he set a European short-course 50 metres freestyle record at a World Cup meeting in Gelsenkirchen, Germany, yesterday.
Foster, who swam a world best of 23.72 seconds for the 50 metres butterfly on Saturday, managed a fast start and powered home in 21.72, shaving 0.04 of a second from former East German Nils Rudolph's three-year-old best.
Livingston: interview setback for appeal
JASON Livingston's future in athletics looks even more bleak following his reported newspaper ‘confession’ that he must have inadvertently taken a banned steroid before the Olympics.
The 21-year-old sprinter, who failed a pre-Games drugs test in July, is due to appeal to an independent tribunal within the next few weeks against his four-year ban imposed by the British Athletic Federation.
But his revelations in The People that he was ‘guilty’ of inadvertently taking a food supplement drink which must have contained the drug Methandianone left even his advisers wondering on what grounds he could still appeal.
Until now, Livingston has consistently protested total innocence of how he could have provided a positive sample in a Sports Council test just before the Games.
But the newspaper article even ‘amazed’ and dismayed Geoff Morphitis, chairman of Livingston's Shaftesbury Barnet club, who has helped the sprinter prepare his defence.
‘These revelations come as news to me,’ said Morphitis.
‘If they're true, I'm disappointed that he didn't hold his hands up earlier and tell us.
Maybe then we would have prepared a different course of action.’
‘He never told me that he was going to do a newspaper article and I just wonder where this leaves Jason and his legal advisers now as far as an appeal goes.’
A BAF spokesman, Tony Ward, said: ‘We will have to talk to Livingston and his advisers to find out whether they are still going to go ahead with the appeal.’
Livingston was quoted as saying he was given the supplement drink by a friend and took it for three weeks before the Games, not knowing it contained the steroid. — PA
But Ward re-asserted BAF's belief that ‘ignorance on the part of an athlete cannot be taken as a plea of not guilty.
It's the duty of every athlete to be aware of what he or she is taking.’
Questions must also be asked about why the sprinter has only now, after five months of considerable time and expense from lawyers, advisers and athletics officials, revealed information that even Morphitis did not know about.
‘That may be something the British Athletic Federation management board will want to discuss,’ said Ward.
Cannon's happy return to Kirkcaldy for victory
KIRKCALDY seems to be Christine Cannon's favourite ice rink.
Yesterday she won the Royal Bank of Scotland Scottish Women's Championship for a third time there and a fourth time overall.
In the final, her Stranraer team of Claire Milne, Mairi Herd and Margaret Richardson beat Lorna Muirhead's Kirkcaldy by 6-3.
Cannon's team is the same as did so well in the world Championships in Winnipeg two seasons ago and they are again worthy champions.
Muirhead, with two former team-mates of Cannon in her side — Margaret Scott and Kimmie Brown — defeated the new champions in the league section and they too had their chances in the final.
But misses at times when they seemed set for a good end let the Stranraer team in.
Milne was in form at third for the winners and Cannon played some superb shots as well.
Cannon raised one of her own stones to lie shot at the first where they stole a single.
Cannon, after a miss, hit and lay for a single at the fourth and then they stole two at the fifth where Muirhead just failed by a fraction with a raised take out.
Cannon stole one at the sixth to go 5-1 up.
Muirhead had Cannon on the ropes at the tenth and looked like getting the 3 needed to force an extra end but, with the last stone, took out one of her own.
The winners will represent Scotland in the World Championships in Geneva next month.
‘Confused’ Seve is 14 behind winner
SPAIN's Seve Ballesteros admitted being confused by his form after trailing in 14 shots behind American winner Brian Watts in the Hong Kong Open yesterday.
Ballesteros, who finished the tournament with a demoralising round of 75 after Saturday's promising 69, said: ‘I am totally confused with the game at the moment.
‘I will continue to work at it and look forward.
I always try the best I can, but at the moment things are not going well.
I am having a tough time.’
Watts withstood a tremendous charge from Taiwan's Chen Tse-chung to win his first title by just one shot on 274.
Ireland's David Feherty carded a final round 68 to finish in third place, just two off the pace.
Sally Prosser (Wentworth) gave Britain a third Asian title in four weeks when a final round of 75 carried her to victory in the JAL Malaysian Open at Rahman Putra in Kuala Lumpur on Saturday.
Prosser emulated Laura Davies and Janet Soulsby who respectively took the Thailand and Singapore Opens when her six-under-par 210 left her six strokes clear of Helen Wadsworth, of Wales, and Sweden's Maria Bertilskold.
Britain's Paul Hoad earned a share of fourth place in the New Zealand Open in Paraparaumu yesterday.
His final round of 73 left him on 279, five strokes behind the winner, Australian Peter Fowler, who shot 67 for a two-stroke triumph.
A confident Tom Kite shot a bogey-free 65 to move two strokes ahead of the field after the fourth round of the Bob Hope Classic in La Quinta, California.
Clinton Whitelaw won the the South African Open by two strokes over his home course of Glendower, east of Johannesburg.
The 22-year-old finished on 279, nine under par.
Lewis stands firm as England head for second defeat
CHRIS LEWIS savaged a maiden Test hundred in Madras yesterday, but then admitted: ‘I did it when the pressure was off.’
All-rounder Lewis reached his 112-ball century with a spectacular six off Venkat Raju, swung high over long on from yards down the pitch.
Yet it was all in a losing cause because England still finished the fourth day of the second Test 43 runs in arrears at 231 for eight in their second innings.
Today, they will inevitably go 2-0 down to India in the three-match series.
Lewis's fireworks merely served to emphasise just how inadequately England's top order played when the follow-on began 274 runs behind.
Neil Fairbrother went from 38 to a sparkling 83 yesterday morning, another Test best performance, to boost England's first innings to 286 and show that the terrors of a turning pitch could be tamed.
But then only Robin Smith of England's top six made India work for his wicket second time around.
The rest, shame to say, all gave it away as England folded dismally to 99 for six.
England's batting in this Test has been as dodgy as the plate of prawns which ruled out captain Graham Gooch.
Without Gooch, the victim of food poisoning the night before the game, much depended on Mike Gatting if England were to escape with a draw following India's first innings run-riot of 560 for six declared.
But Gatting has disappointed hugely, contributing to his downfall in both innings — yesterday picking the wrong ball to sweep after he and Smith were threatening to rally England from 12 for two with a third wicket stand of 59.
Alec Stewart and Graeme Hick, who played so well in England's first innings, bagged ducks just when their country needed a repeat performance.
Stewart made the mistake of moving too far across his stumps and then trying to flick a straight ball to leg, while Hick went third ball after lunch to a sloppy drive at Kapil Dev and an edge to second slip.
Hick's first innings 64 looked as if it could be the Test breakthrough England have been so patiently waiting for.
But, 24 hours later, he was back to the player who before this Test had made just 333 from 19 innings at an average of 17.53.
Richard Blakey, brought in when Gooch fell ill because Stewart wanted to open but not keep wicket as captain, looked out of his depth in the top order.
The Yorkshireman added just six to his first innings duck, completing a miserable Test debut by shouldering arms to a ball from Anil Kumble, which plucked out his off stump.
Why Michael Atherton was not immediately drafted in when the experience of Gooch was lost before the start, with Stewart being told to keep wicket as originally planned, remains one of the mysteries of the tour — and as crass a selection error as leaving out Phil Tufnell from the first Test at Calcutta.
Leg-spinner Kumble ended the day with five wickets, returning midway through the final session to halt Ian Salisbury's dogged resistance in support of the inspired Lewis.
Fairbrother was another Kumble victim, skying a catch to mid-off to be sixth out and playing the shot of a man fed up with being the last recognised batsman caught in a hopeless position.
Yet at least England can now hope in the future for better things from the bat of Lewis, who has always looked to have the ability to be a genuine all-rounder at Test level but until this match had scored just 483 runs from 15 Tests at an average of 24.
He had scored only three half centuries for England, with a previous top-score of 70 against New Zealand last winter and admitted: ‘This is the sort of innings I would like to play more often for England.’
‘But today the situation took the pressure off me; most people thought the game would be over by tonight.
‘My approach was quite simple.
I felt there was no point in just trying to occupy the crease.
‘In the first innings, I waited for something to happen, and it did I was back in the pavilion for a duck!
The pitch was deteriorating and things were always were likely to happen if you just tried to survive.’
Asked about the daring six that took him to his century, Lewis added: ‘I had got to 90 by attacking the bowling so I was determined to keep playing that way.
I went down the pitch and the ball was there for the shot.
I felt good and it came off.’
Lewis hit two sixes and 13 fours in his magnificent century, the first six a straight hit against off spinner Rajesh Chauhan.
He also enjoyed staunch support from both Salisbury (12), who stayed 82 minutes to help add 73 for the seventh wicket and Tufnell, who was 10 not out at the close and had become the fourth England player in the match to better his previous best Test score.
Poor umpiring decisions against Smith, Hick and Salisbury, all  adjudged lbw to balls drifting down the leg side, did not help England's cause in the first innings.
But today, they simply batted badly.
When the end comes tomorrow there can be no excuses.
India have fully deserved their series triumph, even though they were lucky to win the toss both here and in Calcutta.
Mohammed Azharuddin's side have bowled, batted, caught and fought better than England.
And English batting technique, especially against the Indian spinners in trying but not terrible conditions, has been found sadly wanting.
Down but not out: Chris Lewis sweeps a ball to the boundary on his way to an unbeaten century against India in Madras
Sparkling 66 sweeps James to victory
From Mike Britten Tenerife
MARK JAMES (right) enjoyed another red letter day on the European Tour when he scored his second victory of the season here in Tenerife.
The 39-year-old Englishman swept to a final-round 66 at Golf del Sur to add the Tenerife Open title to the  Madeira Open crown he won last month, and to displace Nick Faldo at the head of the money list.
James won by six shots with a 13-under-par total of 275 after his Irish rivals Eamonn Darcy and Christy O'Connor, jun, suffered a last-round collapse.
Darcy, in second place overnight, took 74 and O'Connor fell from third to 25th after crashing to an embarrassing 80.
South African newcomer, De Wet Basson, took the runners-up prize of £38,880 with a 68 for 281, three shots better than Darcy.
James, winner of almost £102,000 this season, said: ‘I cannot remember playing golf as good as that for four rounds,’ he commented.
‘I amazed myself by ripping the ball at the flag.’
James collected £58,330 with with ease after birdie-ing four of the first six holes.
His majestic iron play gave him birdies at the short second and sixth and in between his putter also worked admirably to acquire birdies at the fourth and long fifth.
When he stepped on to the seventh tee he was five shots clear of all challengers and the title was safely under lock and key.
James added: ‘It is still too early to start thinking about the Ryder Cup.
My ambition at the moment is to make sure I qualify for this year's Open Championship.’
James is now fourth in the Ryder table behind Barry Lane, this win having taken him ahead of Sandy Lyle.
After turning in 32 he treated the sun-basking crowds to some confident shot making, adding further birdies at the tenth and fourteenth to underline his command
Darcy was taken aback by the speed of the Englishman's surge, and after going into four successive bunkers from the start, was unable to close the gap.
O'Connor, jnr, three-putted himself to extinction for he needed 22 strokes on the greens in the first nine holes which he covered in 43 shots.
He three-putted four times in the first six holes and on the inward run twice fluffed chips to take a third 6 at the thirteenth.
Darcy commented ‘It was a very negative day and I got all the bad breaks going.
O'Connor, jnr said ‘I hit the ball under every tree and bush and the only thing I did not suffer was a heart attack.’
Former European Open champion Andrew Murray, of Manchester, took a share of fourth place with Argentine Eduardo Romero (69) and the Caribbean newcomer Stephen Ames who shot 67 for the second day in a row.
Peter Smith, of Aberdeen was the best of the surviving Scots, finishing with 70 for 291 alongside O'Connor, jnr to win £3,169.
Kite flying high after closing 62
TOM KITE yesterday shot a course-record ten-under-par 62 to win the Bob Hope Classic with a 90-hole aggregate of 325, 35 under par and a record for the US Tour.
The 43-year-old US Open champion, who won by six strokes, had 37 birdies and two eagles in the five-day tournament at La Quinta, California.
His aggregate was four better than the old 90-hole record of 329 set by Andrew Magee and DA Weibring in the 1991 Las Vegas Invitational.
Saving his best for the last, Kite, who started the final round with a one-shot lead, closed the greatest scoring binge of his 22-year US Tour career with a 29 on the back nine on the Arnold Palmer Course at PGA West.
He finished in some style, picking up birdies at the last four holes.
Rick Fehr, who, like Kite, lost out in a play-off for this title a year ago, closed with a 67 to match the old tournament record of 331.
His score, good enough to win all 34 of the previous Hope Classics, was a distant second against Kite's exploits which included scores of 67, 67 and 64 on Bermuda Dunes, Tamarisk and Indian Wells respectively, and scores of 65 and 62 at the Palmer Course.
The victory, the 18th of Kite's career, was worth $198,000 and lifted him into the top spot on this year's US Tour money-winning list with $292,361.
It also put the man who has won more money than anyone else in golf within reach of the $8 million mark.
He how has $7,905,279. 930215 
Designer stubble in trouble at Harrods
Trouble in store for designer stubble
DESIGNER stubble at Harrods?
Perish the thought, dear boy.
The world-renowned store in London's Knightsbridge has issued guidelines to its 3,500 staff on how they should look at work, it was disclosed yesterday.
In an attempt to stop any counter revolution, it is having no truck with the more exotic side of fashion.
If men must sport beards and moustaches, they are to be be kept neatly trimmed.
And ponytails, earrings, or that stubbly look are out.
For women, make-up should be ‘light and fresh’ while jewellery must be discreet and worn sparingly.
Women must also be in a plain black, navy or grey structured skirt, dress or tailored suit, with a white or cream blouse and ‘plain stockings or tights in conservative business colours.’
Men should wear a dark conservative suit in navy, black or grey with a white, cream or conservatively-striped shirt and a discreet tie.
Harrods, which last year refused entry to Jason Donovan, the singer, because he was wearing torn denims, said the guidelines were part of a programme to keep staff up to date with the latest styles.
‘As styles change and looks change we have to update the look,’ said a spokesman, Peter Willasey.
‘Any extremes of fashion such as goatee beards are not encouraged.
Our customers expect to be served by people who are well turned out.’
— PA
Mr Willasey expected the latest document to last through most of the 1990s, but it would be reviewed subject to any changes in fashion trends.
— PA 
If, as Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind said (according to your report today)‘the Cold War is over’, would he therefore tell us why we still need Trident?
Tourism review
I welcome your editorial comments today (‘All-inclusive package’) on the Scottish Office's review on tourism.
Your description of this as a review of Scotland's promotion apparatus will, however, worry many in the industry.
Our understanding is that the Scottish Office brief is far wider than to look only at the promotion of Scotland as a destination.
If tourism is to be properly recognised as Scotland's largest employer, and recognised for the very considerable revenue that it brings into the country, it must first be given higher priority within the Scottish Office itself.
International tourism is now a highly sophisticated and competitive industry and the review needs to create a mechanism capable of producing a co-ordinated overall strategy for the development of tourism in Scotland.
Better-funded and targeted promotion is fundamental, but promotion must be linked to our transport policies, to infrastructure, development and environmental requirements and to language and skills training.
The skills and disciplines to deliver each of these elements is available in Scotland, but will only be effectively utilised if they are part of our overall tourism strategy under one board and not, as now, with a variety of organisations working in partial isolation, and indeed often in competition.
The presence of current organisations involved in tourism will be necessary, but if the new organisation is to succeed the private sector must be much more actively involved in decision making than has been allowed in the past.
Time wasted
It is now five weeks since the Braer was wrecked.
There has been much debate about the effect on the local economy, the health of local residents, and the environment.
Some of these effects were immediate; others will only come to light in time, if at all.
The ecological monitoring group is a useful initiative to ensure that the environmental impacts of the spill would be assessed.
However, to get some idea of the true impact, it is essential to put a comprehensive monitoring programme in place as soon as possible.
The monitoring group has a chairman but no members and no date for its first meeting.
Meanwhile, the situation in the marine environment around Shetland is changing.
Valuable information and time are being lost.
Some of the short-term effects may well have come and gone.
We may never learn the full cost.
Tricycle man
J E Nicholson (Points of View, 10 February) can stop wondering who ‘the man on the tricycle is and where he is going’, as I am that man.
I commute from Dunfermline to Edinburgh to work for an enlightened firm of architects which designed into its office a shower facility, which allows me to cycle in all weathers.
Like Mr Nicholson, I have been commuting for more than ten years from Fife, but hardly ever by car, which I find is too nerve-wracking and frustrating an experience and almost as bad as commuting by bus.
Overcrowding on the bus service is even worse than on the train service.
I agree with your correspondent's sentiments regarding the Forth Road Bridge and the removal of the tolls, but he will only be arriving a few minutes earlier at Edinburgh's infamous Barnton roundabout tailback, which I believe can only be resolved by switching transport policy away from cars and road freight.
Instead, we must develop and improve our railways (currently receiving the lowest subsidy of any nationwide rail system in Europe) and obviously, for commuters travelling shorter distances, the use of bicycles should be encouraged with safe cyclist-only lanes.
If people are fit to work, they are fit enough to cycle five miles (on average, 74 per cent of all car journeys are less than five miles).
Using a car weighing over a ton to transport a 12 stone person less than five miles is like using an atomic bomb to kill a canary.
I am encouraged that in the last few years the number of cyclists I see commuting to and in Edinburgh has increased.
Perhaps Mr Nicholson will buy a bicycle with the £192 toll money he will save by crossing the bridge by that method, let alone the cost of petrol, road tax and maintenance.
He will then discover the pleasure and satisfaction of cycling to work.
Parading pain
Can someone please tell me what are the benefits expected from the current practice of having the relations of murder victims parade their pain on television?
If the impassioned pleas are directed at those close to the culprits, I cannot see them having much effect.
If the intention is to jog the memories and consciences of possible witnesses, surely this could be better achieved by a simple request by the officer in charge of the investigation.
The law officers should put a stop to the practice forthwith.
Eccentric
I see that the television game show that inspired letters to you recently has been at it again.
Yesterday it had ‘calm’ and ‘salaam’rhyming with ‘arm’!
But that was not the day's only Anglican eccentricity.
We had a spokesman for the English Football Association proclaiming that the new soccer strip was a  representation of the ‘traditional red, white and blue’.
The English Rugby Union seems to be afflicted by the same misconception.
It is perhaps just as well that the English cannot understand Burns or they would probably also hijack him.
NZ example
Bernard Hickey reports on New Zealand's plans for rail privatisation (Business, 9 February) and recommends ‘a little Antipodean train-spotting’ to us.
Having done so, I find the one feature that is common to both the New Zealand and British schemes is that their basic purpose is to relieve financially-embarrassed governments of claims for further investment.
The alleged purpose of improving the service and operating at a profit has already been achieved by New Zealand Rail as a state-owned enterprise, as Bernard Hickey points out.
That is what is making it attractive to private buyers, whereas here the Government naively believes the opposite, that privatisation of itself will do the trick.
New Zealand Rail is likely to be sold off in one year as one going concern, comprising the network, rolling stock and inter-island train ferries, as urged by the railway management.
In contrast, the scheme for BR is fragmented, confused, spread over a dozen years and opposed accordingly by railway staff and users.
The key point in the New Zealand Rail story has nothing to do with privatisation.
It is its remarkable success as a freight carrier, from which Scotland, in its contrasting failure on a network similar in some respects, could learn a great deal.
Offside?
If Mrs Ebyth Morton (Points of View, today) was disappointed at the failure to show clips from the France-Scotland match in the BBC television news last Saturday, I wonder what she would have thought about Scottish Television's choice on Sunday: ‘2:30 Scotsport.
Live coverage — Crystal Palace v Arsenal.’?
Killing fields
I am surely not alone in feeling profoundly sad over the so-called reprieve of certain regiments in the British Army.
For a few months, I entertained a ray of hope that after many, many years there was now less need for young men to face death in battle, but that hope has now died.
We are told by our leaders that new killing fields around the world have to be serviced by British soldiers and that more, not fewer, men are needed.
What makes me really despair, however, is the way in which ordinary people, including the families of those who served and died in these regiments, are campaigning vigorously for their continuance.
This is a clear indication of the effectiveness of the cynical propaganda used by political and military leaders.
They turn unspeakable horror into honour and glory.
Glamorous uniforms, marching bands, waving banners and gleaming medals have, in many countries round the world, worked their magic.
Countless millions have suffered and died in order to satisfy the power lust of a handful of evil men and we have learned nothing except new ways of slaughtering our fellow men in yet more efficient and hideous ways.
Scots, in particular, should rejoice over the disbandment of a regiment, praying that at last their sons' names need not be added to the memorials which stand in every town, village and glen across the country as mute testament to the suffering and sorrow of the past.
The subtle effects of centuries of propaganda will not be easily overcome, but we could make a start by looking more honestly at the reality of war and stop being blinded by the glamour.
To disband every army everywhere; now that would be something to celebrate!
Useful chaps, lawyers
THE good, wrote Plutarch (somewhat dubiously), have no need of an advocate.
Ministers in the toils, by contrast, clearly find m'learned friends an expedient, if inconsistent, recourse.
The Government's latest position on the Maastricht Bill debacle, presented with patrician brazenness by Douglas Hurd yesterday as the law officers' latest position, is that it matters not a whit whether MPs approve Labour's amendment on the social chapter.
Previously, it would appear, the law officers had mistakenly advised ministers (and ministers the Commons) that it mattered enough to wreck the Maastricht Treaty.
Last week, it seemed to matter enough for Mr Hurd to hint that the Government would refuse to ratify if the amendment prevailed.
By the weekend, the legal advice was apparently that ministers could tell Parliament to go hang.
Now, it is that they have no need to do anything so rash.
Previous statements, as Ron Ziegler used to tell the press during Watergate, are inoperative.
The rationale behind this staggeringly convenient interpretation seems to run as follows.
First, the Bill is not about ratifying the Treaty, but about incorporating its provisions into British statute.
By deleting the social protocol, Parliament would be making no inroads on British law, since the protocol excludes the UK from social chapter legislation.
Second, the protocol's main effect is to authorise the other 11 EC states to use Community institutions in pursuit of the 1989 Social Charter.
Therefore, to excise it would not imply any reversal of Britain's opt-out.
Suppose, for sake of argument, that this is indeed the definitive legal position.
It would imply that Labour was ill-advised in ever tabling the amendment, and in believing it to undermine the opt-out.
Well, there seems to have been a lot of ill-advice about.
If the amendment's supporters were wrong, so was the Government until yesterday.
But the issue penetrates, or ought to, rather deeper than the fine weave of legal technicality.
The Government is ostensibly looking to Parliament to confer not just statutory enactment of what it negotiated at Maastricht, but moral and political assent.
Mr Major himself was clear enough about that, stressing time and again to Britain's partners that the Government would only ratify the Treaty if the terms proved acceptable to Parliament.
Even yesterday, Mr Hurd was insisting that the UK would not ratify unless the Bill was approved by Parliament.
But what do ‘approved’ or ‘acceptable’now mean?
That ratification depends on Parliament only dissenting in legally ambiguous ways?
Ministers might justly argue that in this case the dissent is also politically ambiguous, given the diverse support for the amendment.
It is a dangerous path, however, when the executive takes it upon itself to qualify Parliament's decisions.
The Government is right to want Maastricht ratified, but it should be winning its case by leadership and statesmanship, not by hiding behind its lawyers.
Pragmatism rules
REALITY has caught up with Lithuania.
After being among the first of the former Soviet republics to fight to free itself from the embrace of Moscow, it has now come full circle with the recognition that it must look East as well as West for its own benefit.
At first sight the election of a former Communist to become the country's next president may appear surprising, but there are a number of factors which were in his favour.
It would be misleading and simplistic to interpret the result as a vote for Lithuania's past.
What this election was about was partly the speed of economic reform — as in so many other eastern European countries — but mainly the candidates themselves and whether the republic should build links with Russia or the West.
While the new president, Algirdas Brazauskas, was leader of the Baltic state's Communist party, it was also he who led the split with the central authorities in Moscow in 1989 and supported the country's moves to independence.
But what seems to have played the greater part is that he was the local candidate, whereas his rival, Stasys Lozoraitis, was seen as an incomer.
For there was little to differentiate them in the policies which they espoused during the campaign.
Both of them were for a free market, the introduction of Lithuania's own currency and withdrawal of Russian troops.
Brazauskas adopted a more cautious line regarding the too rapid dismantling of state industries, although he still emphasised that privatisation needed to be speeded up.
Lithuanians have been hit hard economically since they regained independence and his cautious approach to economic reform will have won him much support.
The real difference between the candidates, however, was their view of the direction in which Lithuania should be turning internationally.
While Lozoraitis urged Lithuanians to look past their current hardship to a western democratic future, Brazauskas preached pragmatism towards Moscow.
The latter's is the more realistic stance.
Lithuania is dependent on its oil from Moscow.
It will also find it hard to break into western markets with products which have difficulty matching the quality of western goods.
Brazauskas has stressed the need to regain lost markets in the rest of the former Soviet Union.
Furthermore, a greater emphasis on relations with Moscow does not imply giving up the country's own democratic future.
In elections these days, wherever they take place, pragmatism tends to win the day.
Small print between the lines
BRITAIN'S opt-out from the social chapter of the Maastricht treaty was the most glittering of the prizes Prime Minister John Major brought home from his ‘game, set and match’ negotiations.
He believes its provisions to be socialistic and that they would cost hundreds of thousands of jobs in Britain while hampering enterprise in industry and small businesses.
Yet both Labour MPs and Euro-MPs in the Tories' Christian Democrat sister parties believe the provision has been over-hyped.
Labour, however, also believes the rights afforded workers would be an essential mirror to the free market.
The social chapter, which takes up three pages of the 134-page treaty, is merely a statement of intent to implement a social dimension within the EC.
But implementation would require a directive, on which any country would have a veto.
The chapter commits the EC to ‘the promotion of employment, improved living and working conditions, proper social conditions, dialogue between management and labour…‘
It promises Community support for the improvement of health and safety, workers’ consultation and equality.
However, the chapter specifically rejects the imposition of legal, financial or bureaucratic constraints which might hamper small businesses and states that it ‘shall not apply to pay, the right of association, the right to strike or the right to impose lock-outs’.
Tidying up the Maastricht mess
Will Major and Hurd be able to neutralise the timebomb set by the social chapter amendment? asks Chris McLaughlin
JOHN Major and Douglas Hurd succeeded yesterday in defusing the Maastricht crisis.
Now it is merely a shambles.
After a week of confusion, warnings of constitutional crisis and outrage over the possibility that Parliament was to be bypassed, Foreign Secretary Hurd turned urbanity and understatement into performance art.
The controversial Commons amendment over the Maastricht Treaty's social chapter — which last week was said to threaten the entire treaty, if not the future of the Government — simply did not matter.
It would be nice to have it in the bill, Hurd told MPs, but only for the sake of ‘completeness and tidiness’.
It was not essential.
In or out, the Government intends to ratify the treaty Major signed 14 months ago in the picturesque Dutch town, excluding the social chapter.
It was a brutally cool, ruthless demolition of the hopes built up — for respectively conflicting reasons — by Labour and a potentially powerful collection of Conservative Euro-sceptics.
Yet in being forced to come to the Commons to tidy up the mess — though splattering egg on the faces of the Foreign Office lawyers and his colleague Tristan Garel-Jones in the process — Hurd confirmed what a few MPs have known for months.
The constitutional position of the European Communities (Amendment) Bill has been clear from the outset.
It does not ratify the Maastricht Treaty and any political discussion about whether it should or not is out of order.
As deputy Speaker Michael Morris told MPs at the first sitting of the line-by-line committee stage in January: ‘I must emphasise that this bill does not ratify the treaty; it makes changes in domestic law consequential upon the treaty.’
Ratification of treaties is the prerogative of the executive, and the formalities are concluded by the Queen on advice from her ministers.
In other words the bill before the Commons is designed to implement, not ratify, the treaty, not least because amendments which alter the terms of the treaty are also out of order.
The aim is that ratification and the Queen's assent may take place at the same time.
The point, though Hurd did not put it this way, is that Labour's amendment 27, seeking to scupper Major's triumph in excluding Britain from the social chapter, was a complete red herring.
The treaty has been signed, sealed and is just waiting to be delivered.
Ministers, therefore, were airily content to allow the Europhobes on both sides of the Commons to let off steam in the twilight zone of arcane — and effectively futile — argument as the bill made its gruelling passage through committee stage.
That was until Norman Tebbit spotted what he believed was the biggest chance of holing the impenetrable protective layer around the bill.
In urging Tory rebels to back Labour leader John Smith's amendment — which has lain dormant for months — he saw a chance to defeat the Government.
The Foreign Office lawyers were caught on the hop, leaving junior minister Garel-Jones to tell the Commons that if the Labour amendment went through, excising the protocol which allows Britain to opt out of the social chapter, the whole treaty would have to be torn up and all 12 countries begin the painful process again.
It was meant to frighten off the Liberal Democrats, but failed.
Instead it backfired by offering the rebels the very goal they had been seeking.
After Hurd wheeled out a different version — to stem potential defeat — the expediency of this political twist was pinpointed  acerbically by the Liberal Democrat MP for Inverness, Nairn and Lochaber, Sir Russell Johnston: ‘Where there is a political will, there is a legal way.’
Yet neither the Foreign Office nor No10 wished the impotency of Parliament to be so well advertised.
Last week Hurd was at his most coy when he said: ‘There is no question of our ratifying a treaty other than the one we negotiated.’
This was taken to mean that the Government would tear up the whole treaty rather than accept the social chapter.
In fact, as is now abundantly clear, it meant that the Government would ratify Maastricht, but without the social chapter, whatever Parliament might have to say on the matter.
The result is to fuel the anger of the Tory rebels and bolster the resolve of Labour.
The chances of the Government being defeated when amendment 27 is voted on in a few weeks are now difficult to judge.
Why should the Tory rebels vote for a wrecking amendment which has been rendered futile?
On the other hand there is nothing in the Labour amendment which many of them would oppose anyway.
Contrary to some reports it does not automatically open the way for the social chapter to be drawn into British law.
All it does is leave a hole where the British opt-out should be.
But only in the bill, not in the treaty.
In total, the potent little amendment reads, as an addition to clause one: ‘…after Community, insert, with the exception of the Protocol on Social Policy…‘
Major, however, may find himself jumping out of the frying pan into the fire.
The explicit confirmation that the Commons really does not matter was the real constitutional crisis waiting to happen, vindication to all those Euro-sceptics who argue that Maastricht rides roughshod over parliamentary sovereignty.
Lady Thatcher will be honing her purple prose for the debate in the Lords.
SIR Teddy Taylor, the redoubtable leader of the Euro-rebels, denounced Hurd's statement as the end of democracy.
It is a tendentious point, since the convention is that treaties are always signed by the executive.
But many MPs are now questioning why, if the Government could ratify this treaty without Parliament's consent, they are being made to jump through the hoops of parliamentary procedures which could be completed in a day.
There are even bits in the one-page bill which do not need to be brought into British law as a result of the treaty.
The Government can expect sustained flak on the wider constitutional issue now that this can of worms has been opened up.
From mainland Europe, the events are seen with a mixture of puzzlement and suspicion.
Martin Bangemann, the second most senior European commissioner after the EC President, Jacques Delors, does not share Chancellor Helmut Kohl's sympathy with Major's parliamentary difficulties, issuing statements about the need to press ahead with the union which only serve to anger further the rebel Tories.
There is an assumption, voiced cheekily by Delors in a speech to the European parliament in Strasbourg last week, that Britain will be forced anyway to accept the social dimension of the EC.
The social chapter is seen as unremarkable in terms of radical measures, supported not only as mainstream policy among the Tories’ Christian Democrat sister-parties, but, until last week's furore forced them to withdraw, by the British Tory Euro-MPs themselves.
The biggest question mark over Major out of the row is how the Government got into this mess in the first place.
Those in his own party who have an ulterior motive in seeing the Government defeated over Maastricht have had their doubts about his leadership confirmed, not least by what appeared to be three conflicting government lines within one week and the belated admission that Parliament is a spectator rather than a player in the game.
Hurd went some way to placate this view by assuring MPs that if they did not wish to incorporate the treaty into British law, by voting down the whole bill, then the treaty would not be ratified.
He had little doubt that there was any danger of that happening and the MPs knew their bluff was called.
But there is still a long way to go and the political timebomb is still ticking.
Unless Major and the Hurd can neutralise it, the Government's credibility is set to take the full force of the shock wave.
Glad to be Glasgay?
Glasgow has marketed itself as a city which rejoices in diversity, but will it be singing about the first homosexual festival?
Ruth Wishart reports
IT launches on Hallowe'en and encompasses Guy Fawkes night.
So Glasgay!, the first UK festival focusing principally on the work of gays and lesbians — or exploring related themes — lacks no excuse for throwing joined-up parties.
The festival is the brainchild of performer, director and playwright Cordelia Ditton and freelance arts  administrator Dominic D'Angelo, both of whom are determined that the overall tone will be celebratory and upbeat.
‘Festivals, after all, are exactly that — cultural celebrations,’ says Ditton.
‘And the arts in general are not just about illumination, creativity and education, but about seeing yourself and your lifestyle reflected back.
But for gay men and lesbian women that's rarely the case.
So we want Glasgay! to help create a feel-good factor for the thousands of people who often feel excluded from much of the cultural life in Britain, despite being over-represented within the arts generally.’
According to D'Angelo, the festival will also offer existing venues the opportunity to bring in new audiences whom they may then attract on a more regular basis for their standard programming.
Audience calculations have been deliberately pitched on the conservative side.
Working on the basis that 8 per cent of the population is presumed to be gay or lesbian, their core document suggests that just 5 per cent of the adult audience in Glasgow represents some 34,000 potential ticket buyers.
Add in people coming from Strathclyde and other major Scottish cities, they say, and the festival becomes a realistic commercial proposition for the theatres, galleries and other arts spaces who participate.
Before she came to live in Glasgow, Ditton was artistic co-director of the theatre company Gay Sweatshop.
Their experience, she says, was that although the themes of its material were about lesbian and gay issues, around a third of the audience was heterosexual and attracted by the quality of the work performed.
Equally, almost half had come to see the company for the first time.
On that basis they cite staging or importing work of high quality as a key aspect of the first festival, reminding you of the critical acclaim attracted by artists like Michael Clark in the city.
‘If artists have the right to fail, Glasgay! does not,’ says D'Angelo, whose modest £65,000 budget projection has been kept that way by trying to involve many indigenous grant-aided bodies in the year one programme.
So while the Citizens Theatre Company will present a production specific to the festival that week, the Tron will play host to 7:84 with a new Jackie Kay play, Clyde Unity will premiere a new John Binnie work, Gay Sweatshop will bring new product to the Arches, the Scottish Youth Theatre will present work at the Old Athenaeum and Tramway will programme international groups.
Tramway, along with the Centre for Contemporary Arts, Street Level and Transmission Galleries will also feature in the visual arts programme, while the Glasgow Film Theatre will run seminars and workshops as well as film and video performances.
There's also wide-ranging music, cabaret, literature and dance programmes, again featuring a mix of indigenous performers with imported work, mainly from England and America.
All of which has been glued together by a not inconsiderable act of faith, since none of the principal funders — the Scottish Arts Council and Glasgow City Council are both being asked for £20,000 — has yet put its thumbprint on the relevant cheque.
‘The point is that it will happen anyway,’ says Ditton.
‘We have enough promises from artists and venues in the city to stage the festival no matter what.
But we need the funding to stage the kind of programme to make it significant, and to lay the groundwork for more, and longer Glasgay! s, perhaps every second year.’
D'Angelo also relates the example of corporate America waking up to the belated realisation that what has become known as ‘the pink economy’ represents significant purchasing power.
Over there, he reminds you, companies like Absolut vodka and Levi Strauss have found that supporting gay and lesbian events has paid off commercially.
Which isn't to say that a particularly bad beer will be bought by any consumer, just because the brewer supported a cherished cause.
But all other things being equal, the gay and lesbian community has responded well to examples of perceived corporate goodwill.
Similarly, says Ditton, they make a very enthusiastic audience, given the relative paucity of work  addressing their concerns.
‘It's different in London which is full of people whose homes and families are elsewhere.
They don't experience the same problems socially or finding cultural events to which they can really relate.
But in cities like Glasgow I think a lot of people must find it very difficult.
But we know from occasional appearances in the city of gay or lesbian performers that there will be a terrific demand for tickets.’
There is a full seminar programme dealing with areas like education, special needs, employment, racial and other campaigning issues.
But Glasgay! seems determined not to take itself too seriously.
The legendary Plaza ballroom will find itself playing host to the London Pink Dancers at the opening tea dance, and the cavernous Tramway has been earmarked for the last night ceilidh.
Glasgow has always marketed itself as a city which rejoices in diversity, and courts cosmopolitanism.
Glasgay! should be an instructive test of whether it really welcomes innovation and potential controversy, or whether its major cultural skill is just mouth music.
Let's celebrate: organisers Cordelia Ditton and Dominic D'Angelo are determined that the overall tone will be upbeat and create a feel-good factor
TAKE IN BRIDGE
Winners in men's national teams
By Liz McGowan
BRIDGE is considered an open sport where gender does not affect ability.
However, while at least half of the players are women, the majority of the top players have always been men.
Women's events were established early to encourage female excellence although women are still eligible to play in open events and occasionally do, usually with a male partner.
The Scottish women's teams have been held annually on the last weekend in February since before the war, but some five years ago the male members of the SBU council decided this was unfair and established the national men's teams held in Perth on Sunday.
This year's winners are from Aberdeen: Jim Hay, John Simpson, Bill Innes and Finlay Marshall.
Second were Charles Outred, Jim Baird, Jim McMenemy and John McMonagle from Glasgow and third, the Edinburgh combination of Grant Dowie, Ian Sime, John MacLaren and Patrick Hume.
The Portland Cup, the British Mixed Pairs championship, was held last weekend at five venues throughout Britain, three in England, one in Wales and one in Perth.
Overall winners are confirmed as the bridge author Brian Senior and Miss T Rigney.
Second were Raymond Brock and Sally Horton and third Sandra Penfold and Peter Littlewood.
The Scottish heat provided the next three places in Dave Walker and Sheila Adamson of Edinburgh, Angela Forsyth and Ian Crorie (Stirling and Edinburgh) and Jill Arthur and James Forbes (Dunblane).
Jockey Doughty fined over Ayr ‘non-trier'
JOCKEY Neale Doughty was fined £450 by the Jockey Club's disciplinary committee yesterday for a breach of one of the rules governing ‘non-triers’.
However, at the same inquiry, trainer Gordon Richards escaped punishment.
The pair faced an investigation into the improved form shown by Thistle Monarch at Carlisle on 26 November, compared with his previous running 13 days earlier at Ayr.
The matter was referred to Jockey Club headquarters in London to enable the stewards to see a video recording of the Ayr race which had not been available at Carlisle.
Thistle Monarch was eighth at Ayr, just over 22 lengths behind the runner-up, JP Morgan.
Yet he was seven lengths ahead of JP Morgan when comfortably winning at Carlisle.
The stewards heard evidence from Doughty, Richards and the handicapper at yesterday's hearing.
Doughty was found to be in breach of the rule which requires a rider to take all reasonable measures to ensure that his mount achieves the best possible placing.
Meanwhile, leading novice chasers Sybillin and Wonder Man are poised for a pre-Cheltenham clash at Nottingham on Saturday.
The trainers of both have confirmed the pair are likely to line-up for the £14,000 Nottinghamshire Novices' Chase.
The two-mile race has been chosen to round off both horses' preparations for the Arkle Challenge Trophy at the Festival on 16 March.
Sybillin was last in action at Ascot last month when hammering seasoned handicappers in the Victor Chandler Chase.
On the same course last week, Wonder Man lost his unbeaten chasing record after making a bad blunder at the penultimate fence.
Sybillin's trainer, Jimmy FitzGerald, won the Nottingham race five years ago with Danish Flight before the gelding lifted the Arkle.
Coulton, joint favourite in some lists for the Champion Hurdle on 16 March, heads a list of eight for the Tote City Trial Hurdle on the same programme.
— PA 
Neale Doughty: fined £450 by Jockey Club
Treatment of Gower disgrace — Botham
IAN BOTHAM yesterday blamed the dropping of David Gower as one of the main reasons why England have lost the Test series against India.
Botham watched the early matches of the series in India before travelling to Australia for a six-week speaking tour with former West Indies captain Viv Richards.
Talking in Perth, the 37-year-old all-rounder fired a broadside at the England selectors and captain Graham Gooch.
‘It was a disgrace the way they treated Gower because in the last Test against Pakistan, before this tour, he did everything that was asked of him with the bat.
To be told he had an attitude problem was astonishing,’ said Botham.
‘Graham Gooch should have sorted the problem out, he did not, and now we are paying for it.’
Botham is hoping that he, Gower and Allan Lamb will all be recalled when England bid to regain the Ashes from Australia next summer.
‘There are three bright young players who are very keen to play against the Aussies this summer,’ he added.
‘Allan Lamb, David Gower and a chap called Botham want to have another crack at Australia because to us that is the pinnacle of Test cricket.’
Bland pitches back home blamed for England's mauling
ENGLISH cricket must learn a slow, hard lesson from the humiliating Test series defeat inflicted on Graham Gooch's men by the Indian spinners.
That was the verdict endorsed by the domestic game's supremo last night as England's players, so ill-prepared to handle the demands of turning pitches, limped away from their Madras mauling by an innings and 22 runs.
They have just three days to brush up their technique before being plunged into another confrontation with their conquerors in Bombay on Friday.
This time it will be only pride to play for.
Few excuses can be offered for the England batsmen's failure to pile up runs both here and in the first Test at Calcutta, where they were beaten by eight wickets.
But Keith Fletcher, nursing a 2-0 defeat in his first Test series as England manager, was at pains to point out one of the root causes of the problems faced by Gooch's side: the lack of dry, turning pitches in the County Championship.
And his views had the full backing of Alan Smith, chief executive of the Test and County Cricket Board.
He said: ‘Keith Fletcher and Graham Gooch are both members of the TCCB's cricket committee and we shall listen carefully to whatever they might have to say in their end-of-tour reports.
‘But I agree that we do not want bland pitches.
We need a balance between bat and ball and pitches that encourage bowlers who put work on the ball.’
As he opened the post-mortem on England's defeat, Fletcher said: ‘We play on too bland pitches at home.
Over here the ball turns and our batsmen have had to learn a new technique in five weeks.
‘I've got no complaints about the pitches in Calcutta and Madras.
I don't blame India at all for preparing pitches to suit their own bowlers.
Gooch, who missed the Madras hammering because of illness, added: ‘We have to come to terms with the style of play we have to use to combat the Indian spinners.
Our players have struggled to master that as a unit.
And our all round cricket has not been up to standard.’
England were bowled out for 286 and 252, losing their last two second innings wickets in 40 minutes yesterday, even though Chris Lewis scored a maiden Test 100 and four other players passed 50, with Neil Fairbrother's 83 and Graeme Hick's 64 both being Test best scores.
Losing the toss in both Tests did not help England's cause, but there has been a collective lack of confidence against spin that has clearly concerned Fletcher.
A special spinners' mat was laid down at pre-tour net sessions at Lilleshall in an effort to prepare England's batsmen for what they could expect to face on dusty Indian pitches.
But English technique has been exposed as inadequate, while the comparative lack of success of our own spinners has been equally disturbing.
India, despite being thrashed themselves in South Africa immediately before this series, have looked sharper and better equipped in every department.
Smith, in India to watch both the Madras match and Friday's final Test at Bombay said: ‘One of the big reasons we have gone for four-day championship cricket is that it will encourage spinners to play a bigger part in our domestic game.’
‘And the TCCB's directive for pitches has for several years now been that they must start dry.’
England have been shown up for the lack of quality in their line-up, although Gooch's illness here, Michael Atherton's illness in Calcutta and the  stupidity of leaving out Phil Tufnell from the first Test and Atherton on the second Test all contributed to an unexpectedly one-sided contest.
But former team manager Micky Stewart advised England to ignore their critics.
‘If you take notice of criticism you are dead,’ said Stewart, questioned on BBC Radio 5 about England's heaviest defeat in 80 Tests against India, spanning 61 years.
‘You carry on playing with great belief, with confidence you stay together and put it right.
That's the way they will go about it.
Former England captain Chris Cowdrey was more critical, saying: ‘Keith Fletcher said before the tour that he thought India posed very few problems.
England have got a problem now.’
England organised a full net practice after the end of play today, and the team travel to Bombay early tomorrow.
The only bright spot was the news that Lewis should be fit to bowl in the final Test.
He was off the field throughout the second day having treatment for a pulled thigh muscle, but said today: ‘I have not felt the injury at all when batting and it is much better.’
Hendry a ‘good bet for world title'
STEPHEN HENDRY is a red hot favourite to retain his world title.
That's the view of his manager and mentor Ian Doyle, who believes that the Scot's 9-5 victory over James Wattana in the final of the Benson and Hedges Masters at Wembley Conference Centre has ended his trophy drought.
Doyle, who has managed Hendry throughout his eight-year professional career, said: ‘I think Stephen is now an extremely good bet for the world championship.
The bookies made him 4-1 to win the Masters.
You won't see him at that price again for a very long time.
He's really striking the ball well and he has got his confidence back.’
William Hill have already reacted by installing him as 5-2 favourite to win the world after his record fifth successive victory in the Masters, a performance which earned him the gold trophy for keeps.
Hendry will be hoping for a repeat of his Masters success at the £150,000 European Open, which gets under way in Antwerp today.
Whatever happens, the Scot, who meets Dennis Taylor in the last 16, is guaranteed to leapfrog back over Jimmy White into first place on the provisional world ranking list.
As White and John Parrott, who currently occupies third spot, both failed to survive the qualifying rounds in Blackpool last September, Hendry will open up a sizeable lead in the standings if he were to capture the European title for the first time.
Stephen Hendry: aiming for the No1 spot again
Surge in coaching north of the Border
THE number of qualified cricket coaches in Scotland is set to double during 1993.
The Scottish Cricket Union's director, Jim Love, has been overwhelmed by applications and expects around 80 people to have gone through basic award courses by May, writes Keith Graham.
The announcement was made at a seminar for coaches, organised by the SCU and the Scottish Sports Council's Teamsport Cricket co-ordinator, Iain Kennedy, held in Dundee last weekend at which the former England team manager, Mickey Stewart, was present.
Stewart, who was responsible for introducing totally new methods of preparation to the England squad, devoted the whole of Sunday morning to coaching techniques.
He admitted to being surprised at the progress being made in Scotland, and expressed much admiration for the work currently being planned by the SCU and Teamsport Scotland in developing coaching at both school and club level.
Stewart, whose father hailed from Glasgow, now travels the country on behalf of the National Cricket Association.
His enthusiasm for the game is clearly undiminished and the 35 Scottish coaches present at the Dundee seminar are certain to have benefited from his experience.
The joint efforts of the SCU and the SSC are already reaping rewards.
This season will see the launch of an under-13 cricket festival in July.
Tour matches: Glasgow and North miss out
By Graham Law
NEITHER North and Midlands nor Glasgow will host any of the four matches when New Zealand tour Scotland next autumn.
SRU secretary, Bill Hogg, told a press briefing in Edinburgh yesterday that with the west stand out of use due to the redevelopment at Murrayfield, the intention was to host the fixtures involving Scotland A and the Scotland development XV at club grounds with the largest capacities.
Thus the A match will take place at Mansfield Park, Hawick, on 13 November, the development game at Myreside, Edinburgh, on 16 November.
Hogg said both stadia had capacity in excess of 10,000.
The international will be staged at Murrayfield (reduced capacity 37,500) on 20 November, while South will provide opposition at Netherdale on 10 November.
Hogg explained: ‘We had to perform a balancing act.
It was nice to take games to North and Midlands and Glasgow and let people see touring sides and top level games.
But, unfortunately, the attendances in these districts in the past have never reached the level of attendances at games in Edinburgh or the South in the past.’
Hogg said the SRU had ruled out taking such a game to a non-rugby ground in either district as costs could prove prohibitive.
Yet it seems strange to me that given the possibility of professional marketing for such an encounter, rugby is missing an opportunity to make its case outwith its heartland.
It will be interesting to see where the matches against Auckland involving Scottish Exiles and a District Select (venues are not listed in the draft fixture list) will be staged.
Hogg added it was likely a draw would be made to determine the order of matches in the Scottish inter-district championship, while the following programme has been devised for the Scottish districts v Irish provinces contest:
Operation rules out England striker Shearer for rest of the season
ALAN SHEARER was last night recovering from an operation to rebuild cruciate knee ligament damage.
Surgery will rule out the Blackburn and England striker for at least the rest of this season, and the Blackburn manager, Kenny Dalglish, promised the player will not be rushed into a return.
Paul Gascoigne and John Salako are other England players to have undergone similar knee operations.
‘I am not sure whether it is the same as the one Gascoigne had,’ said Dalglish.
‘The surgeon is happy with the way the operation has gone.
There are no problems whatsoever.
‘Alan is going to be left now to rehabilitate.
How long that might take we've no idea — whenever he is ready I suppose.
He won't be rushed one way or the other.
We will have to rely on expert medical opinion as to when he is ready.’
Shearer was on the operating table at the same time as fit-again Gascoigne and his other international colleagues were preparing for tomorrow's World Cup qualifier against San Marino.
Les Ferdinand makes his debut in Shearer's frontline slot — and now he knows it can become a long-term chance.
Shearer, who became British football's most expensive player when he moved from Southampton to Blackburn for £3.4 million at the start of the season, has played only 30 minutes since Boxing Day.
He had a knee operation last month, but broke down in training last week and was sent to see top Cambridge specialist, David Dandy.
The decision was taken to admit Shearer almost immediately and Dandy said yesterday: ‘I've reconstructed the cruciate ligament in his injured knee.
He will certainly be out for the rest of this season but I'd hope he'll be back for the start of next season if all goes well.’
Shearer, still the Premier League's leading scorer with 22 goals, will miss Blackburn's bid to reach Wembley in the FA Cup — they are at home to Sheffield United in the quarter-finals — and also the bulk of England's qualifying programme.
Manager Graham Taylor was expecting Shearer to be laid off for some while, but the extent of the injury will be worrying for all concerned.
Gascoigne snapped his cruciate ligaments playing for Tottenham in the 1991 FA Cup Final and was sidelined for a year.
Crystal Palace winger Salako — he broke down again earlier this season — and Ian Durrant of Rangers both went to America to have a dead person's tendon implanted in the knee.
Shearer's injury might not be on quite the same scale, but it will keep him out of qualifiers in Turkey next month, the Netherlands at home in April and the end-of-season double away to Poland on 29 May and Norway four days later.
The injury also rules out Shearer from the summer tour to America.
His comeback target will be the game against Poland at Wembley in early September.
— PA
ATHLETICS
Meyer takes spoils
ELANA MEYER won the battle between South Africa's two top middle distance runners when she comfortably beat Zola Pieterse over 3,000 metres at a meeting in Stellenbosch yesterday.
Meyer, the 10,000m Olympic silver medallist in Barcelona, clocked eight minutes 51.65 seconds, almost nine seconds ahead of her rival.
BOXING
Lennox visits Glasgow
LENNOX LEWIS, the WBC heavyweight champion, has accepted an invitation from the St Andrew's Sporting Club to be special guest of honour at their monthly boxing promotion on Monday which features the Scottish lightweight title-holder, Kris McAdam, against Wayne Windle, of England.
CRICKET
Young Australians struggle
PETER SUCH (Essex) produced a career-best 7-82 for England A against the Australian Cricket Academy in Melbourne which sent the ACA reeling to 231 all out in their first innings, after they appeared to be heading for a huge lead when they reached 159 for one.
EQUESTRIANISM
Licence plan is scrapped
A CONTROVERSIAL plan to charge foreign three-day-event riders a £500-a-season licence fee to compete in Britain has been dropped because it could run up against European regulations.
The move was designed to protect home riders who, it was claimed, were being balloted out of their own events by foreigners.
MARATHON
Mitchell second in Malta
FORMER Scottish marathon champion Terry Mitchell (Fife AC) finished second in the Malta Marathon, finishing 2min 26sec behind Hugh Jones, of England.
Mitchell, who had turned down a place in Scotland's team for the world cross-country trial to concentrate on his marathon commitments, clocked 2hr 21min 56 sec.
MODERN PENTATHLON
McFadden back to form
EDINBURGH-BASED Rachel McFadden has her first competitive test of current form in Bracknell this weekend at the British modern tetrathlon championships.
After a below-par year caused by injury and examination pressure, she is once again approaching medal-winning form.
ORIENTEERING
Coaching post for Allison
DONALD PETRIE (Clydeside) will take up the post of Scottish development and administrative officer next month.
He takes over from Alloa-based Derek Allison who has moved on to be British national coach.
SAILING
North-east event for all
THE Grampian Piers Race, for dinghies, multi-hulls, windsurfers and water-skiers, will be held for the first time on Saturday, 7 August.
The race, covering 28.5 miles, will start at Aberdeen and finish at Peterhead.
TENNIS
Another title for Seles
MONICA SELES ended defending champion Martina Navratilova's reign in the final of the Virginia Slims of Chicago tournament winning 3-6, 6-2, 6-1.
Top seed Jim Courier needed seven match points before finally beating giant-killer Todd Martin 5-7, 7-6, 7-6 in the final of the St Jude tournament in Memphis.
WOMEN'S HOCKEY
Tough test for Scots
SCOTLAND are to host a Four Nations tournament featuring current European champions England, Olympic and European silver medallists Germany and, possibly, France, at Helenvale, Glasgow, from 25-28 June.
Kite's win improves ranking
TOM KITE, winner of the Bob Hope Classic at La Quinta, California, with a record-breaking 35-under-par total of 325 for the five-round tournament, has moved up one place to ninth in the latest Sony world rankings.
Mark James has moved up 15 places to 38th following his victory in the Tenerife Open.
Kite, who earned £120,000 for his victory, birdied the last four holes for a ten-under-par 62 to break the Palmer Course record by a stroke.
His brilliant shot-making erased the Hope Classic record by four strokes and his total was also four shots better than the US Tour record for bettering par.
Kite, 43, is the US Tour's all-time leading money winner with $7,905,279.
The victory was the 18th of his career.
Wales different, but dangerous…
THE depth of the inquest into the 12 tackles Wales missed in their precarious 10-9 defeat of England tells its own story of the priorities — at this stage, at any rate — behind the Welsh ‘revival’.
Yet no Scot who regularly watches BBC's Rugby Special, and has seen for himself the standard of much of the club game in Wales, will doubt their latent capacity to erupt in attack.
Partly for his own protection, their coach, Alan Davies, has striven hard to ensure that the heroic, but precarious victory over England was kept in perspective.
Mostly, he would seem to have succeeded.
Many of their most one-eyed, passionate supporters have remained uncharacteristically realistic.
Some uncharitably believe that, for all the problems the recast Welsh front-row sometimes had with Jeff Probyn and company, the recent loss of both Mike Griffiths and Garin Jenkins was the proverbial blessing in disguise.
They argue that Griffiths is undeniably a solid scrummager on the loose-head and they acknowledge that, largely depending on the nature of the game in question and the particular opposition, there are still plenty of matches where that can prove to be invaluable.
But, what with the way rugby is evolving and fewer scrums, a prop whose contribution is mainly confined to the scrummages can often seem something of an anachronism.
As for Jenkins, his temperament, so their argument goes, was all too apt to make him a liability.
Again, they shrug, if they could survive with a front-row of Ricky Evans, Nigel Meek and Hugh Williams-Jones against England, they should hardly be in undue trouble against Scotland — particularly as they will be under the eye of the same referee in France's Joel Dume.
They have reservations concerning their middle jumper, Tony Copsley, aside from the fact that he is still labelled, as exemplified by that marvellously unfortunate tattoo on his behind, ‘Made in England.’
But Gareth Llewellyn, as front jumper, is held to have answered many of his detractors.
Maybe, though, Scotland will move Derek Turnbull up to No1 on the Welsh throw ‘to do an Alan Watt.’
However, the real key to an encouraging performance at the lineout by the home team was surely that, given the choice, England would much have preferred to play under the old lineout laws, Wales under the new.
The Welsh manager, Robert Norster, was, of course, a superb lineout specialist who relied on a good technique cleverly utilised to confound taller opponents.
Clearly, he is still putting that savvy to telling use.
The absence of a natural openside wing forward in the Welsh back-row has been worrying the cognoscenti in the Principality.
Of course, against England, purely in terms of the tackling, they were always going to find their expatriate, Dewi Morris, from scrum-half, an awful lot more of a handful than Rob Andrew.
Robert Jones may have been overshadowed on the day by Morris, but he has a lovely service and covers with tireless courage.
But Gary Armstrong, for whom Jones has much respect, is unlikely to prove any more soothing an adversary than was Morris.
No-one is making any great claims for Neil Jenkins — which borders on the unique for a Welsh stand-off — but many are persuaded he will be a different player for his part in an historic triumph.
We shall see.
Mike Hall does not excite superlatives, but he is a good, accurate tackler and, they reckon in Cardiff, not without a measure of penetration when coming off his left foot.
Scott Gibbs, whose midfield tackling was at the very heart of the Welsh win, has always struck one as having tremendous potential, but he has before now been roundly censured for his use of the ball after a break.
Ominously, that criticism has notably subsided.
Ieuan Evans, as Scots know to their cost, can be elusive as well as opportunist and quick.
Interestingly, those who see him regularly, fret that he is a bit too ready to chip ahead; unnecessarily reluctant to take on his man ball in hand.
As to Wayne Proctor, there were those who would have gone for the former Welsh hurdler, Nigel Walker, though, heaven knows, Proctor, the fastest player in the side, was himself no mean athlete in his schooldays.
Incidentally, though Walker is held to be still more than a touch rusty after so long away from rugby — inclined, for instance, to carry the ball under the wrong arm — the rapidity with which he has come into cap contention ought to be food for thought for our own Jamie Henderson.
He, after all, was a member of an unbeaten Edinburgh Academy XV as a 15-year-old before devoting himself to athletics en route to becoming an international sprinter.
Michael Rayer has given the selectors so little excuse to drop him, has been so sound in all aspects of play, that he has consigned possibly the most dangerous prong of the Welsh attack to the replacements' bench.
Namely, Anthony Clement.
But what if Rayer's high tackle on Morris had cost Wales the match as it so easily could have done?
Worse Scotland sides — and certainly sides without as practical a blend of available resources up front— have beaten much better Welsh teams at Murrayfield ere now, but this game is different from many in the past.
So often it was a case of Scotland knocking a much more fancied, often very cocky, Wales XV out of their stride.
Not this time.
Much more nearly ‘like against like’ in terms of the sum of their respective — though, in places, contrasting — pluses and minuses.
Which brings us to ground advantage and the opinion of some of the Scotland players that there was less noise in the Irish match from the now all-seated crowd than in days gone by.
A challenge one trusts the clans will take to heart.
It could make the difference.
Robert Jones: has much respect for opposite number Gary Armstrong
Sevens ‘at risk’ if Five Nations matches are moved back to April
By Graham Law
MOVES are under way to switch the Five Nations Championship from its traditional position in the rugby calendar to March and April.
Wales seem ready to support a proposal by England which, if approved, could mean the end to the dominance of sevens in the last full month of the Scottish season.
Informal discussions have taken place between members of the English and Welsh unions with a view to alleviating domestic fixture congestion.
Leading Welsh players, too, are concerned about having to play important league fixtures between internationals and a meeting will take place this week between Welsh team manager Robert Norster and coach Alan Davies and representatives of the 48 Heineken League clubs to try to come to a compromise.
SRU secretary Bill Hogg said dates for Five Nations matches were kept under constant review.
The last proposal for change had come from France on the grounds of weather being better later in the season but it was decided then to leave fixtures in their present slots from January-March.
The current proposals, however, will be debated by the SRU's representative fixtures working party in the next few weeks.
‘The matter is under consideration,’ Hogg noted.
He went on: ‘Rugby is a winter sport.
Playing in March and April does not necessarily guarantee better weather.
I can recall on one occasion the league programme being snowed off on the fifth Saturday in March.
‘We would also have to consider that sevens is a very important part of the Scottish game and is a good breeding ground for many of the skills required in the XV-a-side game.
‘There seems to be a general reluctance to play XV-a-side rugby in Scotland in April.
We would have to see a whole change of pattern and thinking for all clubs and all players in April.
It would lead to quite a massive rethink,’ he added.
A spokesman for the Irish RFU, confirming it would also debate the plan, said: ‘All countries are finding there is congestion with league fixtures and — in the case of Scotland and ourselves where we are trying to get the district/provincial structure in as well as a prelude to the Five Nations — that the pre-Christmas period is getting very congested.
‘The matter has not been discussed formally by our general committee but our fixtures committee has talked about the possible advantages of the Five Nations championship being moved back a bit.’
Reaction from the Borders, stronghold of the abbreviated game in Scotland — sevens was founded by Melrose butcher Ned Haig in 1883 and the Greenyards hosts the world's oldest tournament — was predictable.
Melrose secretary Stuart Henderson commented: ‘If changes were brought about by other bodies we would have to look at what we do.
That said, we would obviously be very loathe to move from the original date.’
Hawick secretary John Thorburn said: ‘From a personal viewpoint I could not see there being sufficient Saturdays for five successive sevens tournaments to be held in April if the Five Nations were to be moved.
‘I think the Border clubs would have to sit down as a composite group and work out a new sevens structure.’
Rugby Scene, Page 16
Go-ahead for Hide to take on Murray for vacant title
HERBIE HIDE's vacant British heavyweight title fight against Manchester's Michael Murray was last night given the green light by the British Boxing Board of Control.
The board's stewards refused to sanction it last week, but had a change of mind after a two-hour hearing with promoter Frank Warren, managers Barry Hearn and Jack Trickett, and Hide.
The about-turn allows Hide and Murray to contest the title, relinquished by WBC champion Lennox Lewis, at Dagenham on 27 February, a bill which also includes the return of former three-times WBC light-heavyweight champion Dennis Andries.
But the board's decision did not come without conditions.
The winner must waive the normal six months' grace afforded to a champion and defend it on a 50-50 purse basis when called upon.
Top contender Henry Akinwande will not be available for domestic service until the summer, being booked for a Commonwealth title fight against New Zealand's Jimmy Thunder in March and a European re-match with Germany's Axel Schulz in Berlin on 1 May, which will net him a £75,000 purse.
Derby's Paddy Reilly, who stopped Murray in eight rounds last year, has had only five professional fights, so the board's options were limited.
— PA
Board secretary John Morris said: ‘The Board's main consideration was whether the title should remain on ice or whether this contest could be accepted for that championship.
‘But after a long deliberation of all the circumstances, the Board agreed to sanction the contest on the conditions laid down.’
— PA
Under-21s give Ferguson and Booth chance to stake claim for big time
By Hugh Keevins
DUNCAN FERGUSON and Scott Booth will this afternoon get the opportunity to justify Craig Brown's opinion that they are full internationalists of the future when they team up for the first time in Scotland's Under-21 side.
The match with Malta at Tannadice, Andy Roxburgh said yesterday, is also Ferguson's chance to ‘show up well and get his career moving again’ after lengthy negative publicity surrounding transfers, fines and a TV appearance by the player's agent to complain about the size of the bed in the forward's digs.
The national coach could not rule out the possibility, either, that Ferguson might go from the under-21 squad to the full international pool at Ibrox in the space of 24 hours.
‘It all depends on our fitness problems, but if I said it was unlikely Ferguson would get the call it could end up sounding like famous last words,’ said Roxburgh.
In the meantime, Ferguson and Booth have enough to do with an under-21 side who have scored only one goal and taken one point in three European Championship qualifying ties with Switzerland, Portugal and Italy.
‘In the beginning, it looked as if it would be a real problem finding a side to play Malta after six call-offs but I think it has turned out not too badly in the end,’ said the national coach, who released Aberdeen's Stephen Wright from his squad to play at Tannadice this afternoon (kick-off 1:30pm).
‘I have had a long chat with Stephen and told him I know that he is knocking at the door of the full international side, but I would rather he played and helped out in the match at Tannadice than did nothing at Ibrox.’
Wright, captain of the under-21 side who last season reached the semi-finals of the European Championship, will be in place to receive official recognition of that achievement.
The SFA will, 20 minutes before today's kick-off, make a presentation to those players who were part of that commendable run.
Gourlay's bowls fail to pass the test
PRESTWICK's David Gourlay, jun, the first Scot in action in yesterday's opening day of the £140,000 Midland Bank World Indoor Championship, survived an off-green setback before moving through to the second round with a three sets to one win over past UK champion Stephen Rees.
Gourlay and Australian pair Ian Schuback (the defending champion) and Commonwealth gold medallist Rob Parrella saw their bowls thrown out of the championship when they failed to pass the compulsory green test.
All competitors' bowls are judged against the International Bowling Board master bowl and must show at least as much bias as the master.
Gourlay, however, refused to let the incident upset him and needed just three ends before completing a 7-0 opening set whitewash over his Swansea-based opponent.
Rees, however, hit back to take the second set 7-5 and then moved 6-2 ahead in the next but Gourlay replied with two doubles and a single to take the set 7-6.
‘That was the turning point — had I gone 2-1 down it would have been a long way back’ said the Ayrshire man later.
Gourlay went on to  complete his win with a 7-3 victory in the fourth set.
Twice former title-holder Richard Corsie advanced to set up an all-Scottish second-round clash with Gourlay when he coasted to a straight-sets win over South Africa's Bill Moseley.
Corsie needed just 18 ends to complete his 7-4, 7-3, 7-3 win.
‘No complaints — I was delighted with my form and relieved to get the opening match under my belt’ said Corsie later.
Hopes of a third Scottish win ended when Dundee dentist Ian Hunter lost to another past UK champion, Gary Smith.
The Englishman won 7-1, 3-7, 7-6, 7-5.
Also through to the second round is England's Mervyn King who beat heavyweight Canadian Bill Boettger 7-3, 5-7, 7-5, 7-3.
Israel's Jeff Rabkin, world outdoor bronze medallist, advanced with a 7-4, 3-7, 7-2, 7-2 win over Cardiff's Phillip Rowlands.
McLeish back to steady shaky Scotland
By Hugh Keevins
ANDY ROXBURGH has decided to restore order to the chaotic build-up to tomorrow night's World Cup qualifying tie with Malta by naming Aberdeen's Alex McLeish as Scotland's captain — two years after he last played an international.
Twenty-six days after his 34th birthday, McLeish has been chosen in preference to Celtic's Paul McStay (Scotland's designated vice-captain) who has deputised for Richard Gough while injury and suspension have cost him his place in the last two internationals.
The second most honoured player in Scotland's history — the game at Ibrox will bring McLeish his 77th cap — was introduced by Roxburgh to the other squad members as captain of the side on Sunday.
‘Alex is a natural leader and I wanted the others to begin relating to him as the captain as soon as possible,’ said the national coach.
McLeish last played for Scotland against Bulgaria in a European Championship qualifying tie, since when he has battled injury to the extent that both player and national coach could yesterday be candid about the reasons why his sudden recapture of the captaincy of his country has a storybook feel.
‘I wondered if he would come back, but knowing his personality so well I have to say I am not surprised that he has returned,’ Roxburgh said.
Problems with a flaked bone in his foot, a broken toe and then hamstring and rib injuries meant that McLeish played only seven times for Aberdeen last season and also missed the first 11 matches of this one.
‘Last season, the international scene seemed a million miles off because it was hard enough to imagine playing for Aberdeen again, far less Scotland,’ he said.
When asked what had kept him going at a time when Willie Miller's appointment as manager at Pittodrie prompted speculation that McLeish might be a natural second-in-command, the defender was unequivocal.
‘I am like Gordon Strachan, kept going by a fear of life without playing football.
Being named as Scotland's captain once again will only increase my enthusiasm.’
McLeish's reading of the role he must perform against Malta is equally uncomplicated.
Scotland's normal practice in qualifying groups is to pick up points early on and then drop some later when a cushion has been inflated to break their fall.
‘This time we have to hope that after taking only two points from our first three games in Group I, Scotland will do things in reverse order.’
The choice of McLeish as captain will, Roxburgh believes, remove an unwanted, additional pressure from McStay's shoulders and let him be the midfield schemer who orchestrates the emphatic victory essential to Scotland's progress.
‘Our build-up started out as a shambles, but I promise you it will not end that way,’ said Roxburgh, who will name his side today.
McLeish will look after those around him at the back, while McStay will almost certainly be partnered by Celtic team-mate John Collins in midfield.
Ally McCoist's fitness will determine who plays up front and yesterday Roxburgh said that the improvement in the player's hamstring injury was such that he would now be ‘disappointed’ if the scorer of 41 goals for his club this season did not play on the ground that has yet to give up a goal to Scotland since they became tenants at Ibrox.
McCoist could not train at McDiarmid Park yesterday, which made him no different from half of Roxburgh's squad, but is healing at an encouraging rate.
Assuming his recovery is completed by this morning's deadline, McCoist and Aberdeen's Eoin Jess will play together from the start for the first time.
Duncan Shearer (Aberdeen) would then be left on the bench along with Hearts' John Robertson while Roxburgh's faith is invested in an enticing partnership.
‘Naturally, I would prefer McCoist to play because if we were without him the Maltese coach, Philip Psaila, would be entitled to rub his hands in delight.’
said Roxburgh.
‘Whatever Scotland's team, I want us to be creative enough to make the Maltese worry without being in any way self conscious about problems that are in the past,’ concluded the national coach.
‘I am like Gordon Strachan, kept going by a fear of life without football.
Being named as Scotland's captain once again will only increase my enthusiasm’ Alex McLeish
Chelsea dismiss Porterfield and turn to Webb
CHELSEA yesterday sacked manager Ian Porterfield and appointed former Southend boss Dave Webb to take charge at Stamford Bridge for the rest of the season.
Chairman Ken Bates acted after a run of 12 matches without a win that has seen the club eliminated from both major cup competitions and slump from title-chasing territory to mid-table.
‘We have reviewed the results and the fact is we lost as many as we have won over the last two seasons,’ said Bates.
‘That's not in keeping with our aspirations and we have dispensed with the services of Ian Porterfield.’
Bates took the decision on Sunday and then contacted former Chelsea defender Webb.
Porterfield, who was sacked by Aberdeen in 1988 after two years in charge, went to work yesterday morning unaware of the behind-the-scenes activity and took a full training session before learning that his 20-month reign was over.
‘We have parted on amicable terms and wished each other all the best,’ added Bates.
Regarding Webb, who quit Southend last season, Bates said: ‘He takes over immediately, initially on a three-month appointment until the end of the season.
The situation will then be reviewed.’
Chelsea's last Premier League win was at Tottenham on 5 December, when they were fourth.
They beat Everton in a Coca-Cola Cup fourth-round replay 11 days later and have not won since.
Saturday's 1-0 reverse against Aston Villa made it seven defeats and five draws in the last dozen games.
Webb played for Chelsea between 1967-73 and made 230 league appearances for the club.
His greatest successes came on the cup front, scoring the goal that took the FA Cup to the Bridge in 1970 (the only time Chelsea have won it), and the following season sharing in a European Cup-Winners' Cup replay triumph over Real Madrid.
Bates is desperate for more success and Porterfield spent more than £6million in an attempt to produce it.
His most expensive buy was Robert Fleck for £2.1m last August but the former Norwich and Rangers player has scored only three goals and was dropped for four games last month.
Porterfield, formerly manager at Aberdeen, Sheffield United and Rotherham, originally joined Chelsea as Bobby Campbell's right-hand man in August 1988.
He was there for 15 months before moving to Reading.
They later sacked him and he returned to Chelsea in June 1991. — PA
Partick out to halt downward spiral
PARTICK THISTLE take on Hibs at Firhill tonight in the throes of a long, destructive run which has seen them win only one of their last 12 league matches and slip towards relegation, writes Hugh Keevins.
Hibs, while not exactly setting the place alight, have at least the comfort of knowing that a win would lift them above St Johnstone and back into the top half of the table.
Alex Miller, Hibs' manager, waits to see if Darren Jackson, Brian Hamilton, Neil Orr and Tommy McIntyre, all of whom missed Saturday's draw with Motherwell, can recover before naming his team.
In the First Division, Kilmarnock go to Clydebank this evening needing to win to regain second position behind Raith Rovers.
Kilmarnock will be without defender Tommy Wilson who was sent off at Dumbarton on Saturday.
The most intriguing match tonight is at Bayview, with the winner of the Scottish Cup, fourth-round replay between East Fife and Arbroath earning a lucrative home tie to Rangers in the last eight.
Form is no indicator, Arbroath having won their Second Division match with East Fife at Bayview this season before losing on their own ground to the Fifers.
Companies' views on recovery mixed
By Our Business Staff
IN THE current economic climate, the definition of an optimistic businessman has been one who irons five shirts on a Sunday evening.
But recently, including today's CBI distributive trades survey, there have been a few straws in the wind suggesting things really might be getting a little better.
So The Scotsman asked several leading businessmen whether they thought the economy really is on the mend.
The results were a very mixed bag, with some of them so gloomy they refused to be quoted.
On the other hand, in the important housing sector, stirrings in the undergrowth have definitely been sighted.
Geoff Ball, chairman of the house-builder, CALA, said things seemed to be improving in Scotland.
‘Since the beginning of the year, we have been pleased with the level of reservations in the central belt and in Aberdeen.’
Mr Ball urged the Government not to whittle away mortgage relief and to have a neutral Budget to allow a longer period of stability.
His assessment of the housing market was echoed by David Cawthra, chief executive of the privately-owned Miller Group, who warned, however, that the construction side of the business, including civil engineering, was showing no signs of improvement.
But James Millar, chief executive of the Dundee-based supermarket chain, Wm Low, was not so optimistic.
‘No, we have not perceived anything of the sort.
What I see here every week, and through speaking to major food suppliers, doesn't suggest that's happening.’
Mr Millar's information — as with all the larger supermarket chains — is bang up-to-date.
‘Each Monday we see figures from 65 of our branches.
These figures aren't showing an upturn, and there is nothing to indicate from inter-company comparisons that anybody else in the industry is experiencing anything different.’
Ralph Ellis, group managing director of the carpets firm, Stoddard Sekers International, said: ‘We are confident that we are holding our share, but it is of a smaller cake.’
Other leading industrialists, however, were more reticent.
One explained: ‘I have to be careful about what I say publicly because it is just not acceptable to be seen adding to the depression.’
And of course there's the fact that any statements I make about general business confidence are price sensitive and could knock the share price.’
Another managing director was extremely sceptical about the value of business confidence surveys.
‘It becomes an insult to your intelligence to read all the time about surging confidence when you know that things are getting tougher, if anything.
At first, we thought everyone else was booming while we were down in the dumps, but from talking to other businessmen you realise that everyone is suffering the same.’
The chairman of one leading quoted company stated flatly that there was no sign of any recovery.
‘There isn't a single economic indicator which suggests that a recovery is on the way.
Even lower inflation is just a consequence of far higher unemployment.
‘We saw a decline through the second half of last year and there is no sign of any recovery in the first half.
There's just not enough business going about.’
But despite its travails, IBM has spotted an upturn.
‘Business was brisk in the last quarter of 1992 and it continues to be encouraging as we settle into 1993.’
Presumptuous
I am writing in response to the reference in ‘Troon on TV’ today to the couple from New Orleans.
The short excerpt at the end of the BBC programme, Love for Sale, showed Amalie and Vernon getting married at Polwarth Parish Church in Edinburgh.
I was situated immediately behind the cameraman, being at the organ and playing for the service.
Your reviewer was rather presumptuous in assuming they might have been living together with ‘kids from previous marriages’.
They are a genuine couple who wished to be married in Scotland and, as they hailed from Gretna in Louisiana, they went to Gretna Green for a ‘traditional’ anvil wedding.
by no means were they living together and certainly had no children from previous marriages.
Anthony Troon, eat your words!
Need for coherent defence policy
R C Sneddon (Points of View, today) damns our campaign with faint praise; on the one hand he says we ‘secured an impressive victory’; on the other hand he asks whether we have diverted attention from the wider issue of whether a balanced structure for the army has been achieved.
In a sense, he is quite right.
Our campaign has consistently urged the Government to undertake a full and proper defence review that would determine what our commitments are, and are likely to be, and what level of resource needs to be made available to meet them — whether from the Army, Navy or Air Force.
Only then will we achieve a proper balance between the services, in relation to current or potential tasks.
Our campaign has focused on the infantry because it is that part of the army which is most stretched.
Not only are today's tasks still as onerous as ever but, looking over the horizon, further potential tasks loom ahead.
Unfortunately, it is the infantry which may bear the brunt of those commitments  in support of United Nations humanitarian or peace-keeping duties, or in conjunction with other emerging multinational or international force structures.
The simple fact is that commitment and resource must be kept in rough equilibrium; at the moment the infantry is being asked to do too much, with too few battalions.
The Government's responsibility, in seeking that equilibrium, is to either reduce commitments or increase those resources necessary to meet them.
That underlines our repeated call for a full and proper defence review.
Mr Sneddon asks us not to label anyone who disagrees with us as unpatriotic.
Can I suggest to him, in relation to this issue, that patriotism doesn't come into it — except in one sense.
The Government has an overriding duty to implement balanced defence policies that not only meet the country's strategic military interests, but also provide a reasonable quality of life to those men and women who are expected to serve on our behalf.
The Government hasn't, and isn't.
The cancellation of two amalgamations by the Defence Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, amounts to a sticking plaster over a more serious problem.
Like Mr Sneddon, we would like to see the Government look at the wider picture and to develop a coherent defence policy that addresses all the issues.
NHS funding
Bob Paton (Points of View, today) suggests what would appear to be a very logical solution to NHS funding problems.
Had he personal experience of the matter, I imagine his views would be rather different.
Our son was born 14 weeks early, suffered a severe brain haemorrhage as a result of his prematurity and the outlook was very bleak.
We know that his care was expensive.
After a routine check just after his first birthday we were told that Cameron is quite normal.
According to Mr Paton's plan he should have been left to die.
A newborn baby has no choice but adults have and are prevented by the law from exercising that choice and dying with dignity.
People who smoke or otherwise abuse their bodies choose to do so and drain millions from the NHS budget.
Surely these are issues to address?
I despair that anyone should seek financial solutions in the ‘culling’ of the innocents.
Bubble bursts
Scottish salmon farmers want to create an international organisation artificially to maintain the production and price of their product (your report, 12 February).
This situation has arisen because restrictions were not introduced years ago when, using a great deal of public money, the industry was encouraged to expand without control.
The truth is that the bubble has burst.
Factory farming of salmon is producing too many fish for too small a market.
Fixing prices to keep themselves afloat is yet another insult to the public who, without choice, have subsidised this industry.
Intensive salmon farms threaten wildlife, the environment and our tourist industry.
Now that they threaten themselves, the farmers are pleading for action.
It is justly ironic that the Government, which refused to control the industry and protect the environment, has also refused to help them conduct a price-fixing operation.
Hopefully, by the end of the decade, the farmers will accept their fate and give our sea lochs back to the wildlife.
Labour hopes
John Orton (Points of View, 9 February) disagrees with my assertion that the Labour Party has no prospect of ever again governing the UK.
I should point out that I included the words ‘as presently constituted’.
In any event, I ask him to consider four facts:
1
forthcoming boundary changes which are estimated to exacerbate Labour's adverse position to the extent of 30 to 50 seats;
2
John Smith sounds more and more like a left-of-centre Conservative minister.
Labour may, as a result, suffer an exodus of disillusioned left-wing voters;
3
the last general election result;
4
the Liberal Democrats will not go away.
In fact, they could prop up the Conservative Government for a fifth term, if the need arises!
Mr Orton infers there is an inconsistency in my contention that, with proportional representation, Labour could achieve power.
Not so!
Labour could include now in its manifesto a realistic form of PR, coupled with a cast-iron commitment to hold a general election under the new electoral system within a specified short period.
Such a move would surely appeal to an electorate which is looking for moderation and co-operation.
May I conclude with a frightening thought for Labour.
The Conservatives may beat Labour to the punch with their own version of PR, as a precaution in the event that they require Lib/Dem support in the next government.
Man of honour
The continued barrage of media attacks on Tom Clarke, the shadow Secretary of State for Scotland, seems to be endless.
So far, I have managed to restrain myself from putting pen to paper to put a balance to the view emanating from the media and their very well-paid political hacks that Tom Clarke can not be allowed to continue as the parliamentary leader of the Scottish Labour Party in Parliament.
First, we should understand that the political hacks were peeved when he won the overwhelming support of his colleagues to represent them on Labour's shadow cabinet and they were really gutted when John Smith gave him the Scottish Office to shadow.
It was unthinkable that a miner's son should be given such a high office in front of a number of so-called ‘acceptable people,’ whose political careers had trod the well-known track through privilege and patronage.
Therefore, it is against that back-cloth, that I respond to these orchestrated criticisms and express my views on the man I have come to know as a friend and a very good colleague.
Tom Clarke is a man of honour and integrity.
His knowledge of Scottish politics is unrivalled on any side of the political spectrum.
The attacks on him are born from jealousy and political snobbery.
This indulgence by journalists and, sadly, a small number of politicians, has been transparent since the shadow cabinet elections in August.
I have been an elected representative of the Labour Party for 20 years and have seen many come and go in their own shadow.
I never judge individuals in moments of comfort and convenience and certainly not by self praise.
Politicians are better judged in moments of conflict and controversy.
When the chips are down, I will have Tom Clarke by me any day of the week and so will the Scottish people.
Exam results
Stuart Harper (Points of View, 6 February) welcomes the Government's decision to provide him with data on examination results so that he can use it to make decisions on schools in ‘the Government's market-place for education.’
However, he should recognise that it is not just the consumer who responds to ‘market forces’.
The producer or service provider does too, and the first thing any prudent producer does is look to the quality of his raw material.
If, in the education market-place, good examination results are the product, parents the consumers, then the youngsters are the raw material and will have to be screened for their examination ability.
Of course, this is something that private schools already do, but it is interesting that, even in the public sector, some ‘magnet’ schools, upset by their relatively poor performance in examination results, are asking if they can't exclude children who come to them on placing requests from deprived areas.
The rationale is that such children do badly in examinations and so their exclusion will improve the end product.
In a free market, all schools would be able to operate quality control on their raw material in this way, and it would not be long before some children were not wanted by any school because they were ‘poor examination material’.
That may sound extreme, but it is already happening in England, where market place education is rather further developed.
And, having watched the recent coal fiasco, we all know what the next step is once an unwanted raw material has been identified; you stop its production.
In education such a policy would improve performance indicators immediately as a much higher percentage of youngsters would then achieve three or more Highers and gain entrance to university; success all round!
Mr Harper may welcome the arrival of ‘the Government's market-place for education’.
I find it chilling!
Marking time in a creative vacuum
German fashion is about cut, fit, price and reliability.
It has very little to do with style, innovation, or direction, says John Davidson.
He reports from the Dusseldorf collections
DELIVER us, please, from designers, manufacturers and retailers who think that they are giving women ‘the fashion which they want’.
This trite and dreary epithet was on the tips of many tongues at last week's Collections Premieres Dusseldorf, the first major preview of fashion for next autumn, and inexpertly disguises a pronounced lack of vision.
When it comes to fashion just how many women do know what they want?
Very few, I'd respectfully wager.
Fashion has little to do with meeting tangible demands.
We buy clothes because we like them, are inspired by them, can't (supposedly) live without them…but rarely because we will otherwise die of exposure.
And that is why fashion at any level needs to capture the imagination, most particularly in a time of economic recession when the consumer is likely to have priorities more urgent than a new frock.
Catrina McCartney, fashion controller at Jenners of Edinburgh, doubtlessly reflects a view widely held by British ‘profashionals’ that the German market is important because of the cut, fit, price, and reliability of its merchandise.
What she doesn't, of course, dare mention is style, innovation, or direction.
German labels have rarely broken new ground.
And in more stable times, that may have been the secret of their success.
Now, however, fashion is in a state of flux, and ideas of just what is commercial are open to question.
The current Seventies retro trend is hopefully only a half-way house on the route towards a radically fresh set of fashion values, in which the tailoring disciplines so dominant over the last ten or 15 years might at last cease to be the basis of contemporary womenswear.
But in this present confusion and uncertainty, while you might have spotted the odd pair of bellbottom pants, German labels are engaged in an unseemly bout of navel-gazing.
They are simply marking time, waiting for fashion futures to be decided elsewhere.
Manfred Kronen is perhaps more sensitive to this extraordinary situation than most.
As chairman of Igedo, operator of the Dusseldorf fashion fairs, and undoubtedly a prime mover in German fashion, he has been sufficiently aware of its creative vacuum to propose establishing an institutionalised incubator to nurture young design talent.
But as it has taken five years of intensive lobbying to assemble the necessary financial support from the native industry for this interesting if rather Teutonic initiative, one might assume that creativity and innovation are still not regarded as entirely positive values.
AT Escada, even the passing of the design mantle from the late Margaretha Ley to young Michael Stolzenburg has certainly not set the collection off in a dramatic new direction.
Devotees of this label can rest assured that it retains more than anyone's fair share of glitzkrieg.
Elsewhere, bright colour and crazy adornment may be a thing of the past, but at Escada the sequinned penguins are alive and well.
If a mish-mash of tartans with ostentatious golden embroideries of coronation coaches and ‘E’ monograms are your bag, take heart.
The Escada heart, in fact.
And I haven't even described the Tyrol-with-edelweiss fantasy — accessorised, of course, with pretzels.
While Escada's founder, Wolfgang Ley is proud to boast of the seamless transition from one designer to the next, the fashion world might have preferred to see Mr Stolzenburg challenge some preconceptions of this label by offering something fresh and new.
The Escada show was proceeded by a lengthy speech from Mr Ley denying rumours of the company's decline.
At KL by Karl Lagerfeld, Klaus Steilmann took the opportunity to  harangue the audience on the enviable success of this most prestigious brand within his giant apparel-manufacturing empire.
(Music to the buyers' ears.)
In case you need any reminder, nothing in this German market quite matches the allure of a commercial certainty.
The KL backdrop featured a giant sketch from Mr Lagerfeld's own fair felt-tip.
Perhaps only expert eyes could have spotted the correlation between this spirited image and the refined clothing which passed in front.
Even when the depicted coat appeared in three-dimensional form, it somehow lacked the optimism and vitality of the sketch.
This does not mean that KL was a dull collection.
It wasn't innovative, but instead included many stylistic references to Lagerfeld's past triumphs.
These comfortably compensated for the famine of new ideas in what is truly a diffusion line.
Elsewhere, and in tune with a strong feeling towards more overtly natural colours and textures, pseudo-ecological shades of cream and stone emerged as a significant common denominator.
At Mondi, they were contrived in elaborate interplays of contrasting fabrics, while at Marc Cain they appeared in sporty layers of rib-knit and casual ‘topper’.
Clasen combined these blonde tones with deeper, warmer shades of camel or vicuna.
MIDNIGHT blue and brown were the other important colour trends, both combined with anthracite or even black for looks as sophisticated as this market ever dares to offer.
Collections in just about every price bracket offered interpretations of the equestrian or dandy themes.
Brend Berger, Nik Janik and Escada all showed narrow-shouldered jackets with contrasting collars and pocket flaps…sometimes even a little half-belt, over waistcoats and jodhpur-slim trousers.
This is the one combination which lifts the tailored jacket out of the dated power-suit idiom and gives it a contemporary relevance.
And the waistcoats in bold stripes at Time Collection, pen and inkwell prints at KL, or madder motifs at KS Selection seem a wearable option in the move towards dressing in a more relaxed idiom.
According to the Germans, leather will be an essential component of every stylish wardrobe next autumn.
Well, isn't it already?
It was mixed with tweed at KL, with tailored wools at Positiv, with jersey and rib-knit at Escada…sometimes for a jacket or waistcoat, sometimes a skirt, and always for trousers or jeans.
The short skirt is dead.
So what do the Germans offer those women who don't want to wear longer lengths?
Shorts, of course.
They appeared everywhere, not only in collections shown for next season but already clinging to many substantial German posteriors in runway show audiences.
With any luck this is one proposal which British buyers will consider unsuitable for export, and not at all the fashion which women want.
DUSSELDORF: A CITY OF SHINY BRASS
IF you want to visit a city of such apparent cleanliness that you really could dine off the pavements, make your destination Dusseldorf.
No city more eloquently articulates German prosperity, with its lavish temples of commerce and its bustling city centre.
Recession?
What recession?
Elegant stores and designer boutiques along the Konigsallee appear unaffected.
Spectacular real furs and overworked multi-tone coiffures survive in profusion.
Dusseldorf remains the capital of mindless extravagance; ostentation rules the KO.
You might take tea in the  rarefied surroundings of Eickhof, a cafe of quite overwhelming temptation for cake-lovers.
Nearby, Otto Bitner has just the sort of chocolate confections for which diets are readily discarded.
Drop into Albert Eickhof's truly international designer fashion store, if you dare pass through the video-framed doorway, only to meet the intimidating glare of Europe's most menacing sales staff.
Another less challenging branch of his empire further along the Konigsallee welcomes shoppers with the cream of German fashion labels.
The Carsch Haus department store is as clinical as the streets outside are spotless, although the champagne bar adjoining the cosmetics department is an intriguing if dangerously habit-forming innovation.
Sip ice-cold Moet while you deliberate fragrance purchases from Germany's leading designer names represented on the Lancaster counter…
Will it be Jil Sander or Wolfgang Joop?
Across Heinrich-Heine-Allee, you can stumble through Kaufhof, a store with proportionately lower prices and standards of housekeeping.
The food hall here offers every vacuum-packed sausage known to Ger-mankind.
But if you want the best speciality produce, shop at the market on picturesque Karlplatz for game, poultry, fruits and vegetables, together with wonderful cheeses.
Dine in the Alstadt, that tiny remaining scrap of old Dusseldorf, at Carl Masson's superb fish restaurant and imbibe the bustling, brasserie-style atmosphere.
Or, if you really insist on going the whole hog in German cuisine (and believe me, their culinary expertise with swine is fabled) try Zum Schiffchen, a restaurant with absolutely no understanding of nouvelle disciplines.
If you would prefer not to cross forks with the time-warped conspicuous consumers of Dusseldorf, explore the  cheaper , culinary alternatives in the harbour area.
The casual informality of Robert's Bistro attracts a  clientele altogether more human in appearance than the designer handbag brigade who strut the Konigsallee.
If your taste demands something more cultured than a shopping and scoffing experience, you may be fascinated by Dusseldorf's wealth of museums and galleries.
Don't expect, however, to find this city as exciting as Berlin, as trendy as Hamburg, or as elegant as Munich.
The buzzword for Dusseldorf remains brash.
But why are the good citizens of Dusseldorf trapped in a stylistic vacuum?
They continue to perpetrate the discredited myth of economic invincibility rather than reflect the harsh realities of recession and reunification.
Not only do they believe their own PR, they generally eat and wear it too.
Where there's muck, there may be brass.
But brass in squeaky-clean Dusseldorf still comes sculpted into Very Important Buttons.
Cricket matches?
They're a test of my patience
CRICKET.
How do I hate thee?
Let me count the ways…
Maybe it all stems from never being allowed to participate with the big boys in childhood beach games using oil drums as wickets.
Or the fact that at secondary school, only the posh wimps played, the ones who actually liked wearing white trousers and rubbing leather balls up and down their groins.
How could you be bothered with cricket when there was golf — a universal, classless and very cheap obsession in Troon, Ayrshire, scene of my upbringing.
This was a place where, in 1969, a yearly junior season ticket for the three municipal courses cost just a fiver.
I was always completely but cheerfully rotten, however, and despite various faltering adult attempts to spoil good walks in the company of would-be Ballesteroses, I remain useless in the Pringle jumper stakes.
Anyway, cricket.
Boredom given form and structure.
Interminable television coverage blocking out the Scooby Doo repeats.
Soporific or just plain asleep commentators.
Nothing to watch.
A moronic scoring system.
A class-ridden, sometimes racist and often boorish hierarchy and following.
And last week they cancelled the Danny Baker show because of it.
Who is Danny Baker, you may well ask?
Believe it or not, he is that fat cheery cockney who does entirely facile washing powder and chocolate gunge bar adverts on telly for which, laughing all the way to the bank, he gets paid vast quantities of money.
He is therefore to be hated and despised.
He also used to do daytime television game-shows of glaring naffness, and may indeed still do so.
Hence he is clearly an obnoxious Monkhousian caricature, that diseased entity, the professional TV personality.
But.
He also, each cricketless weekday morning, is responsible for the best radio show on UK airwaves.
No question, at least for anyone between 30 and 45 who is out of bed relatively early.
Danny Baker's Morning Edition on BBC Radio Five is a stunning eruption of top-notch Q-magazine rock pop and country music, all of which comes second to non-stop verbal pyrotechnics from Danny, his studio team and constant phoning-in members of the public.
The show specialises in the arcane trivia of popular culture.
It is for those of us who remember and rejoice in Deputy Dawg cartoons, the horrors of actually still having that Curved Air album, of ever attending a gig by Ten Years After or Where Eagles Dare starring which castle?
Which Shakespearian actor?
Themes are set: The worst live album ever made; most embarrassing incident during school; films you have walked out of and why.
Calls flood in, many from cellphones.
But there's more.
Fiendishly funny, cliche-lancing, vituperative and litigation-dodging rants from Mr Baker: Why Sir Ranulph Fiennes and such like explorers are a sick joke.
Why all television consumer shows are pathetic, self-righteous typically British nanny-state garbage for the small of brain.
Why most pop music is rubbish (he will often play only seconds of a record before ripping it off the turntable).
Whole chunks of dialogue from old films are recited.
It's a cult.
It's very, very thirty and fortysomething.
It's fast, flash, intelligent and makes everything on Radio One sound slow and middle-aged.
But then, maybe that's because I'm middle-aged.
But the otherwise fresh, assured and generally excellent Radio Five has problems.
It's on crackle-prone Medium Wave.
And it is big on sport.
Very.
So much so that for cricket internationals, they cancel the best show.
Therefore I had to do some work last week.
Friday morning saw me up Aonach Mor among all the skiers, sweating daintily in the snow through their expensive Gore-Tex.
The smell was awful.
This is the problem environmentalists ought to look at.
Sweat pollution from skiers wearing breathable fabrics.
No wonder the bird life on Cairngorm has been wiped out.
It's the sweat.
Not to mention all the horrid underarm deodorants leaching into the microclimate.
I was there to watch the British Mount Everest Medical Expedition selling themselves to potential sponsors.
The big lump of Velcro on this particular pair of salopettes being a woman, Alison Hargreaves, who is going to attempt the ascent without oxygen and with the immense added handicap of being British.
Not only that, her two children, aged four and two, are to accompany her to base camp in the Himalayas, along with ignored tent-husband Jim, nanny for the duration.
All would be well, she said, because there were going to be so many doctors around.
What faith.
Doctors are all very well, but mountain climbing doctors are all bonkers in my experience, mutant crosses between James Robertson Justice, Rab C Nesbitt and Evel Knievel, eternally setting up drips the better and faster to imbibe Old Scrotum's Real Brain Shrinking Liver Ale.
The Everest crew may not be like that.
It is a proven fact, however, that prolonged high altitude reduces intelligence.
I rest my case.
Enough of all this physical stuff, I thought.
I must have some art.
Actually, I'd already had some in the Western Isles the previous day at the excellent An Lanntair gallery.
But my aesthetic soul craved more.
So with a quick stop at Inverness to hone shamelessly my tabloid first-paragraph skills on Alison Hargreaves, it was off to Ullapool.
Someday, everywhere in the world will have a Ceilidh Place, Jean and Robert Urquhart's wonderful hotel/theatre/art gallery/bookshop/restaurant/bar/cafe.
It was the setting on Friday night for the launch of The Great Ullapool Picture Show, an exhibition with a difference.
The idea of telephone engineer Iain Robertson, it gave local people the chance to see their own favourite picture displayed among those of other villagers.
The result was splendid.
The stories each picture told varied from the tragic to the hilarious: The expensive oil landscape which had had seagulls drawn on to the sky in ballpoint pen; the ancient Highland cattle picture, swopped for food after the First World War by a travelling artist.
The superb etching by Bulgarian Dimi Kolibarov, first introduced to Scotland by a klondyker crewman carrying a bundle of prints; there was an inevitable Tretchikoff but perhaps most poignant of all, two very accomplished prison paintings by convicted local cocaine smuggler Robert Burns.
One, of a fox, called Sly was apparently produced for his son.
The other, a warlike woman, looked like one of Saddam Hussein's concubines and featured more phallic symbols than a hedgehog.
There was music, there was good (verbal) crack, there was the Ceilidh Place's astonishing ‘honesty’ bar for residents (drink what you like then note it down in a book.
Honestly!).
Best of all, there was the news that England were getting gubbed.
And that the Danny Baker show would soon be back, refreshed and vengeful.
‘Rollercoaster’ award for Roy
THE entertainer Roy Castle received his OBE insignia from the Queen yesterday and called it his ‘greatest up after the lowest down’.
Castle, 60, said the Queen had asked him about his health after his year-long battle with lung cancer.
‘I never dreamed I would be here when I was lying in bed getting the chemotherapy with a five to ten per cent chance of survival.
‘It is the greatest up after the lowest down — it is the biggest rollercoaster I have been on in my life.’
Castle, who was attending Buckingham Palace with his wife Fiona and two of his four children, said the OBE for services to charity was ‘marvellous — it's what it says: the Old Boy's Ego’.
At yesterday's investiture he joined the newly-knighted television presenter Sir David Frost, the sports commentator David Coleman, also an OBE, and the Olympic swimmer Sharron Davies, who was invested as an MBE.
Sir David, 53, said that receiving his knighthood from the Queen was an ‘awe-inspiring and thrilling experience’.
His fellow BBC journalist David Coleman said he was ‘thrilled’ with his OBE.
Also invested as an OBE was Paul Davies, the ITN correspondent who has reported from some of the world's troublespots during a 23-year career.
Mr Davies, 40, who attended with his parents, Derek and Joan, said he has just returned from Bosnia, which the Queen said must be a dreadful place to work.
He said: ‘She wished me luck next time I went back.’
A ‘very proud’ Sharron Davies told reporters: ‘The Queen said this was another medal to add to all the other medals I had won.
I am more proud of this one than the others.’
Also receiving their honours today were Anne Snelling, headmistress at Stratford School, east London, and Jocelyn Stevens, 61, chairman of English Heritage.
Mrs Snelling, who was engaged in a power struggle with school governors over the control of her opted-out school, received her OBE, but declined to comment on her award.
Mr Stevens said he was ‘very honoured indeed’ to be made a Commander of the Royal Victorian Order for his work on the Sovereign Exhibition, which was held at London's Victoria and Albert Museum.
Roy Castle, OBE: ‘The Old Boy's Ego’
McKay handed top Foundation award
By Ian Wood
MHAIRI McKAY, the 17-year-old Turnberry golfer described by Tony Jacklin as ‘the most exciting young talent to emerge since the young Seve Ballesteros’, has been named as a Golf Foundation award-winner for 1992.
The award goes to outstanding junior golfers who have benefited from the foundation's work and who have maintained high standards both on and off the course.
Shaun Devenney, of Strabane, is winner in the boys' section.
In the course of a remarkable year, Mhairi, who played off plus-two, won both the British and Belgian Girls' Championships, the Scottish Girls' Closed Championship and the Helen Holm Trophy.
Second in the Scottish Girls' Under-21 Stroke-play Championship, she was also runner-up in the Daily Telegraph Junior Golfer of the Year tournament which she won in 1991.
A member of the Scottish Girls' team for the European Team championship, she led the side to victory in the Home Internationals.
She represented her country in the senior Home Internationals and was undefeated in singles.
Her season began unpromisingly with an attack of shingles which kept her out of action for a couple of weeks but she recovered quickly and so completely that in addition to compiling her formidable record on the golf course, she was able to cope more than adequately with her school exams.
A pupil at Fernhill School, Rutherglen, she plans a sixth year with a view to going to university to study law.
‘I would like to have a profession behind me,’ says Mhairi, who sees her golf remaining rooted in the amateur ranks.
On the subject of Curtis Cup selection, she says: ‘Oh, that's a long way off,’ though at the present rate of progress, it may not be as distant a prospect as she thinks.
Shaun Devenney played off three at the beginning of last season and now plays to one, his year's successes including the Leinster Boys' and the Mark Ryder Under-22 championships and the Ulster Junior Foursomes.
An Irish internationalist at boys and youths level, he has been playing golf for five years.
Eileen Sessions, former head teacher at Smestow School, Stafford, whose introduction of Golf Foundation lessons to her school curriculum 1971 led to the establishment of a Staffordshire County Schools' Association which now incorporates 60 schools, is the first winner of the Sir Henry Cotton Award for Meritorious Service to Junior Golf.
She receives £1,000 from the Stanley Morrison Trust.
The effects of the recession were reflected in the chairman's report to the foundation's agm, which recorded a deficit of £69,220 for 1991-92 due to a combination of increased expenditure on coaching activities and a fall-off in sponsorship.
While the golf trade generally had been slow to respond, the R & A continued its generous support and the Gus Payne Trophy for the highest club donation to the annual appeal went to Wentworth, which raised a record total of £9,005.
Mhairi McKay: the Turnberry girl is recognised as an outstanding young prospect
Farr has sights on major event
By Elspeth Burnside
AFTER the success of last week's inaugural Scottish championships, the Telesquash inventor, Eric Farr, is determined to put together an even more ambitious project within the next few months.
‘I want to stage either a Scotland versus England international or a British championship by the end of April,’ said Farr.
‘I've taken the tape of last week's event around several companies, and already some are showing interest.’
After a low-key opening day, the Aberdeen tournament burst into life on finals night when Alison Bowie beat Emma Donaldson in a five-game women's final, and then Peter Nicol inflicted defeat on Mark Maclean in the men's decider that also went the full distance.
The new format certainly appeared to go down well with the packed crowd.
Telesquash rallies are restricted to a maximum of 15 strokes — the server wins the point if no-one hits a winner — and thus the format encourages attacking play.
Farr has also invented a special Telesquash ‘nick’— a piece of skirting board which is placed along part of the side and back walls — and it also helped to increase the incidence of outright winners.
This weekend, Nicol, who also won the Scottish National title last month, will be going for a Scottish hat-trick when he lines-up as top seed in the North of Scotland Open, sponsored by Stewart Milne Construction, at his home Aberdeen Club.
With a £2,000 prize fund, the championships have attracted five top English players headed by second seed, Jonathan Lilley, who is due to meet Scotland's Martin Heath in the semi-finals, and Paul Millington.
In the women's event, Donaldson and Bowie are favourites to reach the final of an event that is the penultimate counter of the Scottish Women's Grand Prix.
With the season's score between the pair standing at one-all — Donaldson had won the Scottish Championship before suffering the Telesquash reverse — it promises to be a crunch contest.
The two local favourites, Claire Waddell, who currently leads the Grand Prix, and Julie Nicol are expected to make up the semi-final line-up.
The women's event is being staged in two pools of five followed by semi-finals and a final so it promises to be a tough weekend for those that reach the latter stages.
In addition, the event also incorporates the Scottish Veteran and Vintage Championships, both of which have attracted record entries.
Mark Maclean carries Scotland's hopes in the Leekes Classic starting in Cardiff today.
Chatam in with Cup ‘chance'
CHATAM remains firmly on course for the Gold Cup after his narrow defeat by Jodami in Ireland on Sunday.
Martin Pipe's nine-year-old made Jodami pull out all the stops in Leopardstown's Hennessy Cognac Gold Cup, beaten a head in a rousing finish.
Chatam had not been seen in public since finishing fourth to Sibton Abbey in the Hennessy at Newbury in November, and Pipe said yesterday: ‘It was a fine run considering he had been off the course for so long and he goes for the Gold Cup with every chance.
‘He has returned home in fine shape and will not run again before Cheltenham.’
Chatam will join stablemates Run For Free and Rushing Wild in the Gold Cup line-up next month.
Meanwhile, Satin Lover's trainer, Nigel Tinkler, will decide on a Cheltenham prep race for his star novice today.
Unbeaten in five starts over timber, Satin Lover is doubly engaged at Sandown tomorrow, but also holds an entry in Nottingham's Tote City Trial Hurdle this weekend.
Satin Lover's Festival options are also open, comprising the Champion Hurdle, County Hurdle and Supreme Novices' Hurdle.
— PA
Two Heads at weekend
ANOTHER busy weekend is ahead for active rowers, with two Head races and trials for potential GB juniors.
The Inverness Head is on Saturday in two divisions, at 12:15 and 2:30pm, over three miles from Dochgarroch to Tomnahurich on the Caledonian Canal — a good and testing course.
On the same day, the Tyne Head is being raced over 5km upstream to Newburn, starting at 1:45pm.
Scots crews often do well there.
The second in the series of long-distance trials for GB juniors will be at Chester.
The new status system for racing under SARA rules has claimed its first victim.
A Clydesdale crew has admitted mistakenly racing and winning at restricted two level in the recent Prontaprint Fours Head.
Campbell to run eye over top Scots
ALLAN CAMPBELL, who takes up his appointment of director of coaching and development with the Scottish Badminton Union on Monday, will have the chance to run his eye over the top players when seven Scots compete in the All England Championships on 15-20 March.
Anne Gibson and Jim Mailer, who won the respective women's and men's national titles earlier this month, spearhead Scotland's challenge at the All England, and they will be backed up by Gillian Martin, Kevin Scott, Bruce Flockhart, and Gordon and Jillian Haldane.
Flockhart and Jillian Haldane are also in the Scotland Under-23 squad who take on Ulster at Stranraer on 11 March.
Next month's Clydesdale Bank Scottish Junior Championships at  Meadowbank have attracted a record entry.
With entries up 20 per cent, the organisers are looking at the possibility of using an additional hall for the event.
Bowlers to blame for Test defeats
Despite thorough preparation, England's cricketers have been no match for India.
Jeremy Allerton analyses their dismal displays
EVEN Napoleon found away fixtures tricky.
Despite all their meticulous pre-tour preparation, England have been routed by a wicked combination of untimely injuries and sickness plus the loss of two vital tosses.
But the simple fact remains that the Indian team, whose form and morale have dramatically improved since their South African tour, have completely outplayed England in every department.
The writing was on the wall early in the tour when Ian Salisbury was promoted from supernumerary net bowler to fully-fledged tourist.
If he was troubling the England batsman then that was worrying on two counts.
Firstly, that the batsmen were struggling against spin, and secondly, that it was against Salisbury.
If he was able to achieve this it did not augur well for the struggles against the three Indian spinners, who had variously been described as inexperienced and nebulous.
This may be unkind to Salisbury, but compare his Madras figures of two for 142 in 29 overs in India's innings against those of his opposite number, Kumble, whose combined total was eight for 125 in 46 overs.
This was the crucial difference.
Salisbury and Phil Tufnell (0-132) never taxed the Indian batsmen, while England's batsmen have only intermittently coped with the Indian spinners in both Tests.
In Calcutta, Mike Gatting batted for six hours in his two innings, while in Madras he was at the crease for only 66 minutes and 21 runs.
In the first Test, Robin Smith looked like an elephant learning to knit, but in the second the message transmission service from head to feet was reconnected.
Graeme Hick confirmed his encouraging form with an excellent 64, which was only ended by one of several bad decisions given by Professor Rathore.
In both Tests, two or three Englishmen looked well set, but failed to convert good innings into substantial ones, unlike India who won the first Test through Azharuddin's great innings of 182 and  laid the foundation for the Madras victory with Tendulkar's 165 and Sidhu's 106.
Confronted with India's massive 560, England made a good start reaching 157 for one.
It needed someone to score 150, and Alec Stewart, who again batted exceptionally well for 74, Hick (64) and Neil Fairbrother (83) all had that chance.
From such a good start it was disappointing to reach only 286 and not avoid the follow on.
Of course, it was a good toss to win and things might have been different if England had batted first.
But there is no point in indulging in ifs.
The Indians in their own habitat are a completely different proposition and it is not surprising that England have only won three of the nine Test series in India.
Sidhu's patient 6-hour century was typical of the Indian's determination and application.
In the pre-Test games, he had walloped the England attack, completely destroying John Emburey in the process.
He was thus dismissed by the England camp as a complete lunatic whose criminal slogging should not be allowed to sully finer sensibilities.
So, in Madras, he demonstrated an alternative approach and it was rather like watching Norman Tebbit become Mahatma Ghandi.
The England pace attack laboured in vain yet again, and what was even more worrying was that the selectors toyed with the idea of once more playing four quick bowlers.
Stewart's captaincy was, in the circumstance, commendable and he looked lively in the field while constantly encouraging dispirited bowlers.
The ineffectiveness of both Emburey and Tufnell has been one of the tour's major shocks and together with Philip DeFreitas's injury has left England looking somewhat toothless.
The bowling department remains England's main problem area, despite the batting failures, and there is not much good that can be said about the bowlers.
Each of the batsmen has had his moments, unfortunately not enough of them and not at the same time to a sufficient degree.
The problem of Stewart's role was further complicated by his relinquishing the wicket-keeping role in order to captain the team.
This meant that Richard Blakey, after one innings in six weeks, batted at No6 and not surprisingly mustered only six runs in two visits to the wicket.
At long last Chris Lewis demonstrated his wonderful batting talent, and together with Hick blossoming and Fairbrother blending his natural game to Test demands, there have been some encouraging signs.
However, it is hard to avoid the impression of a team who have not had the best of luck on and off the field, and who have had great difficulty in coping with Indian spinners, hitches, food and umpires.
‘Twas ever thus.
Over half a million people have watched the first two Tests and two things are immediately obvious.
Contrary to some reports, Test cricket is still flourishing in India and it is a great pity that this is not a five-Test series instead of three.
While we English are only too ‘delighted’ to witness such unalloyed victorious joy in former colonial outposts such as Cardiff and Madras, it is not a trend we would wish to see maintained in the serious stuff of life — the Calcutta Cup!
Ian Salisbury: the spinner has failed to trouble Indian batsmen
Graham Bell pips brother for title
IN perfect conditions, Graham Bell, the leading member of the British World Cup downhill squad on current form, pipped his brother, Martin, to lift the British downhill title for the first time at Tignes, France, yesterday.
With Dundee's Ronald Duncan — the 1991 British champion and Britain's best in the world rankings — out through a back injury, the Bell brothers had it pretty much their own way.
Graham finished the 2,500m course in a time of 1min 14.10sec, beating his brother by 0.36sec.
Debbie Pratt retained her British women's downhill title, with Emma Carrick-Anderson taking third place 0.87sec behind the winner.
Hay may spring surprise in Scottish
MIKE HAY's Atholl team could be the dark horses in the Bell's Scottish Championship finals which start at Kirkcaldy tonight, writes WH Kemp.
Hay has taken over Grant McPherson's side, with Alistair Scott at third, Billy Andrew at second and Derek Brown at lead, all former junior internationalists.
Hay won this title as skip in 1984 and has been prominent as a player and coach in Scotland and Canada since.
He guided David Smith's Perth to the world title in 1991.
Hay also knows the strength and weaknesses of Hammy McMillan's Stranraer, the holders, having played alongside him for Scotland.
Colin Hamilton's Gogar, beaten finalists last year, are still on form and the Dryburgh family's Aviemore team could again make the semis.
Incidentally, McMillan has called a meeting of all curlers at Perth on 27 February, when a players' group or association will come a step nearer reality.
Today's draw.
First round (7pm): D Aitken (Galleon) v D Dryburgh (Aviemore); C Hamilton (Gogar) v M Hay (Atholl); J Kenny (Forest Hills) v P Loudon (Letham Grange); H McMillan (Stranraer) v W Smith (Perth); D Smith (Perth) v P Wilson (Stranraer).
Lineen still setting lively pace
SEAN LINEEN, the former Scotland centre who retired from international rugby after last summer's tour to Australia, is preparing for a hectic schedule of three games in five days, writes Graham Law.
Lineen will captain the Saltires when they aim to repeat last year's record victory over Ulster at Ravenhill, Belfast, tonight (7:30).
On Friday, he will be on club duty at Meggetland (7:30), where Boroughmuir meet Llanelli in a glamour friendly, and on Sunday he will be playing in a New Zealand XV, organised by Buck Shelford, in a sell-out match with Northampton.
For tonight's match Lineen, is joined by five other Scottish caps — Iwan Tukalo, Peter Jones, Martin Scott, David McIvor and Ian Smith.
Ian Hunter (knee injury) yesterday withdrew from England's squad for the international against Scotland on 6 March and his position on the replacements' bench has been taken by Bath centre Phil De Glanville.
Orrell winger Nigel Heslop, capped ten times by England, signed for rugby league Oldham last night.
Saltires (v Ulster at Ravenhill tonight): S Burns (Edinburgh Acads); S Davies (Llanelli), S Lineen (Boroughmuir) capt, F Clough (Wasps), I Tukalo (Selkirk); C Stephens (Llanelli), R Moon (Rosslyn Park); P Jones (Gloucester), M Scott (Edinburgh Acads), B Robertson (Stirling Co), J Richardson (Edinburgh Acads), D Sims (Gloucester), D McIvor (Edinburgh Acads), S Reid (Boroughmuir), I Smith (Gloucester).
Midlands District Union (v Glasgow DU at Duffus Park, Cupar, tonight at 7pm): C Boath; S Duncan (both Madras College); K Grieve (Glenrothes), M Carberry (Hillfoots), S Cassidy; D Peterson (both Alloa), S Bowyer (Hillfoots); J Pryde (Madras), D Whitehead capt, S Penman (both Hillfoots); D Brannon (Alloa), G Kennedy (Hillfoots), S Purdon (Carnoustie HSFP), K Manson (Hillfoots), C O'Donnell (Alloa).
Swail furious over Irish snub
IRISH champion Joe Swail reached the last eight of the Humo European Open in Antwerp yesterday, then expressed his amazement at being left out of the Benson and Hedges Irish Masters at Goffs next month.
Swail, who defeated Tony Drago 5-3, had expected to be named as one of three-wild card entries for an event which also includes the top nine on the world ranking list.
But, instead, last season's runner-up, Ken Doherty, who won the Regal Welsh Open last month, runner-up Alan McManus and former world champion Dennis Taylor received the nod.
‘To say I'm disgusted is putting it mildly,’ said Swail.
‘What have I got to do, win the world championship?
‘I don't have any argument with the players who have received wild-card entries but I do feel I should have been one of them.
‘Alan is a great player but I find it strange that a Scot is preferred to an Irishman and the more matches I win, the bigger the snub will be.’
Mick Price, a quarter-finalist in the European Open a year ago, reached the last eight again after a 5-2 victory over former world champion Joe Johnson.
— PA
World League may touchdown in Glasgow
By Mike Aitken
GLASGOW could become the home of a professional American football team next year if the city is chosen as one of two British venues for the NFL's revived World League in the spring of 1994.
Plans are under consideration for an extended European League which would include two teams in Germany, one in Spain, one in Paris or Milan and two in the UK.
London will again fill one of the places with Glasgow, Manchester and Birmingham competing for the other spot.
Representatives of the NFL were in Glasgow yesterday for a coaching clinic and were impressed by the extent of the interest shown in the sport.
A capacity turn-out of 55 local coaches attended a classroom clinic last night given by the former Pittsburgh Steelers head coach Chuck Noll, the only man to win four Super Bowls.
Accompanying Noll at the clinic were Ray Willsey, who won two Super Bowl rings with the Los Angeles Raiders, Jack Bicknell, of the Barcelona Dragons, Oliver Luck, general manager of Frankfurt Galaxy, and the former Chicago Bears general manager, Jerry Vainisi.
This group of NFL stalwarts were in Scotland as part of the World Partnership programme which has been set up to assist in the development of American football at amateur level in Europe.
Between now and August, the scheme hopes to reach 10,000 players and 1,000 coaches.
‘We believe that the future of American football internationally rests with the young coaches and players,’ said Neil Austrian, president of the NFL.
‘That's why the NFL World Partnership has been created and why we are putting considerable amounts of time, effort and financing into its development.’
The World League, which ran in 1991 and 1992, was dropped this year because of poor TV ratings in the US.
Ironically, the league was a success in Europe with encouraging attendances at games in Barcelona, Frankfurt and London.
The sport made a big impact in Germany where Frankfurt Galaxy drew more spectators to home matches than Eintracht Frankfurt.
Indeed, only three Bundesliga clubs attracted higher average gates in a country where football is king.
While few cities are more obsessed with soccer than Glasgow, the NFL believes it would attract a different, younger audience to watch American football.
‘We would be happy to live alongside soccer and draw on that enthusiasm,’ said an NFL spokesman.
‘What we hope to offer is a family outing — an event — as well as attracting a younger crowd.’
The average age of spectators at Frankfurt Galaxy matches was 24 and the NFL obviously believes that young people here will show the same enthusiasm for American sport that they do for fast food, clothes and records.
‘I've been impressed by the enthusiasm for American football in Scotland and the thirst for knowledge,’ said Noll.
‘What we're trying to get across are some of the basics which will help amateur players win their individual battles.
If you try to learn it all, the sport will seem very complex.
But we can reduce that complexity by answering the question — how do I win my battle?’
In his 23 years with the Steelers, Noll was the most successful head coach in the history of the NFL.
Apart from guiding the Steelers to four Super Bowl titles, he became one of the elite group of coaches to have won more than 200 games in the NFL's 73-year history.
‘I started as a player in pro football in 1953 and what I'm trying to do now is put back some of the enjoyment I've had from the game,’ he added.
’ It's been good for me and if I can show others how to enjoy it, then that's what will continue to make American Football grow.’
Interest in Channel4's coverage of the game and booming sales of NFL products suggest that American football could be ripe for development in Scotland.
If the professional game does come here, the players and coaches appreciate that audiences may not understand all the nuances of the game.
However, as Jack Bicknell, the Barcelona Dragons coach recalled, lack of knowledge can work both ways.
‘We want to try and educate the fans, but sometimes they teach us,’ he said.
‘In one game in Barcelona, the players asked me why the crowd was whistling.
I told them — it's because they think we stink.
And, you know, they were right.’
DONALD MacLEOD
Hands on approach: former Pittsburgh Steelers head coach, Chuck Noll, in Glasgow yesterday
SWIMMING
Walker record but no medal
WARRENDER's Fraser Walker broke the British 100m medley record at yesterday's Uncle Ben's World Cup Meet in Sheffield, but just failed to collect a medal.
The 19-year-old finished fourth in 57.62sec — which knocked 0.02sec from John Davey's British mark and a massive four seconds plus from the previous Scottish best held by Scott McKinlay — in an event won by Germany's Christian Keller in 55.30.
Overall, the Scottish team produced four finalists, with Alison Sheppard and Neil Hudghton both finishing sixth in the 50m freestyle and 200m breaststroke respectively, and junior, Graeme Smith, taking eighth in the 400m freestyle.
Paul Palmer, Nick Gillingham and Mark Foster gave Britain a golden treble.
Palmer won the 400m freestyle in 3:45.82, Foster the 50m butterfly in 24.00 and  Gillingham's 2:11.01 won the 200m breaststroke.
Sandra Voelker, from Germany, set a world best of 28.33sec in the 50m backstroke.
ATHLETICS
Sinqe sacked from marathon
ANGRY London Marathon organisers have thrown top South African runner Zithulele Sinqe out of April's race for breaking the terms of his contract.
Sinqe, who holds his country's national record of 2hr 8min 4sec, was due to run his first marathon outside the republic in the NutraSweet-sponsored event on 18 April but London organisers were left fuming when they discovered he had run a marathon in Japan a fortnight ago in defiance of his contract which stipulated that he should not run a competitive marathon within 90 days of the big race.
BASKETBALL
Pentland call for shake-up
A CALL for a big shake-up in the structure of the Scottish leagues has come from a shock source.
Pentland — who are currently propping up the bottom of the men's first division table without a win — have called for a bigger, more competitive league next season.
The club was reacting to a proposal by Glasgow Brightsiders that the Scottish men's first division should consist of just six teams next season.
CYCLING
Portsmouth starting line
THE Kellogg's Tour of Britain will start for the first time in Portsmouth and finish in Liverpool after 550 miles' racing in five days in August.
It will be contested by 105 riders from 15 teams.
Itinerary: 9 Aug: Portsmouth-Bath, 100 miles.
10 Aug: Cardiff-Swansea, 124 miles.
11 Aug: Newport-Coventry, 114 miles.
12 Aug: Birmingham-Manchester, 112 miles.
13 Aug: Bradford-Liverpool, 107 miles.
FENCING
Ritchie takes honours
SCOTTISH fencers excelled at the British Age Group Championships, Croydon.
In the under-18 sabre, Jack Ritchie (Culloden) came first, Colin MacAuley (Dingwall) was seventh, Duncan Scott (Dingwall) eighth, and Andrew Stewart (Carluke) ninth.
In the under-16 sabre, Christopher Orr (Bellahouston) was third with Fraser Shaw (Carluke) tenth and Michael Brown (Blantyre) sixteenth.
ICE HOCKEY
Brewer quits sponsorship
HEINEKEN is discontinuing sponsorship of the sport after ten years.
The move means that the league and the end of season play-offs now need sponsorship as the company will bow out at the British Championships at Wembley in April.
VOLLEYBALL
Syer to psyche Scots team
SCOTLAND have enlisted the help of leading sports psychologist, John Syer, to help their preparations for the men's Western European Championships in Turkey in April.
Syer, who has worked closely with Tottenham FC in the past and has advised top British athletes, will attend this Sunday's training session at Jordanhill.
YACHTING
Knox-Johnson off Brazil
ROUND the world yachtsman Robin Knox-Johnson and his crew were off the southern coast of Brazil yesterday as they maintained their  challenge for the Jules Verne Trophy.
Muir and Duff clear opening hurdle
IRVINE's Jim Muir and Hugh Duff, the former Auchinleck man who is now living south of the Border and lining up in England's colours, won through to the second round of the Midland Bank World Indoor Championship in Preston yesterday as former winners Terry Sullivan and David Bryant tumbled out of the title race.
Muir, omitted from the event last year after an administrative error, needed just 15 ends to help heal the wounds as he sent New Zealand's Gary Lawson tumbling out of the championship.
An impressive display from Magnum player Muir saw him cruise through with a 7-2, 7-1, 7-1 win.
Duff had to work a lot harder for his five-set victory over the 1985 world champion, Terry Sullivan.
Sullivan took the opener 7-4 but then Duff looked to have taken command when he won the second 7-3 and the next 7-0.
Sullivan, however, hit back with a last-gasp 7-6 win in the next set to force the decider, but Duff led all the way for a 7-3 win.
Bryant, now in the twilight of an incredible career, recovered after dropping the opening set against Australia's Dennis Katunarich to take the second and third sets.
However, as Bryant later admitted: ‘I didn't last the pace.’
Katunarich recovered to win 7-6, 2-7, 6-7, 7-2, 7-2.
Swansea's John Price, who took the title two years ago and lost out in last year's final, had to work hard during the early exchanges in his clash with Noel Graham, a world championship newcomer from Belfast, but the Welshman finally won through 7-6, 7-5, 7-0.
Hendry edges into quarter-finals
STEPHEN HENDRY last night advanced to the last eight of the Humo European Open in Antwerp with a narrow 5-4 victory over Dennis Taylor.
The world champion compiled breaks of 101, 74, 61 and 45 and now faces Irish champion Joe Swail in the quarter-finals.
Taylor's top breaks against the Scot who just 48 hours earlier won the Benson & Hedges Masters for a fifth time, were an 88 and 65 in the seventh and eighth frames.
Swail defeated Tony Drago 5-3 and then expressed his amazement at being left out of the B&H Irish Masters at Goffs next month.
He had expected to be named as one of three-wild card entries for an event which also includes the top nine on the world ranking list.
But, instead, last season's runner-up, Ken Doherty, who won the Regal Welsh Open last month, runner-up Alan McManus and former world champion Dennis Taylor received the nod.
‘To say I'm disgusted is putting it mildly,’ said Swail.
‘What have I got to do, win the world championship?’
‘I don't have any argument with the players who have received wild-card entries but I do feel I should have been one of them.
‘Alan is a great player but I find it strange that a Scot is preferred to an Irishman and the more matches I win, the bigger the snub will be.’
Mick Price, a quarter-finalist in the European Open a year ago, reached the last eight again after a 5-2 victory over former world champion Joe Johnson.
— PA 
Three key men doubtful for Malta tie
Late decision on Roxburgh's final line-up
By Hugh Keevins
SCOTLAND's objectives in their World Cup qualifying tie against Malta at Ibrox tonight are clearer than Andy Roxburgh's final team selection.
Doubts over the fitness of Rangers pair Ally McCoist and Davie McPherson as well as Alan McLaren of Hearts will remain unanswered until this morning.
Against a country who have yet to win a game in this competition, McCoist is at one time the biggest worry and the main source of inspiration for Roxburgh.
The forward trained yesterday and if there is no reaction today, he is the one who, in Roxburgh's eyes, can trouble the Maltese.
‘At a time when Scotland's supply of quality players is limited, McCoist can make this tie less of a banana skin than it looks,’ said Roxburgh, who freely admits he would rather his team were playing Germany, Italy or the Netherlands.
‘Games against the very best suit the Scottish temperament.
We are impetuous by nature and get frustrated if there is no battle to be won, particularly in midfield,’ he said.
‘If opponents such as the Maltese constantly back off, we sometimes wonder what to do and we get careless.
‘Part of the deal at Ibrox will be that Malta deliberately try to frustrate Scotland, but if McCoist and Eoin Jess are allowed the room to show off their club form, that has to be a comfort to us.’
The closest comparison that can be made to tonight's match is the final game played by Scotland when winning their European Championship qualifying group.
Against San Marino at Hampden in November 1991, Scotland scored three times in the first half but then finished up with so many forwards that order went out the window and only one more goal was scored amid the scramble created by having Mo Johnston and Kevin Gallacher supplement John Robertson, McCoist and Gordon Durie.
Proper deployment is therefore as essential as the personnel employed by Roxburgh tonight.
Hearts' Robertson could play beside McCoist with the young Pittodrie forward, Jess, taking up a wider position in his first full international appearance from the start.
Celtic's John Collins will definitely begin the match, beside Paul McStay in midfield and he favours playing three attackers.
‘It means that when we collect the ball and look up there are more passing options available,’ he stated.
Collins' form has been as stable as his club's progress has been erratic this season and the player feels he should have represented his country more often than he has done.
‘There have been times when I felt I was overlooked and that has left me desperately disappointed,’ said the player who will tonight win his tenth cap.
The midfield players and forwards from which Roxburgh will choose his team have amassed 31 goals for Scotland and the national coach came up with a cinematic analogy to summarise the task against Malta.
‘We have ten qualifying ties in all to play.
So far, Scotland have taken only two points from the first three games in Group I.
‘That leaves us like Clint Eastwood going into seven different towns for shoot-outs.
If the shooting is not up to the mark, we will need to carry the consequences.’
A case of Andy goes to Hollywood or, in the event of blanks being fired, Scotland do not go to America next year for the World Cup finals.
Malta, as the coach observed, are light years ahead of San Marino and the closeness of their results against Portugal and Italy (both won by the odd goal), confirms their aptitude for denying space to the opposition.
‘The Maltese have improved dramatically and are gaining respect so it would be impossible to dismiss them, especially when they have a striker like Carmel Busuttil who has scored 16 goals for his country.’
Busuttil, incidentally, had six stitches inserted in a calf injury after last weekend's game for Belgians FC Genk, but he is expected to play.
The record books show that Malta have played 36 World Cup qualifying ties, drawing four and losing 32.
If the Man With No Name were involved in a shoot-out with them, the opposition would be wiped out without any ash dropping from the cheroot at the side of his mouth.
In the real, as opposed to celluloid, world, Roxburgh would settle for a win emphatic enough to stabilise his team and prepare them for the more demanding games ahead.
The presence of McCoist, the aerial prowess of McPherson and the reliable defending of McLaren, which made him outstanding against Italy in Scotland's last match, would all be of assistance in extending Malta's poor record.
Booth's record strikes gives Scots hope Scotland
Under-21s 3 Malta Under-21s 0
A GRITTY rather than spectacular display, highlighted by two goals from Scott Booth, against ultra-negative visitors at Tannadice yesterday earned Scotland a lifeline in the European Under-21 Championship.
It was the young Scots' first win in four outings and gave them an outside chance of qualifying for the latter stages of the championship.
But Craig Brown's boys remain long odds on achieving that aim with extremely tough tasks yet to be undertaken in both Portugal and Italy.
However, manager Brown was full of optimism as he claimed afterwards: ‘We are far from being dead yet.
In fact, I believe that we are capable of going anywhere and winning, providing we have our best players available.’
Yesterday's match-winning pair up front, Aberdeen's Booth and Dundee United's Duncan Ferguson, were lining up together for the first time during the current campaign.
The last time Booth played alongside Ferguson at international level, he netted a hat-trick in a friendly against Denmark.
At Tannadice yesterday, Booth fell just one short of that total, revelling in the assistance offered him by Ferguson's undoubted physical threat amid a nervous-looking Maltese defence.
But his under-21 tally of seven is a record — two more than Celtic's Gerry Creaney netted.
The one-sided affair ought to have seen the hosts cash in on early superiority, even before Booth struck in the 31st minute to break the deadlock with a well-placed glancing header off Darren Ferguson's corner.
Boosted by that success, Scotland looked for more, and they duly obliged three minutes into the second half when Paul Telfer's flag-kick was met by Duncan Ferguson's deadly forehead, the ball speeding past a bemused Tony Mallia.
From then on, with the visitors seemingly content to waste time at every opportunity in the hope of keeping the scoreline respectable, the expected increase in Scotland's lead failed to materialise.
That was until the 89th minute when yet another set-piece produced the third goal.
Luton's Paul Telfer, impressive on his debut, again provided the assist, this time from a free-kick, and Booth, from wide of the far post, nodded a skilful header across goal and in under the crossbar.
One player, Malta's Jon Buhagiar, was booked in a tough and often uncompromising affair in which Scotland's impressive central defensive pairing of Stephen Wright and Kevin Bain always looked in command.
World Cup points may be raised
THE governing body of world football, FIFA, is considering awarding three points for a win in next year's group matches in the World Cup finals to reward attacking play.
FIFA general secretary Sepp Blatter said yesterday he was in favour of awarding three instead of two points for winning teams, particularly in the finals, and suggested it may be introduced in the United States next year.
‘I am in favour of three points for a win and I will see if the organising committee can examine this for the future,’ Blatter said.
The proposal will be discussed in June.
FIFA is also considering bringing in sudden-death penalty shoot-outs in drawn games in the knockout stages.
In addition, the world body would like to see a women's football tournament at the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta.
A competition involving eight teams is planned.
— Reuter
Platt is Taylor's fifth captain as England take on San Marino
DAVID PLATT, the Juventus midfielder, will captain England for the first time in the World Cup clash with San Marino at Wembley tonight.
When the £5 million Juventus midfielder leads out England for the first time he will spare a thought for the man who captained England to 1966 World Cup glory, just 48 hours after Bobby Moore revealed that he was battling cancer.
‘It's a marvellous feeling to know your name will go into the record books alongside all the greats of the past like Bobby Moore,’ said the player who moved to Italy from Aston Villa for £5million.
‘I admire all the previous England captains but Moore takes the accolade because he is the only player to have lifted the World Cup for England.’
Platt becomes England's 32nd post-war captain and the fifth leader in 28 matches under Graham Taylor.
His patience with the media, command of Italian and tireless displays on the pitch make Platt an ideal choice, though his chance has arrived because Stuart Pearce is out through injury.
But Platt, at 25, has every chance of eventually succeeding Pearce who is five years older.
Said Taylor: ‘I see this as part of David's natural development and although this is a one-off there is every chance of him taking it on if he is still in the side when Stuart is no longer with us.’
The ultimate accolade caps a dramatic rise for Platt who was rejected by Manchester United before establishing himself in the game with Crewe, then joining Taylor at Aston Villa and then going onto Juventus via Bari.
The thought of wearing the coveted England captain's armband holds no fears for Platt, who insists he has completely recovered from a knee operation.
He said: ‘I feel I am ready for it although it has only come along because Stuart is injured.
I enjoy responsibility but I'm not a shouter.
‘I will talk to players around me but I'm sure being captained won't affect my own game.
This means everything to me.
Obviously it is the pinnacle of anyone's professional career to captain their country.
You can't get any higher than that.
It is a dream come true for me.’
Gary Lineker, Bryan Robson, Mark Wright and Pearce were Taylor's previous captains but Platt now has a chance to stake his claim.
In contrast San Marino's happy band of no-hopers will play the paupers to England's princes when they enter fairytale land at Wembley.
While Graham Taylor's loadsamoney outfit add to their lucrative market value by pulling on England shirts, half-a-dozen of the mountain men's reward for tackling their Everest will be to actually find themselves out of pocket.
‘No-one gets paid for playing for San Marino and they never will,’ explained team physio Giovanni Ragini.
‘In some cases they are actually paying to represent their country!
Apart from San Marino's two professionals, almost all the players, ranging from a nurse to a shop assistant, have had to beg their employers for time off work to travel to England.
Take the plight of William Guerra.
The 24-year-old sweeper will lose three days’ wages for deserting his father's electrical business to take on the infinitely more difficult job of shoring up the leakiest defence in international soccer.
Compare his night out with that of England new boy Les Ferdinand.
One agent suggested today that the QPR striker stands to have £500,000 added to his price tag at a stroke if he enjoys a successful debut not to mention the guaranteed lucrative spin-off of joining the England players' pool.
For coach Giorgio Leoni's men, there is nothing to play for but pride.
‘We don't believe in miracles,’ he said and neither, apparently, does anyone else in San Marino, particularly the mountain top bookies.
According to Ragini, the players can have gleaned little confidence from the fact that most of the 24,000 population have been flocking to wager thousands of their hard-earned lire on them getting beaten 7-0.
Team: Woods (Sheff Wed); Dixon (Arsenal), Dorigo (Leeds), Palmer (Sheff Wed), Walker (Sampdoria), Adams (Arsenal), Platt (Juventus), Gascoigne (Lazio), Ferdinand (QPR), Barnes (Liverpool), Ince (Man Utd).
McGinlay double lifts Hibs and worsens poor Partick's plight
Partick Thistle 0 Hibs 3
By Hugh Keevins
PAT McGINLAY scored twice at Firhill last night to lift Hibs into the top half of the Premier Division.
The player's display would have been of as much interest to the watching Celtic manager, Liam Brady, as the distressing form of his opponents on Saturday.
Goals in each half from the midfield player — taking McGinlay's total for the season to ten — were added to by one from Michael Weir and the result further endangers Partick Thistle's place in the Premier Division.
The Glasgow club have now won only one of their last 13 league matches and look to be in free fall from the top flight unless they can break up this losing streak.
Retribution was not long in coming for the Partick side who, last Saturday, lost four goals for the second league game in succession.
Manager John Lambie dropped six players and brought in Nelson, Law, Jamieson, Irons, Cameron and McWalter.
But the defensive laxity which has been at the root of Partick Thistle's recent decline was not removed simply by taking such swingeing action.
Nelson, who took Murdoch's place in goal, first of all did as his namesake and turned a blind eye to a cross from McGinlay.
As Wright challenged the goalkeeper for the dropped ball, however, Nelson recovered to kick it clear as he fell to the ground.
Hibs started the game only one point better off than the ailing home side, and they, too, needed to smarten up their ideas if the last quarter of the season were not to be fraught with danger.
The combination of two struggling sides, though, made for a game that was too frantic and unimaginative for its own good.
Typical of what went on was the booking of Weir.
The Hibs player deliberately handled the ball, but was not cautioned, much to the annoyance of the crowd.
Not content with a reprieve, Weir somehow managed to talk his way into the referee's notebook for dissent before play could be restarted after the original infringement.
as if to highlight the fact that the referee's performance was as inconsistent as everybody's else's, McGinlay was booked seven minutes before the interval for hand ball.
It was in keeping with the eccentric turn of events that, within three minutes of his caution, McGinlay gave Hibs the lead.
Mitchell's pass found Wright, who slipped but regained possession of the ball and squared it to the far post, where McGinlay was lying in wait to beat Nelson from inside the six-yard box.
Partick's troubles were added to when Grant Tierney had to be stretchered off after an accidental clash of heads with Mitchell early in the second half.
By then the game was running away from them and McGinlay confirmed as much in 60 minutes.
Tortolano fed Weir and he touched the ball on to McGinlay, who ran through a porous home defence to score easily.
Four  minutes later, the lively Weir ensured both points for Hibs with a goal from close range.
Arbroath earn home tie with Rangers
East Fife 1 Arbroath 4
ARBROATH struck four times at Bayview last night to see off the Scottish Cup challenge of East Fife and advance to a home quarter-final tie with Rangers.
The fourth-round replay began at a frantic pace and burst into life after 12 minutes.
East Fife striker, John Sludden, took advantage of some slack defensive play by Arbroath to fire the opening goal past Harkness.
But almost immediately, Paul Tosh equalised for Danny McGrain's side, firing a low shot into the corner of the net in 15 minutes after an error by Stewart Burgess.
Ten minutes later, goalkeeper Charles had to move smartly off his line to deny Tosh.
Arbroath made the best possible start to the second half.
Just one minute after the restart, Kenny McDonald pushed a magnificent through ball into the path of Craig Martin who made no mistake from eight yards.
Six minutes later, Martin struck again to make it 3-1, cracking a stunning volley into the net from the edge of the box.
As East Fife pushed forward hoping to reduce the deficit, they were caught on the break by Paul Tosh, who ran through to add a fourth (83min).
The match turned ugly in the dying minutes when two-goal Tosh of Arbroath and Fife goalkeeper Charles were sent off for violent conduct.
In the last minute, Andrew of East Fife, and Florence of Arbroath, were both booked.
Kilmarnock miss their chance
THE First Division promotion race was thrown wide open last night when Kilmarnock slumped to their second successive league defeat.
They lost 2-0 to Clydebank at Kilbowie and, in the process, missed out on the chance to regain second place.
Kilmarnock were unlucky in the first half when Gus McPherson hit the crossbar, but goals from Paul Harvey and Craig Flannigan after the break gave Clydebank the points.
In the Second Division, Clyde strengthened their bid for promotion with a 2-1 home win over Queen of the South.
Steve Clark and Keith Knox scored for Alex Smith's side in a five-minute spell in the first half before Darren Henderson got a late consolation for the Dumfries side.
930410 
Lamont takes heart at high street revival
By Clifford German and Alison Daniels
A SURGE in high street sales last month was hailed as good news by Chancellor Norman Lamont yesterday, who said it showed that Britain was on track for economic recovery.
Hopes were rising that the shoppers who rushed out for bargains on offer in the January sales may have finally triggered the long-awaited recovery in consumer spending.
Last night, major retail chains said they were confident the Government's latest figures were borne out in their sales, and in at least one case, Scotland appeared to be performing better than England.
The City, on the other hand, was sceptical about the figures and the pound kept falling.
The sales surge will come as more welcome news for the Chancellor after encouraging signs earlier in the week that both inflation and public spending were being kept under control.
After a disappointing December when sales fell by 1.0 per cent, the volume of sales jumped 1.6 per cent between December and January, according to figures from the Central Statistical Office.
It was the highest total and the biggest increase since March 1991, when shoppers went out on a spending spree to beat the rise in value-added tax rates.
Last night Mr Lamont said: ‘The figures show confidence is returning to the high street.
This is good news for retailers and good news for all those who supply goods to our shops.’
With an eye to the latest unemployment figures, due today, when the seasonally adjusted total is expected to remain just under the three million barrier, the Chancellor added: ‘Obviously in the months ahead we are going to have good news and bad news.
But the figures show we are on the right track.’
Mr Lamont also used the news as an opportunity to rule out once again any more cuts in interest rates in the immediate future, saying the signs of spontaneous recovery confirm his judgement that he has done enough to bring the recession to an end.
The upturn in sales was double the increase the economic forecasters had been expecting, but the City remained sceptical.
Gavyn Davies, chief economist at the US investment house Goldman Sachs said the City was not yet convinced that recovery was in place.
Many analysts still felt the Chancellor would be forced to make a fresh cut in interest rates to guarantee a recovery, and the pound fell again to its lowest ever closing quotation of 2.3486 Deutschmarks.
The recovery was welcomed by Richard Mays, spokesman for the Retail Consortium.
Large businesses continued to do best, he said, but small businesses, with a turnover of less than £2 million a year, also reported a modest recovery last month.
Some retailers sounded a note of caution.
Sales figures around Christmas and New Year are very prone to changes in seasonal patterns, and total sales in the last three months together were less than 0.25 per cent higher than in the previous three months and only 1.4 per cent higher than in the corresponding three months a year ago.
Last autumn, the annual increases were slightly higher.
The surge in sales last month was also directly inspired by price cuts which reflected the desperation of many shopkeepers faced with poor results in December, traditionally the peak buying season of the year.
Shops slashed the average price of clothing, shoes, and household goods, TVs and stereos between December and January, by up to 5 per cent on average, and finally persuaded shoppers to come out and spend.
A spokesman for Marks & Spencer said sales were in line with the store's New Year estimates.
‘Our Scottish stores continue to out-perform our English stores.
We are spending a lot of money in Scotland expanding existing stores and building others.’
British Home Stores and Mothercare also said sales figures continued to show growth.
‘Our sales figures have been fairly consistent over the last few months.
We've experience a growth rate of around eight per cent,’ said a spokeswoman.
Ian Brown, secretary of Edinburgh's Princes Street Traders Association, reported that sales were better this January compared with last year.
Shares recover, Page 17
Norman Lamont: ‘We are on the right track’
Strangeways prisoners flee court
FIVE prisoners being tried in connection with the Strangeways riot were on the run last night after escaping from a court.
The Home Office said the men fled from Manchester Crown Court at about 5.30pm while in the custody of prison officers.
They were named by the Home Office as Barry Morton, 23, John Murray, 24, Anthony Bush, 27, Mark Azzopardi, 23 and Alan Lord, 31.
A spokesman said: ‘This escape is regarded as a very serious matter and the Director General of the Prison Service, Derek Lewis, has ordered an immediate and urgent inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the escape.’
Three youths freed as murdered boy's uncle pleads for calm
By Audrey Gillan
THE 12-year-old boy who was being questioned in connection with the murder of two-year-old James Bulger was released from custody and eliminated from police inquiries last night.
Two other youths being questioned were released earlier in the day.
Police also said that the 12-year-old's family had been rehoused at an undisclosed address after disturbances by angry crowds outside their home at Kirkdale in Liverpool.
Those scenes and others outside the murder investigation headquarters in Bootle yesterday prompted an appeal for calm from the Bulger family and the police.
Dennis Mather, James's uncle, urged the public to contain their anger, saying that the family were just as enraged as the people of the surrounding area.
‘We just don't want young people to be brought in and charged with this,’ he said.
‘It has got to be the right people and it's going to take time.’
Evidence emerged yesterday suggesting that the two boys who abducted James from the Strand shopping centre in Bootle on Friday may have tried to take away two other children an hour before.
Det Supt Albert Kirby, the officer in charge of the inquiry, said that a woman claimed she had seen the two youths in the Strand at 2:30pm.
‘This lady has described how they were quite deliberately trying to entice her two young children out into the public passageway area,’ he said.
The policewoman who has been comforting James's parents said his mother Denise was still ‘shellshocked’ by the loss.
WPC Mandy Waller first met Denise when she made her initial frantic report about James's disappearance.
She was with the family when they were told that his body had been found and has tried to help them through their grief.
‘They are obviously devastated,’ she said.
‘They are trying to keep themselves together.
They are a close-knit family and they are getting a lot of support from their relatives.
‘I don't know how they are going to cope with it all.
They have obviously been through a very bad time over the last few days and it isn't going to get any better over the next few weeks.’
Chief Supt Dave Thompson, who is in charge at Sefton, the division where the murder took place, said: ‘The family feel alone and isolated and they are going through a sense of frustration and they need to know more information.’
He added that the inquiry had been hampered for about 24 hours by the violence on Tuesday night.
As a result of public order offences, police had to be diverted from making house-to-house inquiries to protect police stations and the houses of those assisting with inquiries.
‘That's another reason why we are appealing for calm.
You have only so many police officers you can use and it's taking our eye off the ball,’ he said.
The streets were quiet last night.
Few people were out around Snowdrop Street and Marsh Lane police station, the scene of the disturbances the night before.
Members of the special constabulary and traffic wardens had been staffing telephones to deal with the ‘tremendous’ response from the public: every hour they were taking 150 calls.
Dennis Mather: urged local people to contain their anger
Unlikely axeman at the door of No 10
By David Wallen
THE policemen on the gate of Downing Street would normally have told him to clear off, dressed as he was in an ill-fitting tweed jacket and blue moon boots — and wasn't that an ice-axe in his right hand?
His hair was dishevelled, his beard had grown around his neck as if he had spent the past four months away from civilisation.
He walked with a limp, and had you not known better you could have mistaken the sores and scabs on his face for the kind of wounds worn by down-and-outs in Cardboard City.
Sir Ranulph Twisleton-Wykeham-Fiennes, 48, had not exactly dressed up for his meeting with John Major.
But then the polar explorer and his partner, Dr Michael Stroud, arrived back in Britain only yesterday from their epic 95-day record-breaking Antarctic expedition.
Sir Ranulph's weight had dropped from 14 to 10 stones and he and Dr Stroud, 37, had only just recovered from the low blood sugar condition hypoglycaemia.
The Prime Minister gave the pair a personal welcome and they in return endorsed Manchester's Olympic campaign.
They seemed happy to be sucked into politics, telling the media that Manchester deserved to win.
Sir Ranulph admitted the ice axe was not a latter-day attempt at emulating Trotsky's assassin — he simply had no other walking stick.
And the moon boots?
They were because he couldn't get a pair of ordinary shoes to fit over his infected and frost-bitten feet from four months described as ‘the nastiest of my life.’
Tomorrow he will announce yet another expedition, but there is a suspicion it will not involve the poles.
‘I have been running expeditions over the last 29 years and it was the most unpleasant, nasty experience and I don't want to be involved in it in any way again,’ he said.
‘It was too cold, too high and too heavy.
We had to shift 1,000 lbs between us up to 11,000 feet and over 1,300 miles.’
The pair made the longest unsupported polar journey and the first unsupported crossing of the Antarctic land mass.
It has been compared to the first ascent of Everest.
Sir Ranulph said: ‘After leading expeditions to remote goals, hot and cold, this endeavour has proved by far the most difficult, and near lethal.
‘Only a great deal of luck has enabled us to complete our main objectives and get out — just — before the portcullis of the oncoming Antarctic winter cut us off.’
Such was their condition — they were pulled off the ice last week ‘more dead than alive’— that Sir Ranulph and Dr Stroud were off to the Army Personnel Research Establishment for tests on the way their bodies held up to it all.
‘We crossed a continent larger than China and India lumped together dragging loads twice as heavy as those dragged by Scott's men,’ commented Sir Ranulph.
The explorer said all the right things to Mr Major.
‘When we went away interest rates were at 13 per cent,’ Sir Ranulph commented unprompted.
‘We got a nice surprise when we got back.’
Picture, Page 2
Three-goal win lifts World Cup hopes
SCOTLAND moved into joint second place in their World Cup qualifying group last night with a 3-0 win over Malta in front of 35,000 fans at Ibrox.
The Rangers striker Ally McCoist scored twice to take his total so far this season to 43.
Pat Nevin scored the third five minutes from time.
The win takes Scotland above Portugal and into joint second place with Italy in the battle to qualify for next year's finals in the US.
However, it was not all plain sailing for Andy Roxburgh's men.
Scotland failed to capitalise fully on their pressure and the fillip provided by McCoist's first goal after 15 minutes.
The Leeds midfielder Gary McAllister missed a penalty later in the first half during a frustrating spell for Scotland.
Aberdeen's Eoin Jess, in the starting line-up for the first time, was the most consistent player throughout but the longer the game went on, the more Malta demonstrated why they have proved so difficult to beat.
South of the Border, the England captain David Platt scored four goals as England beat San Marino 6-0 in a World Cup qualifying game at Wembley.
The Juventus player's display was one of the few bright spots as England made heavy work of beating a San Marino side made up mainly of part-time players, including postmen, bus drivers and newsagents.
Les Ferdinand and Carlton Palmer got the other England goals.
Platt was soon on the mark after leading out an England team sporting a new strip and aiming to go for goals in this Group II encounter.
Tony Dorigo twice fired over the bar and Paul Gascoigne was fortunate to escape a lecture from Luxembourg referee Robert Philippi when he flicked out a foot after being fouled by Loris Zanotti.
Platt, moved up front as Les Ferdinand's minder, came close with a shot parried by Benedettini and Bruno Muccioli raced in to head over the bar as the ball appeared to be dropping into goal.
San Marino scrambled away the resulting corner at the cost of a second flag kick from which England snatched the lead.
Gascoigne took it, John Barnes flicked on at the near post and Platt arrived behind him to head in his 13th England goal.
The same player struck again 11 minutes later for his seventh goal in his last nine internationals.
Batty, a late choice to replace Manchester United's Paul Ince, sent over a teasing right-foot cross and from beyond the far post Platt got in a powerful header.
Benedettini clawed the ball out with his right hand, but a linesman raised his flag to indicate a goal.
Platt got the ball in the net again after 31 minutes, but he was ruled offside.
The first half had virtually passed Ferdinand by, but at least the £5 million-rated QPR striker got involved after the break although without much success.
Barnes, moving wide to the left, at last got over a telling cross but Ferdinand completely missed the ball in front of goal.
Carlton Palmer drove forward to bring a two-fisted save from Benedettini and the goal-keeper followed up with another save from a Ferdinand header.
The crowd began to lose patience and some slow hand-clapping broke out.
Platt provided the perfect answer when he completed his first hat-trick after 67 minutes and soon the energetic Palmer notched a fourth.
Not surprisingly, San Marino tired in the later stages and England cashed in.
Platt got his fourth in the 83rd minute and three minutes later Ferdinand got his name on the scoresheet.
Property fees
I would like to correct an inaccuracy in ‘The Session’, your guide to the law in Scotland, published today.
Typical estate agents' commissions are not ‘about 1.5 per cent with conveyancing on top’, as stated.
Like solicitors, estate agents generally charge only 1 per cent.
The difference in overall cost is in the price of conveyancing.
Over a year ago REAL (the association of estate agents in Edinburgh and the Lothians), introduced a maximum conveyancing fee of £350 plus VAT and outlays, a considerable saving on the scale fee which traditionally has been charged by solicitors.
In practical terms, selling a house through an estate agent cannot possibly cost more than using a solicitor.
In many cases it costs less.
And there's the added advantage that by using an estate agent you're dealing with a dedicated property specialist, a description which applies to only a handful of solicitors.
Small nations
We are continually told by representatives of the Labour Party that the policy of independence in Europe favoured by the SNP is completely untenable.
Those small nations of roughly comparable size to Scotland, which are member states of the EC, apparently have little room for manoeuvre and could never hope to have anything like the power wielded by the UK.
I was surprised, therefore, to hear Donald Dewar, MP, on Good Morning Scotland today, extolling the interventionist approach of the Belgian and Dutch governments over attempts to save DAF jobs in their countries, while Whitehall stands idly by.
Unless I am mistaken, both Belgium and the Netherlands are examples of small independent nations in Europe!
Trident policy
I am sure we are all indebted to the Scottish executive of the Labour Party for clearing up the confusion surrounding its policy on water privatisation after the speech by Labour leader John Smith and the remarks by shadow Scottish Secretary Tom Clarke.
Might we now expect some clarification regarding Trident.
Currently the Labour Party in Scotland is  committed to no nuclear weapons on our soil, but shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown has given a firm commitment to Rosyth Dockyard for the refitting of Trident submarines.
Knowledge of Gaelic helps with pronunciation of foreign languages
During the past 60 years, I have lived on islands in the Hebrides where Gaelic was the normal means of communication in church services and in daily life.
On one of them, where I farmed for 45 years, while my employees who belonged there spoke Gaelic, I also from time to time employed Scots speakers from Alyth, splendid fellows, in whose speech I could recognise classical Scots words which occur in the poetry of the Scottish Chaucerians.
What nonsense is talked and written about these languages by people who approach them from outside with superficial knowledge.
Gaelic is a complicated language phonetically, expressed in writing by an alphabet of only 18 letters used in a most ingenious way.
Gu does not express the pronunciation of ghaoithe, as suggested in a letter today.
It is a word of two syllables possessing two sounds, written gh and ao, which do not occur in English.
Hence the miserable attempts of BBC announcers to pronounce the name of the secretary-general of the United Nations, which contains one of these sounds.
A knowledge of spoken Gaelic is a great help in producing the sounds of various foreign languages.
How right are the comments made by John Stewart about the current crop of Gaelic television programmes.
He criticises their lack of any real depth of Gaelic culture, and with the exception of Machair, which has got off to an excellent start, all the other programmes seem to be shallow or merely ‘Mickey Mouse’.
Do we really want the Gaelic programme fund spent on copies of Scots-English programmes?
I thought the fund was to help Gaels speak to the rest of us and not only to themselves.
Where are the adventurous programmes, the innovation, the unusual?
Last year your film correspondent, William Parente, suggested that the last real subject left for the British film industry to tackle was the Highland Clearances, a subject of relevance to the Gaels, their current political context, and to many thousands of Scots around the world.
I read that the film-maker, Gareth Wardell, had such a project that needed only support from the fund.
This was followed by silence.
What happened to that project, I wonder?
Was it too universal a theme for the Gaelic fund committee to tackle, too big a scale of project, too close to reality and too controversial a subject?
Instead, we are treated to the Gaelic language stuck on the culture of others like Thomas the Tank Engine or pastiche gardening programmes about how to grow runner beans against a breeze block wall!
Maybe the fault lies with BBC or with Scottish and Grampian.
Maybe it is they who are being too timid in their ideas and proposals.
Meanwhile I, and people like me, will still look to Gaelic friends and to books for the real poetry and prose of this rich seam of Scottish history.
Fatal hole blown in credentials
The Government has argued for some time now that we live in a parliamentary democracy and that all decisions on behalf of the people will be made by Parliament.
This argument has been used to blunt the demands for a referendum on a Scottish parliament and the Maastricht treaty.
Despite this fairly consistent position the Government has today blown a fatal hole in its democratic credentials.
By challenging the right of Parliament to agree to the social chapter against the wishes of the Government and proposing that the treaty will be ratified without the decisions of Parliament, it has underlined the very reasons why there is a need for referendums on the crucial constitutional questions that face us.
Politicians can only be trusted when they think that they are on the winning side and will ignore any democratic mechanism to prove that they are ‘right’.
The only effective way of dealing with the constitutional questions is to ask the group of people who will be most affected by changes, both within Europe and Scotland.
Surely the small group of people who will face the economic and social changes head-on have some authority in deciding their future arrangements for their system of government.
Who are these people that the politicians can't trust to consider such questions and decide upon?
They are the voters of this country, of course.
They are worn out by the desire of politicians to fight among themselves, manipulating the archaic rules of Westminster and creating red herrings as part of the game that aims to divorce the people from having a say.
The majority of people voted in favour of parties that advocate the inclusion of the social chapter, but the Government rejects it.
The majority of people also voted for parties which advocate a Scottish parliament, but the Government rejects it.
Democracy and accountability are the cornerstones of freedom, liberty and justice.
When will we get them in this country?
John Stewart (Points of View, today) laments over the quality of programmes being made for the £30 million being spent over the next three years on Gaelic television.
What precisely is wrong with Gaelic-speaking children being allowed to see Thomas the Tank Engine, and Postman Pat in their own language?
Surely Mr Stewart doesn't deprecate the value of children's television?
A far broader question needs to be asked: Do we need this incredible amount of money spent on a minority culture when television in Scotland is so appalling in the first place?
In conclusion, Mr Stewart asks: ‘Where are the songs, poetry and stories of Gaeldom?’
I am reminded of Barrie Davies, answering his own questions as to the whereabouts of the German defence in the 1988 Olympic hockey final: ‘…and quite frankly, who cares?’
Minding one's P45 and the dole queue
THE jobless figures out this morning will draw the usual gasps or alibis according to political inclination.
But by now most of us well know that these intermittent statistics are the damnedest of lies.
Pauchling the figures has gone on for so long that even the newscasters have got sloppy, mostly failing to add the rider that the bald headcount does not include anybody excluded from claiming benefit for whatever reason.
And excluding people from benefit has become something of a consuming passion within the cash-limited, pressurised Department of Social Insecurity.
The effect of those figures on those notionally in a queue for real jobs has been well documented.
It does not take a well-qualified anthropologist to guess at the impact on self-esteem, relationships, and family lifestyles.
And the effect on a disintegrating social order of a generation for whom guaranteed employment seems a figment of their parents' flawed imagination has been only too luridly illustrated by the rises in crime and homelessness.
But in the midst of the holocaust wrought by long-term unemployment on the jobless, there has been little time to examine the effect of the current climate on the working population.
What has happened in that sector has been no less dramatic.
It would be crass to suggest that any employer welcomes high levels of unemployment.
But nevertheless some have ruthlessly taken advantage of them.
For the less scrupulous, this has become the age of the worker with built in obsolescence.
Staffs are pruned ostensibly to produce leaner and fitter organisations, but actually to replace relatively expensive, experienced employees with cheap young labour grateful to be spared another six months prowling the Jobcentre, or negotiating the shifting sands of the training programmes.
Hard-won working conditions and employment protection are now routinely jettisoned by many cowboy operators, secure in the knowledge that if workers complain they can be shown the door, outside which is a four-deep queue of would-be replacements willing to thole all manner of demands provided there is the prospect of regular work at whatever depressed rates.
I listened to a woman executive on the radio the other morning explaining as to an idiot audience that the abolition of the wages councils was long overdue since workers couldn't keep on pricing themselves out of the labour market.
Either she was woefully ignorant, or wilfully obtuse.
The depressing facts of the matter are that in those sectors still covered by the councils, areas like shops and catering and laundries, security and administration, people are already working punishing shifts for pittances because their employers know the chances of being caught dispensing illegal hourly rates are minimal as are the resultant fines in those few cases successfully brought to prosecution.
The same arguments are endlessly rehearsed in terms of the Government's determination to continue to set its face against the social chapter of the Maastricht agreement already accepted by all its European partners.
If Brussels dictates to British employers it will make us less competitive, they intone; lessen the chances of creating jobs.
This is forked-tongue-speak for saving British employers from paying the rate for the job, offering a realistic working week, taking some responsibility for sick pay, and having a civilised view about holidays and maternity or paternity leave.
In the early years of the Thatcher government, it was fashionable to decry what was characterised as the overweening power of the trades unions.
And in truth, it wasn't difficult to cite examples of short-sightedness, bloody-mindedness, and cynical manipulation of memberships.
But these last few years have been a potent reminder of what the union movement was originally about in terms of ensuring just reward for work, and enlightened protection for workforces.
It would be comforting to persuade ourselves that those people who are generating wealth by creating poverty are all fly-by-night operators with little regard for the basic niceties of the employer/employee relationship.
Would it were so.
But this week two tales in two major industries suggested that even the largest corporations were not immune from bovver boy attitudes to their own workforces.
One banking employee told me of the demise of her bank branch.
It had, as it happened, been a popular and successful branch but like many others had fallen victim to the latest ‘rationalisation’ process.
So far, so unfortunate.
But the staff were told this only weeks before the closure.
They were told also that half of them would face redundancy.
Unfortunately the bank were unable to be more precise as to which names would appear on a P45.
Instead they were shunted to another bank for a few days.
After which the losers in the employment lottery would be popped into the revolving door.
Another man, a colleague in the newspaper industry in London, left the office where he had worked for most of his adult life to travel home for the weekend.
The following day a telephone message advised him his services were no longer required.
A pension package would follow in due course.
A pronouncement which proved to be news to his own personnel department when he made the first anguished inquiries.
The economists tell us that one of the core factors hindering recovery from recession is a lack of consumer confidence created by fear of redundancy.
That corrosive fear has now spread through industries and professions who once felt that if they didn't have the fabled ‘job for life’, they could at least be assured of adequate warning of impending unemployment, reasonable compensation, a decent level of benefit linked to their final salary, and a realistic chance of a fresh start with another company.
Today's figures will do little to dispel it.
Back to nature's drawing board
Andrew Kelton explains how a cheap, efficient, sewage plant can be constructed as a natural habitat based on reeds
ENGINEERING, by one common definition, is the application of scientific knowledge to problems in the physical environment, man-made or otherwise.
Ecological engineering is subtly, but significantly, different as the application of ecological knowledge — biological, chemical and hydrological, as well as some indefinable intuitive ken — to man-made problems in the natural world.
It is an idea that has taken root recently in Scotland where local government and private enterprise, approaching it from different starting points, have begun to put both the idea and supporting environmental ideals to the test.
The theory behind ecological engineering has an instant intuitive appeal: since nature recycles all natural ‘waste’ products of all life processes as the essential resources for other organisms, why not deliberately mimic this property and design artificial ecosystems to treat man-made pollution?
Human variations of waste recycling are at least as old as the practice of ‘folding’ sheep on the poorer uplands of medieval Europe to manure the fields and provide nutrients for summer cereals.
And biological means of treating pollution are routinely used in modern sewage works, where billions of bacteria — admittedly cosseted in concrete tubs and so protected from the ravages of the natural environment — busily consume waste.
In fact, the ‘ecological’ in ecological engineering is a matter of degree: natural processes even in conventional waste treatment would be hard to exclude altogether.
But the real distinction from conventional approaches is that nature is no longer an unwanted intruder but an admired role-model, and even teacher.
An ecologically engineered design will much more closely resemble a natural habitat — such as a wetland, with its distinctive plant and animal species — than a conventional building.
However, in this radical attitude towards the relationship between nature and man — and his science — lies both the promise and the abiding problem of ecological engineering.
The problem is hinted at in the uneasy combination of the two descriptive terms, one signifying natural complexity and even contrariness, the other, mechanical order and simplicity.
Techniques that cannot readily be proven analytically are unlikely to gain much engineering credence.
This may be one reason why ecological engineering was slow to reach Britain, and Scotland in particular, only arriving in the mid-1980s on a tide of environmental consciousness.
Growing concern over pollution of the North Sea, in part by an outdated sewerage system dispersing waste straight to open water, coincided with a surge of enthusiasm for Continental techniques among Water Research Centre scientists and local authority engineers.
In 1987, a pilot reed-bed system doused with domestic waste was set up by Fife Regional Council at Torry Bay on land reclaimed from the Firth of Forth.
Initially, there was some professional scepticism about what seemed to be a ‘third world technology’, according to Fife Region engineer Ron Dickson, who was involved in the project from the outset.
Dickson himself admits to having early doubts about some of the ecological subtleties — including the supposed, and biologically unusual, ability of the common reeds that would comprise the visible part of the constructed wetland, to transfer oxygen from leaf-surface to below water, thereby allowing aerobic bacteria to metabolise concentrated sewage.
It does not appear to be an adaptive characterisation for a species to operate ‘altruistically’ in this way.
In fact, marsh plants and bacteria don't act altruistically but symbiotically, the latter producing the inorganic salts that plants require for growth.
In terms of waste treatment, the above-ground reed-beds are the secondary system: their growth binds in some of the nutrients, but is subsidiary in importance to the waste-decomposing effect of the bacteria.
The wetlands' oxygenated soil, honeycombed with reed rhizomes (underground stems) provides a perfect environment for these bacterial workhorses.
These facts, once understood in detail, would gain for ecological engineering the support from engineers it now enjoys.
During the same period a much less exclusively analytical approach was being developed by an enterprising young couple, David and Jane Shields, who based their tiny ecological engineering company, Living Water, at Edinburgh University.
The pair's work is founded on the philosophy that ‘Nature knows best’, as US biologist Barry Commoner put it — pithily if controversially — in his seminal 1970 book on ecology, The Closing Circle.
In it, he describes numerous man-made intrusions into the natural environment which have had disastrous side-effects, making the point that the connections within natural systems are often so complex, and the effects of changes so unpredictable, that it is wise to ensure the good imitative ‘fit’ of any intervention.
In the design of artificial ecosystems, also, imitation of nature is the best rule of thumb, the Shields believe.
Their first project, the design of a wetland to treat household sewage from a hotel a few miles from Drumnadrochit and Loch Ness, exemplifies this belief.
The system, located below the outfall from the hotel's septic tank and apparently comprising no more than a marshy, plant-filled hollow, blends easily into the informal garden.
In summer, spotted flycatchers intercept insects emerging from the tangle of vegetation beneath.
In contrast to the Fife project with its one reed species, diversity of plants and animals here is intentional; the variety provides a buffer against unpredicted changes in the waste-stream, a check against the overproduction of any one constituent of the wetland, and — because the system's make-up is allowed to change — a means of continually testing refinements not anticipated in the original biological  analysis .
This aspect is possibly the Achilles heel of the Living Water approach, though: adding diversity, attractive and valuable in many other ways, makes full and definitive scientific analysis of the type that engineers would require nearly impossible.
Indeed, according to traditional scientific thought, not only does nature not know best (science does), but it is blind, fickle, and must be ‘vexed’, as Francis Bacon put it — rigorously put to the test in controlled experimental conditions — to make it reveal its secrets.
Ecological intuitions about the universal recycling of nutrients and the usefulness of much that is also aesthetic are unlikely to measure up against this yardstick for scientific truth.
THIS is unfortunate because the more intuitive Living Water approach points to what might be in ecological engineering.
A great many anthropogenic wastes — pollution by any other name — could be rehabilitated by being treated as a positive resource only awaiting an inventive ecological design.
For example, the company now has a contract with the Body Shop to utilise as plant food the complex emulsions emitted from its cosmetics factory.
It takes only a small leap of imagination to think of much wider applications, from artificial wetlands full of bird-life designed to remove agricultural phosphates from Loch Leven's influent streams, perhaps, to plant-filled lagoons created to transform fish farm effluents into natural water gardens.
To be fair, engineers are also impressed by the idea of harnessing the purifying capabilities of nature in this way, largely confining themselves to pointing out the real-world constraints on the wilder flights of fancy.
At Torry Bay the main constraints — involving questions like suitability of available soil substrate, survival of reeds in a brackish environment, and conformity of results to Purification Board standards — have been tested and overcome; the pilot is to give way this year to a full-scale artificial reed-bed of 11 acres, treating domestic waste from a population of 8,000 people, and backed up by a £500,000 grant from an EC North Sea protection programme.
Like the (far smaller) Living Water designs, the project will be much cheaper to construct than a conventional treatment works of comparable size, with operating costs about 80 per cent lower (partly because of vastly reduced energy consumption, a good environmental argument in itself).
Both Scottish variants on the ecological engineering theme have now proven themselves adequately, it seems, to permit considerably wider application, whatever the scientific differences over their contrasting approaches.
Ballesteros wants more match-play before Ryder Cup
SEVE Ballesteros has his eyes fixed firmly on the Ryder Cup clash at The Belfry in September — and is determined to play more match-play golf.
Ballesteros tuned up for the Moroccan Open, which begins today at King Hassan II's private golf course at Agadir, by playing for Europe in a special international match against Africa yesterday and said: ‘We need more of this type of golf.’
The 35-year-old Spanish maestro, who has played in Dubai, Singapore, Brunei and Hong Kong during the past month, added: ‘It is a very good idea to have this type of golf.
I prefer it to shoot-outs.
‘It would be nice to play more foursomes and four-balls before the Ryder Cup.’
Ballesteros explained that at a meeting of top players at Wentworth last year he had pushed the idea of more match-play golf and when told that American captain Tom Watson was also planning on the same lines he said: ‘He copied me.’
The Spaniard added: ‘Foursomes, for example, is a most difficult game.
Sometimes you hit only one shot every hole and it is difficult to get used to it.’
As for his ambitions to be Ryder Cup captain in the future, Ballesteros explained: ‘I'm not thinking of that.
It would be a great honour but at the moment I want to concentrate on my game and just be one of the members of the team.’
Ballesteros gets a little touchy when asked about his form.
He played well to finish joint third in the Dubai Open, where he played all four rounds under par, but missed the cut in the Johnnie Walker Classic in Singapore.
Last week he finished well down in Hong Kong and said: ‘Sometimes you play well and sometimes you don't.
I appear to be in a bit of a slump and I did not play well in Hong Kong.
‘But I played well in Dubai and I think the course here is good for my game.
It is in good condition and the grass is how I like it.’
Ballesteros will have strong competition this week in a field that includes Ryder Cup colleagues Ronan Rafferty, Colin Montgomerie, David Gilford, Steven Richardson, and Sam Torrance.
— PA 
Seve Ballesteros: faces strong competition in this week's Moroccan Open over King Hassan II's private course at Agadir
Injured Reid out of China Open
SCOT Dale Reid is an absentee from the Republic of China Open, the final event of the Asian Circuit, which begins at Chang Gung in Taipei today.
Reid, who was unable to complete both the Singapore and Malaysian Opens, has flown to Australia, where she hopes to receive attention on her injured thumb.
This leaves Scottish hopes in the hands of Gillian Stewart, Cathy Panton-Lewis and Julie Forbes, now recovered from flu.
Four British players — Sally Prosser, Janet Soulsby, Helen Wadsworth and Lora Fairclough — are the main challengers for the order of merit title, which offers an expenses-paid invitation to the $1.5 million Asahi Cup in Japan in September and complimentary flights on next year's Asian Circuit.
Prosser is top of the table after her first victory as a professional in Kuala Lumpur last weekend.
Barring a dramatic swing, American Kim Lasken is the only threat to the British quartet.
Mountain bike squad get in gear for season
WITH the competitive mountain bike season opening on 28 February, national team manager John Anderson has a squad get-together this weekend at Aberfoyle.
The 14-strong squad is headed by Scottish champion Andrew Davies and also includes British junior champion Andrew Wright and Scottish junior champion Martin Graham.
There are 19 mountain bike events listed in the SCU calendar, but competitors will have at least the same number again available to them in Scotland.
Those with real aspirations will travel south for British MB Federation races.
Anderson's aim is to produce riders able to compete in the ten-event Grundig World Series.
Five of these are held in the US and five in Europe, including Plymouth, where a Scottish team could get its first taste of the big time if sponsorship was forthcoming.
Gooch seeking victory in last ‘away’ Test
GRAHAM GOOCH is preparing himself for one last big effort as an England Test captain on a foreign field.
Seldom before have England needed him so badly as they go into tomorrow's third Test in Bombay already beaten 2-0 in the series by India.
Beset by illness — with Gooch himself the most damaging victim of the last few weeks — and bemused by Indian spin, England must pull themselves together if a bitterly disappointing tour is not to become a total disaster.
Gooch has been unwell for several weeks, playing in the first Test at Calcutta with a chest infection that should have ruled him out, missing the three-day match at Vishakhapatnam because he still felt weak, and then pulling out of the second Test at Madras after his infamous encounter with a poisonous prawn.
The England team manager, Keith Fletcher, said: ‘We have missed Graham a lot.
As captain and opening bat, he's an important member of the side, to say the least.
It has been tough during the last two Tests, and when it gets tough you want to have your best blokes there.’
Gooch, typically, tried to play down the huge blow to England his own illness has been.
The 39-year-old, on what he insists is his last tour, re-asserted his intention to return home at the end of the India leg on 6 March — rather than go, after all, to Sri Lanka for the final fortnight in an effort to help restore confidence and belief to his side.
Gooch said: ‘Teams have to cope with injury and illness.
We have 16 other good players here and you just have to get on with things if someone is ruled out.
‘I just hope we are a bit more successful in this Test than the last two we have played in.
Bombay has been a good ground for me in the past, but we need to put in a better performance than we have been doing.
I don't want this match to end up like the last two Tests.’
England's players have been left in no doubt about their need to improve.
Fletcher said: ‘Our batting department has let us down in both Tests, although everyone has been working hard on their game and how to combat their spinners on turning pitches.
‘As individuals, the batsmen have all made at least one score, but we have got to start putting it together as a team.’
England are ‘considering more options’ in their team selection.
Neil Fairbrother missed practice yesterday because of a virus, but, at the moment, England's management do not regard him as being doubtful.
Chris Lewis bowled in the nets without suffering a reaction to a thigh injury he picked up in Calcutta, while fellow paceman Phil DeFreitas is also back in contention for a place.
Gooch will return with Richard Blakey dropping out, but DeFreitas, Michael Atherton and John Emburey are players yet to appear in the Test series who could all come under consideration.
— PA 
Greenoak part of power struggle
PETER RADFORD, leader of a ‘gang of four,’ yesterday fired the first shots in a power struggle for control of British athletics.
The four claim the current administration has not responded adequately to the fast-moving demands of a modern-day sport.
The former Olympic sprinter declared: ‘Our athletes have achieved success in spite of the system, not because of it.
Layers of bureaucracy have stifled action.
We need better leadership.’
Radford is standing for the chairmanship of the British Athletic Federation at its annual meeting of clubs in Birmingham on 20 March.
Earlier this month, he was censured by the BAF council over moves to oust the chief executive, Malcolm Jones.
The BAF secretary, David Bedford, and treasurer John Lister — both seeking re-election — were also rapped over the knuckles for their part in a vote of no confidence delivered against Jones.
The fourth member of the ‘gang’ is Bob Greenoak, secretary of the Scottish Amateur Athletics Association, who is contesting the post of BAF vice-chairman.
All but Lister are being opposed.
It is believed to be the first time that prospective officers have sought election on a collective basis.
Their election manifesto calls for increased spending on club development, up to £250,000 immediately, and £1 million a year within five years.
It wants more and better quality coaches, special attention given to women's athletics, improved communication — and the appointment of a national director of development.
The Australian sun is obviously working wonders for Scotland's hammer-throwers.
The Scottish No1, Russell Devine, has been joined by his Inverness team-mate, Dave Allan, and both have just set new personal bests.
Devine improved for the fourth time this winter when he reached 64.40 metres at a meeting in Melbourne.
That is over a metre beyond his previous best, also set in the Victorian capital.
Allan, whose best last season was 57.50m, reached 59.14m in a meeting in Adelaide.
Another Scots exile, David Strang, has broken the Scottish indoor mile record for the third time in the US.
The Glasgow-born Strang clocked 3min 57.57sec in the Mobil Invitational at Fairfax, Virginia.
Major's support could be trump card
JOHN MAJOR yesterday officially launched Manchester's bid to stage the 2000 Olympics with the prediction: ‘We are going for gold and I believe we will get it.’
The Prime Minister decided to unveil Manchester's ‘unique’ £1.5 billion blue-print for the Games at his Downing Street home to emphasise how important he believes the bid is for both the city and the nation.
Major ignored the prophets of financial doom who fear the taxpayer could end up footing a massive bill by insisting: ‘I think it's a good bargain for all of us.’
Organisers boasted of a technically unsurpassed ‘compact’ Games which could make a profit of £65 million.
With Major announcing that Government support would now total £115 million as well as pledging it would underwrite costs, they hailed his enthusiastic involvement as their trump card.
Six other cities — Sydney, Peking, Istanbul, Milan, Berlin and Brasilia — are also in the race, to be decided when the International Olympic Committee meets in Monte Carlo in September.
But Major, who will be meeting the IOC president, Juan Antonio Samaranch, in Lausanne in April to push Manchester's case, said he believed the city had come from ‘overwhelming underdogs’ last year to become joint favourites with Sydney and Peking.
Answering two Australian journalists who wondered whether Major would rather watch the Games in Sydney or Manchester, he smiled and said: ‘We look forward to welcoming both you Australians here in 2000.’
The Prime Minister added: ‘Between now and September we will be showing the world what Manchester can offer, what Britain can offer.
We are going for gold and I believe we will get it.’
Bob Scott, the man behind the bid, admitted that the city's main problem remained its lack of glamour, but Major provided a fierce defence of a ‘vibrant’ city.
He said: ‘The Manchester bid is more than just a superb technical achievement.
It is a vision that the citizens of Manchester have for the city's future and their region.’
He explained that the Government's original pledge last year of £55 million had been increased to £75 million, with a further £40 million funding to spearhead the regeneration of east Manchester.
The £1.5 billion capital costs will be shared between the public and private purse, with Major confident there would be no shortage of private finance available.
Scott, revealing details of the 500-page bid document for the first time, insisted the big selling point was the proximity of the sports venues to the competitors' village, which would be in a canalside setting in the heart of the city.
Fifteen of the 25 sports would be accommodated in the centre, ten of them within walking distance of the village.
All but four of the sports venues — boxing and volleyball in Liverpool, yachting in Pwllheli and shooting near Chester — would be less than 20 minutes' drive from the village.
It marks a complete change from Manchester's unsuccessful 1996 bid, centred on an unappealing out-of-town site near the Ship Canal.
‘Last time it was a dream, this time we're serious,’ said the British Olympic Association chairman, Craig Reedie.
The jewel in the crown would be a projected £120m 80,000-seater Olympic Stadium next to the village.
Scott was adamant the city had the support of British athletes, despite recent reported comments by Olympic champion Linford Christie that Sydney was a better bet.
‘Linford says he was misquoted,’ stated Scott.
‘He's in support of us in our bid document and he's been a good friend to us.’
HOW THE OLYMPIC VILLAGE WILL SHAPE UP
Located uniquely at canalside in the city centre on a 130-acre site, including refurbished Victorian buildings and newly-built structures to house an estimated 15,000 competitors and officials.
Transport includes canal boats from Village to Olympic centre.
Afterwards, to be used for residential and business purposes, as well as student accommodation
There's no place like home for Arbroath
Hugh Keevins finds out how Danny McGrain has managed to reach the Scottish Cup quarter-finals
ARBROATH have decided to forsake mere money for prestige and play Rangers on their own Gayfield pitch (capacity 6,488) in the quarter-finals of the Scottish Cup on 6 March.
Tickets for the game — Rangers' allocation will roughly match their share for the European Champions' League tie with FC Brugge in Belgium three days earlier — will go on sale on Saturday.
The decision is proof of the Angus club's willingness to put the romance of the Cup before the reality of their financial situation, and the print run was begun on Tuesday night, only hours after Danny McGrain's team had beaten East Fife in a fourth-round replay at Methil.
The excitement of a side from the Second Division being next in line to see if they can do what the likes of Leeds United and Marseille could not, and defeat Rangers in cup competition this season, was put to the back of the manager's mind last night.
McGrain, capped 62 times by Scotland and a member of the SFA's Hall of Fame, was unable to use the free ticket given to him and the rest of that elite group for all Scotland's matches.
Instead of being at Ibrox to watch Scotland play Malta in their World Cup qualifying tie, McGrain was in a deserted Commonwealth Stadium in Edinburgh to see Arbroath reserves play Meadowbank, so he could assess four  triallists .
‘Club before country was how it had to be for me because injury and suspension have left me with only 11 players for Arbroath's league game with Brechin City on Saturday,’ said McGrain.
A club which exists on a shoestring budget could have elected to play Rangers on a neutral ground, and made at least four times the amount of money Arbroath will get from next month's Cup tie.
‘It would have been unfair to deny the Arbroath support the opportunity to revel in what will be the biggest day in the club's history,’ McGrain said.
‘I did not relish visiting Gayfield when I was a Celtic player and my team now has as good a chance of beating Rangers as anybody else.
‘If I did not believe that, I would have advised our club president, James King, to go to a venue that would have made us a comparative fortune.’
The TV crews are today scheduled to move into the town more famous for fish than football, and begin the invasion of a club arguably best known for achieving the record Scottish Cup result, the 36-0 defeat of Bon Accord in 1885.
A path is now being beaten to the door of McGrain, who could not convince anybody in the game to give him a job in management for five years after he left Celtic.
‘I am not bitter about that, only grateful to Arbroath for allowing me the opportunity to put what I have learned over the years into practice,’ said McGrain, who was awarded the MBE in 1983 for his services to the game.
‘I have been with the club for 10 weeks and sometimes it feels like 10 years.
If getting to the last eight of the Scottish Cup makes it look as if I have taken to management like a duck to water, I would be telling lies if I said the job was easy.
After knowing only life at the highest level of the game, McGrain is full of admiration for the players Arbroath have assembled from Tayside, Edinburgh and Glasgow who combine playing, training and travelling long distances with everyday jobs.
‘I am happiest for the players because they have got out of the Cup what they have deserved.
Success has brought them confidence and confidence is what brings success.’
ARMANDO BABANI/AP
No way through: Northern Ireland's Jim Magilton (white shorts), scorer of the opening goal against Albania yesterday, fails this time.
Report, Page 26
Foster holds off champion to smash world record
BRITAIN's Mark Foster smashed the 50m freestyle world record in sensational fashion at yesterday's Uncle Ben's World Cup swimming meet in Sheffield.
The 22-year-old Londoner, who set a world best in the 50m butterfly in Germany last weekend, held off Russia's Olympic champion, Alex Popov, by exactly half a second with 21.6sec.
The swim earned Foster, coached by Scotland's Dougie Campbell at Barnet Copthall, a £3,000 bonus as the World Cup 50m freestyle champion.
Four Scots made finals: Warrender's Jonathan Hunter was fifth in the 200m backstroke (2:05.36) and sixth in the 50m backstroke (27.25); Graeme Smith was fifth in the 1,000m freestyle (10:05.49); and Alison Sheppard and Ewan Stewart were eighth in the 100m freestyle (57.19) and 100m butterfly (56.67) respectively.
CRICKET
W Indies lose in tight finish
SOUTH AFRICA scored a four-run victory over West Indies at Cape Town yesterday in a triangular series game, and are now level with Pakistan, who have a game in hand.
West Indies needed eight from the last five overs with two wickets left, to match the home side's 140 for nine, but were denied by Hansie Cronje and Meyrick Pringle.
SHINTY
Verbal abuse costs £150
OBAN Camanachd have been fined £150 by the executive committee of the Camanachd Association following verbal abuse given to referee Jim Kerr, of Inveraray, after he abandoned their home league match against Glasgow Mid Argyll with ten minutes to play as Camanachd led 4-0.
The match is to be replayed.
SKIING
Bell brothers stay on top
BROTHERS Martin and Graham Bell — Britain's leading World Cup skiers — continued their expected dominance at the British Land British National Championships in Tignes, France.
Graham repeated his win over Martin in Monday's downhill by taking the Super Giant title yesterday by 0:93sec.
SQUASH Maclean to face Martin
EDINBURGH's Mark Maclean set up a last 16 meeting with World No4 Brett Martin when he beat Australia's Craig Rowland 15-7, 14-15, 15-9, 15-9 in yesterday's opening round of the Leekes Squash Classic in Cardiff.
TABLE TENNIS
One still to be chosen
SCOTLAND's international selectors have taken the unusual step of leaving a vacancy in their team for the World Championships in Gothenburg in May, until after the Scottish national championships and the Top 12 tournament next month.
Sarah Hurry is unavailable because of university exams and Carole Dalrymple is ineligible.
TENNIS
Agassi is Davis doubt
ANDRE AGASSI, the undefeated star of last year's winning US Davis Cup team, is uncertain about playing in next month's opening-round tie in Australia.
The Wimbledon champion is troubled by the travel demands of the trip to Australia during a cluttered playing schedule.
WEIGHTLIFTING
Scandal confirmed
ANOTHER CIS coach has confirmed that Olympic champion, Alexander Kurlovich, failed a dope test just before Barcelona, but said he was amazed chief trainer, Vasily Alexeyev, had revealed the scandal.
‘I simply can't understand why it was necessary to dredge up this story before the whole world,’ assistant trainer, Leonty Goncharenko, said.
Wood's world championship hopes dashed once again WILLIE WOOD's quest for the world indoor singles crown, which began back in 1982, reached another dead end yesterday when the 1989 runner-up went out after a titanic five-set battle with England's Mel Biggs.
Wood led twice, 1-0 and 2-1, before Biggs hit back to snatch a 1-7, 7-5, 6-7, 7-2, 7-6 win in Preston.
Wood was left regretting missed chances after seeing a 4-0 lead disappear in the deciding set.
Biggs counted six shots over the next three ends to take a 6-4 advantage before Wood replied with a sixth-end double.
The East Lothian man missed a great chance to add a match-winning third shot and paid for his miss when Biggs took the shot on the next and deciding end.
‘I've only myself to blame.
I had chances and didn't take them,’ said the 54-year-old Wood later.
Blantyre's Jim McCann became the fifth Scot through to the second round when he beat off a determined challenge from New Zealand's Robin Jefferson.
McCann won a tight five-setter 7-4, 2-7, 7-4, 6-7, 7-1.
‘I can play better, but I was reasonably happy with my game and I'm delighted to have got the first tie under my belt,’ said McCann.
The first major upset of the championship came when the Anglo-Scot, Andy Thomson, the No2 seed and bookmakers' favourite for the title, tumbled out tamely to a world championship debutant, Cameron Curtis, from Australia, 7-6, 7-1, 7-0.
Thomson, who again again failed to break his run of poor form in this championship, bemoaned: ‘I was very nervous and don't think I've ever played so badly.
I couldn't get any rhythm going whatsoever.’
Curtis, who admitted to getting some help from doubles partner and defending champion, Ian Schuback, now faces McCann.
Smith's men are too good for Wilson
DAVID SMITH's Perth, world champions in 1991, beat Peter Wilson's Stranraer 11-1 after six ends in the Bell's Scottish Championship at Kirkcaldy last night, writes WH Kemp.
On good drawing ice, Smith had a 4 at the first.
Facing 3, Wilson failed with a take-out and Smith drew for his 4.
Colin Hamilton's Gogar were 5-2 up on Mike Hay's Atholl after six ends.
Hamilton took a 2 at the first and then stole a single.
JJ Kenny's Forest Hills were 8-2 up on Peter Loudon's Letham Grange after six ends; Douglas Dryburgh's Aviemore were leading 6-4 against David Aitken's Galleon after six; and the holders, Hammy McMillan's Stranraer, took 2 at the sixth to lead Warwick Smith's Perth by 6-2.
After 30 years at Coates Crescent, in Edinburgh, the Royal Caledonian Curling Club is to move its headquarters across the city next month to 81 Great King Street.
The club is taking over a second-floor suite of offices on a short-term lease, but it is to continue searching for new premises, almost certainly still in Edinburgh.
It was announced yesterday that Oberstdorf, Germany, has withdrawn as the site for the 1994 World Championships.
An immediate replacement is being sought.
Cue doctor comes to aid of Hendry
IF Stephen Hendry wins the Humo European Open in Antwerp on Sunday, he will owe a debt of gratitude to leading referee and expert cue doctor, Lawrie Annandale.
The Rosyth official flew home last night after a whistle-stop trip to Belgium to repair the 24-year-old world champion's damaged cue.
Hendry split his tip during a 5-4 victory over stablemate Dennis Taylor on Monday night.
But within 20 minutes of Annandale's arrival, at a cost of nearly £500 to Hendry's manager, Ian Doyle, he had successfully completed his task.
‘When I got the call to come to Belgium I had a few things to do,’ he explained.
‘But nothing that couldn't wait.
I'm only too pleased to be of assistance.’
Hendry resumes his bid for another title when he faces Ulsterman Joe Swail tonight for a place in Saturday's semi-finals.
Teenagers Ronnie O'Sullivan and Andy Hicks took it out on the Welsh in the last 16 yesterday.
O'Sullivan, a former world junior champion, defeated Doug Mountjoy 5-0 and Hicks weighed in with breaks of 82 and 73 as his opponent, Darren Morgan, suffered a similar whitewash.
Former world champion, Steve Davis, compiled breaks of 107, 77 and 61 in a 5-2 victory over Steve James.
Platt hits four but England disappoint
England 6 San Marino 0
DAVID PLATT saved England from World Cup embarrassment by San Marino's part-timers at Wembley last night with a four-goal salvo which ensured respectability but no glory.
Graham Taylor's stand-in captain even missed an 89th-minute penalty, which denied him the place in the history books that his brilliant individual display deserved.
However, four goals in the last 23 minutes quietened the boos and whistles from a crowd which arrived with great expectations and feared they would go home asking for more, much more.
In the end, England were short of the ten Norway scored against the Italian tax haven's clerks, postmen, electricians and bus drivers, but it was just about enough.
Handed the captaincy in place of the absent Stuart Pearce, and moved up front, Platt stepped into the shoes of another former leader, Gary Lineker, to perfection.
His four-goal tally was the highest individual return since Lineker's quartet in Kuala Lumpur in 1991.
If the penalty had gone in he would have matched Malcolm Macdonald's five against Cyprus in 1975.
Platt was soon on the mark after leading out an England team sporting a new strip and aiming to go for goals in this Group II encounter.
A Paul Gascoigne corner in the 13th minute was flicked on at the near post by John Barnes and Platt arrived behind him to head in his 13th England goal.
He struck again 11 minutes later for his seventh goal in his last nine internationals.
David Batty sent over a teasing cross and from beyond the far post Platt got in a powerful header.
Benedettini clawed the ball out with his right hand, but a linesman raised his flag to indicate a goal.
Platt completed his hat-trick after 67 minutes and soon the energetic Carlton Palmer notched a fourth.
The England captain got his fourth in the 83rd minute and three minutes later Les Ferdinand made it 6-0.
Saltires lose the place
Ulster 36 Saltires 17
ULSTER levelled their annual series against the Saltires at three games each with a five-try spree at Ravenhill, Belfast, last night.
Ulster fielded four new caps, but were not overawed by a Saltire side which included six internationalists.
The Saltires started well, centre Simon Davies crossing for a try in the 19th minute.
Colin Stephens added the conversion to go with an earlier penalty for a 10-0 lead.
The momentum of the match changed in the 26th minute when Ulster centre, Mark Wylie, intercepted Terry McMaster's pass to score from 70 metres out.
David Humphreys kicked the conversion, then added a penalty, and just before half-time converted Wylie's second try to put Ulster 17-10 ahead.
Debut winger, Innes Gray, scored two tries in three minutes as Ulster took control in the final quarter, and flanker Kevin McKee made it three tries in five minutes.
Full-back Simon Burns managed a consolation try for the Saltires just before the finish, Stephens converting.
Hamilton sets a hot pace in first round
THERE were no surprises in the opening round of the Bell's Scottish Championship finals at Kirkcaldy last night, except perhaps for the 8-3 winning margin of Colin Hamilton's Gogar over Mike Hay's Atholl, writes WH Kemp.
Hamilton took a 2 at the first, then stole a single and had a 3 at the seventh to go 8-2 up.
Hay had no answer.
David Smith's Perth, the 1991 world champions, beat Peter Wilson's Stranraer 11-1 in six ends.
Smith drew for a 4 at the first.
The holders, Hammy McMillan's Stranraer, had a 4 at the eighth to break Warwick Smith's Perth and win by 9-3.
JJ Kenny's Forest Hills won five ends in a row from the third — 3, 2, 2, 3 — to trounce Peter Loudon's Letham Grange 11-2, while on a sheet of ice showing a big swing Douglas Dryburgh's Aviemore defeated David Aitken's Galleon 10-6.
McCoist keeps Scots hopes alive
Nevin also on target at Ibrox against defensive Maltese
Scotland 3 Malta 0
By Hugh Keevins
TWO goals from Ally McCoist at Ibrox last night provided the platform that lifted Scotland above Portugal and into joint second place with Italy in their World Cup qualifying group.
McCoist scoring at Ibrox has been a predictable occurrence in a season in which he has now amassed 43 goals in all competitions.
Scotland failing to capitalise on pressure and inflicting wounds on themselves at the same time is another common event, though, and a first-half penalty missed by Gary McAllister had a profound effect on Andy Roxburgh's side.
An optimistic beginning, with an early goal thrown in, gave way to uncertainty and it took McCoist's second goal to inspire Scotland to the stirring finale which brought a third from Pat Nevin five minutes from the end.
Eoin Jess was the most consistent player throughout but the longer the game went on, the more Malta demonstrated why they have proved so difficult to beat.
Even when behind, the Maltese show no willingness to go forward and make a game of it.
Whatever Scotland's faults, being negative is not one of them, even though some of the old-fashioned methods have largely disappeared.
A country once famed for providing a succession of wingers now has only one orthodox link with the past, Tranmere's Nevin, and he was preferred to John Robertson in attack last night.
Nevin probed for openings on the right hand side of the park while Tommy Boyd was more of a left midfield player than a member of Scotland's back four.
The start of the game, with Scotland camped in Malta's half, appeared to imply that the night would be spent wearing down a Maltese defence which used Buttigieg as a sweeper behind four other bodies.
However, Nevin was involved in the goal which, after 15 minutes, was laden with historical significance.
It was scored by Ally McCoist after he reacted quickly to a cross from Nevin that evaded Malta's blanket defence and was the first of modern times to be recorded by Scotland at Ibrox.
Torry Gillick, in 1938 against Hungary, had been the last man to score for his country on Rangers' pitch.
McCoist also became his club's record scorer for Scotland at the same time when getting his 14th goal for Roxburgh.
There was, however, no inclination on the part of the Maltese to take a more adventurous approach even after going behind and they remained keen to foil the kind of movement off the ball being displayed by Jess, eagerly starting an international for the first time.
The Scottish midfield of Gary McAllister, Paul McStay and John Collins was also thrusting forward in an unfettered way and the overall impression given was that Andy Goram, who had begun the game with an unblemished record at international level inside Ibrox, would not be bettered by Malta where Italy and Portugal had failed.
Less easy to predict, though, was the way in which Scotland squandered an opportunity to go further in front 13 minutes before the interval.
McCoist was nudged off the ball and the award of a penalty was as obvious as McAllister's thunderous kick off the underside of the bar was perplexing.
The Finnish official made one of several peculiar decisions when he failed to order a retake.
Cluett moved about his line long before McAllister made contact with the ball, though the referee seemed to be the only person not to notice the offence.
Nevertheless, a totally one-sided match had a deceptively close scoreline that temporarily upset Scotland and caused them to look confused as half time arrived.
Scotland's uncertainty was matched by that of Buhagiar, who was booked in the final minute of the first half for bringing down Nevin.
Scotland's disorientation continued after the break, worsened by the tighter marking of the midfield by the Maltese and the positioning of Nevin.
The winger transferred to the left hand side of the field — unusual for a right-footed player, and also got in the way of Boyd as he broke forward in the same area.
Jess was the liveliest player on the park and after he had won a free kick on the edge of the penalty box, the Aberdeen forward came close with a header from Nevin's cross.
McCoist did snatch at a mistimed clearance from Buttigieg but by then the appeal of a substitution was growing at the same rate as the crowd's dismay.
A badly-worked free kick, which saw McAllister over-hit an attempted pass to Collins, provoked audible unrest in the stands.
It had not been McAllister's night from dead ball situations and the consequences had been widespread.
In the 63rd minute, therefore, Robertson was introduced up front at the expense of a defender, McPherson, as Scotland made a belated attempt to improve on what had gone before.
The substitute had been on the field for only three minutes when McCoist got his second goal of the evening, made for him by another purposeful run and pass by Jess.
McCoist's effort put a better complexion on the night for Scotland though without enabling anyone to go overboard about their prospects in World Cup qualifying Group I.
Nevertheless, it was no more than Scotland deserved for perseverance, and a fitting punishment for the obstinate Maltese when Nevin squeezed in a third goal in the 85th minute to ensure Scotland's opening victory of this World Cup campaign.
Boost for Chalmers on and off the field
By Graham Law
CRAIG CHALMERS was declared fit last night to win his 32nd cap in Saturday's Royal Bank international against Wales at Murrayfield.
Chalmers had been forced to miss the Sunday practice on account of a bruised right thigh but he was given the all clear after yesterday's training to renew rivalries with the Welsh — the country against whom he was first capped four years ago.
Yesterday proved to be significant for the stand-off for he also announced his engagement to Lucy Fleming, a 25-year-old art teacher from Uplawmoor, near Glasgow.
Chalmers has been at the centre of speculation this week, one report suggesting he was leaving Melrose to join Newcastle Gosforth.
His swift denial —‘Nobody has even been in contact with me from Gosforth,’— was followed by his confirmation that Moseley were making inquiries.
It would appear, however, that Chalmers is content at the Greenyards where he considers the quality of the coaching to be among the ‘highest at club level in the UK.’
While one injury scare was resolved, another was brewing.
Damian Cronin, the 29-year-old London Scottish lock, was suffering from flu and on arrival at the team's hotel was sent straight to bed.
According to SRU secretary Bill Hogg, Cronin's bug is of the 24-hour variety, his wife, Annie, having been similarly afflicted earlier this week.
Nevertheless, Chris Gray (Nottingham) has been enlisted as a precaution.
Hooker Kenny Milne (Heriot's) was the only other casualty at the afternoon runabout.
He was bothered by a hamstring tweak and played a limited part.
Gavin Hastings, Iain Morrison, Derek Turnbull and Ian Corcoran were all reported fully fit.
Wales also filed a clean bill of health after their stint at the National Stadium yesterday with Mike Hall and Tony Clement, who had been struggling with groin and ankle injuries respectively, satisfying the medics.
Hall commented: ‘I'm relieved that nothing is really wrong.
The muscle is giving me some grief but as long as there is no long-term damage then I am willing to play through the pain barrier.’
Damian Cronin: sidelined after flu scare
Pittodrie stand's royal opening
THE Princess Royal is to officially open the new Richard Donald stand at Pittodrie on Wednesday, 18 August.
It is hoped Aberdeen will mark the occasion by taking on Real Madrid in a replay of the 1983 European Cup Winners' Cup final, won by Alex Ferguson's side.
The £4.5million Beach End complex, which will seat 6,000, has been named in honour of the Aberdeen chairman who has been associated with the club for 60 years, first as a player and then as a director.
N Ireland win sets up Dublin showdown Albania1
N Ireland2
NORTHERN Ireland guaranteed themselves a show-down with their World Cup rivals, the Republic, in Dublin next month after victory in Tirana yesterday.
The win lifts Northern Ireland to third place in Group III, equal on points with the Republic, though having played a game more and with an inferior goal difference.
Billy Bingham's men made the perfect start with a goal after just 14 minutes from Jim Magilton.
The Oxford midfielder played a one-two with the recalled Ian Dowie before steering the ball home for his second World Cup goal.
When captain Alan McDonald made it 2-0 seven minutes before half-time, the Irish looked to be well in charge.
After Kingsley Black won a corner on the right, Magilton fired the ball over, Dowie flicked it on and McDonald powered in a header.
Dowie had two chances to increase the lead after the interval, but just failed to reach a cross from Black and then saw a low shot kept out by the legs of goalkeeper Kapilarii.
But suddenly Northern Ireland began to lose their grip as the Albanians came forward and captain Sulyman Demmollari should have scored when goalkeeper Tommy Wright missed a cross.
Raklli then saw Wright save two efforts — and also a penalty — after Magilton handled in the area.
Demmollari took the spot kick, Wright parried and substitute Tlis Shulkai headed over the rebound.
After Eduard Abazi had a shot pushed on to the bar by Wright, Raklli finally broke through with just seconds remaining to earn the home side a deserved consolation.
But the result still adds spice to next month's Dublin date and Republic manager, Jack Charlton, who made the trip to Tirana to spy on both sides, will have his work cut out spiking Northern Ireland's challenge.
Belgians not to sell tickets for Ibrox
BELGIAN champions Club Brugge will not be selling any tickets for their away European Cup game against Rangers at Ibrox on 17 March.
Their decision follows crowd trouble by supporters in a previous European Champions League match at Marseille last December, for which their punishment by UEFA was to play their home game against Rangers on 3 March in an empty stadium.
Last week, however, Brugge successfully appealed against the ban and instead were fined 250,000 Swiss francs (about £115,000)— one of the heaviest fines by UEFA.
Brugge will also not sell tickets for their other away series match against CSKA Moscow on 7 April.
— Reuter
Ibrox squeal replaces Hampden roar as young fans voice their support
YOUNGSTERS from the West of Scotland should not be underestimated.
Graeme Souness, an Edinburgh man who doesn't frighten easily, once recalled how the scariest moment of his life unfolded outside Parkhead when he made the acquaintance of two locals.
As a teenager, Souness trained with Celtic and was waiting with a friend to catch a late bus home.
‘It wouldn't have been so bad,’ Souness remembered, ‘but for the fact that one of our assailants was wielding a sword.
Over the years people have accused me of not being quick.
But you should have seen me then.
Allan Wells would have been proud.’
There were 17,000 junior members of the Tartan Army packed inside Ibrox last night as a consequence of the initiative taken by the SFA to allow organised parties into the game free of charge.
If the Maltese expected the match to have the friendly atmosphere of a schoolboy international, however, then they were in for a rude awakening.
Seldom can so many so young have enjoyed the benefit of complimentary seating.
Billy McNeill, who was working at last night's game for television, recalled a visit to Canada when he was invited to watch Toronto Blizzard.
McNeill was reluctant to accept because it meant asking the club for 14 tickets.
An official eased his embarrassment by pointing out that since they gave away 8,000 tickets at every home game another 14 was neither here nor there.
Not surprisingly, the noise bellowing around Ibrox when the teams took to the pitch was an octave or two higher than normal.
But there was no denying the passion of this young audience.
After the Hampden roar, the Ibrox squeal could become Scotland's secret weapon.
Such was the enthusiasm generated by the thousands of kids at the game that a passer-by might have been forgiven for thinking that either Take That or New Kids On The Block were performing at Ibrox rather than Scotland's football team.
Instead it was Andy Roxburgh's new kid on the block, Eoin Jess, who did most to bring the young supporters out of their seats.
Like a young Kenny Dalglish, Jess was involved in every aspect of Scotland's play and must now be regarded as a first choice.
Ally McCoist, who invited Malta to take that with the two goals that took his tally for Scotland to 15, also thrived on the good service provided by Pat Nevin, John Collins and Paul McStay.
Beating Malta was one thing, in so much as it sustained the national team's hopes of qualifying for the World Cup finals.
Winning in a manner which combined style and sportsmanship — and presented the game to a youthful audience in a positive light — was a more onerous task.
The fact that Scotland tried to rise to the occasion was worth more than just two precious points.
Many of the thousands of youngsters who were at last night's tie as non-paying guests may have been sufficiently impressed to want to come back one day as paying customers.
Mike Aitken
Jess earns praise from all quarters
ROY HODGSON, manager of the Swiss team who lead Group I, said last night that Scotland had done all that was possible against Malta.
Hodgson also expressed the belief that it was not possible to predict which two countries would go to America for the World Cup finals next year.
‘There are three points between Switzerland and Scotland but we have still to visit Glasgow.
Andy Roxburgh has unearthed a real talent in Eoin Jess,’ said the Englishman.
Roxburgh, though, was frustrated by Gary McAllister's penalty miss.
‘If the score had gone to 2-0 that early, Malta would have known it was all over.
We got our second goal too late to run up the score that might have been available to us,’ said the national coach.
Roxburgh nevertheless emphasised the positive aspects of Scotland's win.
‘It was the highest result yet against Malta in this group and with greater composure it could have been even more.
‘It was also the third shut-out in a row for Andy Goram.
‘The bottom line, though, is that we have only recorded our first win and now we must face the tough and noisy atmosphere of Lisbon's Stadium of Light when we play Portugal in our next match.’
The national coach singled out for praise Ally McCoist —‘the predator’ as Roxburgh calls him — and Eoin Jess.’
‘He (Jess) really excites me.
Whenever he gets the ball, everybody thinks something is about to happen.
If anyone has a promising future, Jess does.’
Brugge ban on tickets for Rangers return
BELGIAN champions, Club Brugge, will not be selling any tickets for their away European Cup game against Rangers at Ibrox on 17 March.
Their decision follows crowd trouble by supporters in a previous European Champions' League match at Marseille last December, for which their punishment by UEFA was to play their home game against Rangers on 3 March in an empty stadium.
Last week, however, Brugge successfully appealed against the ban and instead were fined 250,000 Swiss francs (about £115,000).
— Reuter 930218 
Tories fear no let-up on jobs for 18 months
By Joy Copley, Parliamentary Correspondent
MINISTERS fear that unemployment, which has hit a six-year high at over three million, will continue to rise for up to 18 months and could delay economic recovery.
The latest figures announced yesterday will intensify pressure on the Government to produce a jobs package in next month's Budget.
The stark three million milestone sparked the most bitter and rowdy Commons clashes for months with John Smith, the Labour leader, accusing the Prime Minister of standing idly by while unemployment soared.
Mr Smith condemned the latest rise, which leaves more than one in ten on the dole queue, as ‘economic madness as well as social tragedy’.
The unadjusted jobless total increased by 78,726 last month to 3,062,065, the highest since April 1987.
The seasonally adjusted figure, regarded as the best long-term guide, rose by a lower-than-expected 22,100 in January to 2,995,100.
Unemployment in Scotland rose by nearly 9,000 to 260,757, but still remains marginally below the UK average.
The unadjusted total of 260,757 is 10.3 per cent of the workforce, while the adjusted total rose by 500 to exactly 250,000, or 9.9 per cent.
As the political temperature rose over the jobs crisis, 2,000 people demonstrated outside the Houses of Parliament and at job centres throughout Britain.
The Cabinet heard a report from Gillian Shephard, the Employment Secretary, about measures to help the unemployed which are to be announced to coincide with the Budget on 16 March.
Some ministers admit privately that unemployment could continue to rise for another 18 months and they are acutely aware that fear of unemployment could hold back spending and delay any economic recovery.
They hope that a jobs package will go some way to defusing criticism over a perceived lack of direction on tackling the long dole queues.
Mrs Shephard said that helping people out of work to find jobs was her priority but ‘throwing huge sums of public money at this problem is not an option for us’.
Unemployment dominated the 15-minute session of Prime Minister's questions, with the Speaker, Betty Boothroyd, struggling to keep order.
John Major yelled above the din: ‘We are determined to bring unemployment down and we will.’
Unemployment was a problem right across Europe, he said, and the Government had put in place a comprehensive system of training and employment schemes ‘unmatched in the history of this country’.
Mr Smith taunted: ‘The country will never forget that it was your Government and your Chancellor who told us unemployment was a price well worth paying.
‘On the day when unemployment has reached the tragic total of three million, will you publicly repudiate this heartless approach?’
Mr Smith said that unemployment at this ‘tragic level’ was an economic millstone round the country's neck costing £27 billion a year and 780 million working days.
‘Isn't this economic madness as well as social tragedy?’ he demanded.
Mr Major said: ‘Of course we appreciate that fact.
That's why we are seeking to help those who are unemployed and to create the circumstances to make sure they have permanent, long-term, sustainable jobs in the future.’
He said the Government would be introducing new training schemes, offering nearly half a million places in April.
Local Scottish figures paint an even grimmer picture.
Several towns have male unemployment of more than 20 per cent and in the former coal and steel areas of Cumnock, Strathclyde, and Sanquhar, Dumfries and Galloway, male unemployment by one calculation is 35 per cent.
The Scottish industry minister, Allan Stewart, said that the rise in the seasonally adjusted figure was the lowest since last March and Scotland had the third lowest unemployment rate of all UK regions.
‘Sustained recovery and employment generation will only occur if Scottish companies continue to improve their competitiveness,’ Mr Stewart said.
The shadow Scottish secretary, Tom Clarke, described the figures as appalling and demanded an urgent meeting with the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang.
Leading a protest outside the Scottish Office, Campbell Christie, the Scottish Trades Union Congress general secretary, said: ‘It's time the Government took a lead in addressing the unemployment crisis and laid the foundations for long-term sustainable economic growth.’
Gruelling tests after polar trek
THE record-breaking Antarctic explorers, Sir Ranulph Fiennes and Dr Michael Stroud, yesterday put off homecoming celebrations to undergo a series of gruelling scientific experiments.
After spending the night at home with their families, the pair had to begin a day of tests at 7:15 at the Army Personnel Research Establishment at Farnborough, Hampshire, to assess the impact on their bodies of their arduous trek.
Dr Richard Allan, establishment director, said: ‘They've not been allowed any alcohol.
But the controls will be off by the end of the day and tomorrow it will be a free for all.’
Only after being punctured by a giant hypodermic needle, dunked in a cold swimming pool and having every part of their bodies weighed and measured will they be allowed to enjoy a celebratory drink.
The champagne was still on ice yesterday morning as the pair, who returned to Britain from their 95-day expedition exhausted but jubilant on Wednesday, kept to their alcohol-free diet.
Dr Allan said the two men were bearing up well and were in better condition than had been expected after making the longest unsupported polar trip and the first unsupported crossing of the Antarctic landmass.
‘They are in tremendous spirits and making very light of their slight physical problems.
They had a good night's sleep but they had a tremendous job waking up this morning.
‘It proved one of the hardest things of the entire expedition.
Now it's a day of tests.
They're being very sporty about it.
They've not been allowed any breakfast.’
Sir Ranulph, 48, also has visited a London hospital for medical opinion about his foot, which is severely frost-bitten and may require a skin graft.
Dr Stroud, 37, who is head of applied physiology at the Farnborough establishment, has frost-bitten fingers but should suffer no longer-term problems, and he hopes to return to work as soon as possible.
The only food the two were allowed yesterday was an experimental high-fat meal of Complan and Mars Bars, which was followed with blood tests to see how their digestion copes.
A team of eight scientists measured height, weight and girth around various parts of the body.
They also measured skin-fold thickness to see how much fat has been lost.
Then there were strength tests.
They were to be weighed under water to measure their body density, but plans for vigorous treadmill tests may have to be shelved because their feet are in such pain.
Then, scientists were to puncture them in the leg with a large hypodermic to extract a sample of muscle tissue.
‘That's the worst bit.
They really hate that.
Ran refers to them as the Nottingham KGB,’ Dr Allan said.
The tests will be analysed over the next month and the results should help in regard to rations for soldiers in gruelling conditions.
Dr Stroud and Sir Ranulph are expected to give more details about their experiences at a London news conference today.
No decision yet in Rangers shares row
By John Robertson Law Correspondent
A DISPUTE over a share transfer deal between the owner of Rangers Football Club, David Murray, and the club's former vice-chairman, Jack Gillespie, remained unresolved yesterday after the first leg of a courtroom clash.
More than five million 10p shares in the Scottish football champions are at stake in the row but a judge decided that evidence would have to be heard before a final decision was reached.
The Court of Session heard that in 1985, Mr Gillespie had agreed to sell shares to the club's owners of the time, John Lawrence (Glasgow) Ltd.
The first batch was transferred on his becoming vice-chairman in November that year.
The rest were to be handed over in 1989 and 1990 with Mr Gillespie being paid £318,750 on each occasion.
However, Murray International Holdings took control of Rangers late in 1988.
Its chairman, David Murray, wrote to Mr Gillespie saying that instead of handing over the shares on the previously agreed dates, he could keep them until he was 65 in 1991, when they would be transferred to MIH in one lump.
Mr Gillespie would remain vice-chairman until his 65th birthday and be a director to the age of 75.
The letter added: ‘In the interim you will vote the shares in accordance with Murray International's wishes.
You agreed that no price will be payable for the transfer of the shares.’
Mr Gillespie wrote back accepting the contents of the letter but since his 65th birthday he has refused to hand over the shares.
MIH asked Lord Penrose to order the transfer, arguing that the exchange of letters between Mr Murray and Mr Gillespie on 19 December, 1988, amounted to a valid and binding agreement.
Mr Gillespie maintained that the correspondence was no more than a stage in negotiations and that there was no final agreement.
He never intended that his shares should be given up for no payment.
He had understood Mr Murray's reference to ‘no price will be payable for the transfer’ to mean that he (Mr Gillespie) would not be liable for the actual transfer costs, such as stamp duty.
In his judgment yesterday, Lord Penrose held that the letters amounted to a concluded agreement.
He said: ‘Having regard to the terms of the correspondence, I am of opinion that the letters were intended to set out, and did set out, matters on which the writers had reached agreement.’
However, there was a separate issue that stemmed from Mr Gillespie's original agreement with Lawrence which MIH had taken over.
It had provided that the deal could be varied in writing only and had to be signed by Mr Gillespie and by a director of the purchasing company acting with the authorisation of its board.
Lord Penrose said that in relation to the letters between Mr Murray and Mr Gillespie: ‘There is nothing in the correspondence that would indicate that Mr Murray had the authority as an individual to bind Murray International in these terms.’
MIH contended, however, that even if the agreement was not strictly in the proper form, Mr Gillespie, by his subsequent actings, was barred from asserting that it was not enforceable.
When a share offer had been made to the public in 1990, the prospectus, which Mr Gillespie as a director accepted, stated that his shares were the subject of an option in favour of MIH.
Also, it was argued, the club's annual report, for which Mr Gillespie again as a director was responsible, pointed out under the heading: ‘Directors and their interests,’ that his shares were subject to an option to MIH.
Lord Penrose said that the case should proceed to a full hearing of evidence on those points.
Working together to boost tourism
In your editorial about the future of Scottish tourism (‘All-inclusive package,’ 9 February) your suggestion that the Scottish Office's review has been ‘an oddly furtive affair’is somewhat ungenerous.
The real problem is that, because of the infighting between various entrenched interests, the Scottish Office may opt for a quiet life and the status quo.
That would be disastrous for an industry that is Scotland's biggest employer.
This review is perhaps the last chance this century to get things right.
I write as chairman of Connoisseurs Scotland, the association of top Scottish hotels whose members provide something close to half a million bed-nights a year.
It was formed in March last year with the specific purpose of promoting ‘world class’ Scotland.
It is a private sector, joint venture initiative between hotels which, in normal circumstances, compete tooth and claw with each other.
However they put aside their competitiveness (the Caledonian and Balmoral in Edinburgh, for example, are fighting for exactly the same guests) because they know that it is only by working together, as one body, that they will attract visitors to Scotland in the first place.
They are, for example, going as a group to the US next week to do just that.
If the professional private sector end of the tourist industry can work together so, surely, must the public bodies currently charged with promoting the various parts of the Scottish tourism industry.
They must be pulled together into one effective, industry-led, force, because, if the effort continues to be fragmented, everyone will suffer.
We should not be bothered by safeguarding entrenched institutions, nor about winners or losers, but by how better to persuade tourists to come to Scotland and how to help the industry that makes them welcome.
This is another example of ‘Scots don't need enemies; we have each other’.
That is why we at Connoisseurs Scotland, who try to practice what we preach, warmly welcomed Scottish Secretary Ian Lang's decision to initiate the current review of the future promotion of Scottish tourism.
Change may be uncomfortable during the transitional period, but change is needed and change there must be.
Junction delays
I cannot be the only motorist who is regularly frustrated by the lengthy delays caused by the traffic lights at the junction in Edinburgh of Lower Granton Road, Trinity Road and Trinity Crescent.
This junction was extensively disrupted by landscaping works last summer and large bill-boards eagerly promote the involvement of Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise, Lothian Regional Council, Edinburgh District Council and others in the scheme to remove an old, disused railway bridge and plant some grass.
I had foolishly assumed that the opportunity would be taken to eliminate a particularly hazardous S-bend and install a roundabout in its place thus easing the flow of the many cars, buses and lorries which use the road.
Superb dean
As one who arrived in Edinburgh while George Montgomery was Dean of the Faculty of Medicine, may I venture to add some brief comments to Sir Alistair Currie's excellent obituary (13 February).
George was a superb dean, not least because of his capacity to listen to colleagues and then make up his mind decisively.
He was a man of absolute integrity, the epitome of a Christian gentleman, a fine organist and pianist and he and his wife were delightful hosts.
I count myself fortunate to have known him.
Dismissive
I agree completely with J Derrick McClure and William Neill (Points of View, 11 February) about the need for Scottish people to recognise and respect the views of people from different backgrounds in this country.
However, it was because of the dismissive attitude to Gaelic displayed in an earlier letter by Dave Reckord that I decided to do a little leg-pulling.
I thank Mr Reckord for now admitting that he might have been insensitive in his remarks.
It should be remembered, however, that Gaelic was proscribed by the authorities for many years.
I knew people who were punished for speaking Gaelic in the playground in a Lochaber school earlier this century.
I am not aware of anyone being punished for speaking the Doric.
Labour progress
The claim is that one of the first to mark out John Smith's future political career was the Labour leader, Hugh Gaitskell, who was in his time characterised and vilified as being right-wing.
Nevertheless, Gaitskell did not think that the issue of public ownership was ‘sterile’ and during the heated debates on Clause IV he stated: ‘I conclude that we should make two things clear to the country.
First, that we have no intention of abandoning public ownership and accepting for all time the present frontier of the public sector.
‘Secondly, that we regard public ownership not as an end in itself but as a means — and not necessarily the only or the most important one to certain ends — such as full employment, greater equality and higher productivity.’
Gaitskell saw public ownership as a means of assisting moves toward equality and a classless society.
Particularly important was the need to have natural monopolies in public ownership.
There is no more natural monopoly than the public utility of water supply and it is obscene that anyone should seek to make it the instrument of private advantage.
Neil Kinnock took eight years to ditch the views of his mentor Aneurin Bevan, John Smith has taken a mere eight months to ditch those of Hugh Gaitskell.
That's a measure of Labour's progress.
Lack of consultation basic cause of traffic chaos
The recent correspondence about traffic problems and congestion fails to address the basic cause of most of the present chaos, which is the lack of consultation and co-operation by those responsible for the development of industry, office space, housing and schools, and public transport during the last 45 years.
Most people travel too far to work, at about the same time every day.
Many people have to use a car to travel to work, and at many other times, because there is no practical alternative.
Better distribution of industry and, more importantly, office blocks, would save many hours of travel.
With advances in information and communication technology huge office blocks in city centres appear to be totally unnecessary.
Staggered working hours would spread travelling times over a longer period of the day and in many cases allow more efficient use of factories, offices, schools and the equipment therein.
What has been neglected for far too long are methods of transferring passengers and goods from one transport system to another.
All rail stations should be developed or moved to incorporate bus stations and car parks.
Combined train/bus stations with one or two levels of car park above are a possible solution at many large stations.
Covered pedestrian access, with lifts and inclines but no stairs (which for the disabled and those with luggage and or small children, can cause major problems) would enable passengers to transfer from road to rail etc in comparative comfort.
Timetables should be co-ordinated to meet the needs of the public, and not the whims or selfishness of individuals or groups within the transport industry.
Options open?
Your issue today is quite fascinating.
On page 6 we have on one side, ‘Lang talks up Scottish economic prospects’, and on the other, with regard to Scotland, ‘Lost jobs put at 1,000 a week’.
In the same issue (Business) you have a picture entitled ‘Euro-research information centre unveiled’, with a two-faced head looking both ways.
Does this represent a major effort to keep our options open?
Confusion
The Labour Party in Scotland, under Tom Clarke, seems to have policies different from those of the party at large, under John Smith.
Their differing perspectives on two issues have caused, at the very least, some confusion: water privatisation and devolution.
We will wait with bated breath for the Scottish Labour Party discussion on defence at its forthcoming conference.
Will Labour in Scotland now endorse Trident, and will it demand a rejection of the party's previous commitment to slash defence spending?
Signs missed
In a written parliamentary answer, the Foreign Secretary stated that the cost of new premises for the secret intelligence service is well over £200 million.
As taxpayers we are entitled to know why intelligence services failed to spot signs of an end to the Cold War.
Significant moments in history do not happen without some kind of advance warning.
We are also entitled to know if the Government received such advice and why it failed to act.
Ailing economy
I am grateful to Morag McIntyre and Malcolm Nicoll (Points of View, 10 February) for their observations on Scottish water.
One can easily argue against its privatisation in emotive terms but it would have been more helpful if both your correspondents had taken the point that the UK economy is not exactly in robust good health.
Our share of world trade has been falling for years under successive governments to the extent that the purchasing power of our currency has roughly halved since 1945.
We also have a public sector borrowing requirement of heroic proportions, and even in a recession we have a huge balance of payments problem.
Any organisation which has a large capital base and a relatively secure home market, whether it be in the industrial, service or utility sector, can make a positive contribution by generating overseas earnings.
In this way we can enhance our gross national product for the benefit of all.
If that is speculation then I am a speculator, but it's hardly piratical.
I am, however, open to reasoned and informed argument and I await with interest your correspondents' blueprint for reversing our economic decline, bearing in mind that the stark choice is that we either increase our earnings or we accept a quite considerable reduction in our living standards.
Furthermore, that choice is imminent and possibly no further away than the next budget.
Unsafe streets
A few years ago I attended, along with my husband, a dinner given in honour of an American diplomat to celebrate his retiral and long association with Edinburgh.
In his farewell speech he announced that he and his wife would be remaining in the capital city as they had grown to love the place and its people.
The greatest contributory factor, however, in choosing to settle in the city was their confidence in the ability to walk in the streets at night in safety.
Regrettably, the same speech would no longer be applicable to Edinburgh today.
Within a short period of time, gratuitous violence has become commonplace.
Recently my own son was attacked a few yards from Princes Street.
His wallet was stolen and he was dragged to the ground and kicked about the head and body before a passing motorist stopped to give assistance.
This week he was again shocked by the death of a young friend in an unprovoked attack, not in the city centre, but in a quiet area.
There is no doubt that there are many reasons for the steady breakdown of law and order and these must be examined.
Meanwhile the cancer grows and it is time for serious surgery.
Those of us who are involved with the courts should look closely at the options available, specifically in the sentencing of cases involving violence.
Prevention, however, must be a priority.
Lothian and Borders Police should begin by calling for a weapons amnesty similar to that underway in Strathclyde.
The police should consider video cameras in areas of the city where the public are most at risk.
A stop-and-search campaign should be given consideration sooner rather than later.
Parliament should contemplate legislating for identity cards being issued to the general public.
Extreme measures perhaps but unfortunately extreme measures are becoming necessary.
Dismal milestone on a long road
WHO would be Secretary of State for Employment?
Little wonder that few of them, over the past decade, have lasted for more than a year or two.
It has to be just about the most melancholy job in Government, cataloguing the Treasury's human detritus.
Certainly, it can be made to look busy enough.
There are training or temporary work schemes to be promoted and amended.
There are further curbs on union activity to think up, a pastime that used to be popular but now looks merely gratuitous.
There is usually something around to de-regulate.
But the central function over most of the period since 1979 has been as apologist, a role which few politicians relish.
If the price of the monetarist experiment has been consistently high levels of unemployment, then someone has to say sorry, to try to explain why all the pain is necessary, and to give the impression that something is being done to help.
It is not much of a script.
Hence, Gillian Shephard's unspirited response yesterday as the crude jobless count rose once more beyond three million (the seasonally-adjusted total will follow it next month).
Helping the unemployed find work, she said, was her top priority.
Only low inflation and free markets brought ‘sustainable growth in jobs.’
She hoped to announce a new initiative to tackle unemployment within a few weeks.
Yet, she knows, as the unemployed assuredly know, that nothing much is going to happen quickly.
After the last recession ended, unemployment climbed onwards and upwards for another five years.
Even in the boom phase of the economic cycle, it only averaged below two million for just two years, before resuming its ascent.
How will Mrs Shephard's new initiative enliven that sort of ‘sustainable growth?’
The answer is that it will not, because an initiative is not a strategy.
In the wake of last September's humiliation on the foreign exchanges, ministers took to claiming that their release from the disciplines of the Exchange Rate Mechanism afforded a happy opportunity to pursue a fresh strategy aimed at economic recovery and the creation of jobs.
It sounded unconvincing then, and it sounds the more so now as they nervously reassure the markets that no further interest rate cuts are planned.
True, there have been some measures to suggest a less austere regime.
Interest rates have been cautiously lowered.
The autumn statement brought encouragement for capital investment, some modest help for the construction and vehicle industries, a leg-up for exporters.
But, with the budget deficit seeping £1 billion a week, the Government's response is not greatly different from a decade ago.
Inflation remains the touchstone.
Nigel Lawson's tax cuts will, it seems, be defended to the last (though the International Monetary Fund is reportedly applying pressure in that regard) and the search is on for cutbacks in the social side of public spending.
What is happening is that the old orthodoxies are being softened, rather than up-ended.
Contrast that with the extraordinary $500 billion package of measures announced on Wednesday evening by President Clinton.
It may or may not resolve America's awesome economic problems, but there can be little denying its radicalism.
This is no humdrum bundle of fiscal adjustments, but a bonfire of the old dogma.
It is hard to think of a more signal change of economic course in the post-war history of the world's biggest trading nation.
The measure of that lies as much in the minor elements as in the headline-grabbing reforms of taxation and expenditure policy.
The core policies of Reaganomics were to free the incomes of the rich through fiscal munificence while squeezing welfare payments to encourage the poor to find work; to stimulate speculation in almost every imaginable commodity, in deference to the mystique of the fast buck; to build up defence spending, but cut almost everything else.
They were, in short, the policies of the free market economy.
Clinton's package bristles with the policies of the social market economy.
Take the inducements to hold rather than trade stock in smaller companies or the incentives for strategic industrial investment, particularly in technology and skills.
These are eminently sensible things, which Reagan would not have done at gunpoint, and much the same themes run through the more contentious measures.
Taxes are to rise by a hefty $243 billion.
Clinton's explanation for this brazen reversal of his campaign promises — that once elected he found the figures to be worse than he had thought — may be glibness on a heroic scale, yet the increases have the virtue of consistency with the rest of the package.
They will hit the top earner, the energy-guzzler, the expense account holder, harder than anyone.
For middle-class workers who suffer, there is the comfort of constraints on the boss's pay rise.
For the most needy, benefits are substantially increased, while the cuts to the US's anarchic health care system are aimed more at profiteering providers than hard-pressed patients.
Defence spending, by contrast, is clobbered.
It might be thought that a programme which proposes to cut the federal workforce by 100,000 over the next four years had scant claim to be a drive for jobs.
Yet, such criticism has to be set against a long-term investment programme — including direct job creation — worth four times the value of the federal payroll cuts.
That, at the end of the day, is the point about the Clinton package: its cohesion.
It is also what gives Bill Clinton something John Major still lacks — a true economic strategy.
Bonfire of the dogma Consistent themes
Fordyce Maxwell
Unlucky draw for the sponsors
SPONSOR for a Curry Ball?
British Gas?
Good idea.
Pity it backfired during the lucky draw at Edinburgh's ritzy Prestonfield House Hotel recently.
The Curry Ball, organised by showman and restaurateur Tommy Miah for charity, had pulled in several hundred of the great and good to overpower lavish helpings.
They also chipped in generously to the draw, more than £1,400 in autographed fivers and tenners, first prize as described by DJ Steve Hamilton ‘a British Gas lucky bag’ of state of the art appliances.
First name out, farmer John Francetti.
The conversation then went approximately like this:
DJ: ‘Congratulations.
Have you got gas?’
Farmer: ‘No, I've got Calor Gas.’
DJ: ‘Oh.
Do you live in a caravan?’
Farmer: ‘No.
British Gas have refused to connect me.’
Where's the fun in being a sponsor if the audience can't fall off its chairs occasionally?
It was all in a good cause.
Two in fact — Save the Children and Bangladeshi Orphanage Fund.
ANOTHER worthy cause looking for a new sponsor is tall and powerful with bandaged ears.
Several of Scotland's rugby players drive sponsored cars, the most recent, Kenny Logan's sporty Escort.
Parked next to it at a recent training session was Doddie Weir's C reg Cavalier.
Kenny's had a splendid sponsor's name and logo.
Doddie's had, finger-written on the side of a typically cared-for farmer's car: ‘Sponsored by his dad.’
Unputdownable?
EVER wonder why our top supermarkets stay that way?
It's because they never miss a food or drink trick.
The BBC TV series based on Peter Mayle's bestseller A Year in Provence starts next Sunday and guess what Sainsbury's will have on its shelves?
Uhuh, a red wine called ‘1991 A Year in Provence.’
In public relations-speak it's evocative of the warmth and ambience of that balmy south-eastern corner of France.
But it could be like the book — bland, flat and not worth trying again.
BETTER luck next time dept: Bowman Associates, graphic designers, tried a mail-shot approach to prospective clients.
Replies so far include ‘in hospital, pneumonia and pleurisy,’‘on long-term maternity leave,’ indicating slight uncertainty about dates, and, from one secretary on behalf of her employer, ‘missing, presumed dead.’
Slight  exasperation there , I fancy, and not necessarily with her employer.
Sweet talker Walker
NICHOLAS Fairbairn, be warned.
Also Revel Alderson, several dozen political commentators and, oh yes, me.
Tangle with Tayside North MP Bill Walker at your peril, particularly if it's about the Maastricht Treaty.
It is now clear, even if little else is to the layman, that a vote for amendment 27 will be a vote to prevent the social chapter being administered.
Which is what Mr Walker said last week, against the flood of expert opinion on what his vote would mean.
He was right and we were all wrong.
That's why he's now being called Maastricht Bill.
THANKS for the postcard, Mr Walker,(who else?) advising me to dial for democracy.
‘You can vote no to the Maastricht Treaty — phone this number right away 0891 335502.’
Of course, you could vote yes to the treaty by dialling 0891 335501.
That's democracy for you.
LUCKILY for some of us, there are politics we can all understand.
Take the naming of parts out West Edinburgh way where all sorts of developments are going on.
Gogar, Loch, and Gyle keep popping up in suggestions being chewed over by councillors, but there's an intriguing bit which used to be known as The Flashees, later Flashing Meadow.
They've ruled out Flashees, but are still thinking about Flashing Meadow.
Shouldn't somebody tell them?
No axe to grind
AS the saying goes, you can always tell Sir Ranulph — aye, but you can't tell him much.
The explorer born 100 years too late, variously described as intrepid and bampot, is now back from his 1,350 mile Antarctic trek, about two-thirds of the weight he was when he started, bushy-bearded, staring of eye, and, as far as we can tell, happy.
However, one of our many mountain goats points out that had Sir Ranulph taken full advantage of mod.tech. he would have reduced his load drastically.
What he brandished on John Major's doorstep this week — no, not his council tax demand — was a MacInnes axe, designed by Hamish of that ilk, leader of the Glencoe Mountain Rescue Team.
Introduced in the Sixties, it was noted for its strong alloy shaft and the fact that it was safer to don a truss before swinging it too energetically.
Hamish, and others, went on to design equally strong, but lighter, axes.
Sir Ranulph, traditionalist that he is, stuck to his old faithful.
No wonder he was limping.
No place like home
IRONY is useful enough as a writing device.
But David Pratt, photographer, has gone off it since he travelled half way round the world's trouble spots unscathed to be battered and mugged on his own Glasgow south side doorstep.
He has been in, and safely out of, Cambodia, Afghanistan, El Salvador, the Middle East and Yugoslavia in the past six years.
Walking through a busy part of Glasgow with his girlfriend, he was attacked by three men, hit with a brick, kicked and robbed.
He thinks the robbing, including negatives and transparencies he can't replace, was incidental to an attack for the fun of it.
Police told him he was lucky not to be ‘plunged’— knifed.
Strange times we live in, he said, when he finds himself looking over his shoulder and thinking he might be safer in Sarajevo.
On a roll
ANOTHER tale of derring do, or in this case derring didn't.
Two postgraduate students, Nina Valebjorg and Ann Heidi Hansen, made a mid-January trip on the Stavanger to Newcastle ferry, planning to ask passengers why they were visiting the UK and Scotland.
Their trip, which took 38 hours instead of the normal 22, coincided with 60ft waves and the worst North Sea gales for almost a century.
‘It was hopeless,’ said Nina, ‘people had no time between bouts of sickness to answer our questions about why they wanted to go to Scotland.’
They were lucky that's all passengers didn't have time to do.
More idle talk
WHAT sort of advice will be given on country sports and the rural economy at a conference in Warwickshire next week?
Speakers include Eddie Idle of English Nature and Giles Sturdy of the National Farmers Union.
Remember the old April Fool telephone call to Edinburgh Zoo, asking to speak to Mr C Lyon?
Fact follows fancy once again— the assistant curator is now Mr Gibbons.
Or the recent review of a cookery bookshop by Helen Pickles?
No?
What about the quarrelling Australian couple who plunged over a cliff in separate vans after a St Valentine's day row and a chase through northern Sydney.
He was only Luis Moreno.
But she was Mrs Love.
Scotland's rugby coach is acknowledged worldwide as the master alchemist whose inspired blending of the human elements at his disposal has made a nonsense of the form book.
But just how does Ian McGeechan get 'em going?
Ruth Wishart reports on his very particular philosophy Chemistry lesson
IT is probably unwise to record in print that a man who is not your lawfully wedded husband has taken you to the heights of unbridled rapture.
Especially if you add that the incident in question took place in public, and in broad daylight.
And furthermore, 15 other energetic male participants were accessories before the fact.
But rapture it was that Saturday afternoon in the spring of 1990 when Ian McGeechan's tartan lads won the Grand Slam, the Triple Crown, the Calcutta Cup and the hearts of all of us numb with tear-stained joy in the stands and terracings of Murrayfield.
It is pleasant to record that the joy which accompanies any triggering of that very special memory for the spectating classes is reflected in McGeechan's own private storehouse of matchless moments.
‘That'll be the one which will always matter, without a doubt.
Even now if I look at a video the hair still stands up on the back of the neck, and you get that tingle on the spine.
You could go through a whole life and never have a day like that.’
And he smiles afresh at the thought of what that particular victory meant to everyone who witnessed it.
It's very pleasant, he notes, that as rugby has gained in popularity, so people stop the Scottish squad and its coaches in the street, beaming broadly and  proffering thanks for pleasures shared.
That pride is evident, he tells you, even in the newer caps whose accents betray a misspent youth some way south of Watford.
‘I think maybe the new boys are quite surprised how strong and important that feeling is with the team, but after all the Grand Slam side had four or five anglos.
And having been brought up outside Scotland, I think I can relate to it.
In some ways that intensifies the feeling.
It's quite special all over the world.
You find people in places like New Zealand perhaps four generations away from Scotland who still see themselves as having a very important Scottish heritage.
When Andy Reed was capped about 20-odd of his family came from Livingstone to watch him.
It just pulls you back to family ties and roots.
‘When you travel round the world, and being brought up in a family like mine, you learn that what happens on the field is actually very important to people elsewhere, and you feel, perhaps not so much a sense of responsibility, as a sense of focus in which people identify nationally for the best kind of reasons, and are made aware of who they are and what they came from.
I've always believed the players should feel that.’
His own sense of Scottishness was nurtured in Leeds where his soldier father was dispatched for wartime treatment for burns and where he met and married Ian's mother.
McGeechan senior came from a large family; Ian's mother was an only child.
In the heritage stakes it was no real contest.
All the same, it took a rather special sense of self to turn down an England trial at the age of 19 on the grounds that Scotland might want him instead.
‘And it took four years of trials before they did,’ McGeechan grins.
‘Four years and about three retirements and four injuries before they got around to me.
I think maybe if you're capped later you appreciate it more, because you've begun to think the chances are fewer.
I remember driving down to Leith on that Friday night, and just going for a walk and thinking that the next time the sun came up I would be playing at Murrayfield.
It was quite a thought.’
And it was quite a career, capped 32 times at stand-off or centre, playing with distinction in two British Lions tours.
It was, ironically, an exhibition match at Ayr in the late Seventies which curtailed his interest in the playing side.
‘If I'd had an op on my knee that summer it might have been all right.
But they decided against it and it went again in October.
I didn't play again till February by which time the international season was more or less finished.
I was 33 by then and played till the end of the season, which was at least better than going out on an injury.’
It is at this stage that it becomes necessary to record a debt of gratitude to Headingley, for whom Ian had played at club level and who suggested he might be interested in coaching.
By 1983, he was in charge of the Scotland B team and on the way to forging that illustrious partnership with Jim Telfer which brought a second Grand Slam in 1990 even sweeter than the French game which settled the first six years before.
The quality of his contribution is underlined by the fact that when he retires as Scotland's senior coach at the end of this five nations series, he will go on to coach the next Lions tour in the summer.
He is acknowledged worldwide now as the master alchemist whose inspired blending of the human elements at his disposal has made a nonsense of perceived national pool strengths.
One of the keys to his very particular philosophy hangs on the wall of his office at Scottish Life.
It is a complex chart underlining the essential interlinking between the trainees for whom he has responsibility and other departments and personnel.
This illustrates two important facets of his management style: his utter belief in the need to tailor strategies to individual groups, and the inclination to think visually.
As a result those, including new players, who imagine that they will slot into some preconceived rugby master plan, will find that McGeechan does not issue tablets of stone, but roughly hewn outlines on which will be chiselled whatever is appropriate to each new grouping.
When he's with the Lions, he says, he'll be working towards a plan to suit that particular squad.
‘And even the Scots who are on the tour will find it different.
Because when you are 12,000 miles away you're not playing for any country.
What matters is how you feel about the guys beside you.
Teams grow together.
One of the strengths Scotland has enjoyed is having a group of players who have become stronger than the individuals.
I've been criticised in the past for being too close to the players, but when you're coaching you have to have an empathy, you have to understand their worries and their weaknesses.
They have to have the confidence that they can query anything and that you are always approachable.
If we're having a training session and they feel something's not going right, I want them to say so, to get it sorted out and get on to the next thing.
That's just the way I feel comfortable, and I don't apologise for that.’
THAT dialogue becomes even more important when several key players leave at once, as has happened in the current squad.
‘There's always the danger that you'll lose a number and the pressure comes back on.
So you have to try and identify the next players and the best way of integrating that new group.
‘You're looking for players to complement each other, then the best players, sometimes playing styles.
Selection is never a black and white business.
You have to look objectively at strengths, and how people will fit in with the others.
What they can give, what things they may not have and whether these are a priority.
The thing about selection is that we never vote.
We talk round all these factors and eventually that tends to work towards a particular player.
In the early days I remember we could spend an hour talking round one position.
In the last game when we lost two players in the same position the last thing I wanted was to come to a quick decision with my brain still buzzing after a training session.
You have to sit down and think and talk it through logically.’
In the Telfer days, those kind of conversations would involve much midnight oil.
Now with Richie Dixon joining Doug Morgan, the coaching sessions have altered to ease Dixon's passage into the backroom team.
Typically McGeechan will do more work with the whole squad before the forwards go off to perfect their blacker arts.
Backs and forwards then have their final session together, rather than apart, and by tomorrow morning McGeechan will have completed an extraordinary preparatory workload.
Now, the weekend after each international, the team goes into an Edinburgh hotel to look at videos of individual performances and those of the next opponents.
And the points picked up that night will inform a Sunday training session.
This last week McGeechan will have had four or five nights working on the videos, and preparing the training sessions.
‘And all the time I try to keep the pictures in my mind.
On Tuesday night I prepared for Wednesday morning and then together with the players we planned Thursday.
On Thursday we drew the whole thing together ending up with team practice and looking at the videos in the evening.
Today we'll have various team meetings and a light session.
And at night we'll all be together again summing everything up, looking at priorities, talking about what happens if we need to change things.
On Saturday morning I want them thinking, I don't want them going into their shells.
The closer we come to the game the more we focus as a group, and the more people drop off the equation.
Down towards the last hour I'm the last person to drop off just trying to leave them with as many positive thoughts and perhaps talking quietly to the odd individual.
I've got a picture of the way I want us to play, and if I can get that picture in 15 heads we've got a chance of playing the way we want to.
If it's only in seven what we get is confusion.
But in the end, at that last hour, it comes down to the 15 and everything we do is focused down on that last hour.’
People ask how can it be that Scotland's relatively small, relatively low-key club set-up can produce teams that will fearlessly take on the best and nurture expectations of victory over them all until the final whistle.
McGeechan puts that down to identifying the likely lads early and raising their sights to higher planes.
Touring with them against the top countries, ‘not hiding, getting thrashed from time to time, but facing the top teams, learning all the time, and accepting that if we're going to stay as a competitive group we've got to be as far ahead of the others as possible’.
In the future, Scotland will have to do that without the immediate services of the great motivator.
Having to graft the rugby workload onto a full-time job has left his wife Judy too often a single parent, he says.
And he frets too that son Rob and daughter Heather are growing up with a part-time father.
‘You have to keep some sense of perspective.’
But he'll miss the total involvement ‘like hell’.
Doubtless living every play with every team.
‘I never thought I'd get the same satisfaction from coaching as from playing, but I have because of the players and the group that has evolved and the atmosphere.
Rugby has given me a life, it's given me everything.
I think it's the greatest game in the world.’
Visual contact: this last week McGeechan will have been working on videos, preparing training sessions.
‘And all the time I try to keep the pictures in my mind’
Illustrious career: McGeechan was capped 32 times at stand-off or centre and played with distinction in two British Lions tours
A pioneering surgeon with many talents
Professor Donald Campbell, president of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow, pays tribute to Professor Tom Gibson, who died last Saturday
PROFESSOR Tom Gibson's death has understandably been widely noted in the public press, such was his reputation and distinction in the world of medical science, medicine and the arts.
Throughout the course of medical history, Scottish names have been synonymous with some of the greatest advances in science and Prof Gibson will be remembered as the pioneering force behind tissue transplantation.
It would be no exaggeration to claim that the whole of present-day transplantation surgery is based on his original insight and on his subsequent collaboration with Sir Peter Medawar, which led to the latter's Nobel Prize.
His own contribution to this work and to surgery in general was later recognised in 1987 by the award of the Lister Medal.
This rarest of distinctions in surgery is decided on by all three Royal colleges of surgeons in the United Kingdom and was a great source of pride to Prof Gibson.
Elsewhere, Tom Gibson's excellence as a plastic surgeon, collaborative bio-engineer and teacher have been noted, and innumerable patients and young surgeons worldwide have cause to remember him with gratitude and affection.
Despite his international acclaim, Prof Gibson never lost sight of his roots.
He was president of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow from 1976-78 where he was also honorary librarian and curator of arts.
His knowledge of, and contribution to, the arts benefited the college greatly and many of its finest paintings were collected by Tom Gibson, in particular a number of excellent examples of the work of Mary Armour and John Cunningham.
He also wrote a scholarly illustrated history of the Royal College's portraits.
Another aspect of Tom Gibson's many-faceted talents was his love of music and poetry, both of which he also practised with an original and humorous flair.
Some of his many poems and humorous versifications were published in 1991 and in his introduction he claimed: ‘The reasons for presenting them at all are twofold.
Firstly, my children and older grandchildren want copies and, secondly, the writings may be not only entertaining but useful as a framework of speeches for others at a loss for what to say.’
Many of his colleagues can bear testimony to the value of the latter.
At Canniesburn Hospital, where he spent the major part of his working life, his close friend and colleague, Professor W Henry Reid, said that Prof Gibson was one of the city's finest sons.
‘He was a true friend in every sense of the word, loyal and compassionate; his modesty was his dominant characteristic.
Tom Gibson collected the glittering prizes, but he undervalued his contribution to his own area of medicine.
He was outstanding and will be greatly missed.’
Wilson centenary
A SPECIAL exhibition and conference are to be staged in Aberdeen next month to mark the centenary of the death of George Washington Wilson, the Banffshire-born photographer who included Queen Victoria among his patrons.
Wilson, the son of a crofter, became one of the leading photographers of the Victorian era and was a pioneer in capturing the lives of ordinary men and women on camera.
He was encouraged by Queen Victoria to branch out from studio portraits, and his landscapes attracted widespread acclaim.
He also worked extensively amid the squalor of Britain's inner cities and in remoter areas of Scotland, including the island crofting community of St Kilda.
Aberdeen University's Centre for Scottish Studies is to host a conference on 29 March, aimed at reassessing Wilson's technical and artistic contribution to photography,
An exhibition, celebrating his achievements, is to be staged at Aberdeen Art Gallery from 13 March to 3 April.
The exhibition will be drawn from more than 45,000 glass plate negatives from the George Washington Wilson Archive at the university.
Pat Garrow: sports writer
PAT Garrow, who has died in Richmond, Surrey, aged 79, was a noted sports writer both north and south of the Border.
Best known for his boxing knowledge, he reported many top-class fights for The Scotsman.
He was, however, very much an all-rounder, and football and curling were among the other sports he covered.
Born in Loanhead, Pat Garrow started in journalism on the former Edinburgh Evening Dispatch before the Second World War.
His father was also a journalist.
After a spell as London editor of the Evening Dispatch he became press officer for the RAF in Scotland and when that job was ended he moved back to London to become a public relations officer for the Royal Navy.
In later years, he concentrated on freelance boxing reporting.
He was a founder member of the Edinburgh Press Club, established more than 50 years ago.
Mr Garrow is survived by his daughter, Gillian.
Principal of Heriot-Watt awarded Faraday Medal
THIS year's Faraday Medal, given for notable or conspicuous achievement in the electrical sciences, has been awarded to Professor Alistair MacFarlane, principal and vice-chancellor of Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh.
The award recognises Prof MacFarlane's pioneering work in computing and control theory.
His postgraduate teaching at Cambridge University, where he held the post of professor of engineering for 15 years, was particularly noted.
He has been principal of Heriot-Watt since 1989.
Prof MacFarlane will receive his medal — which is named after Michael Faraday, who formulated some of the principal laws of electromagnetics — on 11 March at a ceremony organised by the award's organisers, the Institution of Electrical Engineers.
Prof Alistair MacFarlane: pioneering work recognised
England give Emburey Test recall
ENGLAND yesterday finally abandoned their ‘pace at all costs’ theory in an attempt to win today's third Test against India in Bombay.
Already 2-0 down in the three-match series, England will go into today's clash with just two frontline seamers after axing their fastest bowler, Devon Malcolm.
England reckon the pitch will fail to assist the seamers and are banking on the spinners to produce victory — without leg-spinner Ian Salisbury, who loses his place to John Emburey.
England's intention to strip their pace bowling to the bone is an indication of how futile they see that line of attack on slow Indian pitches.
India have won both the Calcutta and Madras Tests preparing conditions to suit their three specialist spinners.
Now England have got one last chance to cope with that problem in what looks like being another turning pitch.
At Calcutta, England were criticised for selecting four fast bowlers in their belief that the Indian batsmen could be upset by quicker bowling, as they were on their recent tour of South Africa.
Then, in Madras, England went in with a more balanced attack of three seamers and three spinners, including Graeme Hick.
Now, they have come round to adopting the Indian selection policy with the ever-improving off-spin of Hick now regarded as part of their frontline attack.
But, in a move that seems defensive, England intend to play seven specialist batsmen — providing Alec Stewart and Neil Fairbrother can recover from illness.
The sick pair were last night confined to their hotel rooms and neither attended the team meeting or traditional eve-of-Test dinner.
Yorkshire's Richard Blakey, who made his Test debut in Madras last week, stands-by in case either Stewart or Fairbrother is ruled out.
There are Test recalls for Emburey, Michael Atherton and Phillip DeFreitas with the Middlesex off-spinner returning after a gap of more than three-and-a-half years.
The 40-year-old replaces 23-year-old Salisbury whose 29 overs in the second Test in Madras cost 142 runs.
Emburey's last Test was against Australia at Old Trafford in 1989, the game in which it was announced that he was among 16 rebels who had decided to tour South Africa and accept an international ban.
Then, it appeared his official England career was over, but today he will become — after Mike Gatting and Paul Jarvis — the third former rebel to return, winning his 61st cap.
It will be a sweet moment for Emburey whose tour seemed doomed when he was savaged by various Indian batsmen in the early games, Test opener Navjot Sidhu hitting him for eight sixes in the second three-day warm-up fixture at Lucknow.
Emburey has played only once during the past month, bowling 20 overs for 53 runs — but no wickets — against the Rest of India at  Vishakhapatnam .
England tour manager Bob Bennett said: ‘He has been selected because we feel his experience will be an advantage to the side in this particular game.’
Atherton and DeFreitas, too, make their first Test appearances of the tour and the Lancashire pair will be keen to make up for lost time.
Opener Atherton was due to play in the first Test at Calcutta before being forced out on the morning of the match because of illness.
He was controversially omitted from the second Test even when captain Graham Gooch went down ill just before the start of that game.
DeFreitas injured a thigh muscle early in the tour and missed the first Test.
He was then made twelfth man in Madras.
— PA
Strong student side for annual match
SCOTTISH Universities will be represented by one of their strongest ever women's sides when they meet the Scottish President's select in the annual challenge match at the Pleasance, Edinburgh University, tomorrow, writes Sandy Sutherland.
Edinburgh University, who beat Teesside 93-34 away on Wednesday to reach the final of the British Universities team championships in Sunderland next month, supply five players, including Scottish senior squad members Dawn Halliday, Tracey Phillips, Joanna Sutherland and Kara Szifris.
Napier supply two members, including senior cap Lyn Connell (Livingston).
Dundee club coach Stewart Harris, the Teamsport co-ordinator for basketball, is taking over from Lawrence Randak as coach to the student side who are preparing for the British Universities group tournament in Bath next week.
The Scottish Select for tomorrow's match includes Carol Maclean (Livingston) and Debbie Strang (Glasgow City Brightsiders), both of whom are also in the national squad preparing for internationals against Wales at the end of March and the Home Countries Championship in Glasgow in April.
Agathist can land fourth success
CAROLINE McCLYMONT, the daughter of the late Charlie MacMillan, and the American-bred Agathist, with three successes already to their name in ladies races over Bogside's former National Hunt racecourse, can land a fourth tomorrow if they turn out for the Lanarkshire and Renfrewshire fixtures at Irvine.
Agathist, a good looking winner of National Hunt races for Gavin Pritchard-Gordon and David Nicholson is prone to leg injuries and makes few race course appearances but is hard to beat when he gets there all in one piece.
Heriot amateur rider Michael Dun has yet to be headed in men's opens this season and with his Jedforest winner Run Lieh Run and last Saturday's Haydon victor Gun Metal Boy to choose from, tomorrow can keep the slate clean.
Bailey and Tory agree to split
KIM BAILEY and jockey Anthony Tory yesterday ‘mutually agreed’ to part after a partnership that had lasted nearly five years.
Tory had ridden for Bailey in two spells, during which his biggest success came on Docklands Express in the 1991 Whitbread Gold Cup.
A statement issued by Bailey announced the end of the ‘informal arrangement under which Tory rode most of the yard's horses’.
He said that it was felt that the change would give both parties more freedom of choice, and stressed that he would continue to use Tory on a freelance basis and was not intending to appoint another stable jockey before the end of the season.
Tory, 26, admitted to frustration at recent results.
He has partnered just 11 winners, half the stable's total.
‘The horses have not been running well for three or four months,’ he said.
‘Most of the yard has been ill, and the ground has been against us.
‘As Kim Bailey doesn't like making up his mind about where his horses run until the last minute, it's been difficult to try for outside rides.
Hopefully it will be easier now I'm freelance.’
Bailey's sole runner today, Mabthul at Fakenham, is partnered by Jamie Railton. -PA
Potter's return can boost Kelburne
DOUGIE POTTER, the former Scotland captain, is coming out of retirement.
He will play for defending champions Kelburne tomorrow against DW Clydesdale and will be available to play for them at regular intervals throughout the second half of the season in addition to the finals of the European Club Championship in May.
The return of Potter will give the Paisley men a significant lift, for they clearly have their work cut out if they are to remain championship contenders.
They didn't look at all impressive last week when losing 4-2 to Edinburgh Civil Service in a friendly.
On that form the capital men could well emerge as dark horses to overthrow the current leaders, Touche Ross.
The young Aberdeen side were relegated from the first division of the indoor league, but they are better disciplined outdoors and with such a wealth of talent at their disposal they will take some shifting.
They are on duty at Gussie Park in Dundee against Torbrex Wanderers and with Paul Doney and Richard Freeland in such dynamic form, they should complete the double over the Taysiders.
In the remaining First Division match, Grange and Inverleith are in direct opposition.
Grange possess the greater depth in their squad and they should emulate Touche Ross, Kelburne and Edinburgh Civil Service, who entertain Stirling, in securing maximum points.
Plenty for Welsh fans to savour before main event
THE thousands of Welsh supporters who have been pouring into the Edinburgh area for the past two days are well catered for if they want to sample club rugby before tomorrow's Royal Bank international, writes Harry Pincott.
It is certain, for instance, that mighty Welsh Cup holders, Llanelli, on their first visit to Scotland, will have a much bigger support than Boroughmuir at Meggetland tonight.
While both sides are short of their international contingents — Boroughmuir have two in the Scotland XV and Llanelli five in the Welsh side — the Stradey Park club are still able to field four caps in centre Nigel Davies, stand-off Colin Stephens, prop Laurance Delaney and flanker Gary Jones.
Regular watchers of Rugby Special will have seen Llanelli, who beat Australia earlier in the season, playing some magnificent rugby as recently as last Saturday, when Stephens scored two tries in the victory over Cardiff, who meet Ayr at Millbrae tonight.
Whether it is a sign of things to come, Boroughmuir, who have beaten Maesteg and Pontypool in recent seasons, field Grant Wilson at tighthead prop with David Cockburn on the loose.
Edinburgh Acads also break new ground with a game against South Wales Police at Raeburn Place this afternoon.
Their only change is Andy Richardson for David Jackson at wing forward.
Academicals' title challenge should be boosted by the return of Rob Wainwright and Derek Patterson from long-term injuries.
Stirling County make some interesting changes for their match against Llandovery at Bridgehaugh tonight, some of them geared towards relegation battles that lie ahead.
They parade a new pair of half backs in Kenny Harper and Ally Logan, while Graham Stewart, 19, gets a run at centre, with Calum Macdonald at full back.
For their visit to Ayr, Cardiff include Nigel Walker, the former Olympic 110m hurdler, scorer of 14 league tries this season, and internationalists Steve Ford and Adrian Davies.
Stewart's-Melville bring in Ian Campbell at centre against Newbridge at Inverleith this afternoon, while hooker Andrew Cadzow will have new props in John Porter and John Blackhall.
Hawick, with Craig Waldie at centre for Nick Bannerman, who broke a bone in a hand at Meggetland last Saturday, meet the powerful Crawshay's Welsh XV at Mansfield Park tonight.
Crawshay's have a flier on the wing in the shape of former cap, Glen Webbe, as well as fielding three B caps.
Kelso and Heriot's are also in action this evening.
The Poynder Park club experiment behind the scrum, with Graeme Aitchison switching to stand-off, Neil Heseltine to centre and Stewart Lang at full back.
The visitors recall veteran Neil Marshall at stand-off.
Glasgow High-Kelvinside, in desperate trouble in Division I, meet Clarkston at Braidholm tonight, and once again Cammy Little and George Breckenridge play musical chairs, this time Little wearing the No 15 jersey and Breckenridge the No 10, while former regular Graham Macnab is drafted in at centre.
Raeburn Place stages one of the few morning games tomorrow when the Scottish Classics take on their Welsh counterparts at 11am.
Thomson and Smith at the double in pairs event
WITH no singles matches scheduled yesterday, the spotlight in the Midland Bank World Indoor Bowling Championships at Preston fell on the pairs event.
St Andrews-born Andy Thomson and his England international colleague, Gary Smith, produced the quickest win of the day, needing just 14 ends to secure a straight sets win over Welsh pair Colin Edwards and Ieuan Terry, who led 3-2 in the first set but never scored again as their opponents recovered to win 7-3, 7-0, 7-0.
BOXING
Lewis row over purse
A CASH dispute has hit Lennox Lewis's first defence of the World Boxing Council heavyweight title against Tony Tucker on 8 May.
As champion, he was banking on 80 per cent of the purse — around £6.7 million — for the fight in Las Vegas, but manager Frank Maloney claimed that promoter Don King was trying to force a 75-25 split.
CRICKET
Harper to join Ayrshire
AYRSHIRE are set to engage the services of Guyanese professional David Harper as part of their effort to recapture the Scottish Counties championship.
Harper, who is the cousin of the former West Indian Test player, Roger Harper, has verbally accepted the offer of a contract with the Prestwick club for the 1993 season.
CURLING
Holders set the pace
HAMMY McMillan's Stranraer, the holders, trounced Douglas Drybrough's Aviemore 10-2 to set the pace in convincing manner in the Bell's Scottish Championship at Kirkcaldy yesterday.
FOOTBALL
Honour for Maradona
DIEGO MARADONA has been crowned as Argentina's best-ever soccer player.
He received the award during a gala dinner in Buenos Aires held to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the Argentine Football Association.
SPEEDWAY
Monarchs hold on to stars
EDINBURGH Gulf Monarchs have moved to kill off speculation that their two top riders, Les Collins and Kenny McKinna, would not be in their line-up in the new season.
A statement from the club confirmed they would be staying in Edinburgh.
SQUASH
Maclean goes out to Martin
MARK MACLEAN's bid for a place in the quarter-finals of the £60,000 Leekes Squash Classic in Cardiff ended yesterday when he lost 17-14, 15-9, 15-13 to the Australian World No4, Brett Martin.
TENNIS
End of Courier's run
JIM COURIER's string of 1993 match victories ended yesterday when he was beaten 7-6 (7-5), 6-1 by Derrick Rostagno in the first round of the Comcast US indoor men's tournament in Philadelphia.
Meanwhile, Martina Navratilova beat Natalia Medvedeva (Ukraine) 6-0, 6-2 to move into the quarter-finals of the Paris Open women's tournament.
Under-21s aim to restore pride
By Graham Law
SCOTLAND set out to salvage their under-21 season when they round off a disappointing campaign against the Welsh at Myreside, Edinburgh, today (3pm).
After defeats against Italy, Ireland and France, the Scots have made sweeping changes for their final encounter, prospects for which will revolve around the amount of ball they can supply for a back division sure to be enlivened by the presence of will-o-the-wisp stand-off, Derrick Lee.
Lee is learning a more rounded game at Myreside under the tutelage of the former internationalist Andrew Ker, but his sense of adventure has not been diminished.
‘I realise you cannot afford to run all the time but, that said, it should still be the first thing you have a look at,’ he reasoned.
Scotland know the Welsh have weight and height advantage in the pack, where the 6ft 8in Paul Jones is a touchline specialist, therefore much will depend on Murray Rudkin and Stewart Campbell.
Campbell, however, was suffering from flu yesterday and a decision on his fitness will not be made until today.
Spence, Gilford give England another boost
By Mike Britten
ENGLAND's triumphant Dunhill Cup golfers left Colin Montgomerie with a distinct feeling of deja vu in Morocco yesterday.
Jamie Spence, who led the trio that defeated Montgomerie-led Scotland in the final at St Andrews last October, shot a pace-setting 67 in the Moroccan Open first round, and David Gilford, the outstanding player that week on the Old Course, had 68.
Yet Montgomerie, fresh from his second place behind Nick Faldo in Singapore, was less perturbed by their outstanding golf than what he described as a lack of big-time atmosphere on the splendid King's Course inside his seaside palace at Agadir.
A Trent-Jones design, it is a challenging links that demands accurate shot-making, especially to the small undulating greens so characteristic of its architect.
But Montgomerie was not unduly impressed, after his 73.
‘There were no galleries, no atmosphere, and no players like Nick Faldo, Fred Couples and Greg Norman,’ he remarked.
‘I always seem to do my best when the big players are around on the big occasion, not at smaller tournaments like these.’
Montgomerie got off on the wrong foot by commencing with a trio of bogeys, making mistakes throughout the bag before settling down to birdie the fifth and sixth and reach the turn in 38.
His homeward golf was error-free, a birdie at the thirteenth, from a putt of only 18 inches, putting him below the card, and a 25-foot putt at the last keeping him within reach of the English player.
Spence began at the tenth, going out in 34, and played the inward half with all the precision required in the swirling wind.
His key putts came from ten feet at the last two holes — one for his final birdie, the other for par.
Gilford, partnering Spanish star Seve Ballesteros, who had a 73, produced the shot of the day for his eagle 3 at the seventeenth.
It was a 3-iron approach from 214 yards which hit the flag and left him a putt of only two feet.
He had begun an impressive defence of the title he took in Rabat last year with a hat-trick of birdies.
Gilford is best known in European golf for being the ‘name’ in the envelope at the 1991 Ryder Cup match.
When American Steve Pate withdrew from the last-day singles because of injury, Gilford did not play.
He said yesterday: ‘I was very disappointed and still am.
But I bear no ill-will towards Bernard Gallacher.
He had to pick someone and he picked me.
It was not his fault what happened.’
Gordon Brand junior stood alongside Montgomerie at one over par despite a scrappy finish of two bogeys in the last three holes, while Sam Torrance and Ross Drummond both began with 74s.
Adam Hunter's 75 kept him within touch of the front runners, but there was some indifferent golf from the remainder of the Scottish contingent.
A 79 from Stephen McAllister, and 80 from Brian Marchbank, leaves them an uphill task to qualify today, while Brian Barnes (84) and Andrew Coltart (88) are already beyond salvation.
At least neither suffered the indignities that befell Spanish rookie, Luis Lopez Quesada.
He totalled 98 on his first professional outing, which included a 10 at the eleventh.
Ian Woosnam fired a two-under-par 70 as the rain-hit Malaysian Open got underway in Kuala Lumpur yesterday.
The Welshman, ranked third in the world, finished three shots off the lead on a day that saw heavy rain halt play early.
Vijay Singh, of Fiji, and American Eric Meeks share the lead on 67.
But 78 players were unable to finish their rounds as torrential rain drove them off the course.
Scots fail to keep up challenge
IT WAS a case of what might have been for Scottish trio Cathy Panton-Lewis, Julie Forbes and Gillian Stewart in the opening round of the Republic of China Open at Chang Gung in Taipei yesterday.
Panton-Lewis and Forbes handed in 74s, with Stewart one stroke behind, as Japan's Fusako Nagata led with a four-under-par round of 68.
Panton-Lewis dropped three strokes in her closing five holes while Forbes three-putted the seventeenth and eighteenth greens to undo her earlier work.
Stewart's only birdie came at the short fourth, where her ball agonisingly finished on the lip of the hole.
Nagata encountered few problems in her 68, which included four birdies and an eagle, while American Kim Lasken holed an 80-yard approach for an eagle 3 at the third hole in her 69.
Britain's Sally Prosser, favourite to take the Asian Circuit order of merit title, also had an eagle in her 71, in which she emulated Forbes by dropping shots at the final two holes.
Ace keeps Senior one off lead
PETER SENIOR stole the limelight at the start of the Australian Masters tournament in Melbourne yesterday, but defending champion Craig Parry signalled he has no intention of relinquishing his crown by opening with a six-under-par 67 to lead by one shot.
Among a group at five-under is his Australian compatriot, Senior, who banked A$100,000 (£50,000) for scoring a hole-in-one at the par 3 fifteenth.
It was Senior's fifth ace but only his second as a professional.
Despite his lead, Parry was not fully satisfied with his game and said he was kept in the hunt only by his putting.
He is in the process of changing his swing and said his old method had started to show up a little too much.
But he was saved on the greens, especially the seventeenth, where he holed a monster putt which he described as about 60 feet long, to sweep into the lead.
‘I was lucky on the seventeenth.
I think it's the first birdie I've made there for about nine years,’ he said.
Six-times champion Greg Norman fired an unspectacular two-under 71 to be four shots off the pace.
Former Masters champion Ian Baker-Finch, playing in the same group as Senior, was also level with the card after the first round.
Spence, Gilford lead way again for England
From Mike Britten, Agadir
Yet Montgomerie, fresh from his second place behind Nick Faldo in Singapore, was less perturbed by their outstanding golf than what he described as a lack of big-time atmosphere on the splendid King's Course inside the seaside palace at Agadir.
Jamie Spence: first-round 67 gives him one-stroke lead over David Gilford in Moroccan Open
Videos take centre stage as Norster programmes his charges for Murrayfield clash
Wales keen to play down their chances
By Graham Law
THE Welsh team arrived in Edinburgh last night keen to milk the underdog tag for tomorrow's Royal Bank international at Murrayfield, a ground where they have not won since 1985.
Their press conference at the Balmoral Hotel began with an impromptu showing of a video prepared by the Welsh  Institute of Sport which manager Robert Norster said that his charges enjoyed to watch as relaxation ‘over and above the analytical stuff!’
A clever piece of cinematic jiggery-pokery married scenes of rampaging clansmen in battle aided by Sean Connery and Christopher Lambert culled from Highlander to shots of Scottish rugby jubilation: from Grand Slam 1990 to the latest victory — over Ireland at home last month, partially accompanied by Holst's Planet Suite.
To redress the balance, we saw some of the juicier moments for the visitors in past Scotland v Wales encounters, yet it hardly seemed the sort of material designed to instil optimism in Welsh ranks.
It certainly led to a timid press conference.
‘That video has totally blown your minds,’ Norster quipped.
Leaving aside the imagery, he maintained: ‘We have set our objectives for this season's championship as two wins out of four and that remains the realistic target.
Lots of people are talking about far better results than that — and we have had a good start — but we have to keep our feet firmly on the ground.’
He instantly spotted the ‘yorker’ delivered by the man from BBC Wales — in effect, that the England match could not have been one he expected to win at the start of the season, therefore the Scottish match must have been on the credit side of the ledger.
Norster, however, would not deviate from his script.
‘The win over England was special but it was two weeks ago.
The game in hand is always the most important and the euphoria that surrounded the result on 6 February is now a thing of the past.
‘Our aim is to stay on course to meet our objectives, continue to learn and see if we can steal another victory.’
Much of the spur for the tight rein which has been kept on emotion has come from the players themselves after their 10-9 victory over England at Cardiff a fortnight ago.
Captain Ieuan Evans acknowledged: ‘The level of enthusiasm our victory has caused has taken the boys a bit by surprise but, as Bob said, it's gratifying to see how the boys have responded.’
The analysis has included a one-hour debrief in the immediate aftermath of Cardiff when self-criticism rather than praise was the theme.
Welsh coach Alan Davies anticipates tomorrow's meeting could stand favourable comparison to some of the free-flowing epics in which the countries have engaged.
Asked whether he believed Scotland would adopt a more attacking approach than England, he countered: ‘Certainly, in the sense of developing quicker ball.
Scotland are a better rucking side than England.
You would expect them to carry on doing that.
‘They have been working on the driving maul yet it's not something they have been renowned for in the past.’
Both Wales and Scotland reported clean bills of health from yesterday's respective sessions.
The Scots — including Wednesday's minor casualties Damian Cronin and Kenny Milne — trained for 100 minutes in private at Murrayfield yesterday.
Only replacement back Kenny Logan was an absentee, confined to bed suffering from the 24-hour flu bug.
The medics however, are reported to believe he will be fine for bench duty tomorrow.
Scotland will hold a public practice at Murrayfield today, though part of it will likely be in camera— when the forwards head indoors to work on the hydraulic scrummaging machine.
Excuse that's just a bit lightweight
THE type of ball being blamed for Scotland's penalty miss against Malta — on the basis that it is lighter than normal — will be in use for the next two years in internationals, writes Hugh Keevins.
The SFA has a contract with sports firm Umbro to use its product in internationals as well as the semi-finals and final of the Scottish Cup.
The laminated ball is fractionally lighter than the leather one which has been used by the Scottish League under its contractual agreement with another firm, Mitre, for the last 14 years.
The professional assessment is that the Mitre ball is heavier when it flies through the air and therefore lends itself to greater accuracy.
There again, the laws of the game state that any ball used shall be:
no more than 28 inches in circumference and no less than 27 inches;
no more than 16 ounces in weight and no less than 14 ounces.
It may be that Gary McAllister simply made a mess of his penalty kick.
There was, after all, a B&Q Cup tie in November in which Hamilton and Meadowbank took 14 penalty kicks in a sudden-death decider.
Eleven of them were missed.
The type of ball used was the Scottish League's Mitre Delta.
There goes that excuse.
Jess's sparkling show will not prompt youth revolution, insists Roxburgh
By Hugh Keevins
IN SPITE of the outstanding display by Eoin Jess in his first full game for Scotland on Wednesday night, Andy Roxburgh will not be flooding his side with youth for the friendly against Germany next month.
While the national coach catalogued a list of players rich in promise who will be seen ‘down the line,’ Roxburgh is mindful that a balance has to be maintained in the interests of qualifying for the World Cup finals next year.
It would not be the national team if there were not a conundrum somewhere and Roxburgh will resist any clamour for the Jess generation to stage a youthful revolution.
One or two from a roll comprising such as Scott Booth, Stephen Wright, Gary Smith (Aberdeen) and Duncan Ferguson (Dundee United) will be blooded in the friendly against Germany that precludes the use of Anglos because of English league commitments.
Boys will not be sent out to do a man's job against the reigning world champions, however, for fear of impeding their development.
Paradoxically, though, Roxburgh observed that Jess, who he favourably compared with a young Kenny Dalglish, had ‘become an internationalist’ at Ibrox by proving he could function at the highest level.
Since Alan McLaren, of Hearts, did likewise in matches against Italy and Malta, there is a temptation to say that it will not be known if the rest of that crop can complete the transition to full international level unless they are given a chance.
Richard Gough, for example, had 15 full caps by the time he was 19.
Booth, Wright, Smith and Ferguson are all over the age of 21.
‘Jess is a class act and the rest all have real promise but there is a danger of getting carried away,’ said Roxburgh.
‘There are no barriers being put up on the basis of age but the national team is now in a situation in qualifying Group I where they have to produce every time in the six ties that remain to be played.
‘Our next competitive match is against Portugal in Lisbon's Stadium of Light in April.
The ground can hold 110,000 spectators and it will be a cauldron when Scotland play there.’
The unmistakeable inference was that, Jess and McLaren apart, the young will be left to take advantage of the fact that they have plenty of time.
Roxburgh will be in Lisbon next week to watch Portugal play Italy; the home team having one point less than Scotland but with two games fewer played, while Arrigo Saachi's side are level on points with one game fewer played.
Confining himself to Scotland's priorities, the national coach expressed relief at having gained an initial win at Malta's expense and admiration for the manner of that achievement.
‘At one stage, we were seriously concerned that we would be unable to field a team of genuine international calibre,’ he said.
‘On Sunday, when the squad assembled, I was told by our medical staff that Ally McCoist was as good as out because of his thigh injury and yet he scored two goals.
‘Alan McLaren played against Malta while suffering from a calf knock and subdued their best player, Bussitil, as he had done Roberto Baggio against Italy.
‘Pat Nevin, our other scorer, has not been able to train properly for the last five weeks because of an ankle problem.’
Such difficulties go with the territory for Roxburgh, though he will at least be assisted, unlike the build-up to Malta, by the cancellation of league fixtures before the crucial match in Lisbon on 28 April.
No experienced player will be dismissed from the coach's thoughts prior to Portugal, either, including Manchester United's Brian McClair.
He is now gainfully employed in the centre of midfield by Alex Ferguson and the next qualifying tie being away from Ibrox, where McClair has had a problem with an element of the crowd, could be an influential factor in Roxburgh's decisions.
‘Jess is a class act and the rest all have real promise but there is a danger of getting carried away’ Andy Roxburgh Alan McLaren: international class against Italy and Malta
England's Best hopes for a classic encounter
By Harry Pincott
IN HIS role as assistant coach to our own Ian McGeechan on the British Lions tour to New Zealand this summer, Dick Best is hoping that tomorrow's game between Scotland and Wales is a classic.
‘It's time we had an outstanding international,’ said the English coach who, without any sour grapes after Wales's win at Cardiff, desperately wants to see some back play, sadly missing in most of the Five Nations games so far.
Best reckons there won't be much between the sides at Murrayfield, having been impressed by the Welsh commitment against his own team —‘We knew they would come at us, and they certainly did, though we should still have won’— while he has taken a liking to the revamped Scottish pack.
Without committing himself, Best reckons that Wales will have one important advantage, namely having played under the French referee, Joel Dume.
‘Against us, Wales played him to the hilt, but then again the Scots themselves have never been slow to play to the referee,’ states Best  who is in Scotland for coaching sessions with five schools (Madras, Morrison's, Watson's, Berwickshire High and Glasgow High) and Edinburgh University last night, all arranged by his firm, Rugby Travel.
‘Wales have made enormous strides, but I would like to see them being more creative before I would say they are a real force again.’
Best, who will attend a Lions meeting in Edinburgh on Sunday — the 30-strong squad won't be chosen until after the last internationals on 21 March — is looking for more back play tomorrow, but if the weather gets any worse he fears that aerial bombardments may be the order of the day.
As far as he's concerned, there's still far too much kicking and he argues strongly that the new laws have not helped, with forwards standing off and forward driving teams not able to maintain any offensive because they lose the ball in the opposition 22.
While his schedule would appear to most to be a fairly exhaustive one Best is actually looking forward to the weekend, ‘The first since September when there has been no real pressure on me.
I'm really going to enjoy myself.’
Certainly, the former Harlequins coach, did that at Myreside yesterday afternoon when he had 24 Watson's boys eating out of his hand, even though he was wearing his England track suit.
‘Through Rugby Travel I get lots of invitations to schools and clubs — I did nine sessions in two days in Northern Ireland recently — and it's a good opportunity to try out different moves.
If they work, then I can introduce them at senior level.’
Though he declined to say who he thought would win tomorrow, one gets the impression that he will be in Scotland's corner, remembering that if they do win they will head for Twickenham and possible Triple Crown glory.
‘We might just let you win it, too,’ joked Best, the memory of what Wales did to his team still fresh on his mind.
Hendry struggles to gain advantage
From Trevor Baxter Antwerp
STEPHEN HENDRY needed just 17 minutes here last night to improve upon his only previous meeting against Irish champion Joe Swail.
Having suffered a rare whitewash when they met in last season's Asian Open qualifiers, the world champion was relieved to clinch a 1-0 lead in  their Humo European Open quarter-final.
But Hendry had more reasons to smile as he reached the mid-session interval with a vital 3-1 advantage.
For, despite the confidence gained from Sunday's fifth Benson & Hedges triumph, the Scot struggled to find form.
With a little more nerve and experience Manchester-based Swail might easily have mopped up all four frames
Hendry made a break of 54 to take the first frame, but lost the next to a run of 50.
World No53 Swail then squandered a hatful of chances to move 2-1 clear as Hendry eventually came through 95-18.
However, the fourth frame looked likely to prove a major turning point.
Swail led 51-35 with only six colours remaining, but he fluffed opportunities to sink the green and brown before a bad safety shot on the blue allowed Hendry to run out a 60-51 victor.
That leaves the Scot requiring two of the remaining five frames to reach tomorrow's semi-finals and a meeting with Englishman Mick Price who beat Mark Johnston-Allen 5-3.
Views sought on United claim
By Hugh Keevins
DUNDEE UNITED's Duncan Ferguson will go into tomorrow's match against Rangers at Tannadice with his club's official complaint about alleged illegal approaches to the player from Ibrox still hanging over his head.
The Scottish League management committee met yesterday in response to a letter from Tannadice accusing Rangers' owner, David Murray, manager Walter Smith and captain Richard Gough of unlawful inducements to Ferguson to break his long-term contract with United.
It has now been decided to write to Rangers asking for their views on statements attributed to the three men since Ferguson's club dropped him for disciplinary reasons, after which it came to light that Murray had spoken to United's manager/chairman, Jim Mclean, about buying the Scotland internationalist.
The matter will therefore drag on for another month until the next management committee meeting, while Ferguson has to continue his return to the first team under awkward circumstances.
The player, who scored last weekend on his comeback against Partick Thistle, might dwell on the advancement that has recently been made by someone like Eoin Jess, however, and reason that he would be well advised to channel all his energies towards regaining the kind of status that had him as part of Scotland's European championship squad eight months ago.
Neither Stuart McCall nor Richard Gough, who withdrew from Scotland's squad for the game with Malta, have been able to train at Ibrox and must be considered unlikely to play at Tannadice.
The League management committee also debated possible changes in league structure yesterday.
Three Premier Division representatives — Campbell Ogilvie (Rangers), Kevin Kelly (Celtic) and Doug Smith (Dundee United)— took part in the discussion while being members of the would-be Super League.
Peter Donald, the Scottish League secretary, said there had to be grounds for optimism that a solution within the governing body's framework was now attainable.
‘There is general agreement on areas that were once contentious,’ he said.
A special meeting has therefore been called for two weeks time in order to press forward with ideas that could be implemented next season.
A transitional season designed to bring about a 10-10-18 system in the 1994/95 season is accepted as being necessary.
The method to be used is still under debate.
The latest suggestion is that three clubs be relegated from the Premier Division next season, with only one gaining promotion from the First Division.
In order to arrive at 10-10-18, four clubs would need to be demoted from the First Division and none promoted from the bottom league.
The concept of a failure rate of over 25% in the First Division has raised objections from those who understand that an  omelette can not be made without first breaking some eggs but would rather not run the risk of being dairy produce.
‘Nevertheless, the atmosphere today compared to that of a few weeks ago is more conducive to a satisfactory settlement,’ concluded Donald.
Hendry's erratic form goes on
From Trevor Baxter Antwerp
STEPHEN HENDRY continues to walk a tightrope between success and failure as he strives for the form that made him world champion just ten months ago.
After last Sunday's fifth Benson and Hedges Masters triumph, Hendry must have felt confident of continuing his winning ways in this week's Humo European Open.
However, the Scot has had successive deciding-frame victories here in Belgium and perhaps his Wembley success may turn out to be another false dawn as he chases his first ranking title of an erratic season.
Last night, against Irish champion Joe Swail, Hendry made breaks of 54 and 66 to lead 3-1 at the mid-session interval and missed a pink into the middle for 4-1.
Manchester-based Swail, the world No53 from Belfast, closed to 4-3 but was on the rack again at 47-0 down in the eighth.
Inexplicably, Hendry played the poorest of safety shots and Swail celebrated his reprieve with a 75 clearance.
Another nightmarish error let in Swail in the ninth but his inexperience proved significant with the winning line in sight.
Ahead 35-20, Swail attempted a reckless red up the side cushion and paid the penalty.
Hendry stepped in with 73 to win 5-4 and clinch a place in the semi-finals tomorrow against Englishman Mick Price.
‘We're going to call him Jesse James,’ said manager Ian Doyle.
‘He certainly robbed that last frame.’
Added Hendry: ‘It's nice to know you can cope with the pressure when it matters.
But it's worrying to keep losing big leads.
‘Too often I've been at home practising with a tournament still going on.
So, I'm pleased to still be involved.’
Earlier, Price came from 3-1 down to beat last year's runner-up, Mark Johnston-Allan, 5-3. 930219 
Rug wrap test head Sub heading to follow
By Graham Law
IAN McGEECHAN made his first home Five Nations appearance as a player in a 10-9 victory over Wales in 1973.
Twenty years on, the odyssey ends for the Scotland coach as he prepares to take his curtain call from the Murrayfield stage, scene of today's Royal Bank international against Wales (2:30pm).
His assistant, Douglas Morgan, was a new cap in that 1973 game and even in more recent years, McGeechan's first home Five Nations match as senior coach was against the Welsh (the 23-7 triumph in 1989).
That said, one senses the ‘do it for the boss’ aspect will not be over-played today.
The experience of some players becoming emotionally spent in such circumstances is all too fresh from Derek White's swansong at Cardiff last year — a performance which Scotland captain Gavin Hastings rated as one of the poorest in which he had been involved.
Doubt remains, too, whether it is really farewell from McGeechan.
More likely it is au revoir.
‘It will be quite hard to step back and give it up,’ he admitted last night.
‘It's eight years — firstly as assistant then as coach — of quite a lot of enjoyment.
I will miss it like hell.’
The players speak in tones of awe and admiration at the amount of time McGeechan devotes to analysing the strengths and weaknesses of the opposition.
Little mannerisms — a scrum-half glancing heavenwards before he puts in a high kick — are dutifully noted and form the basis of the most lucid dissertations which remain, as far as today's visitors are concerned, ‘not for publication’.
‘All I want is for Scotland to keep winning.
It will never be easy but you have to try to give the players every avenue and every support to achieve that,’ he explained.
‘They deserve that sort of commitment and that's one of the reasons why I'm stepping back — because you cannot half do it.
‘It's just catching my breath a bit, really.
If I'm not careful my family will have grown up and I will have missed part of it.’
After his time-out next season, however, McGeechan is likely to be back, perhaps to mastermind Scotland's 1995 World Cup campaign.
His confidence in the ability of the current Scotland team contrasts sharply with much of the gloom and doom prevalent in the aftermath of a disjointed national trial.
Since then, however, Scotland's forward play, under the benevolent eye of Richie Dixon, has developed with pleasing continuity, particularly at the lineout, where in both the previous Five Nations games opposition machinations have been torn asunder rather like the post-war devastation in the Orson Welles screen classic.
The touchline was the launchpad — more so against Ireland than France — of some of Scotland's best driving mauls and highlighted the danger of players swelling defensive ranks rather than committing themselves to the maul.
A two-handed lineout catch — of which both Andrew Reed and Damian Cronin have proved capable — represents the best platform for the maul to chug.
Wales lost the lineout count 24-19 against England but Gareth Llewellyn, stationed at two, had a profitable afternoon, claiming ten clean catches.
Scotland are aware of the threat he poses — and the additional difficulties which the 6ft 2in loosehead prop, Ricky Evans, could cause at the front.
Thus it is likely Derek Turnbull will find himself on occasions deployed in that region.
Scotland's lineout ace, however, would again appear to be Doddie Weir, whose height at the lineout tail cannot be matched by the Welsh, unless they leave themselves unprotected elsewhere.
Scotland have claimed pushover tries against the Welsh on their last three visits to Murrayfield and though the Welsh front-row emerged with considerable scrummage plaudits from their tussle with England, I have observed before in these columns that Martin Bayfield is not in the same league as Paul Ackford as a scrummaging lock; Jason Leonard, too, hardly seems to be at the peak of his powers following the bone-graft operation in his neck during the close season.
Scotland have had disruptions to their scrummaging routines this week though, as both McGeechan and Dixon reasoned, it is not as if they have had to fuse any newcomers to the pack, where Peter Wright's sabbatical to loosehead worked well against the French.
Should setpiece equality form the plot, what prospects are there for Scotland's backs to build on their Ireland display and will we see more than the limited offerings which the Welsh managed against England?
The quite ferocious tackling of Mike Hall and Scott Gibbs was a fundamental plank in Welsh success a fortnight ago but Scotland have negotiated such bone-crunching engagement in the recent past.
Remember how they succeeded in shifting the target in the World Cup quarter-final against Western Samoa?
Much will depend on Craig Chalmers' readiness to exploit quality possession, move more ball and ask more running questions than he did in Paris.
Chalmers, however, has scored tries against the Welsh on their last two visits to Murrayfield and he is on something of a high this week after the announcement of his engagement.
Both he and his half-back partner, Gary Armstrong, might be forgiven if thoughts turned to British Lions selection for the summer tour to New Zealand but Gavin Hastings, another candidate in that department who is now being touted as Lions skipper, was adamant that performing for Scotland was the only issue at stake.
For all the talk of Welsh rebirth, Scotland's performance ought to be good enough to set up the Triple Crown chance at Twickenham next month.
Charitable work
Your obituary notice today, recording the death of Mary, Duchess of Buccleuch, says she will be remembered as an illustrious, aristocratic character who held up a Royal canopy.
As one who knew her and her husband only a little, I remember her as a vivacious lady of beauty and charm who worked throughout her life for many good causes.
During the Second World War she worked indefatigably for charities such as the Red Cross, which packed parcels for prisoners of war, made medical dressings for the wounded and provided canteens for the serving men and women.
Her London home was used as a hostel by the Scottish rank and file who needed a bed in the capital as they were posted from one place to another, and all were made welcome.
You refer to her stately homes, which she cared for deeply, but more importantly round these homes she knew by name a huge number of tenants, workers and friends who always received a warm and cheerful word, and many enjoyed great generosity from her and her husband.
For her ability, her kindness and her enthusiasm for everything she did she will be remembered.
Fixed Easter
It is high time that Scotland set a lead to the world by establishing a fixed date for Easter.
The present position is a complete nuisance.
Easter stravaigs round the calendar like Wallace Mercer looking for a football pitch.
Very few people could say when it is without consulting a diary or the like.
A few years ago it was not even included in some school Easter holidays.
There is no excuse for this.
If Christians can agree 25 December as the supposed date for an alleged birth it should not take them 2,000 years to agree a date for an alleged death.
There should be a remit to The Beechgrove Garden to fix Easter, based on the normal optimum weekend for planting tatties.
AMERICAN FOOTBALL
Super Bowl finalists on show
BRITISH fans will get a rematch of this year's Super Bowl — or a semblance thereof — when the Dallas Cowboys and Buffalo Bills play an exhibition game at the Wembley Stadium, London, on 8 August.
BASKETBALL
City aim to keep on title trail
THE City of Edinburgh women defend their unbeaten record at the top of the Scottish first division against RH Dunedin at Royal High School tomorrow knowing that a victory would be a major step to their first title.
BOXING
Audience awaits Eubank
THERE will be a ten million-plus television audience and another £200,000 tucked safely into his bank account when Chris Eubank defends his WBO title against Ohio's Lindell Holmes, the former IBF champion, at Olympia tonight.
CRICKET
Compton raises youth cash
DENIS COMPTON's vintage year was 1947 when he set an all-time record of 3,816 runs in first-class cricket — a total never likely to be surpassed.
His arrival in Edinburgh yesterday to launch the Scottish Youth Cricket Foundation, prompted the raising of a pound for every run he scored in that memorable season.
Compton was the guest speaker at a luncheon in the City Chambers to launch the foundation and an auction of cricket memorabilia, a raffle, and a number of donations, raised enough money to give the new organisation a flying start.
CYCLING
Alexander fined for change
THE British mountain bike champion, Caroline Alexander, has been fined £1,000 by the British Cycling Federation's professional racing committee for allegedly breaking an agreement to ride in Raleigh's colours this coming season.
HOCKEY
Russelsheim slaughter Scots
WESTERN Klick Photopoint will have their work cut out if they are to get among the medals in this season's European Women's Indoor Championships after losing 8-1 in their opening game to defending champions Russelsheim, in Berlin, last night.
It was a better night for Scotland in the B division of the men's championship, in Basle, Switzerland, where Menzieshill scored a 4-3 victory over Slavia Prague.
SKIING
Langmuir retains slalom title
EDINBURGH's Sean Langmuir retained his slalom title on the final day of the British Land national championships in Tignes, France.
Emma Carrick-Anderson (Dunblane) secured her first senior British title by winning the women's slalom.
Lesley Robertson, 18, from Aberdeen, took the overall women's championship, while Graham Bell's consistent results in all four disciplines gave him the Victor Ludorum title.
SNOOKER
Davis through to semi-final
STEVE DAVIS reached the semi-finals of the £150,000 Humo European Open in Antwerp last night with a 5-1 victory over Steve Lee.
Davis, who hasn't won a world ranking event for 13 months, now faces Devon's Andy Hicks for a place in tomorrow's final.
Hicks, 19, in his second season as a professional, defeated Ronnie O'Sullivan 5-4.
Hick comes good to stand on brink of century
GRAEME HICK finally lived up to his tag as England's saviour yesterday — and the one-time ‘Boy Wonder’ could not have chosen a better moment to put his wretched Test record behind him.
Just as England's hopes were dying in the third and final Test against India in Bombay, Hick revived his side with a magnificent innings of 99 not out.
It would be a travesty if he was denied the crowning glory of one more run for his maiden Test century this morning.
Hick pulled England around from 58 for four, and then 118 for six, to the comparative riches of 239 for seven.
If England can get around 300, it will turn out to be a more than useful total on a pitch already taking spin and starting to crumble.
Michael Atherton (37), and especially Chris Lewis (49), also played their part in stands of 58 and 93 respectively with Hick as England tried to salvage something from a Test series they have already lost 2-0.
But the opening day belonged to Zimbabwe-born Hick, the man who has suffered huge mental torment since becoming eligible for England in April, 1991.
A failure against West indies that summer, an under-achiever in New Zealand last winter and a failure against Pakistan last summer, Hick came to India with a Test record of just 307 runs from 11 matches and 17 innings.
Scores of one and 25 in the first Test at Calcutta were in line with his dismal average of 17, but in the first innings of the second Test in Madras, he at last showed signs of mastering the Indian spinners.
Initially hesitant on the turning pitches England have encountered throughout India, Hick clearly decided at Madras to be more positive and take the attack to the bowlers.
He made 64 going in at number three, and although that was followed by a second-innings duck, a corner had been turned.
Yesterday, back down the order, Hick reacted to England's latest batting crisis with a confidence many had feared he could never show at top level.
Warming up by straight-driving Rajesh Chauhan for four, he then took 12 from one over from the off-spinner — an off-drive, a full-blooded swing over midwicket and a dismissive pull as the bowler wilted under the assault.
Mixing aggression with an improved defensive technique, Hick reached 50 from just 79 balls and even the loss of Atherton and Richard Blakey in quick succession, leaving the innings in ruins once again, did not faze him.
It could have been Hick holding together a Worcestershire innings — and that is exactly what England have been waiting and hoping for from the man who had completed 57 first-class hundreds before he was 25.
He made his England debut in a one-day international against the West Indies at Edgbaston, on his 25th birthday and after a seven-year qualification period.
The expectations of his adopted nation were such that nothing other than instant success was going to do.
In almost two years that expectation has evaporated, and now Hick is thought of by many as a mere one-day specialist, someone whose England place has survived only because of his limited-overs  achievements (697 runs from 23 internationals at an average of 38) and his all-round ability as a fielder and more than useful off-spinner.
Whatever happens in this match now, Hick has surely earned the right to start this summer's Ashes series with Australia.
England team manager, Keith Fletcher, said: ‘I'm delighted for him and it is noticeable how his confidence has grown in recent weeks.
If he starts making runs consistently at Test level he will become a big asset to England.’
Like Hick, all-rounder Lewis has made big strides on this tour despite England's struggles.
Lewis's maiden Test hundred in Madras was down-graded critically because it was made in a losing cause in England's second innings.
But yesterday he made his runs with style, a fine technique and under great pressure before he was beaten by Anil Kumble's quicker ball.
By then, however, Lewis and Hick had almost doubled England's total to complete the recovery following a disastrous morning session.
Graham Gooch won an important toss but then fell in the seventh over, clearly surprised to be given out caught at the wicket.
Alec Stewart ran himself out as he tried for a sharp single to cover and found Atherton unwilling to budge at the non-striker's end.
Robin Smith's struggle against spin continued and Mike Gatting's bright 23 was ended by a poor shot.
Atherton, back in the side for his first Test of the tour, battled through 41 overs to show England's management why they should have picked him at Madras, while Blakey — brought in because Neil Fairbrother was still ill with a virus — has now made only seven runs from three Test innings and looks out of his depth.
— PA
Vijay stays in front by one stroke
HOLDER Vijay Singh, of Fiji, fired a three-under-par 69 for a one-shot halfway lead in the $225,000 Malaysian Open in Kuala Lumpur, yesterday.
Singh totalled 136 as he continued to outshine Welshman Ian Woosnam and Mark McNulty, of Zimbabwe.
Woosnam had problems on the greens and dropped to six shots off the pace after a 72.
Meanwhile, Britain's Sally Prosser was only two strokes off the lead after a 72 in the second round of the Republic of China Open, at Chang Gung, in Taipei yesterday.
Prosser finished on 143 behind Australians Mardi Lunn and Wendy Doolan who share the lead with Fusako Nagata from Japan.
Gillian Stewart and Julie Forbes finished on 147 and Cathy Panton-Lewis produced a 77 to make the cut of 151.
Scottish students need last-minute penalty to draw with Welsh
Scottish Universities 18 Welsh Universities 18
SCOTTISH Universities earned a draw against Welsh Universities at Peffermill, Edinburgh, yesterday, but only through a last-minute penalty by their full-back, Nick Mardon.
It was the Edinburgh man's only success from four attempts, and with Nick White failing with four attempts earlier in the game, the Scots squandered opportunities that should have won them the game comfortably.
Their three tries, all unconverted, looked to have been enough to win them the game.
Ben Smith's try after only five minutes, when the flanker had provided inside support to the left wing, Kevin McLuskey, pointed to an easy win for Scottish Universities.
However Swansea stand-off, John Powell, kicked two penalties and converted one of the two Welsh tries.
The Scots' other two tries came from the St Andrews wing, David Hall, both scores resulting from crisp handling in the midfield, where Peter Flockhart at inside centre was one of the Scots' big successes.
Up front, the Scottish students won a show of possession at the lineout through David Ridland, Chris Wands and Stuart Griffen at the tail.
But too often the pack failed to ruck as a unit.
The Welsh tries came from full-back, Duncan Hughes, after a move started by what seemed an unstoppable rolling maul, and three minutes before full-time, from their left wing, Mike Summerell, after a quickly-taken penalty.
Powell's conversion gave the Welsh students the lead, only for Mardon to find his kicking rhythm in the 81st minute.
Boroughmuir 31 Llanelli 33
AN interception try and a penalty, both in the last five minutes, earned Llanelli a narrow victory over Boroughmuir in a spectacular game in front of a 4,000 crowd at Meggetland last night.
Both sides threw the ball about and scored five tries each.
Try-scorers for the home side were Chris McFarlane (2), Barrie Brown, Ian Howden and Murry Walker, who added three conversions.
The Llanelli tryscorers were Ian Jones (2), Simon Davies, Nigel Davies and Gary Jones, while stand-off Colin Stephens landed two penalties and a conversion.
Melrose 20 Peebles 10
MELROSE found Peebles quite a handful in this friendly at the Greenyards.
The Second Division side were down 7-3 at half-time — a Brian Laidlaw try for Melrose, converted by Gary Parker, to a penalty for Peebles by Graham Mutch.
In the second half, Peebles raised their game after Chris Davis and Neil White had scored for Melrose, and they were rewarded with an excellent try by winger Robert Knox, converted by Mutch.
A late penalty by Ian Ramsay gave Melrose a slightly flattering win.
Hawick 3 Crawshay's Welsh 66
THE star-studded Crawshay's Welsh XV, recognised as the Welsh Barbarians, served up a feast of entertaining rugby under the Mansfield Park floodlights last night by scoring ten tries in a runaway 66-3 victory over Hawick.
The tryscorers included Welsh international winger, Glen Webbe.
Hawick's consolation penalty goal was landed by full-back, Gregor Sharp.
Kelso 59 Heriot's FP 14
JOHN JEFFREY led Kelso by example last night by scoring a try in each half in a nine-try romp against Heriot's.
Kelso led 45-7 at half-time.
John Robertson scored both the Heriots' tries and Henry Murray added both conversions.
Other scorers for Kelso were Kevin Hendry, Stewart Lang, Adam Roxburgh, Neil Heseltine, Stewart Bennet, Bryan Cassie and Graham Aitchison, who also slotted seven of the nine touchdowns.
Hawick 3 Crawshay's Welsh 66
THE star-studded Crawshay's Welsh XV scored ten tries at Mansfield Park last night.
The tryscorers included Welsh international winger, Glen Webbe.
Hawick's consolation penalty goal was landed by Gregor Sharp.
Turnbull fails to catch Baulch
By Sandy Sutherland
WORLD junior championship relay gold medallist, James Baulch, equalled his recent Welsh indoor record when he won the 200 metres in a stylish 21.65 in the indoor international against Scotland at the Kelvin Hall, Glasgow, last night.
Scotland's Neil Turnbull clocked a respectable 21.90 but could not match the Welshman.
Scotland took full points in the women's race, with Sinead Dudgeon (Edinburgh AC)— recovering from the shock of finding Scottish partner, Mel Neef, coming round the final bend inside her in a slight lead — winning in 24.66.
The most impressive performance of the evening came in a field event, where Alison Grey won the shot for Scotland with the best distance by a British competitor indoors this winter, 15.70m.
Wales took victory in the men's match by 72-65, but Scotland ran out overall winners by 148-115 thanks to a comfortable women's victory.
Singh totalled 136 as he continued to outshine Welshman Ian Woosnam, who had dropped to six shots off the pace after a 72.
Meanwhile, Britain's Sally Prosser was only two strokes off the lead after a 72 in the second round of the Republic of China Open, at Chang Gung in Taipei yesterday.
Prosser finished on 143 behind Australians Mardi Lunn and Wendy Doolan, who share the lead with Fusako Nagata from Japan.
Gillian Stewart and Julie Forbes finished on 147 and Cathy Panton-Lewis produced a 77 to make the cut of 151.
Holders on course for semis
By WH Kemp
THE holders, Hammy McMillan's Stranraer, and David Smith's Perth were both on six wins after seven rounds of the Bell's Scottish Championship at Kirkcaldy yesterday.
Colin Hamilton's Gogar and Douglas Dryburgh's Aviemore were on five wins each and the four looked likely to make tomorrow's semi-finals, though David Aitken's Galleon were still in with a chance.
McMillan's unbeaten record lasted until the sixth end when they lost 7-6 to another Stranraer team, skipped by Peter Wilson.
Scots slump to a seventh successive loss
Scotland Under-21 8 Wales Under-21 16
By Graham Law
SCOTT QUINNELL continued his try-scoring habit against the Scots in age-group internationals.
His second-half score at Myreside yesterday was instrumental in consigning Scotland to a seventh successive defeat in the under-21 series.
The Welsh, however, might be inclined to ask rather more questions after this latest triumph.
Why, for example, did they not make more of the greater physique and technique of their battle-hardened pack?
Scotland coaches Johnny Brown and Bob Easson praised their side's defence, yet they were left to lament on some daft errors in a match which was pockmarked by two flare-ups — one straight from the kick-off — and some rank inconsistent refereeing, where the advantage law was entirely disregarded.
Had Ross Brown been able to touch down on completion of his powerful break (or Nick Penny been able to cleanly gather his pass) off a Derrick Lee snipe after Scotland had levelled at 8-8 in the second half, then a steal might have materialised.
Instead, Scotland ended their season with four losses from four games.
Easson noted: ‘One of the things we need is to be together with these guys for a lengthier period, whether pre-season, or an off-season tour.’
Lessons, Brown nodded, had been learned, especially after the heavy defeat in France.
Scotland had trailed 3-8 at the break, Murray Thomson and Jason Williams exchanging penalties — the latter was to fail with seven other goal kicks — and Robert Appleyard crossing for a try from Jon Evans's tighthead strike, Iestyn Lewis's ruck provision and the linkage of Huw Harries and Quinnell.
Scotland's first try of the under-21 campaign followed.
From Murray Rudkin's lineout work, Lee threw out an inviting flat pass to the intruding Thomson, the impressive Kenny Milligan bludgeoned on and Rudkin was in support for the try.
The formidable Quinnell — he scored two tries in last season's corresponding fixture — forced his way over in the fall-out of a close-range scrummage as the Welsh pack raised their effort and Williams added a further penalty to eliminate Scottish hopes.
Jess generation make their mark
Premier clubs follow trend towards youth
By Mike Aitken
AT THE END of a week in which Eoin Jess's splendid performance for Scotland against Malta turned the spotlight on the next generation of international footballers, Premier Division managers across the country yesterday indicated a willingness to add spice to this afternoon's card by giving youth a fling.
Celtic, whose results suggest an infusion of new blood would be no bad thing, have included Jamie McQuilken, a teenage left-back, in their squad to face Partick Thistle at Parkhead.
The 17-year-old is one of several young men at Celtic Park — Eddie Gray's son, Stuart, is another — catching the eye.
Like Tom Boyd, who took advantage of a Youth Training Scheme place at Motherwell to launch a successful career, McQuilken is a YTS lad.
He has yet to be offered a contract by Celtic.
Still chasing a place in Europe next season, Celtic took heart from an honourable draw at Aberdeen last week.
Injuries have not made Brady's task any simpler — Tony Mowbray, Gerry Creaney, Joe Miller and Peter Grant are all missing — but Celtic should win with something to spare this afternoon.
Thistle's recent form has been dreadful: one win in 15 matches.
Dundee United will take the view that there could be no more fitting postscript to the public dispute between themselves and the Ibrox club over Duncan Ferguson's future than if the big striker was to score the goal at Tannadice today which brought to an end Rangers' remarkable unbeaten run of 36 matches.
Ferguson was one of a crop of outstanding young Scottish prospects named by Andy Roxburgh this week who can play a more prominent role in the fortunes of the national team.
However, unlike Jess, who has made headlines for all the right reasons this season, Ferguson's off-the-field activities have generated more publicity than his performances on the pitch.
After helping United to their best win of the season at Firhill last week, Ferguson was also on target for Scotland's Under-21s in midweek.
With support from Paddy Connolly and Scott Crabbe, Ferguson can cause Rangers problems if he lives up to their £2.5million assessment of his worth.
The champions, who yesterday did their bit for youth by including 19-year-olds Neil Murray and David Hagen, have played some of their best football at Tannadice.
Rangers followed up a 3-2 win in the Skol Cup with a 4-0 victory there in the league in September.
Ian Ferguson will return to play his first league match since injuring a hand against United on 5 January.
He could replace Trevor Steven, who is doubtful because of flu.
As always, Rangers will look to Mark Hateley and Ally McCoist to maintain the phenomenal partnership which has already produced 61 goals.
Hearts have not won any of their last six matches against back-markers Airdrie and the Lanarkshire side are the only Scottish club to beat Hearts home and away this season.
With a former Hearts' manager and a number of Tynecastle old boys in their team, Airdrie never have much difficulty in raising their game against Joe Jordan's side.
The presence of teenager Kevin Thomas in the Hearts' squad may be designed to supply the goals that tend to elude them at Broomfield.
Yet Thomas, 17, who made a scoring debut as a substitute last week, could have to settle for a place on the bench again as Hearts look to John Robert- son and Ian Ferguson to shoulder the responsibility in attack.
Neil Berry will again deputise in central defence for the suspended Craig Levein.
Hibs have found a blend in central defence elusive this season, but could have discovered the answer to their problems in Steven Tweed.
The 20-year-old is set to make his home debut at Easter Road against Dundee after helping the defence to keep a clean sheet at Fir Park and Firhill.
At 6ft 3in, Tweed is dominant in the air with the pace to get out of bother on the ground.
He's formed a useful partnership with Gordon Hunter and may retain his place in spite of the fact that Tommy McIntyre and Neil Orr are again available.
Pat McGinlay, with six goals in his last eight games, has become Hibs' most likely match-winner while Dundee will hope that player-manager Simon Stainrod, with five goals in his last five appearances, recovers from injury.
No Scottish club have more talented young players than Aberdeen.
Gary Smith, who missed the Celtic game because of a leg injury, will regain his place at McDiarmid Park where Jess, Scott Booth and Stephen Wright will all be looking to capitalise on their good showings for Scotland's senior and under-21 sides.
Paul Mason is also available again and, on a ground where they've come to grief in the past, Aberdeen have been reminded by Willie Miller that only their best will be good enough against St Johnstone.
With young players of the calibre of Phil O'Donnell, Motherwell have always been unlikely candidates for the drop.
Today they meet Falkirk, who have conceded 66 league goals so far, and they will be glad to welcome back veteran Joe McLaughlin after an absence of 19 games.
Gary Smith: returns for Aberdeen at Perth
Top teams sign record £12m deal
ENGLISH Premier League clubs yesterday staged an about-turn as they accepted a British record £12million four-year sponsorship with brewers Bass.
The change of heart — five months after the clubs rejected a similar deal — was confirmed by league chairman Sir John Quinton in London.
Sir John credited chief executive Rick Parry with achieving agreement after the so-called ‘platinum eight’ clubs' block vote scuppered a £10m Bass offer in September.
No vote was taken and Sir John refused to say whether any clubs opposed the deal but he added: ‘It all went through in a very few minutes.’
Asked to explain the clubs' change of heart, Parry said: ‘Time is a great healer.
I'm delighted to have secured this deal at long last.
The cash will be helpful for clubs faced with ground improvement bills.’
From next season the league will be known as the FA Carling Premier League.
Bass, which produces Carling lager, will invest £3m per season over four seasons to be shared equally among the 22 clubs who will receive about £150,000 each season.
— PA
Off-form Montgomerie hits out over Morocco ‘amateur sham'
From Mike Britten Agadir
SCOT Colin Montgomerie's chance of adding the Moroccan Open to his European Tour honours disappeared on the windswept Kings Course here yesterday.
England's Jamie Spence and David Gilford contrived to lead the British assault on this £62,500 title at the halfway stage, but Montgomerie is now back among the infantry after a second-round 77 that enabled him to beat the halfway cut by just one stroke.
Spence shot 69 in the near-gale that battered the morning starters to stand on 136, eight under par.
The measure of his performance was that at lunch he held a nine-stroke lead over the other morning starters.
Then the hot desert wind died to a whisper and the reprieved showed their relief.
Ireland's Darren Clarke, Sweden's Robert Karlsson and the veteran Argentine Vicente Fernandez all shot 67, while Gilford birdied the last two holes to return 70 and hang on to second place — only two strokes behind his England Dunhill colleague.
Montgomerie, runner-up in the recent Johnnie Walker Asian Classic in Singapore, where only an inspired Nick Faldo topped his efforts, had complained about the pace of play and lack of atmosphere after Thursday's first round.
Yesterday he allowed himself to become infuriated by another day of snail's pace golf and awkward pin placings on the small, undulating greens.
‘This tournament is a bit of an amateur sham,’ he said.
‘To have players shooting 101 and 98 in a European tournament that carries Ryder Cup qualifying points, is ridiculous.
It is the main reason why it is taking so long to get round this course.
‘This is the sort of tournament that should not even be considered as a Ryder Cup qualifier.
There should be only 20 such tournaments in a Ryder Cup year and they should be the biggest and best.’
Montgomerie pointed to a scoreboard showing a Moroccan amateur with scores of 101 and 86 for a 43-over-par total of 187, and a Spanish professional with rounds of 98 and 87 to his name.
He was also critical of PGA officials for their selection of pin placings and failure to ensure supplies of water on the course.
‘Those people who make the decisions should have gone out early in the morning and tried to putt to the holes we had to play to,’ he added.
‘Then they might have been more sympathetic.’
Montgomerie's humour was not improved by a poor start.
He three-putted the tenth, his first, then bogeyed three holes in a row with scrappy play around the greens.
After turning in 37, he dropped shots at four inward holes, twice more taking three putts.
The Scot will be in good company when he sets out with the early starters among the 70 survivors today.
Seve Ballesteros also had 77, while Mark James, winner in Madeira and Tenerife this season, was on the same six-over-par mark after 36 holes.
The only complaint from Sam Torrance after his par 72 for 146 was that he could not get the ball into the hole.
He had birdie putts on most greens, but managed only two.
Adam Hunter (73) got through on 148, one ahead of Prestwick's Ross Drummond (75).
Gary Orr (73) and Gordon Brand, jun, who took 77, were alongside Montgomerie, while Brian Marchbank did well to also join the qualifiers.
He recovered from an opening 80 to beat par with a 71.
Schuback in shock defeat
GUERNSEY's Mike Nicolle created the biggest upset in the history of the Midland Bank World Indoor Championship when he beat the defending champion, Ian Schuback, in yesterday's opening round in Preston.
Nicolle gave the Channel Islands their first ever victory in the championship when he edged out the defending champion 7-1, 3-7, 7-6, 1-7, 7-2.
After a thrilling final-set victory, the 43-year-old architect said: ‘I had a bit of luck to win the third set and after Ian took the fourth I thought I would lose.’
‘To beat the defending champion has to be the highlight of my career.’
Australian Schuback said he was happy with his own performance, but his opponent kept pulling out all the stops.
Twice former winner Tony Allcock cruised through his opening match when he beat Jersey's David Le Marquand 7-3, 7-2, 7-1 in the concluding first-round match.
South Africa's Bill Mosley's and Jeff Rabkin from Israel clinched a quarter-final place in the pairs when they beat Ireland's Rodney McCutcheon and Cliff Craig 7-3, 0-7, 7-6, 7-6 last night.
930220 
Dublin claims Ayr plant in £400m Digital ‘deal’
By Graeme Stewart Industry Correspondent
IRISH politicians are convinced that Scotland will win the battle to be European base for the American-owned Digital computer company.
Michael Noonan, finance spokesman for the Irish opposition party, Fine Gael, and other politicians claim that a £400 million deal has been struck between Digital and Scottish Enterprise and the Scottish Office to ensure that the company invests in its manufacturing plant at Ayr.
Government officials in Dublin warned that they will make an official complaint to the European Commission if they find proof of claims that Britain used the lure of £400 million worth of lucrative defence contracts to persuade Digital to retain Ayr at the expense of Galway.
Speaking on Irish radio yesterday, Mr Noonan accused ‘the Scottish Development Agency’ of dirty tricks in attracting inward investment.
In contrast, Scottish Enterprise and the Scottish Office were keeping tight-lipped and waiting for a final decision to be made known today or tomorrow.
A spokesman said it would be premature to say Ayr had won the battle.
However, the Ayr plant with 1,000 employees seems to be Digital's preferred site ahead of a similar plant at Galway where 1,200 jobs are now at risk.
The Ayr plant makes personal computers while the Galway factory manufactures mainframes and is a centre of research and development.
In both Scotland and Ireland, the Digital plants are the largest employers in the area and closure would be a devastating blow for the local economies.
The successful plant will gain hundreds of jobs.
The Irish view the situation so seriously that Ruari Quinn, employment and enterprise minister, flew to Boston yesterday to meet Digital's president and chief executive, Robert Palmer, in a last-ditch attempt to rescue the Galway plant.
With him were the head of the Irish Development Agency, Kieran McGowan, and Galway's mayor, Padraic McCormack.
The Digital board, which is reviewing its international operation and cutting 25,000 jobs from a worldwide payroll of 102,000, intends to concentrate its resources on a single computer manufacturing base for ease of access to the European market.
Digital, the world's second-biggest computer company, has a major presence in Livingston and a microchip unit at South Queensferry which supplies the Alpha chip for the hard-ware assembled at Ayr and Galway.
Tree to bear fruit of appeal for Eric Liddell memorial
By Severin Carrell
A METAL tree bearing leaves of brass is to become the symbol of a £900,000 appeal towards a community centre dedicated to the memory of Eric Liddell, Scotland's first athletics hero.
Each leaf on the Lemande Tree, given its name after the Old English word for shining and glittering, will represent a donation towards the appeal to build a glass-walled community centre for the elderly and mentally ill within an old church in Morningside, Edinburgh.
Rosemary Macarthur, an appeal spokeswoman, said the centre was particularly needed as Morningside had Scotland's highest proportion of elderly people.
Around 30 per cent of the population is aged 80 or over, living alone, with many of their carers aged 70 or over.
The Eric Liddell Centre was established at the former North Morningside Church in 1974, by the congregations of four churches on Holy Corner, Morningside, one of which was formerly the runner's home church.
Since 1974, the centre has been restricted to the old church hall and peripheral buildings around the former church because of the poor and unsuitable state of the main building itself.
But those facilities are now too small to meet demand.
Noel Littlefair, the centre's chairman, said: ‘We want to go further afield than just Morningside.
We want to go out and we want people to come in; that is the theme of the centre.’
The appeal, supported by the Lord Provost of Edinburgh, Norman Irons, aims to complete by 1994 the construction of the first two of four floors within the church to provide a day centre and restaurant for local pensioners and dementia sufferers.
The centre, designed by architect Nicholas Groves Raines after a competition in 1987, will be partially enveloped by a glass shell within the building, allowing light to enter through the church's widely-admired stained glass windows.
Around half of the appeal total has already been found, and the centre hopes to raise the remaining sum by autumn this year.
Eventually, further money will be raised to complete the remaining two floors to provide a youth centre and possibly a sports hall.
Mr Irons said that after 18 years of work, the centre had a demonstrated track record in community care.
‘The fact that it's tied in with Eric Liddell, combines the practical efforts of the community with commemoration of a great Scot and a great Christian Scot,’ he said.
Greenwich gets new look
THE most famous observatory in the world is to get a major relaunch next month.
Sir Christopher Wren's 17th-century masterpiece in Greenwich, south-east London, is the home of Mean Time and Longitude Zero.
Over the last 15 months it has undergone a complete refurbishment which aims to unravel the phenomena of time, space and astronomy through 12 new galleries.
Highlights of the ‘new’ Royal Observatory include a fresh presentation of the international Meridian Line which marks the beginning of all time and space on Earth.
Visitors will be able to see the eight-sided Octagon Room, a giant digital clock showing GMT to the nearest tenth of a second hands-on science stations for children and a sound and light show in the darkened dome, which houses the largest refracting telescope in the country.
Founded by Charles II in 1675, the observatory was first opened to the public in the 1950s and contains one of the world's finest collections of precision clocks and scientific instruments.
The re-opening on March 24 celebrates the 300th anniversary of the birth of John Harrison, the unsung genius who designed and built a series of chronometers 250 years ago.
The chronometers, now kept in full working order at the observatory were clocks which kept accurate time at sea, solving the problem of determining longitude and paving the way for some of the greatest world discoveries.
Inner life of a scholarly gentleman
Allen Wright on a superb production at Perth Theatre, an apt swansong for outgoing artistic director Joan Knight
WILLIAM Nicholson's play Shadowlands, about an autumnal love affair, is a perfect vehicle for Tom Fleming to make a triumphant return to the stage.
This fine actor, whose appearances on the stage are all too infrequent, is well suited to the part of CS Lewis, committed Christian and seemingly confirmed bachelor.
Today, 30 years after his death, Lewis is remembered more as the author of such enchanting children's stories as The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe than as a writer and broadcaster on ethical and religious questions, but it is one of those BBC sermons which he delivers at the beginning of this play.
Seeking some sense in all the suffering which God appears to condone, Lewis proceeds to quote from personal experience…
Guarded, if not downright timid, in his attitude to women, Lewis mysteriously lets an American admirer, Joy Davidman, become closely acquainted with him.
It is not that she possesses dazzling charm or an especially brilliant intellect, but he enjoys her company so long as he thinks their friendship is platonic.
It is only when she falls desperately ill that he recognises how much he loves her.
The closer she moves towards death, the more he comes to passionate life.
If this sounds like a trite tear-jerker, the writing and acting are of a highly intelligent quality and Joan Knight's production never becomes mawkish.
Indeed the most dramatically powerful scene could be painfully sentimental were it not for the fierce intensity with which Tom Fleming expresses his feelings.
The subtle way in which Fleming conveys the emotional development of this character is immensely impressive.
An apparently dry old stick, secure in the fraternity of the common room, and content with the comradeship of his brother, Lewis is approaching 60 when he learns to love a woman.
His early observation that ‘You can always be much more friendly with people who can't stay long’ later assumes a terrible significance, so short-lived is their romantic relationship.
The part of Joy Davidman is very well played by Kay Gallie though it is difficult to take to the character in the first act of the play.
Delightfully witty studies are given by Leon Sinden as the brother and by Neville Barber as the most waspish of the Oxford dons who gang up against the female intruder.
With her compassionate production of this gentle and thoughtful play, Joan Knight ends her remarkable reign of 25 years as artistic director of Perth Theatre.
Subtle intensity: Tom Fleming makes a triumphant return to the stage as CS Lewis
Clinton defence is called off
By Hugh Keevins
PAT CLINTON's second defence of his WBO flyweight title, against South African ‘Baby’ Jake Matlala, has had to be called off because the world champion is suffering from a back complaint.
The contract which has been signed for the fight will be honoured, though, and a new date will be sought for the spring in Glasgow.
Clinton's place on the bill at the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre on 6 March will be taken by the new British bantamweight champion, Drew Docherty, who will fight an as yet unnamed American.
More than 4,000 tickets have so far been sold for next month's event which will have as it's feature bout the fight between Nigel Benn and Italian Mauro Galvano.
Docherty, who is so far undefeated as a professional, is from the same part of Strathclyde as Clinton and will attract the crowd who traditionally follow the flyweight.
Clinton's reign as world champion has been blemished by controversy because of the debate over the validity of his win over the Mexican, Isidro Perez, to win his title and the verdict given the Scot after his first defence against Danny Porter, from London.
Tommy Gilmour, Clinton's manager, said last night: ‘Pat had tried to go through the pain barrier and keep his injury from me but I have taken the decision to withdraw him after consultation with an orthopaedic surgeon.’
Clinton will be back in training in three weeks' time.
In the meantime, Docherty will help sell the remainder of the tickets for the 7,000 capacity arena on 6 March.
Docherty will no longer be a guest in the company of the WBC heavyweight champion, Lennox Lewis, at tonight's St Andrew's Sporting Club fight night in Glasgow.
‘It is time for Drew to go back to work for a living,’ said his manager.
Brugge's manager not blown off course
HUGO BROOSE, manager of FC Brugge, Rangers' next European Champions League opponents, was not deceived by the disjointed display of Walter Smith's team after visiting gale-  stricken Tannadice at the weekend, writes Hugh Keevins.
‘I have seen Rangers play in better conditions, otherwise I would have said it will be easy for us in Belgium,’ Broose remarked after watching a match endured by players and spectators alike in farcical conditions.
International players were made to look foolish as the ball swirled capriciously in the wind that howled around the ground from start to finish.
‘A manager always learns something,’ Broose said afterwards.
The Belgian's main lesson, though, was probably not to come back to Scotland in February.
The manager had watched Rangers play Dundee United at Ibrox last month and has therefore seen Walter Smith's side put under  pressure over two games — a two-goal lead having been lost in Glasgow before Ally McCoist eventually scored the winner.
FC Brugge have steadied themselves after losing to Marseille in their last European match and suffering a domestic backlash.
‘We are playing better and looking forward to Rangers’ visit all the more because of UEFA's decision to allow our fans to see the match.
They are the reason we play so well in our stadium,’ said Broose.
Rangers, incidentally, are to issue every supporter travelling to Belgium with the club next week a booklet outlining the need for good behaviour in order to avoid an incident of the type in France which recently cost FC Brugge a UEFA imposed fine of £118,000 after they had reversed an earlier decision to have the match with Rangers played behind closed doors.
While the Ibrox club can be thankful for the estimated £4m they will receive in total from participation in the European Champions League,
Troubled Celtic are thinking of how they can raise the money to buy Pat McGinlay from Hibs.
The midfield player is out of contract at Easter Road at the end of this season and Liam Brady, Celtic's manager, would not deny weekend reports that he will attempt to sign McGinlay in the summer.
The player is seen by Celtic to have the aggression they are looking for as the club struggles badly on and off the park.
It is Celtic's financial plight which will make it difficult to sign McGinlay.
Saturday's attendance against Partick Thistle was 15,536, or just over half the crowd that is thought necessary at each home game to meet the club's weekly costs and overdraft repayments.
Given Celtic's goal-less draw against a team soundly beaten twice in four days on their own pitch immediately before the weekend, and the hostile reaction of the lowly crowd, even fewer are likely to be in attendance at the next home game.
Even if Brady were able to sell one of several players who would be allowed to leave the club in response to a reasonable offer, Celtic's bankers might be unwilling to let them use the money for the purchase of McGinlay or anybody else.
McGinlay scored his eleventh goal of the season on Saturday, though he was on the losing side against Dundee, and would relish a move to Celtic, no matter their current state.
Montgomerie feels draw of Augusta
WITH the count-down to the US Masters at Augusta having begun, maybe no single shot on the European Tour this year will have interested the Scottish golfing fraternity more than Colin Montgomerie's drive at the 72nd in the Johnnie Walker Classic in Singapore.
A par 5, the eighteenth at the Singapore Island GC is a left-hand dog-leg.
As Montgomerie — whose staple shot is, of course, the fade — settled into his address, it was clear that his intention was to flight the ball right to left.
It is history now how he followed that perfectly shaped tee shot by greening a sumptuous 4-iron — only to lose out to Nick Faldo's answering birdie as the Open champion holed a 15-footer on which the engines had cut out long before it dropped.
Faldo is, notoriously, a more certain shotmaker than he is a wordsmith but David Feherty himself could not have improved upon his wry reflection: ‘There's an old Irish saying that 99 per cent of putts left short don't go in.
That was the one per cent.’
They say that nobody remembers who came second but when that has happened to you as often as it has to Montgomerie, it is difficult to forget.
But, head to head with the world's No 1, the strapping Scot had had a four-under- par 66 to his conqueror's 68 and the satisfaction of having unfurled a draw just when he needed it most.
Many have blamed what they termed an inability to win on an inability to hit more than one shape of shot.
There is undeniably some truth in that but, when you look in any detail at Montgomerie's so-called failures since he won the Scandinavian Masters in 1991, it has more often than not been less a question of his losing the tournament than of someone else winning it.
Indeed, in the eight events since his last victory in which he has finished third equal or better, he has never once failed to beat par in the last round.
Nonetheless, he knew himself that he had to learn to draw the ball — not least for the tee shots at Augusta.
Accordingly, he recently repaired to his old tutor, Ilkley's Bill Ferguson.
They did not work directly on the draw: rather on so lessening his degree of fade that it would be that much easier for him to move the ball the other way when circumstances dictated.
Besides which, at Augusta, while you often want to draw your drive, a fade is frequently the better shot to the green.
One of the reasons why Montgomerie has done so well as a professional is that he has stayed basically with the swing which brought him Walker Cup honours in his student days in Texas.
Once again, the alteration which he and Ferguson made together was a long way from a major structural change.
‘I always,’ he explains, ‘had the feeling that I was taking the club back straight for the first two feet of the backswing but now I am taking it slightly inside.
‘The effect is fourfold.
I have a definite sensation of making a better turn and of having more time in which to make the hit.
The shots are flying straighter both in the sense of having less fade and of greater accuracy.
‘Again, while I have always felt that length was not one of my problems, the additional ten yards I have picked up are obviously very welcome.’
Would he also look to a change of driver to help him with the draw he will want at Augusta?
‘I shall take four or five drivers with me.
At least one of them will have the whippier shaft which, I suspect, might in itself go a long way to doing the trick.’
Verily, the game has moved on from the days when Bobby Locke could, for instance, win seven tournaments in his baptismal year on the US circuit, and four Open Championships on this side of the Atlantic, and yet virtually never feel the need to depart from his habitual draw.
Once, when play had been suspended at Little Aston because of rain, Norman Sutton, that fine striker with the double-handed grip, was recalling a tournament in which the wind was blowing hard from right to left across the eighteenth.
At long off, to borrow from cricket parlance, there was a stately tree which, to a man, Locke's rivals considered would force the ‘Old Knickerbocker Man’ to forego his familiar shape of shot.
But, to their chagrin, when he came to the hole, he did not desert his draw.
He simply exaggerated it, bringing the ball wide round the tree on the wind as if on the proverbial piece of string.
Not that he could not have held the ball up in that wind if he had been so minded.
One day when Ken Bowden, formerly editor of Golf World, was playing with him, he asked Locke whether he could fade the ball.
Without even bothering to change from his ultra closed stance, Locke produced a brace of exquisitely faded woods.
It was merely that he never wanted in a tournament round to risk anything which might upset his endlessly repetitive ritual and rhythm.
Lee Trevino, in his heyday on the main tour, was the nearest thing to Bobby Locke and yet his antithesis.
For all that he was such a consummate shot-maker, Trevino stayed almost as relentlessly with his fade.
In fact, though one has seen him play Augusta in an admirable 67, even Jack Nicklaus had trouble convincing him that he had the game to win the US Masters and he never did.
Though Ronnie Shade, in his halcyon days as an amateur, came as close as any golfer one has seen to hitting shot after shot without any discernible sidespin, most of the elite of professional golf have had a preferred shape of shot since — and probably long before — the days of Harry Vardon and his fade.
Henry Cotton always maintained that the turning point in his own career was his sojourn in America in the company of Tommy Armour.
The swing he had practised endlessly into a net in the cramped family garage had been very upright of necessity but, in the States, he learned to draw the ball from a much flatter plane.
Again, since the adoption of the 1.68 ball, European golfers have, perforce, worked the ball much more than they did the 1.62.
Now, strangely, Spalding have come up with a ball which measures 1.717 but which they call simply a 1.72 — the legal requirement regarding size, as stipulated in Clause (b) of Appendix III of the Rules of Golf, being only that the diameter of the ball shall be not less than 1.680 inches (42.67mm).
It is called the Top-Flite Magna and Spalding — correctly, one fancies — anticipate much scepticism.
Certainly, one's own immediate reaction was that so big a ball would be still more at the mercy of wind and spin.
Not so, claim the manufacturers.
They say their new ball is aimed mainly at the middle and high handicapper and, though nice and soft on the clubface, actually spins less because of the larger dimpling on the Zylin cover.
They even claim that it goes farther than their 1.68 Top-Flite.
Whatever next?
The idea behind this latest Spalding missile is that, because it spins less, it is more forgiving in terms of the higher handicapper's hook or slice which is also, of course, part of the appeal of the metal wood.
In truth, one can remember once, in the professional's shop at Augusta, finding the great Gary Player thoughtfully fingering a set of Cleveland woods which reminded him of some Ben Hogan woods he had once owned.
But what was wrong with the metal wood he had been employing off the tee?
‘I can't hook it,’ exclaimed Player, plaintively.
Which, from a man who had fought a hook for a goodly part of his life, was something of a collector's item.
The fade has always been the safer shot as Ben Hogan — another who, for long, was haunted by a hook — so thrillingly and chillingly exemplified.
No one put it better than Trevino: ‘You can talk to a fade, but a hook won't listen…‘
Dynamic Scots look to Twickenham
Wales left blowing in the wind
Scotland 20 Wales 0
THERE are moments in matches where a team must sense it is just not going to be their day.
For hapless Wales in the Royal Bank international at Murrayfield, it happened straight from the second-half kick-off.
Neil Jenkins’ restart was gathered by Gary Armstrong and the scrum-half, like some meteorological mystic, harnessed the swirling gusts in the corridor down the east stand side to hoof the ball a gargantuan 70 metres.
Wales had believed they were playing with the malevolent elements in the second-half, Armstrong's kick disabused them of that notion.
In the view of Scotland coach Ian McGeechan it was a tremendous psychological boost to his side.
Not that they really needed it, as the chance of Triple Crown against England in a fortnight's time duly materialised.
The control the Scots' pack brought to proceedings — principally from the platform of the lineout which they took by a conclusive 30-16 margin (Doddie Weir and Damian Cronin pouching ten takes each), yet also in the alacrity with which they arrived at breakdown — left the Welsh utterly befuddled.
Just how they defeated England remains one of the most esoteric of puzzles.
The wind did not reach the heights on the Beaufort scale registered against Ireland, but Scotland clearly utilised their local knowledge and were less unsettled by its capricious nature.
At the post-match banquet, Scotland captain Gavin Hastings, at his most self-deprecating, noted: ‘Ieuan Evans (the Welsh skipper) was not very sure where the wind was going.
I was not either, which probably explained why my kicks went between the posts!’
Hastings has been subjected to some stern criticism since his unfortunate goal-kicking blunders on the far from immaculate surface at the Parc des Princes 16 days ago.
Yet even ‘Disgruntled, Kilgraston Road, Edinburgh,’ who had expressed his disquiet most volubly to the The Scotsman sports desk had to gorge on his opprobrious remarks as Hastings became the leading scorer in matches between the two countries with some imperious striking as he landed five goals from eight attempts.
Both Hastings and McGeechan ranked the Scottish effort as one of the finest in which they had been involved.
Much of the credit for that must go to forwards' coach, Richie Dixon.
Working on the template agreed with his fellow coaches, McGeechan and Douglas Morgan, Dixon has brought a dynamism to the driving mauls, mostly triggered from clean lineout ball, which had seemed largely beyond the Scottish Exiles — four of whom are in the pack — when they attempted to deploy that tactic during the inter-district championship.
Necessity was the mother of invention for Dixon when refereeing interpretation compelled a switch from ruck to maul during Scotland's 1988 tour to Zimbabwe — of which three survivors played on Saturday: Paul Burnell, Cronin and Derek Turnbull.
Five years on, as Turnbull related, the law changes make such a drive, the ‘moving ruck’ as he described it, a grand option, ‘especially if you are trying to keep on your feet.
That's the easiest way to do it and to protect the ball.
You have a greater degree of control on it.’
It is also hard to halt legally.
Turnbull admitted it has formed a large part of forwards' practice where the pack try to shift as many as 16 others, which concentrates the mind wonderfully on body positions.
Dixon, he asserted, had a sound rapport with his charges.
‘He allows players to give their views.
If the players are unsure whether something will work, he is able to listen, dissects their concerns and adjusts the style accordingly.’
Turnbull, who required four stitches in a head wound, crossed the try line in the company of Iain Morrison.
He, however, had two hands on the ball, Morrison one, and as befitting his rank as a PC with Lothian and Borders Police, he claimed the score on the basis that ‘possession is nine tenths of the law!’
The medical team are confident Turnbull will be fit for Twickenham.
His only concern was quite what officials will make of his wound when he appears as a witness at Jedburgh Sheriff Court today.
Some of the brightest moments in the game stemmed from forwards and backs in blissful unison, fully exercising the courageous Welsh defensive repertoire: Derek Stark, one felt, might have done rather better with his chance in the second minute, created by Peter Wright's lineout tidy, midfield linkage and Gavin Hastings' incision.
Evans made the saving tackle, just as he did when Tony Stanger, having barn-stormed out of Wayne Proctor's tackle, threatened to bring the house down in a move created by Craig Chalmers' adroit collection of Mike Rayer's kick, the  irrepressible Armstrong arcing out of harm's way on a touchline blast and the thumping support of Cronin and Kenny Milne (one tighthead to the good).
Stanger also quite  magnificently clawed down Proctor after he had been uncorked in his own 22 by the largely negative Neil Jenkins (who had two goal-kicking failures), Rayer and Ricky Evans having capitalised on a Scottish attack short-circuiting.
Andy Reed's lineout provision had created that chance and the Bath lock could prove a real dark horse for the Lions given his sterling deeds at restarts, a superb chopping of Mike Hall, a dive pass from a ruck and his arrival in the burn-out of Gavin Hastings' break which required more last-gasp heroics, this time from Stuart Davies, to prevent a try.
McGeechan reflected that Scotland probably should have scored three tries and there was some suspicion about the Scottish scrummage (though preparation for the England game in that regard will not be as fraught as last week).
 Twickenham and all that that entails is now on the horizon.
Ieuan Evans argued Scotland can do it ‘if the pack in particular perform as they did’, while his fellow captain, Hastings, predicted; ‘The victory, if it comes, will be dedicated to Ian McGeechan.’
TAKE IN HOW POINTS WERE SCORED WOB GAVIN HASTINGS scored five penalties: 3min: Welsh offside from close-range scrum from which Armstrong and Gavin Hastings dunted. 22min: Offside in aftermath of lineout where Cronin and Milne liaised. 27min: Tony Copsey lectured for stamping on intervention of touch-judge Patrick Robin.
49min: Offside as Scotland drove through Wright, Milne and Reed off two-handed lineout catch by Weir.
60min: Emyr Lewis's illegal challenge on Armstrong following scrum.
The game's only try — Turnbull's second for Scotland — was recorded in the 38th minute and emanated from Stark's pursuit of Scott Hastings's chip-kick which forced Rayer to concede a lineout two metres from the Welsh line.
From Cronin's catch, Scotland chugged and after a delay, while referee Joel Dume peeled off bodies, Turnbull was rightly awarded the try.
SCOTLAND: G Hastings (Watsonians) captain; A Stanger (Hawick), S Hastings (Watsonians), G Shiel (Melrose), D Stark (Boroughmuir); C Chalmers (Melrose), G Armstrong (Jedforest); P Wright (Boroughmuir), K Milne (Heriot's), P Burnell (London Scottish), A Reed (Bath), D Cronin (London Scottish), D Turnbull (Hawick), G Weir (Melrose), I Morrison (London Scottish).
WALES: M Rayer; I Evans captain, M Hall, S Gibbs, W Proctor; N Jenkins, R Jones; R Evans, N Meek, H Williams-Jones, G Llewellyn, A Copsey, E Lewis, S  Davies , R Webster.
Referee J Dume (France).
The last time Wales failed to score in a Murrayfield international was in 1961 when Scotland triumphed 3-0 through an Arthur Smith try.
Gavin Hastings became the leading scorer in matches between Scotland and Wales with 55 points, overtaking Phil Bennett's mark.
Chalmers answers critics in best fashion
By Harry Pincott
CRAIG CHALMERS had the look of a man who had completed a job well-done.
The Melrose stand-off had been stung by comments after both the Irish and French matches that he was not being creative enough and that the boot had become his only attacking weapon.
‘I don't think the criticism was merited,’ argued Chalmers, still only 24 but with 32 caps to his credit.
‘We were under a great deal of pressure in Paris, the ball was not coming out quickly enough and it was a very poor playing surface.
You just can't run bad ball.’
Against the Welsh, Chalmers, who had struggled all last week to overcome shin and thigh knocks, answered his critics in no uncertain manner with some jinking running, especially on the narrow side, and accurate kicking in the gusting wind.
He and his partner, Gary Armstrong, playing together in a major international for the 25th time, plus a few other Scots, must have booked their places on the forthcoming British Lions tour to New Zealand.
As Chalmers admitted: ‘The superb kicking of Gavin Hastings took a lot of pressure off us early on.’
And with the forwards winning quality possession the stage was set for him to re-establish his reputation as Britain's No1 stand off.
The only disappointment as far as Chalmers is concerned was that the Scots scored only one try.
‘We should really have scored 30-35 points.
We had been expecting a much harder game but the Welsh were never in it, thanks to our forwards’ control.’
Until this point, the words Triple Crown had never been mentioned but both Chalmers and Armstrong thought that was perfectly natural.
‘Everything had been geared towards winning today and only now and over the next two weeks will we be concentrating on the Twickenham game,’ acknowledged Armstrong who had his usual superb display.
While happy enough with the performance, Chalmers reckons there's a lot more to come from this Scottish team.
‘The training is getting better and better all the time and we can play an awful lot better.’
They will certainly have to do that to beat England and, of course, the Scots won't have the backing of such a supportive crowd, a point appreciated by Chalmers who made his opposite number, Neil Jenkins, look so ordinary.
One can't believe that players such as Colin Stephens, Aled Williams or Adrian Davies would not do a better job in the No10 jersey and it seems a far cry from the days when the Welsh stand off factory was in full production.
An authoritative player in that position would have helped Wales greatly.
Jenkins' kicking, especially in the first half, gave little encouragement to his forwards.
As Arthur Emyr, the former Welsh winger who turned out in the Classics International on Saturday morning stated afterwards.
‘Wales's performance was so bad it wasn't true.
Craig Chalmers: ‘I don't think the criticism was merited’
Hastings proves he is a captain of many parts
By Mike Aitken
GAVIN HASTINGS had just kicked the living daylights out of Wales.
After the disappointment of Paris, when everyone kept reminding him how he'd missed five kicks out of six in the Parc des Princes, there was bound to be a reaction from Hastings at Murrayfield.
Yet few among the Scotland captain's admirers could have predicted he would fashion such a heroic riposte.
Perhaps it was an omen when the woman on television's Sport In Question last week, who had joined in the rebuke of his kicking against the French, sent him a good luck telegram on Saturday.
‘Did I feel I had a point to prove?’ pondered Hastings.
‘You bet I did.
People raised so much comment after Paris it will be nice to see what they have to say this time round.’
After missing in a flat calm against the French, it was typical of Hastings that he succeeded in a gale which made the Murrayfield goal-posts moan like a didgeridoo.
So, apart from a desire to prove the doubters wrong, what had changed since Paris?
‘The difference against Wales was that I didn't have any really long kicks,’ he replied.
‘It was a question of keeping the ball straight — and by and large I did that.
In Paris I had long, long kicks.
I'm not sure if people appreciate that when you attempt kicks of that distance you have to strike the ball 100 per cent.
‘It's like a golfer trying to knock a one iron or a two iron into the green.
Unless you hit the ball absolutely right, it isn't going to go where you want it to go.
In Paris I wasn't getting it right.
But I don't want to dwell on that too much.
Against Wales, I answered my critics.’
Kenny Milne, who had to deal with the vagaries of a vicious swirl when he threw in at the lineout, thought that the Hastings' boot was the big difference between the games against France and Wales.
‘After Gavin slotted over those first three kicks we never thought we would lose,’ said the hooker.
Yet there was more to Hastings than just kicking penalties.
Against Wales, he was a man of many parts.
A scorer of important points — he converted five kicks out of eight in a gale which made staying upright seem like an  achievement — a strong defender, a swashbuckling attacker and a powerful captain.
Even Rory Bremner would have been hard pressed to impersonate more roles in a single show.
If Hastings' performance did much to underline his candidacy for the Lions captaincy — no one else of his individual stature has a similar gift for bringing players together on and off the field — it also made a significant contribution in bringing the new Murrayfield to life.
After the greying of the Irish, Hastings painted the Welsh match in primary colours.
When the crowd sang Flower Of Scotland deep into the final quarter of the match, Hastings responded with a brilliant diagonal run off a dummy scissors which would have brought a try for Reed in the corner but for courageous defending from Davies.
‘It was a  fantastic feeling to be out on that field for the last 10 or 15 minutes,’ he recalled.
‘When everyone started to sing Flower of Scotland it gave everyone a great lift.
I think we deserved it because that was one of the finest team performances I've ever been involved with.
The atmosphere in the stadium is different — the noise reverberates and comes back down on to the pitch — but I think it was a measure of the way we played that the crowd really got behind us.’
Interestingly, what gave Hastings more personal satisfaction than the haul of points which took his international tally to 415 in 44 appearances was the fact that Scotland kept a clean sheet against the Welsh.
‘In my book, that's what mattered most.
That and the fact that new players who have come in looked as if they've always been there.’
Craig Chalmers reckons that much of the credit for making the new men feel part of the Scotland set-up is down to Hastings.
The captain mixes easily with everyone in the squad and avoids cliques.
Their success has also been his.
After the match, Hastings gave a television interview, attended the official post-match briefing and found time to have a word with me all before he'd had a shower.
When we chatted, Hastings looked as composed as if he'd just spent the afternoon at his office rather than sending Wales homeward to Cardiff to think again.
As you'd expect, Twickenham, the Triple Crown and that Calcutta Cup match against England cannot come quickly enough now.
‘Here we go,’ the captain beamed.
‘That was one of the finest team performances I've ever been involved with’ Gavin Hastings
Backs begin to bite in time for Twickenham
SCOTLAND go to Twickenham in a fortnight's time with the best chance of beating England at home for years.
That is the undeniable conclusion that all observers will have come to following the overwhelming defeat of Wales.
For me, it was as much a personal triumph for the coach, Ian McGeechan, as anybody else, because of what he has achieved with this side in such a short space of time.
At last his backs were starting to use the abundance of possession in a positive fashion and using their pace to good effect.
Although they did not score a try, every time they moved the ball the Welsh defence was in trouble.
Once again, as often is the case, the forwards laid the foundation of victory, but make no mistake, they were made to work very hard before they started to dominate the Welsh pack.
This domination eventually came more because of what the forwards were doing when they had not won possession as when they had.
The Scottish pressure on ball won by the Welsh was superb and this really indicated how far they have come on since the match against the Italians.
That said, they were presented with some fairly easy targets, not least from the incredibly untidy lineout ball that the Welsh jumpers were offering poor Robert Jones before it eventually dried up altogether.
The domination of Damian Cronin, Andrew Reed and Doddie Weir in all three matches so far has been a revelation and there must be a number of former international backs who are extremely envious of the amount of ball the current Scottish side are winning.
The scrum has also looked solid enough to date, although no side has really put it under any pressure yet.
The pack have also developed their loose play a long way and although I am not a great fan of the ‘hand ruck’, in the games so far the pack has mixed its rucking and mauling well.
I would still prefer to see the priority being a quick release of the ball to the backs, purely because they are looking as dangerous now as they have done for years.
By mauling and driving, the defence is able to reorganise and fan out across the pitch, ready for the next attack, as the English team found out to their cost in Cardiff.
It is difficult to pinpoint frailties amongst the forwards at the moment, because they have played so well, but to accept that they are peaking now would be folly.
There is always room for improvement, not least in their tightness and body positions at the breakdown and it would be nice to see forwards hitting rucks in threes and fours rather than ones and twos.
The greatest test of this season has yet to come, when they play an English side with a dented pride and one where many players have still to get over their last defeat by Scotland three years ago.
Because much of the Scottish game revolves around ball won at the touchlines, extra attention will have to be paid to this facet of play.
For the first time this year, Messrs Cronin and Co will be looking up to their opposite numbers and it will be essential that both blockers and sweepers are doing their job.
The sweeping has not been great yet and perhaps it is time that some ball ‘off the top’ is considered as an option.
Scotland have hardly used any back-row moves in their games to date, maybe because they do not want to put extra pressure on Weir in his first season at No 8, but also because they do not have the same penetration from the base of the scrum as they have done in previous seasons.
Or perhaps it is because they are saving their best for England.
Some back-row moves would certainly help to break up the pattern of play, but they must have a solid scrum first.
Once again, this will be a key area on 6 March because if the front-row are under pressure then invariably so are the back-row and half-backs.
Scotland have looked the most dangerous side in the championship when they have moved the ball.
The backs have breath-taking pace out wide and both wingers have looked hungry for ball, turning up on each other 's wings regularly to create the extra man.
Scotland must use their backs in London if they are to lift the Triple Crown and Calcutta Cup.
Craig Chalmers must continue to bring his backs into the game rather than kick away possession or run himself into the thickest traffic.
Saturday's game illustrated the importance of taking scoring chances when they are presented, even if they are in the form of kicks at goal.
From the comfort of the stand, it still felt very close, even at 14-0, but not one scoring chance was missed until late in the second half and by that time the game was over.
Scotland must take their chances in London against a side that has been the most consistent for the last few years if they are to come away with the spoils of victory.
Gavin, pack your kicking boots!
David Sole
Best goes home with plenty to think about
‘And sent them homeward tae think again.’
These words from Flower of Scotland will no doubt have been running through the head of Dick Best as he flew home to London yesterday.
The England coach, who is also assistant to Ian McGeechan on the Lions tour to New Zealand this summer, and who has been in Scotland since last Thursday, admitted yesterday that the Scots' performance against Wales ‘had been very impressive and must have surprised quite a few people, especially down south’.
Best who was at a Lions selection meeting in Edinburgh yesterday morning, reckoned the margin and manner of Scotland's 20-0 victory would certainly have England worried and that he expected a cracker of a game on Saturday week at Twickenham, where Scotland have won only twice, in 1971 and 1983, since the Second World War.
‘Bearing in mind that it will be Ian McGeechan's last game as Scotland coach, it's a perfect setting for Gavin and his side to give him a fitting send-off,’ said Best, who will be taking a video of the Murrayfield game back with him and will spend this week poring over it, looking at both the performances of Scotland and potential Lions.
What most impressed Best about Scotland's showing was their lineout play.
‘That's an area they have improved on dramatically this season and they are able to control the game through their dominance on the touchline.
‘The forwards played extremely well as a unit, driving in unison and providing their backs with good ball.
They possibly should have scored more tries, but as against England, the Welsh defended very well.’
Best also highlighted Gavin Hastings' goalkicking as a key element in the victory.
‘With Gavin landing penalties Scotland kept moving steadily ahead and by half-time I felt the game was over.’
From a Lions viewpoint, Best stressed he was extremely pleased with Scotland's performance and judging by the displays of the Irish and Welsh against McGeechan's men there should be a fair tartan representation in the 30-strong Lions squad which will be announced the week beginning 21 March.
On a final note Best admitted that after watching Wales at Murrayfield, his side's defeat at Cardiff two weeks ago was even harder to swallow now.
But surely no harder than TV pundit Eddie Butler's statement two weeks ago that Gareth Llewellyn was the best front lineout jumper in Europe.
Where does that leave Damian Cronin?
The best in the world?
Harry Pincott
Reports of Ireland's demise prove to be much exaggerated
Ireland 6 France 21
By Chris Thau.
THERE are some arguments you can't win.
Before this game we were told that this was the poorest Irish team in memory, that Irish rugby was in the doldrums and that the swashbuckling French were about to turn on the after-burners and skyrocket into the stratosphere.
Afterwards, we were informed that, in fact, this was a mediocre French team and that the reports suggesting Irish rugby was terminally ill were rather exaggerated.
Of course, there are many aspects of the Irish game, their back play in particular , that need attention, perhaps even surgery, but on account of their gallant, almost heroic performance, the overall diagnosis suggests slow but eventual full recovery.
As for the French, one could detect a degree of masochism in the ritual bouts of depression following an unpolished, yet solid and competent performance.
‘This is second division rugby.
There is no rigour, no game plan, no inspiration,’ the former national coach, Jacques Fouroux, murmured darkly.
‘It's pathetic, a dull, forgettable performance,’ lamented a senior French rugby writer, while the gathered hacks confidentially predicted that heads will have to roll.
As it happens, despite or because of its imperfections, it was a pulsating though untidy game.
The French, trying to expand, were taken aback by the collective ferocity of the Irish defensive response.
Sadly, Ireland's attack could not match their defensive endeavour.
The French stand-off, Didier Camberabero, explained: ‘There is so much arrogance in the assumptions people make.
They write off Ireland as a spent force, which in my experience is a foolish thing to do.
Then you are criticised for not winning in a style they regard as appropriate.
It's a recurrent theme.
‘My father (Guy Camberabero from the French 1968 Grand Slam) was slaughtered by the media at the time.
Now they talk about that side with nostalgia.
You can't win.
The Irish team is talented and in a couple of years will be a threat to anyone.
They need to sort out a few things and they'll be very competitive.’
Such is Ireland's thrust for self-respect that, after the match, the Irish dressing room was buzzing as if there was some confusion about the outcome.
It is quite clear that the hard work put into it by coach Gerry Murphy is beginning to pay off.
The back division have badly under-performed while the forwards have hardly put a foot wrong, with debutant No 8, Michael Galwey, outstanding.
The Irish Lions selector, Ken Reid, who arrived yesterday in Edinburgh for a selectors meeting, must have been in a reasonably good frame of mind after Saturday's contest.
Galwey and Popplewell, and to an extent O'Hara and the much-maligned Francis, produced outstanding performances which, if repeated against Wales and England, could secure them tickets for the trip to New Zealand.
The quality of the ball reaching Simon Geoghegan may have compromised his chances to make the Lions party unless the selectors are aware that the young London Irish winger could set the world alight if provided with a bit of time and space.
For nearly 70 minutes, Ireland were in contention, but their inability to convert pressure into points when playing with the wind behind their backs in the first half cost them dearly in the end.
Two opportunist tries by Saint-Andre, his third in the current championship, and Sella, his first this year, sealed the fate of the hapless Irish still searching for an elusive win after 11 consecutive games.
Webb takes an early dip in Chelsea mire
CHELSEA's new manager, Dave Webb, yesterday discovered the magnitude of his task as his side crashed to a 2-0 defeat against Blackburn Rovers in the English Premier League to make it 13 games without a win.
To add to his worries, Webb saw defender Frank Sinclair sent off as Chelsea battled in vain to halt their alarming slide down the Premier League.
Mike Newell scored twice and missed a penalty as Blackburn ended a run of three league defeats to climb to fourth in the table.
Newell opened his account in the ninth minute when he beat left-back Tony Barness on the right before steering the ball over goalkeeper Kevin Hitchcock.
They should have increased their lead 20 seconds into the second half when Sinclair's hand ball on the line brought them a penalty.
But Blackburn's £1.1 million striker fired his spot kick high and wide.
However, Newell made amends in the 64th minute when he raced on to a hopeful through ball, rounded Hitchcock and fired home.
It was Chelsea's sixth away defeat of the season, part of a run that cost Ian Porterfield his job last week and brought in 1970's FA Cup hero Webb, who will have to act quickly to prevent Chelsea ending their season in a relegation dogfight.
West Ham failed to close the gap on Division I leaders Newcastle as Kevin Keegan's men forced a goalless draw at Upton Park.
West Ham have cut Newcastle's lead from 15 points to four over the last month and increased their unbeaten league run to 12.
Remedial step: Mick Newell got Blackburn Rovers back to winning ways with two goals against Chelsea yesterday
This Jess could be the best for eons
St Johnstone 0 Aberdeen 2
By Ian Wood
EVERY now and again, just when flower arranging has begun to seem a reasonable way of spending Saturday afternoons, the game produces something which restores the faith.
Right now, Aberdeen's young striker, Eoin Jess, is that something.
At McDiarmid Park on Saturday, the 22 year old made light of his excellent midweek showing for Scotland and played some football which was a delight to the eye.
On a day when the general debate centred on whether or not games should be held when gales are blowing, Jess ruined a few arguments by going about his business so smoothly he gave the impression that in those areas of the field in which he moved, the wind had been magically stilled.
He brings to football a dimension which hasn't been present since the days of the great wingers.
When Jess holds the ball, looking for men to beat, the truly hooked observer is caught in that exquisite dilemma of wishing he'd get rid of it so as not to risk failure, while at the same time hoping he'll carry on regardless and do something outrageous.
When he opened the scoring, it came as no surprise, for it had looked as if he'd be the one to do it from the start.
Everything he did had been inventive and sharp, his running incisive.
Simple passes were made menacing by their precision and timing.
Paul Mason, on the right, found Mixu Paatelainen on the left edge of the St Johnstone area.
The Finn touched the ball inside to Jess who controlled it and turned in a blur of movement which took him clear of his cover and a sweetly struck shot hummed past Andy Rhodes.
Afterwards Jess admitted to feeling a little leg-weary over the last 20 minutes or so, but by then Willie Miller had sent on his other hot young property, Scott Booth, whose ability to leap from the bench and score drew Jess's unstinted admiration.
Booth did it in the last minute, slipping the ball home after Lee Richardson, an outstanding performer in the Aberdeen midfield, had struck the post with a clever shot made possible when Rhodes miskicked.
That goal was a little rough on St Johnstone, who had chances during the second half, though the best came in the first when Harry Curran threaded a pass through to Vinny Arkins.
The striker, perhaps because he was braced for the offside whistle (it had looked a bit that way), was less than decisive and allowed Michael Watt to save at his feet.
Motherwell breeze past poor Falkirk
Falkirk 1  Motherwell l3
FALKIRK are fighting two battles.
On the pitch they are struggling to preserve their Premier Division status with the worse defensive record among the top clubs while boardroom battles continue to drive a wedge between club and supporters.
Banners and chants were aimed at certain members of the Brockville board before the game and the team's performance did little to soothe the ire of a post-match demonstration.
Motherwell twice exposed the soft centre of the Falkirk defence in the opening 11 minutes, David Weir scoring a bizarre wind-assisted own goal when he misread the break of the ball then Paul McGrillen was allowed to run almost half the length of the field unhindered before scoring.
The wind, which played its part in unsettling the home defence, helped Ian McCall convert a corner kick into a goal before Motherwell substitute Jamie Dolan secured the points for Tommy McLean's men to open a three-point gap between the teams.
‘Conditions were a disgrace in the second half,’ said McLean who has never hidden his hatred of a strong wind.
But with just one defeat in ten games and key players available after injury and suspension his team are looking increasingly safe from relegation.
Falkirk's plight has worsened and will continue to do so until their defensive and boardroom problems are resolved.
Such is the depth of feeling around the club it would be a tough decision for many Falkirk fans to choose between the winning of two points or the departure of Hamish and George Deans.
Celtic's patience hangs by a thread
Celtic 0 Partick Thistle 0
By Mike McLean
DAVIE PROVAN, in the past a favourite at Parkhead and now a radio summariser, wore the expression currently described as ‘gobsmacked’ when he entered the press lounge at half time.
‘Was it as bad as that when I was here?’ he asked wistfully of no one in particular.
A rhetorical question, but asked with deep feeling.
There was also a tinge of sadness in Gerry Britton's voice when he was asked about his old club.
‘They're not getting any luck.
They are frustrated because things aren't working out as they had hoped.
But we've got to be happy with a point.’
Britton looking battle-weary after a match in which he was left as Thistle's lone attacker, a task which he confessed he had never experienced before, admitted he had a fair bit of work to do as a result.
‘But I got quick support from Albert Craig and Ray Farningham coming from midfield,’ he admitted.
‘The teams that stay up will be those that lose as few goals as possible.
I'm sure we'll survive.’
After losing seven goals in two games, Thistle were as resolutely organised as they had previously been chaotically lax.
They packed five players into midfield to snuff out any Celtic creative instincts, and assistant manager Gerry Collins was delighted with the ploy.
‘We were unlucky not to get two points.’
he said.
‘The man of the match award [to Pat Bonner]speaks for itself.’
He denied that Thistle had adopted negative tactics.
‘We weren't negative today.
When we had the ball we made Celtic work.’
And he added ominously: ‘We may well try the same tactics against some of the other bigger teams.’
Considering Thistle have the second worse defence in the Premier Division, a shut-out has to be a plus.
But Thistle fans haven't seen a Saturday goal this year, though there was little complaint at the weekend.
Bonner earned his match award with crucial one-to-one saves in each half from Britton and Farningham.
But what of Celtic?
They earned 15 corners, by my calculation, to Thistle's two (which were 79 minutes apart).
Yet keeper Craig Nelson's most anxious moments came from Frank McAvennie efforts one in each half.
Virtually every other effort missed the target by miles.
Liam Brady offered no excuses.
‘We knew they'd get lots of players behind the ball.
After Aberdeen last week, we should have offered the fans much better than that.’
Perhaps the manager, who is still registered as a player, should get out there and show his side the way.
Or would that be the final admission that everything in Paradise is not what it's cracked up to be?
Bone looks to young players
THE ability of St Mirren's young players to cope with pressure could be a key factor in their drive for promotion from the First Division, according to manager Jimmy Bone.
A Barry Lavety goal earned both points against Ayr United and enabled the Paisley club to make it tighter with the three clubs above them all dropping a point each.
Bone said yesterday: ‘My young players are handling the pressure well and that is a bonus for us.’
Although top-scoring Gordon Dalziel got his 27th goal of the season, Raith Rovers dropped a point to Meadowbank.
Dunfermline also surprisingly failed to get both points due to a fighting performance from Dumbarton while Kilmarnock were saved by an injury time equaliser from Calum Campbell against bottom club Cowdenbeath.
It was also a day of surprises in the Second Division with the top two, Brechin and Clyde, being defeated, by Arbroath and Queen's Park respectively.
Gough in a rash return to hostility
Dundee United 0 Rangers 0
By Hugh Keevins
RICHARD GOUGH, the subject of a Scottish League investigation for alleged statements that amounted to an illegal approach on Rangers behalf to Dundee United's Duncan Ferguson, has now fallen foul of the SFA over the same player.
Ironically, Gough's rash challenge on Ferguson at Tannadice resulted in a booking which carries him over the disciplinary points threshold and costs Rangers the services of their captain when they visit Arbroath for the Scottish Cup, quarter-final tie on 6 March.
Gough could always write back to the Scottish League — as he is obliged to do this week in response to the management committee's request for his views on United's complaint over Ferguson — and point out that being forced to go to such lengths to contain his opponent proves he was correct to covet the forward for his team.
Ferguson, for his part, can now look any supporter of his club in the eye and say that Gough having to commit the foul that debarred him from a Cup-tie verified the youngster's ability to put an awkward pre-match situation out of his mind and play in a determined way that suggested his temperament was on the mend.
Rangers, of course, have had to make do without Gough on numerous occasions this season because of injury and, while acknowledging that he is inspirational, they have not found the loss costly.
For the first time this season, though, Rangers have gone two successive domestic matches without winning and in these times at Ibrox that is as close as it gets to a crisis.
United would have sent Rangers into tomorrow night's match at Motherwell on the rebound from their first defeat in 37 matches, too, had it not been for the exceptional goalkeeping of Andy Goram once again.
In Gough's opinion, Goram is Rangers' most consistent player this season.
‘Andy makes crucial saves for us at vital times in matches and we have actually come to expect that of him,’ said Gough.
His remarks served as a reminder that while Rangers have two forwards, McCoist and Hateley, who score as if there is no tomorrow, it is the goalkeeper who makes the next day dawn with a secure feeling.
Rangers' captain, manager and owner all knew beforehand that the publicity given to Dundee United's charges of rule-breaking by Gough, Walter Smith and David Murray would have the effect of motivating the Tannadice players to an extraordinary degree.
‘With all the stuff that had gone on prior to the match and then the conditions we had to play in, the result could have been worse for Rangers but for our goalkeeper,’ Gough admitted.
Dundee United mastered the elements better than their opponents and had in Ferguson, Scott Crabbe and Paddy Connolly lively players who continue to give the impression that Jim McLean is not far off having a team capable of far better than has been seen from his club in recent seasons.
The younger element, like Mark Perry, are being allowed to make their mistakes while in the first team and, once greater experience tells, United will have a balanced side of rich promise.
Rangers, meanwhile, roll on and were able to give one of their young players, Neil Murray, his Premier Division debut.
He had previously collated a sequence of appearances for the memoirs by getting his first game against Stranraer in the Skol Cup and his next against Marseille in the European Champions league.
Murray's assured introduction to league football further expands a Rangers squad big enough to handle the loss of John Brown and Trevor Steven at the weekend through suspension and injury.
Both will be available for Fir Park tomorrow night and that is the value of a strong pool as well as a points cushion that can be leaned on but not to the stage of deflation.
That is the theory, at any rate, and it is one that will now be put to the test by two league games, against Motherwell and Hearts, and two cup-ties, domestic and European, with FC Brugge and Arbroath, all within the next 12 days.
It is a combination of depth of choice and Goram when all else fails which has so far made an ass of the law of averages.
Hibs dig their own grave
Hibernian 1 Dundee 3
THE avenue to UEFA Cup qualification is fast becoming a blind alley for Hibs.
This latest setback on a blustery day at Easter Road simply served to underline what has been an inconsistent season, writes Roddy Mackenzie.
So inconsistent, in fact, that on only one occasion this season (back in September against Dundee United and Celtic) have Hibs recorded back-to-back league victories.
Just when it looked as if they were starting to put something together (they had not lost a goal in their previous four matches), along came Dundee to ruin it all.
It is true that there were unforeseen obstacles for Hibs to overcome — not least of which was an ankle injury to goalkeeper Chris Reid who was stretchered off after 37 minutes after a 50-50 challenge with Colin West — but it was difficult to disagree with Alex Miller's belief that Hibs shot themselves in the foot.
Stand-in goalkeeper Graham Mitchell was only called into action three times in the second half, but on two of those occasions he was collecting the ball from the net behind him.
Mickey Weir missed a penalty five minutes from the end (Hibs only have 50 per cent success rate from the spot this season) and, had he scored, he would have tied the scores at 2-2.
As it turned out, the miss was sandwiched between goals from the Dundee substitutes Andy Dow (78 minutes) and Andy Kiwomya (87min) which settled the issue.
Thankfully for the Hibs manager, Reid's ankle is not broken as was first feared but he is doubtful for Saturday's match against Airdrie which could result in a recall for John Burridge.
Miller has plenty to ponder as Hibs leave this morning for a three- day break in Jersey.
Whereas Hibs are still striving to find consistency, Simon Stainrod's Dundee have taken seven points from eight out of their last four league matches, thank you very much.
Stainrod contributed the first goal and, after Pat McGinlay had headed Hibs level early in the second half, the player-manager then conjured up two inspired substitutions which brought Dundee victory.
Only now, after fully a year in charge, does Stainrod believe he has a settled side.
He has used no fewer than 28 players in league matches this season and has plucked players from all football cultures.
‘It's only now that I'm getting to know what my best 15 or 16 players are,’ admitted the ever-courteous Englishman.
‘The side is starting to pick itself.’
Celtic are next to test the growing confidence at Dens Park when they visit for a rearranged fixture tomorrow.
Hearts hit Airdrie block
Airdrie 0 Hearts 0
HOW Hearts must be praying that Airdrie do them a favour and finish in the bottom two of the Premier Division this season.
The Tynecastle men simply cannot play well against the side managed by their former manager, Alex MacDonald, and illustrated that fact once again on Saturday.
Airdrie have ended Hearts' interest in the Scottish Cup in the past two seasons and are the only domestic side to have beaten them home and away this term.
They even knocked them out of the Tennents Sixes this year.
On Saturday they stretched their unbeaten run over the Edinburgh side to seven matches and hardly had to break sweat to do it.
Certainly, they rarely threatened to win the match, though Dave Kirkwood — one of four former Hearts players in the Airdrie ranks — missed the most clear-cut chance of the game in the closing minutes.
But with the apparently ageless Walter Kidd running around with John Robertson safely tucked away in his back pocket, the home side never looked like conceding a goal.
Games between the sides in the past have seen brawn get the better of brain, even in good conditions.
On Saturday with a gale blowing from one end of the pitch to the other, it was always going to be a battle between two sets of players who are never content just to hold the jacket when the going gets tough.
The wind-chill factor was obvious, but the wind-skill factor was non-existent and a series of nasty vendettas sprung up all over the pitch.
Referee Joe Timmons, who sent off two Dundee players for innocuous offences at Broomfield recently was in more lenient mood this time round.
This was fortunate for the Hearts forward Ian Ferguson who was as surprised as anyone to remain on the field after flooring Gus Caesar with as good a right hook as has been seen this side of Madison Square Gardens for many a long day.
In the end, Airdrie will feel they should have won.
But manager MacDonald knows that a fourth straight draw will help keep his side's new-found belief in themselves intact.
He said: ‘We had most of the play, but it is points we need not possession.
However the players are getting out of the losing habit.
It wasn't a great match but the windy conditions didn't help.’
Hearts manager Joe Jordan took that last remark a little further, stating: ‘It is impossible to play good football in those conditions.
The entertainment value for the people who paid to watch was non-existent, but it is difficult to criticise the players who tried their best in the conditions.’
Deportivo cash in on Toshack's misery
DEPORTIVO Coruna underlined their Spanish championship aspirations by thrashing Real Sociedad 5-1 yesterday to consolidate their  position at the top of the league.
The former Real Madrid midfielder, Adolfo Aldana, scored twice and the Brazilian striker, Bebeto, increased his league tally to 20 with a 34th-minute goal.
Real Sociedad, who are managed by John Toshack, were missing six first-team regulars because of injury and were reduced to ten men for the last 30 minutes.
To add to their misery, keeper Javier Yubero miskicked a clearance in the 15th minute and put the ball in his own net.
Deportivo captain Javier Fran made it five in the 74th minute while Imabol Alguacil scored a 44th-minute consolation goal for the visitors.
Barcelona struggled to squeeze a 1-0 win at bottom-of-the-league Real Burgos.
Diego Maradona, who flew back on Saturday after international duty with Argentina, scarcely figured in Sevilla's 2-0 defeat at lowly Logrones.
In Germany striker Bruno Labbadia scored twice as leaders Bayern Munich emerged from the first division's two-month winter break with a workmanlike 2-0 victory over struggling Bayer Uerdingen on Saturday.
Labbadia is being tipped as a possible successor to Rudi Voeller in the German national team and could be a strong candidate for the 1994 World Cup squad.
Eintracht Frankfurt stayed second after a 2-0 victory at Dynamo Dresden.
European Cup Winners Cup holders Werder Bremen, who beat Nuremberg 3-0 on Friday, are a further point behind in third.
Big names fighting shy of Eubank
CHRIS EUBANK finds himself in a predicament after his successful WBO super-middleweight title defence against Ohio veteran, Lindell Holmes, at Olympia, London.
He still wants to take on the best in the world, but the best do not seem to want him.
Eubank's 1993 aim was to tackle the cream of the 12-stone division, but achieving that has proved initially impossible for his promoter, Barry Hearn.
Hearn's approaches to new IBF champion, James Toney, WBA holder, Michael Nunn, Britain's leading WBC contender, Henry Wharton, and France's WBO No1 contender, Frank Nicotra, have all failed.
A rematch with Nigel Benn is no closer to being written into this year's domestic calendar.
Hearn estimates that Ireland's Steve Collins, European champion, Vincenzo Nardiello, or ex-IBF holder, Darrin Van Horn, could be Eubank's spring opposition.
Another option is to go to America to defend against Toney victim, Iran Barkley.
Whatever the outcome, the time is overdue for the public to see Eubank in more demanding action.
He attracts ten million-plus television audiences, but how much longer will they put up with him doing just enough to beat men who have have gone beyond their ‘sell-by’ date?
Hearn said: ‘The handlers of Toney and Nunn, Bob Arum and Don King, don't want to know Chris because he is very awkward and could make their men look bad.
And he is not big enough in the States for pay-per-view.
‘I approached Mickey Duff about Wharton, but he said ‘not for a million pounds’, then Nicotra demanded a ridiculous £375,000 to fight.
Nunn is the one I really want, but it could end up being Collins in an outdoor fight in Dublin.’
Eubank's priority is to recover from a badly-bruised right forearm, sustained as early as the second round of a unanimous victory which stretched his winning sequence to 35.
The judges' scoring, however, differed widely.
Italy's Walter Cavalieri made it a close 116-114 and Germany's Arthur Ellensohn carded a ‘shut-out’ 120-109, while Puerto Rico's Cesar Ramos had the fight just about right at 117-112.
Holmes, the former IBF champion now close to his 36th birthday, simply did not have the legs or power left to unhinge the champion.
— PA 
The world heavyweight champion, Riddick Bowe, said yesterday he had agreed to a rematch with Evander Holy- field, whom he dethroned last November.
‘My manager is working out the details of the rematch.
I am the champion of the world and will beat him again,’ Bowe said.
Holyfield announced his retirement from boxing after losing to Bowe by a unanimous points decision
FIONA HANSON/PA
Boxing clever: Chris Eubank (left) copes with all that challenger, Lindell Holmes, can throw at him during a successful WBO title defence at Olympia
Morley Street dashes back into Cheltenham picture
MORLEY STREET's hat was back in the Champion Hurdle ring yesterday after persuading trainer, Toby Balding, that he retains his dash in a crucial gallop on Saturday.
The 1991 Cheltenham hero has fallen from grace this season, showing a poor attitude and worse form, most recently when tailed off last behind Mole Board at Sandown a fortnight ago.
But he was re-introduced in the betting (at 10-1 by Coral and 14-1 by Ladbrokes) after Balding confirmed yesterday: ‘He's pleased me and has scoped clear.’
Morley Street is one of 11 entries for the Kingwell Hurdle at Wincanton on Thursday, but Balding is likely to avoid taking on Champion Hurdle favourite, Muse, there and send him straight to the Festival.
‘He'll only run if Flown is so impressive at Fontwell tomorrow that Richard Dunwoody, Morley Street's regular rider, decides to ride him instead,’ explained Balding.
‘I don't need him to have another run before Cheltenham.
I'd only send him to Wincanton if a new jockey comes into the equation, and needs to get to know him.’
Balding is at a loss to explain what has been wrong with Morley Street.
After his latest defeat, Morley Street earned one of the Timeform Black Book's more dramatic pieces of advice: ‘Best left severely alone’.
Balding shrugged: ‘I was actually away at the time, but I suspect the ground wasn't what we thought it was.
If you look at the very slow times, I think you'll find it was pretty dead old ground.’
Definitely running at Wincanton is the Irish mare, Sanndila. — PA
Record-breaker Murray aims for Toronto
YVONNE MURRAY has suddenly emerged as a contender for a trip to the world indoor championships in Toronto next month.
She has been rebuilding her confidence after her Barcelona setback — and after breaking the European, Commonwealth and UK all-comers' 2,000 metres record in 5min 40.90sec at the TSB International in Birmingham at the weekend, the Musselburgh runner says she will consider running the 3,000m in Toronto.
Murray's new all-comers' mark was one of six set on Saturday — along with Olympic champion Maksim Tarasov's 5.81m pole vault, Jon Edwards's 17.16m triple jump and Michael Johnson's incredible 400m in 45.14, which could have been a world record if he had not eased up.
But perfectionist Noureddine Morceli felt his two all-comers' marks — 3:50.70 for the mile as well as 3:34.73 for the 1,500m en route— were no consolation for just missing out on Eamonn Coghlan's world mile record.
Colin Jackson predicted that his pal, Linford Christie, could join him in a double world championship assault.
Olympic champion Christie, who was flying home to Britain yesterday after an eight-week training stint in Australia, has consistently protested he would not put his new-found sprint supremacy on the line over 60m at the world indoor championships.
But Jackson, whose latest majestic triumph in Birmingham confirmed him as hot favourite for the 60m hurdles in Toronto, reckons Christie is in such good shape, he could be persuaded to change his mind.
‘I can tell you he's running quicker than at the same time last year,’ said the Welshman, confident that Christie is capable of matching Canadian Bruny Surin's 1993 world best of 6.45.
Next Saturday, Jackson could be on the receiving end of a hammering from Christie, when the pair meet over 60m at the national indoor championships in Birmingham.
Canadian athletics officials have to decide whether injured sprinter, Ben Johnson, can compete in Toronto next month after he pulled out of Saturday's national qualifiers.
Johnson arrived in Winnipeg for the Canadian championships, but his advisers notified organisers late on Friday that a week-old hamstring injury had not healed sufficiently to enable him to race in Saturday's 60 metres.
Bruny Surin won the event in 6.59, and Derrick Sutherland was second in 6.67.
Normally that would mean they qualified for the world indoor event, but Johnson has the option of appealing to Athletics Canada for one of Canada's two 60m berths.
Christie leads the way in 25-0 rout
MENZIESHILL and John Christie yesterday combined to produce a devastating performance in the European club championship, when Amit Bucharest were beaten 25-0 in the B Division in Basle.
The Dundee club proceeded to win the event with a maximum record.
Scotland's most deadly striker scored 14 goals in the game, and he received good assistance from Kenny Stibbles, who scored seven, and Paul Golden, who hit another four, as the Scots recorded the highest score ever in a European indoor championship match.
Christie also made his mark on Saturday morning by scoring five times in Menzieshill's 9-4 defeat of the Welsh side, Northop Hall.
Later in the day, Oslo were beaten 19-2 by the Scots.
This time round, the damage was done by Billy McPherson and Paul Golden, who scored 11 goals between them.
With Bucharest out of the way yesterday morning, the championship then rested on the confrontation between Menzieshill and Basler.
The Scots went into the game requiring just a draw to take the title, but there was no stopping them in their fifth successive victory, by 5-2.
In the A Division of the women's championship in Berlin, Scotland's representatives, Western Klick Photopoint, had a disappointing final day.
They were beaten 3-2 in the semi-finals by the eventual winners, Berlin, and then went down 4-2 against the English side, Hightown, in the play-off for the bronze medals.
The Glasgow girls were particularly disappointed in losing out to Berlin in the semi-finals.
The host club's third goal was somewhat controversial, as the Scots appeared to be wrongly penalised when the umpire awarded Berlin a penalty corner.
Crowd trouble spoils a perfect day for India
THE England manager, Keith Fletcher, said rowdy behaviour by sections of a frenzied 45,000 crowd watching the third and final Test in Bombay yesterday had marred an otherwise perfect performance by India.
Phil DeFreitas was hit on the head by a missile thrown by a spectator.
He was one of three England players who complained to the umpires about being pelted by objects.
Vinod Kambli and Sachin Tendulkar, both raised in Bombay, were instrumental in whipping up their home supporters as they savaged England's attack in a stand of 194.
India were 397 for three and take a 50-run first-innings lead into the fourth day.
To make matters worse, DeFreitas also dropped a vital catch and had his bowling plundered as any cause for England optimism evaporated.
Fletcher said: ‘Phil asked to move away from his position on the boundary because he was hit by a little battery and also had more of those and the odd bottle thrown at him.
Alex Stewart had a Coke bottle thrown past him and Phil Tufnell also had various things directed at him.
It may have started a bit playfully but I thought it got out of hand.
‘I think it was a bit sad that this kind of thing happened — for the Indian Board, the players and the cricket lovers — because it spoilt a very good day for India,’ he added.
DeFreitas's miss was the turning point of the day, with Kambli on 39 of his eventual 164 not out when the Lancashire all-rounder misjudged a straightforward boundary catch off John Emburey.
Slow left-armer Tufnell had just removed opener Navjot Sidhu for 79 in the 13th over of the day, to leave India 174 for two, when Kambli charged Emburey but failed to connect properly.
DeFreitas circled under the ball at long off but it slipped through his up-stretched hand and over the boundary rope.
Armed with the new ball just before lunch, DeFreitas was then thrashed for 15 runs from the first over of his spell.
And, from the first over after lunch, Kambli and Tendulkar savaged another 14 off him.
In all DeFreitas's figures yesterday were 5-1-32-0.
Kambli, on 20 overnight with India resuming at 144 for one, was also let off on 119 when Graham Gooch spilled a waist-high catch at first slip off Chris Lewis.
Kambli's maiden Test 100 sent the crowd wild, while Tendulkar marked his first Test appearance on his home ground by scoring a more watchful 78.
Tufnell deserved his two wickets, England's only successes on yet another gruelling day.
— PA
Gilford warms to Ryder Cup theme with Morocco win
From Mike Britten Agadir
DAVID GILFORD retained his Moroccan Open title with a hard-earned one-stroke victory over England rival Jamie Spence and Caribbean newcomer Stephen Ames here yesterday.
Gilford's success on the King's Links, where he returned a nine-under-par total of 279, earned him £62,500 and considerably strengthened his claim for a Ryder Cup place against the US in September.
The 27-year-old from Crewe who farms a dairy herd in his spare time, was the name in the envelope at the last Ryder contest two years ago.
He did not play in the last-day singles when American Steve Pate withdrew because of injury.
Since then Gilford has nursed an ambition to become a major figure in the game and has proved one of the strong men on the PGA European tour.
He won all five of his singles matches in England's Dunhill Cup triumph at St Andrews last October.
His victory here was a tribute to his quiet persistence in an intriguing struggle in the hot afternoon sunshine.
Gilford forged a three-stoke lead when he chipped in at the seventh but first Spence, with birdies at the tenth and eleventh, then Ames with strikes at the fourteenth and fifteenth, cut his lead to only one.
Ames, who went so close to winning in Madeira last month, then birdied the seventeenth as well to join Gilford on nine under par on the last tee with Spence one stroke behind.
But whereas Gilford secured his par 4, Spence could not birdie to force a tie, and Ames, in going for outright victory, was too aggressive and overshot the green.
When his par-saving putt of 15 feet pulled up short of the hole, Gilford was assured of his third European victory.
‘This is the best start I have made to any season and it is the best four rounds I have ever put together,’ he said.
He was sixth in Madeira, ninth in Dubai and tenth last week in Tenerife.
Spence and Ames both shot 72 to tie on 280, each winning £32,550.
Sweden's Robert Karlsson, who was runner-up last year in Rabat, was fourth.
Leading Scot was Adam Hunter after a 72 for 291 that gave him a share of 13th place and a cheque for £5,783.
But the one who made the most impact and will probably pay dearly for his injudicious comments during the week was Colin Montgomerie.
His comment that the Moroccan event which this year was given an extra cash injection of £125,000, was a ‘bit of an amateur sham’, has upset the local organisers, and European tour chief executive Ken Schofield.
He says he will examine press reports before deciding what action to take against Montgomerie, and whether to impose a fine under tour regulations.
Yesterday Montgomerie remained unrepentant.
He said: ‘I do not retract anything.
It will be very wrong if what I said gets me into trouble.
I feel officials have to be able to accept criticism.’
Montgomerie finished in a share of 20th place after a closing 70 for 293.
Ross Drummond (72) was on 297 to be 44th, one ahead of Gary Orr (74).
Brian Marchbank, who closed with 79 for 305, was among the reserve money in 66th place.
Smith men regain Scottish crown
By WH Kemp
IN A FINAL in which both sides were attempting to exploit their opponents' mistakes, David Smith's Perth team regained the Bell's Scottish Championship at Kirkcaldy yesterday, defeating the holders, Hammy McMillan's Stranraer, by 5-3.
It was a silent final, one of the decisive points being David Smith's decision to quietly take an easy single at the fourth end rather than wait for a more decisive 2 at the later end.
Smith's mini gamble paid off for two ends later he stole a single to tie the score at 1-1.
Here McMillan's draw weight with last stone was perfect but the stone didn't curl as expected over the last few yards.
He was only a fraction out.
When McMillan was short by inches at the seventh, Smith drew the button and got two on a measure.
That put the Perth team 4-2 ahead and well on the way to the title.
Over the five days of the championship there have  been rumblings about the ice and the stones.
Yesterday's semi-finalists were allowed to select their own set of stones.
Under uncertain conditions, Smith's team came into their own — as they showed in winning the world title in Winnipeg two years ago.
Graeme Connal had an especially good game at third while Peter Smith and David Hay's made no serious mistakes.
Now they'll represent Scotland in Geneva in the world championship next month.
For David Smith it will be his sixth time in a Scotland blazer (five times as skip); for Peter Smith it's the fifth time.
930222 
Girl, 9, charged with baby murder attempt
A GIRL aged 9 appeared in Paisley Sheriff Court yesterday charged with attempting to murder a baby in her pram by trying to suffocate her.
The girl, accompanied by a policewoman and two social workers, was seen in private by Sheriff George Crozier, who sat with his gown and wig on.
Police and officials cordoned off corridors leading to the courtroom while the girl made a three-minute appearance.
The girl, who cannot be named for legal reasons, was then led out the back door of the court building and taken to the social work department.
The girl was charged with attacking the nine-week-old baby in Well Street, Paisley, last Monday.
The charged alleged that the girl placed her hand over the baby's mouth, compressed her nose to the danger of her life, and attempted to murder her.
The defence solicitor, Robert Kerr, said later: ‘No plea or declaration was made to the court and the girl was remanded in custody for a week for further inquiries to be carried out.
‘The sheriff made an order placing the girl into the care of the local authority's social works department.’
A child as young as nine would normally go before the children's panel unless the reporter to the panel referred the case to the sheriff court, which is extremely rare.
The age of criminal responsibility is eight in Scotland, against ten in England.
RE philosophy
Nigel Bruce's letter (Points of View, 16 February) has the heading, ‘Religious education encrusted in myths and fantasies’.
This sweeping and quite unsubstantiated assertion is but one man's opinion and has no more weight than another's, for example, my own which is completely contrary.
However, neither Mr Bruce's opinion nor mine are relevant to the matter under discussion.
In the last analysis the opinions on such matters which carry weight are those of the parents of the pupils concerned.
The UN Declaration of Human Rights states: ‘Parents have a prior right to choose the kind of education that shall be given to their children.’
The European Charter is even more specific.
I would remind Mr Bruce that in Scottish schools today the general bias is humanistic and it is the Christian parents who are being denied their rights.
Mr Bruce, in the latter part of his letter, uses the emotive word ‘indoctrination’ differentiating, it from education.
In fact there is no real distinction.
Education is indoctrination.
Each college of education has its own particular theory and philosophy of education and may or may not influence the trainee teacher.
However, each teacher in the end will form her/his own ‘world view’ with its basic presuppositions be they materialistic, humanistic, existentialist or whatever.
That world view will determine how she/he will influence the children for it is simply not possible for anyone to be completely objective.
The teacher is in a position of authority and, especially with younger children, almost of infallibility and so we have indoctrination, willy-nilly.
Parents have a tremendous responsibility to know how and what their children are being taught.
Welsh score
THE Welsh may be gone after the Murrayfield rugby international, but so is many a trophy from many an Edinburgh bar.
This is an old, if not distinguished, tradition.
On Scotland's Grand Slam night in 1984, for instance, some England supporters tried to steal a soup tureen from what was then the Claret Jug in Great King Street.
They managed to remove the tureen almost to the door: until, that is, they discovered the flex was plugged into the wall through a hole in the bar.
This time, the owner of Drew Nicol's pub in Cockburn Street tried a novel approach to avoid unwanted thefts.
He crowded the bar with all sorts of gee-gaws specially chosen to attract the interest of the Cambrian cousins — de luxe malt whisky boxes (minus whisky, of course), Highland mannikins (the sort of cheapo-Hong Kong poppets guaranteed to appear on That's Life), etc.
Unluckily, though, the boyos were not interested in such cheap detritus.
The choosy cymrus nabbed a hunting horn, placed with great care on the most inaccessible place of the wall.
‘The joke is,’ said Nicol, crying into his pint, ‘it was the only thing in the pub which cost me nothing.
But it had great sentimental value.’
Damn and blast, say I.
Prized memories
POTTED at last week's rock and pop Brit Awards — where pensionable music executives dish out prizes to superannuated superstars — was the Liberal Democrat president, Charles Kennedy MP.
Perhaps the 33-year-old was trying to relive those days back in 1983 when he was the youngest in the House.
He certainly was at this wrinklefest.
Even so, one other distinguished guest claims ‘youngish’ Charles left the extravaganza in a ‘catatonic’condition.
Not as catatonic as the viewers at home, I fear.
Michael Conway Teddy bears mum away
TEDDY Taylor is never off the television these days.
Any time some southern television producer wants a bit of good knockabout, he or she arranges a duel between Teresa Gorman, the Billericay battleaxe, and Teddy, the Southend shouter.
Good entertainment it is, too, even though no one knows the winner in the end, since both Essex MPs are usually still shouting each other down when the credits roll.
Despite all that, few people have a bad word for Teddy.
He is unfailingly polite and tries desperately to understand other people's views.
Even when he waves a noose, he holds it with a velvet glove.
Now the Diary learns his mother Minnie, who is nearing 90, is to join him in Southend at the end of March after living most of her days in Glasgow.
We wish her well, but advise her not to take a bathing costume.
After all, Teddy once insisted on taking a dip in Southend to prove there was nothing in the European Commission's condemnation of the beach.
We would hate to see him invite his mother to a similar jaunt, even for the best of motives.
What a comedian!
ATTEMPTING to bring order to a recent meeting of the Socialist group at the European parliament, Jean Pierre Cot managed inadvertently to produce quite the opposite effect, according to a story emanating from the mouth of David Martin, the Lothian MEP who glories in the high falutin' title of vice-president of the assembly.
He explains that although the parliament itself enjoys simultaneous translation facilities, the group meetings have no such luck.
In order to communicate, it break itself down into small groups and appoints an in-house trusty to translate the speeches, allowed to be made in only a limited number of major languages (tip — Portuguese is not one them).
When there is disagreement, of course, the whole place turns into the tower of Babel.
This is where Jean Pierre intervened.
Banging the table, he shouted ‘order’, and continuing in English — to the amazement of members — he said he came from a noble family in Normandy and in Normandy, they were used to doing things in an orderly way.
Angry defiance again rent the air.
‘What this chamber needs is a little Norman wisdom!’ barked M Cot, to the amused collapse of the Socialist Group (British Section).
Punkshooayshun
LAST week, a newspaper which sells mainly in the Glasgow area made a dig at The Scotsman.
Here we print the top of one of their business cards.
Notice something funny?
At least for a ‘publisher's’?
Load of old bull
CURIOUS what people will buy and, indeed, sell.
A press release from the Alice Import-Export company promises just above a fiver for any cattle gallstones you manage to retrieve.
‘Dried old cows and retired old bulls are more likely to have gallstones,’ they helpfully inform.
Although how they can tell bovine gallstones from, say, the human variety is nobody's business.
And the purpose of collecting these biliary concretions?
Why, ‘for over 200 years, gallstones have been used as an ingredient for producing Chinese medicine for controlling fever with similar effect of antibiotics.’
Eh?
I always thought that was rhinoceros horn.
Given a stock reply
A READER writes that she has been trying for weeks to find the outcome of the Prime Minister's ‘Taking Stock’ exercise.
Determined to arrange a meeting to discuss it (postponed as it has been from summer to autumn, autumn to December, December to ‘early in the the New Year’ and so on…), she rang the Scottish Office direct in an attempt to find out the proposed date of revelation and publication.
After being passed from one civil servant to another, an embarrassed underling finally admitted ‘he only wished he knew’ confessing ‘the trouble is, we have no control over it up here; it's all being done down in London.’
His name, we hasten to add, was not I Lang.
‘We can always tell what Matt's had for dinner…
This looks like split pea soup!’
For all the first-glance goriness that has led to several bans, Jim Rose's surreal sideshow is too fantastical and funny to be taken seriously, says Craig McLean
Oh what a circus, oh what a freak show
‘I THOUGHT I was still standing and then I realised I was on the floor.’
Richard, a student at Glasgow Technical College, is leaning outside, ashen-faced and soon, most probably, bruise-faced.
‘It was the razor blades that did it for me,’ he reckons.
Sure enough, it was just as the second, regurgitated blade appeared, dangling on a length of thread from Jim Rose's mouth, that Richard had collided suddenly and rather violently with the floor of Strathclyde University Union's level eight hall.
Richard has never fainted before.
He doesn't consider himself squeamish.
He even went to see Hell Raiser III last night, ‘and that didn't bother me at all.
Not half as much as that did’.
That's that Jim Rose Feeling for you…
‘Unlike most rock bands that will do practically anything to become controversial,’ drawls the man himself before the show, ‘our main focus is to keep controversy down.
If we wanted to be tabloid fodder we easily could be.
It's my job to make atrocities palatable.’
Rose looks drained on this, only the second night of his Circus Sideshow's second and largest UK tour.
Last night it was Dublin, the night before filming The Word in London.
Their debut British television performance recorded late last year in their home town of Seattle for The Word scored 400 complaining calls.
So far the ‘live’ forays of this ‘grunge circus’(sick, or more to the point sick) have resulted in bans by outraged councillors in Portsmouth and Bristol and concerned universities in Edinburgh.
If this is making atrocities palatable for not a few concerned citizens the aftertaste is a bit too much.
But not too much for James and his pal Andrew, for whom aftertaste should be the least of their worries.
They had just partaken of ‘bile beer’, as brewed and purveyed by Matt ‘the tube’ Crowley.
Matt is a 6ft-plus bald former pharmacist from Montana.
He is also The Duke of Puke.
The Earl of Hurl.
Plastic tubing, 7ft of it, appears on stage with him then disappears up his nose into what I presume is his stomach.
Into a container connected to the (exterior) end Rose pours four bottles of beer, a dash of tomato sauce, a smidgin of chocolate sauce and, for that subtle garnish, a dollop of milk of magnesia.
This vile cocktail, this blended brew from a malevolent Moulinex, is forced by a plunger down the tube and into Crowley's tum-tum.
It is a putrid pink colour.
Moments later, after some ‘internal juggling’, it reappears from Crowley's gizzard and once again fills the container.
It is a ghastly green colour.
‘We can always tell what Matt's had for dinner,’ cackles Rose.
‘This looks like split pea soup!’
If it is it must have been with croutons, since those lumpy floaters weren't there when the liquid-lunch-from-hell embarked on its inward journey.
‘Bonus puke!’
Rose announces triumphantly.
‘A WEE bit sicky.
You could taste the stomach off it.’
Quite how James, a tattooist, knows what stomach tastes like remains a mystery.
If anyone should know, I guess it's him.
‘It tasted fine,’ James beams, ‘better than the beer they serve in here.’
‘It tasted good,’ slurs Andrew, drunk but happy.
‘I might go and see them in Edinburgh tomorrow as well.’
The Jim Rose Circus Sideshow goes for such audience participation in a big way.
Get the public involved, the rationale seems to be, and the public will always come back for more.
So Rose, a smooth-talking and mirth-making ringmaster who seems a wired embodiment of every snake oil shyster and showman there ever was, pulls the strings and baits the crowd.
Do we want to see him hammer nails up his nostrils?
‘Yeeeeaah!’
Have a dollar bill staple-gunned to his head?
‘Wooooh!’
Have three girls stand on his chest as he lies on a bed of nails?
‘All riiight!’
He yells: ‘I got a strong back!
I got a tough back!’
He also got a teabag back, heavily perforated.
Nothing, however, floods out — no blood, no gore, no hassle.
Likewise with Torture King, festooned with 40 pins piercing his flesh and a needle through his throat.
Later on the 40 pins will reveal themselves to be tiny light bulbs.
Torture King places a circular fluorescent light bulb on his head and touches an open electrical circuit.
His body and halo light up.
Way to go Electric Jesus, truly we have seen the light.
It is this sense of the unreal, the surreal, that saves the Jim Rose Circus Sideshow.
Is this not ethically dubious pseudo-masochism at play?
Is this satisfying everyone's innate, latent, hopefully minimal blood lust?
Or just catalysing it?
Blades and knives are endemic on our streets — do we really need sword swallowers and self-mutilators on the stage, supposedly in the name of art and entertainment?
Most definitely.
The Circus, for all its at-first-glance goriness, is too weird, too fantastical, to be aped elsewhere.
It is also too freaking funny to be taken seriously.
If it helps to view the circus as a horror show then it's Carry on Screaming.
‘I come from the background of human marvels,’ says Rose, a globally travelled street performer for 12 years before forming the circus in 1991.
‘That is, people who were born normal and make themselves freaks through altering the body.’
So Rose preaches endurance and strength, focus and discipline of the kind that lets The Amazing Mr Lifto pierce his nipples and suspend a chain and concrete block from them.
And is that another strategically placed ring piercing Lifto's naked body?
Yep.
Two steam irons are hooked to Lifto's pendulous manhood.
‘Is Glasgow too conservative for this?’ teases Rose.
‘Noooo!’ goes Glasgow's massed, lusty reply.
Lifto tiptoes and teeters and swings.
‘We're college educated, we've made the decision to do this,’ Rose states matter of factly.
‘I had a successful career myself that I could have pursued had I opted to.’
Which was?
‘I was a fund-raiser for liberal politics.’
Bit of a radical change of direction?
‘Well,’ he shrugs, ‘I'm still liberal.’
Take the strain: so far the forays of this ‘grunge circus’ have resulted in bans by outraged councillors and concerned universities
Sir Dick White: former spy chief
SIR Dick White, former chief of both MI5 and MI6, died at his Sussex home, on Sunday.
He was 87.
In the shadowy world of the secret services he was one of the most powerful yet least-known government servants until his cover was blown in 1967 by the US magazine Saturday Evening Post.
At that time Sir Dick was head of MI6, the secret service responsible for intelligence services overseas.
In those days the names of intelligence chiefs were guarded by the D-Notice system so British newspapers tended not to publish them.
The Saturday Evening Post scoop was relayed to British newspapers which quoted from the article and disclosed that the head of MI5 was Sir Martin Furnival-Jones.
Dick Goldsmith White was educated at Bishop's Stortford College in Hertfordshire and Christ Church, Oxford.
He also attended US universities in Michigan and California.
His move into intelligence came during the Second World War in which he served as a colonel and worked with Eisenhower's Supreme Allied Headquarters.
Sir Dick was appointed leader of the team ordered to investigate Hitler's death and took a team into war-ravaged Berlin.
Churchill wanted to be certain that Hitler was indeed dead to prevent fanatical Nazis from continuing to fight.
The team uncovered a diary belonging to Hitler's valet and later a will which was authenticated as signed by Hitler.
It also conducted lengthy interviews with survivors from Hitler's bunker and pieced together the dictator's final hours.
After the war he disappeared into the closed world of post-war intelligence with MI5 until 1956 before moving to MI6 as the real life ‘M’ made famous in fiction by James Bond creator Ian Fleming.
He was in command when the treachery of Guy Burgess and Donald McLean, George Blake and Kim Philby was uncovered, scandals which for years seriously damaged Britain's relations with the American CIA.
He was one of the men who knew that the Surveyor of the Queen's Pictures, Sir Anthony Blunt, had been recruited by the Russians long before he confessed in 1964.
It was only after Sir Dick's retirement that odd corners of his life became known.
He himself denied that the former MI5 deputy director Guy Liddell was a Russian agent during the war and he also defended Sir Roger Hollis who fell under suspicion when he was director-general of the security services.
Sir Dick was criticised for helping various spy authors with their books but the Government decided not to take any action.
Still unpublished is a biography which Sir Dick was helping author Andrew Boyle to write.
Mr Boyle died in 1991.
Sir Dick was also planning to write his own life story despite Government disapproval of such books.
He was made Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George in 1960, after the KBE in 1955.
Sir Dick and his wife, Kathleen, had four children, Adrian, Frances, Jenny and Stephen.
Three quarter-finals in Scottish Cup played
By Liz McGowan
SATURDAY was the official date for the quarter-finals of the Scottish Cup but only three of them were played.
The Highland District runs its own segment of the draw to save excessive travelling and they get one team to the quarter-final stage.
For the second year running the most travelled team in the event, Kay MacDonald (D Mackenzie, D MacLeod, S MacDonald) of Stornoway, have got to this stage and will play their match next month against Charles Outred.
When the match is played their semi-final opponents will be Jim McMenemy (John McMonagle, John Murdoch, Brian Spears) who managed to beat David Gerrard by just eight imps.
In the other half of the draw Les Steel (Barnet Shenkin, John Matheson, Victor Goldberg) had a comfortable win by 62 imps over David Shenkin.
They will meet Liz McGowan's team (Ken Baxter, Malcolm Cuthertson and Andrew McIntosh) who had more of a struggle against Douglas Piper, winning by just 15 imps.
The Gold Cup continues its second round with another upset when my team were beaten comfortably by Bob McPaul of Dundee.
Les Steel had a convincing win over Dierdre Sanders but Roy Bennett made it more difficult, beating Jim Power by a single imp.
Jockey Club squash doping allegations
FEARS that a new doping scandal was about to erupt were firmly quashed yesterday by the Jockey Club, which announced that a series of tests carried out on recent race- course flops had proved negative.
Rumours that a number of horses had been ‘got at’ had swelled following a succession of below-par performances by short-priced favourites.
Among the horses tested was Boogie Bopper, trained by champion jumps trainer Martin Pipe, who was beaten by over 50 lengths at odds of 4-6 in a hurdle race at Leicester last Thursday.
But David Pipe, the Jockey Club's Director of Public Affairs, said yesterday: ‘The tests are all clear.
There is no evidence to support any allegations of skulduggery.’
Samples from Hamanaka and Badastan, who returned with irregular heartbeats following their defeats at Leicester and Sandown last Thursday, have also proved negative.
In September 1990, three fancied horses were found to have been doped in the space of a week.
Meanwhile, the Cheltenham Festival's newest race, the £40,000 added Coral Cup, has been an instant hit with trainers.
The richest race of the meeting, on 17 March, has attracted 69 entrants, headed by the Tote Jackpot Hurdle winner, Trainglot.
However, entries for the American Express Gold Card Handicap Hurdle, the staying race which had previously carried the Coral name, have slumped to 39 from 108.
The overall number of entries for seven handicap races are also down on 1992, to 394 from 443, but Irish interest has risen sharply with 61 engaged this year, compared with 39 a year ago, which Cheltenham's managing director, Edward Gillespie, said was great news.
Bureau out to make point in needle match
By Roddy Mackenzie
TEAM Components Bureau have the chance tonight to remove any reasonable doubt about where the Royal Bank Scottish Women's league title will end up.
Their rearranged match with champions Glasgow Powerhouse, at Whitburn Academy (7:15pm), is, without question, the most significant of the season so far.
If Components Bureau can beat the champions for a second time, then they will virtually be home and dry.
However, if Powerhouse can turn the tables, the title would go down to the wire and almost certainly be decided on set difference.
What gives tonight's meeting added spice is that the original fixture between the teams last month was postponed in such controversial circumstances.
Powerhouse walked out after complaining that they had been kept waiting for 40 minutes for the court and Components Bureau claimed the points by default and then appealed unsuccessfully against the Scottish Association's decision to rearrange the fixture.
‘There is a feeling that we did not get justice off court and the players want to put things right on court,’ said the Components Bureau coach, Bob Stokes.
The Whitburn side, who eased into the Royal Bank Scottish Women's Cup final by beating Streamline Hazlehead on Saturday, believe they are in the best shape possible for the match.
‘Whereas we had a comfortable semi-final win on Saturday, Powerhouse were forced to show their hand when they were given such a hard match by Jets in their semi-final,’ said Stokes, who was an interested spectator.
Powerhouse coach, Vince Krawczyk, argued: ‘The semi-final was the best preparation possible for the match with Components.
We needed to test our resources and Jets gave us that chance.’
Powerhouse lost both Morag Walker (illness) and Pam Bell (cramp) during Saturday's semi-final win but Krawczyk is hoping both will be fit for tonight.
Su Ragazzi kept on course for their first men's league and cup by qualifying for their cup final at Meadowbank on 28 March.
The Glasgow side defeated Coatbridge 15-3, 15-5, 14-16, 15-6 in last weekend's semi-final and now face the most important eight-day spell in their history.
Su Ragazzi meet league champions West Coast in the league decider on 20 March in Glasgow before facing Jets in the cup final in Edinburgh eight days later.
Jets will have the advantage in terms of cup final experience as four of their players turned out for Telford in last year's final.
None of the Su Ragazzi players has played in a final before.
Sandra Grubb of Team Components Bureau rises to smash the ball during the Whitburn side's Scottish Cup semi-final victory over Streamline Hazlehead on Saturday
BRADLEY HUGHES' victory in the Australian Masters on Sunday has earned him a place in this year's Johnnie Walker world championship in Jamaica, the organisers said yesterday.
The Australian is the third player to qualify for the 28-man event, which will again be held in December.
World No1, Nick Faldo, is assured of a place as defending champion, while American Davis Love qualified by winning the Tournament of Champions last month.
Hughes beat compatriot, Peter Senior, on the first hole of a sudden-death play-off in Melbourne to earn a chance at the $550,000 first prize in Jamaica.
Phil Mickelson, a 22-year old rookie, won the Buick Invitational of California tournament at La Jolla by four shots, for his first victory as a professional.
Mickelson, who as an amateur won an Arizona tournament in 1991, shot a final-round, seven-under-par 65 to record a 72-hole score of 278.
The victory was worth $180,000 for the resident of nearby San Diego, and was his second on the PGA Tour.
Germans keen to back Scots event
THE GERMAN club which won the Glenfiddich International indoor tournament in Glasgow last month, Harvestehudur, from Hamburg, will be back in Scotland in January to defend their title.
Doubts about their availability arose last week, when the German Hockey Board announced an alteration to the Bundesliga season because of the 1994 European Nations Cup.
The German authorities decreed that the second weekend in January would have to be used for matches, as a weekend in February would be lost because of the European tournament.
Members of the board met at the weekend in Berlin to discuss Harvestehudur's request for a postponement in order to compete in the Glenfiddich.
It was agreed that any club invited to the Glenfiddich will be paired with a local side to allow them to play the fixture in midweek either before or after the trip to Glasgow.
A similar facility will be offered to any other Bundesliga side involved in the event.
It is a dramatic change in attitude by the Germans, for they had repeatedly stressed that domestic competitions would take priority over international events.
In making this concession, the Germans clearly want to maintain Scotland's standing in the indoor sport.
Paul Lissek, the German coach, said: ‘We wouldn't have won the gold medals in the Barcelona Olympics had it not been for our involvement in indoor hockey.’
Indeed Cees Kopelar, the Dutchman who coaches Ireland, has told the Irish authorities: ‘If you want to make your mark in hockey, clubs will have to be encouraged to participate more in the indoor game in order to develop their skills.’
The Scottish Hockey Union has remained loyal to the sport, so Scotland should have a head start on several countries in the coming seasons.
Corsie survives first-set scare to beat Gourlay
EDINBURGH's Richard Corsie notched up his second successive straight-sets win in the Midland Bank World Indoor Singles Championship in Preston yesterday.
He eased through to the quarter-finals with a 7-6, 7-2, 7-2 win over his Scottish international colleague, David Gourlay.
Corsie had to come from behind to take the opening set when Gourlay moved 6-4 ahead and then laid the shot he required to take the set on the seventh end.
Corsie, however, produced a perfect running bowl to take out Gourlay's two nearest and give him the three shots he needed to take the set.
Gourlay opened the second set with a double, but two ends later found himself two sets down after a maximum 4 and a 3 gave Corsie the set 7-2.
From that point there was no way back for the Prestwick man, and Corsie went on to add another 7-2 win in the third set, thanks mainly to a count of 4 on the third end that finally sealed Gourlay's fate.
‘The first set was incredible — it was like a final — but after I got that set David seemed to lose heart a bit,’ said Corsie later.
Gourlay agreed: ‘There's no doubt I didn't play well after that opening set — I don't know if it upset me — I suppose subconsciously it must have.’
Corsie now meets English champion, Mervyn King, in the quarter-finals tomorrow.
In yesterday's only pairs encounter, Australia's Ian Schuback and partner Cameron Curtis produced a remarkable fightback to go through to meet David Bryant and Tony Allcock in the semi-finals on Friday night.
The Australians looked to be heading out of the championship when New Zealand's Peter Belliss and Gary Lawson took the opening set 7-1 and then recovered from 0-6 down to add the second 7-6.
‘But we played a couple of soft ends and let them back into it,’ said Belliss later.
The Australians just needed three ends to take the third set with a 7-0 whitewash and then confined the New Zealanders to just three singles, one in the fourth set and two in the last, to complete a 1-7, 7-6, 7-0, 7-1, 7-2 win.
Why Lions' tour is so important to Scotland
THERE is a limit to how often history can be expected to repeat itself.
Nevertheless, the intense interest in how many Scots will make the Lions' party for New Zealand is assuredly not diluted by the fact that each of the thistle's three Grand Slams has followed hard upon just such a British Isles venture.
Namely, to South Africa in 1924 before Scotland's 1925 Grand Slam; to New Zealand in 1983 before the 1984; and to Australia in 1989 before the 1990.
Of course, there have been plenty of Lions' tours which brought no such dividend, 1951 being a case in point.
With Peter Kininmonth the only Lion in their ranks compared to the 11 of Wales, Scotland scored three tries in their 19-0 victory — the other memorable statistic that season being that Scotland overall scored seven tries to four, but wound up with the wooden spoon, where England in 1991 scored five tries to four and wound up with a Grand Slam!
Inevitably, Saturday's rout of Wales evoked the 1951 match but, though the difference was only one point, the matches had little else in common.
In 1951, Scotland eventually ran a much more fancied Welsh side off their feet and won going away, but there was no question of exercising a clinical control virtually from kick-off to no-side as there was last Saturday.
Nor was there when, in another famous victory, Scotland scored five tries to one in beating Wales 34-18 at the Arms Park in 1982 — a match perfectly encapsulated in Andy Irvine's immortal comment: ‘We looked dangerous every time Wales got the ball!’
The fact that flu and injury had precluded any live scrummaging last Wednesday had a detrimental effect, and that department will have to be better for Twickenham.
But it still wasn't that bad…
Peter Wright has done an admirable job and not just in the set scrum.
He is likely to be tested at Twickenham as never before, but a really good game there could even give the Lions' selectors food for thought.
Props who can play on either head can be doubly useful on a bruising tour.
If, perish the thought, Scotland were scarcely to win a ball from the lineout at Twickenham, this pack would probably still finish the championship having won more possession from that set-piece than any Scotland pack in living memory.
Having three genuine lineout specialists has made all the difference, not to mention Derek Turnbull and, in the Irish match, Alan Watt.
Now, however, in England, they will be up against another pack with a towering trinity and, in the 6ft10in Martin Bayfield and the 6ft8in Wade Dooley, up against bigger men.
That puts still more of a premium on shrewdly imaginative lineout tactics, married to throwing in of just the right pace and parabola.
Encouragingly, in both those respects, Scotland were superb last Saturday.
Kenny Milne again threw in beautifully and that in a wind only less bullyingly treacherous than in the Irish match.
As for Ian McGeechan, his reading of the Welsh lineout had left Scotland, in fact and figuratively, a jump ahead.
McGeechan had noted that, in the first eight lineouts against England on their own throw, the Welsh tactical deployment was different each time.
But that was only half the trick.
What to do about it was the other half, and there McGeechan and his fellow coaches excelled.
‘Playing to the referee’ is often used pejoratively but, in modern international rugby, you fail to do so at your peril.
Wales were convinced that they were one up on Scotland in having already experienced Joel Dume in their England match, while the Sassenachs' top brass reckoned Scotland would be at a definite disadvantage for the first 20 minutes.
But, once again, Scotland had done their homework, though it has to be said that Monsieur Dume was a little different from the referee of Cardiff, presumably because referees also watch videos and wince at their own sins, not least of omission.
Incidentally, the Scottish players thought he got it right both times in that Gary Armstrong had not scored, but Turnbull had.
The English pundit, John Reason, hardly gives the impression that endearing himself to Scots is high among his priorities, but many surely enjoyed his observation that, by the time Dume had peeled away the last player obscuring his verdict, Turnbull must have felt he had been down there longer than Tutankhamen.
The advent of Andy Reed  belatedly persuaded the selectors to move Doddie Weir to No8 where, between the great-hearted, combative Turnbull and an Iain Morrison now reproducing his best London Scottish form, he has so far done splendidly as an embryonic Mervyn Davies or Murray Mexted.
Obviously, though, he is still acclimatising to the berth at international level.
At Twickenham, he is going to have to play a full part in a Scottish back-row who — which has not been the case for some years — will be having to cope with, in Dewi Morris and Stuart Barnes, not only a breaking scrum-half, but a running stand-off who attacks the gain-line.
If he comes through it well, Weir has a very good chance of going to New Zealand as a versatile forward who, in that company, could find himself pulling on the No6 jersey.
His clubmate, Craig Chalmers, has maybe not played a better all-round international since New Zealand in 1990.
If that is what getting engaged does to him, the pity is that we live in a monogamous society!
Again Gavin Hastings gave what was a truly great performance by any standards.
His goal-kicking through that difficult wind was in itself something to remember.
Intriguingly, McGeechan had come to the conclusion that, no matter the uncertain footing, and seemingly somewhat extreme forward tilt of the ball, the biggest factor in his captain's goal-kicking problems at Parc des Princes could well have lain elsewhere.
To wit, that Hastings had inadvertently forsaken the preparatory little step back before moving into the kick which does for him, in terms of rhythm, what the forward press does for a golfer.
Montgomerie's complaints could be costly
SCOT Colin Montgomerie, who produced a disappointing performance in the Moroccan Open, is also facing a possible £1,000 fine for bringing the European PGA Tour into disrepute.
Montgomerie was upset after a second-round 77 in Agadir which left him 14 shots behind then leader, Jamie Spence, and criticised the set-up of the tournament.
The 29-year-old complained bitterly about pin positions, said it was stupid that players shooting scores of ‘101 and 98’ should be allowed to compete and claimed a tournament allowing such poor players should not be a Ryder Cup points-counting event.
Fellow Scot, Ken Schofield, executive director of the European PGA Tour, was not amused by Montgomerie's outburst.
Schofield said: ‘I shall be looking at all the press cuttings when I get home and deciding what action to take.
We will issue a statement later this week.’
Montgomerie, who finished joint 20th in Agadir, 14 shots behind winner David Gilford, will not be worried by a £1,000 fine — he has won more than £70,000 already this year — but will be dismayed if he is disciplined.
It is not good for a player to be considered a poor sport.
Schofield said: ‘Montgomerie must learn to accept scores of 77 without complaining.’
In contrast to Montgomerie, Gilford, who won in Agadir with a nine-under-par 279 to retain the title, and runner-up Spence, who finished on 280 with Stephen Ames of Trinidad and Tobago, flew home well satisfied with their four days' work.
Their performances have considerably boosted their chances of winning a European Ryder Cup place.
Spence, the 29-year-old Kent player, said: ‘Some of the pin positions were difficult but all the greens are sloping and you just have to accept them.
‘I don't think Colin's remarks were justified.
For myself, I thought it was a magnificent course.’
— PA
Higgins triumphs in scrappy tie
SCOTTISH starlet, John Higgins, gained a surprising but deserved victory on the opening day of the £250,000 Wickes British Open at Derby yesterday.
Higgins, 17, a practice partner of Stephen Hendry, knocked out the 1979 world champion, Terry Griffiths, 5-2 to reach the last 32.
‘It doesn't rank as my best win, but it was one of my toughest,’ said the Wishaw-based Higgins.
‘It was scrappy all the way through and both of us can play a lot better.’
Higgins's next opponent is Englishman Nick Terry, who beat the 1989 British Open finalist, Dean Reynolds, 5-3.
London's Danny Smith, provisionally ranked 297 in the world, produced another upset by beating the former runner-up, Neal Foulds, 5-4.
‘I'd never clapped eyes on the guy before,’ said a stunned Foulds.
Smith, a second-season professional from Crouch End, not surprisingly described his victory as ‘the best so far.
In truth, I was just hoping to give him a good game.’
The 19-year-old almost fell victim to a great comeback, however.
Foulds came back from 4-0 down to take the match into a decider.
‘I fancied my chances then,’ added Foulds.
‘The adrenalin was pumping and my experience should have stood me in good stead.
But all credit to Danny, he held himself together superbly.’
Australian veteran, Eddie Charlton, dashed off a 5-0 victory over Welshman Colin Roscoe, while his fellow countryman, Warren King, came through 5-2 against former European Open champion, Tony Jones.
John Higgins: reckons he can play a lot better
Bans for seven
LIVINGSTON Bulls' Great Britain internationalist, Iain Maclean, and Cameron King (Edinburgh Burger Kings) have each been suspended for four games for their part in the Scottish Cup final fracas at Meadowbank earlier this month, writes Roddy Mackenzie.
Maclean and King became entangled on the floor in an incident in which several other players became involved and punches were thrown.
Three others — Paul Dalrymple and John Sutherland (Kings) and Gary Williams (Bulls)— have been given two-match suspensions, while Kings' Graham Bailey and George Charters, who left the bench when not on court at the time, each receive a one-match ban.
But the matter may not end there.
The Scottish Basketball Association's executive is to debate the matter on Saturday, 6 March, and may decide on further action.
Thomson new captain
ALLAN THOMSON has been appointed captain of the Scottish Boys team and will commence his duties in the quadrangular match with France, Italy and Sweden in Sardinia from 19-21 March.
With 39 caps to his credit, Thomson is the third most capped Scot, behind Charlie Green and George Macgregor.
McAllister signs new three-year contract with Leeds United
LEEDS United captain, Gary McAllister, signed a new three-year contract after talks with manager Howard Wilkinson last night.
It will run from this summer, when the Scotland midfielder's existing agreement expires.
McAllister, 28, joined Leeds from Leicester City for £1m in the summer of 1990, and has not missed a league game.
Wilkinson said: ‘I am pleased that Gary has shown his faith in the club's future by agreeing to stay.’
Chelsea chairman, Ken Bates, has warned his entire staff — new manager, David Webb, and all — that they are on trial until the end of the season.
In a letter to season-ticket holders this week, chairman Bates warned that everyone's job at Stamford Bridge was on the line.
Bates wrote: ‘For the rest of the season every player and member of the management team is on trial.
‘If we are going to build the best stadium in England, it must be matched by the team.
Nothing less will do.
‘Inevitably, in the last few years, we have been pre-occupied with saving our ground.
That is now behind us.
The dressing-room will be under much closer scrutiny in the future.’
Meanwhile, former Tottenham player Gary Lineker's Japanese adventure got underway when he trained for the first time with his Grampus Eight teammates at Nagoya yesterday.
The team will play friendlies from April, with the league starting on 15 May.
Diego Maradona is on collision course with his Spanish club, Seville, after leaving the country without permission to play for Argentina.
The Argentinian captain returned to Buenos Aires yesterday for the match against Denmark tomorrow after club president, Luis Cuervas, had ordered Maradona to prepare for next weekend's home fixture in Spain.
CYCLING
Lille starting line
LILLE is to stage the start of the 1994 Tour de France.
Lille's mayor confirmed an agreement with Tour de France organisers for Lille to stage the prologue on 2 July followed by the first stage to Armentieres the next day.
FENCING
Hoenigman third
PAUL Hoenigman (Bellahouston) finished third in the top UK sabre competition, the Cole Cup, which was held at Croydon over the weekend.
Paul's brother, Michael, reached the last 16.
Other Scots to do well were Rory Cowan and Ben Hanley, of Heriot-Watt University, who reached the last 24.
RUGBY LEAGUE
Skills scheme
THE Rugby Football League yesterday started a new £80,000 skills awards scheme for young players.
Backed by the Government and sponsors British Fuels Ltd, the project is open to those aged between five and 17 and includes promotional kits, handbooks and certificates.
RUGBY UNION
Points progress
ONLY Alistair Donaldson made significant progress among the top points scorers in Scotland during the week.
The Currie stand-off added 12 points against Kirkcaldy to total 247 for the season.
SKIING
No Super-G race to be held
THE International Ski Federation has decided not to re-schedule the men's super giant slalom, cancelled at the Alpine world championships in Japan earlier this month.
Sture Sivertsen, of Norway, took his first major individual title by pipping Vladimir Smirnov, of Kazakhastan, by 3.9sec in the 10km cross-country race at the World Nordic Championships, in Falun, Sweden, yesterday.
SQUASH
Donaldson top
THE victory in the North of Scotland Open lifted Emma Donaldson to the top of the Scottish Women's Grand Prix rankings.
The top three after the final counting event — the Dalmahoy Open next month — will be automatic selections for Scotland's team for the European championships in France in May.
TENNIS
Lendl concedes to Woodforde
INJURY forced Ivan Lendl to concede defeat in the final of the US Indoor tournament against unseeded Australian Mark Woodforde in Philadelphia.
Fourth seed Lendl retired after straining his left side while trailing 5-4 in the first set.
Defending champion Zina Garrison Jackson overcame Patty Fendick 6-2, 6-2 to win an all-American final in the Oklahoma City Classic.
YACHTING
Sailors on course
ROBIN Knox-Johnston and Peter Blake are still well ahead of schedule in their bid to sail round the world in under 80 days.
Their 85ft catamaran Enza New Zealand is 1,118 miles up on her pre-planned programme after 22 days.
Lifters can continue
TWO Britons sent home from the Barcelona Olympics after failing drug tests carried out by the Sports Council will not be disciplined by their international federation, who said yesterday it had no jurisdiction in the case of Andrew Davies and Andrew Saxon.
They remain free to compete, as the British Amateur Weightlifting Association decided last year to take no action against them.
The Sports Council will not be happy with the decision and must now decide whether to go ahead with a threat to cut BAWA's annual grant.
Meanwhile, in Budapest, a top weightlifting official, Tamas Ajan, denied that Olympic champion Alexander Kurlovich had tested positive for steroids before the Games.
Ajan, secretary general of the International Weightlifting Federation (IWF), was reacting to coach Vasily Alexeyev who branded Belarussian Kurlovich a drug cheat in a newspaper interview last week.
But Ajan, back from an IWF meeting in Egypt, said: ‘The IWF tested Kurlovich four times in 1992.
All were negative.’
Alexeyev claimed Kurlovich, who successfully defended his super-heavyweight title in Barcelona, had tested positive for steroids just before the Games and was ‘zero’ without them.
He said he had taken Kurlovich to Barcelona aware of the positive test and fearful disclosure might bring on a dope scandal similar to the Bulgarian one which shook the 1988 Games.
But Ajan said: ‘Kurlovich was tested out of competition before the Olympics in mid-June 1992.
In Barcelona he was among the 261 who were tested between July 20 and 30.’
He had also been tested in December last year.
A weightlifting official, who preferred to remain anonymous, told Reuters: ‘There is very strong opposition between Alexeyev and Kurlovich.
Kurlovich does not accept Alexeyev.
I suppose this is behind the accusations.’
Last Tuesday a top Belarussian Olympic official dismissed the allegation, suggesting intrigues within the team as the motive.
Then a second CIS trainer backed Alexeyev's version, but on Thursday Russian Olympic chief Vitaly Smirnov disagreed and on Friday Kurlovich himself hit back savagely at the accusation.
Alexeyev had also branded former Olympic champions Yuri Zkharevich and Anatoly Khrapaty as drug cheats.
Ajan said: ‘The IWF will not act officially purely on a basis of a media accusation.
‘Doping makes people so distrustful that if someone jumps two cms longer in a long jump, a cm higher in the pole-vault or lifts 2.5 kgs more than I do, the accusation is there.’
Kurlovich was convicted and banned in 1984 for smuggling anabolic steroids, but returned to the sport two years later, convinced ‘drugs do not contribute to sport’.
REUTER EVI DT
Jacklin goes native at Dalmahoy
By Ian Wood
AN ADDITIONAL fillip to the £625,000 1993 Tartan Tour will be the presence in the field for the Tartan Special Professional Championship of Tony Jacklin, the first Briton since Harry Vardon to hold the Open and US Open titles simultaneously.
Jacklin, 48, the former Ryder Cup player and captain, who now lives at Biggar, plans to campaign on the senior circuits of the world when he comes of age next year.
He has, by way of a build-up, laid out a programme of events which will involve him in both the European and Scottish PGA tours.
His appearance at the Scottish Professional Championship at Dalmahoy from 20 to 23 May will be his first on the Tartan Tour as it is now constituted, though he played in the Northern Open at Nairn in 1964.
His schedule includes the Benson & Hedges International at St Mellion and the Volvo PGA Championship at Wentworth in May, the Dunhill British Masters at Woburn in June, the Murphy's English Open at Forest of Arden in August and the GA European Open at East Sussex National in September.
In Scotland, after Dalmahoy, he intends to play in the Clydesdale Bank Northern Open at Nairn Dunbar in June and the Gore-Tex Challenge at Cawder in August.
If invited, he would play in the Bell's Scottish Open at Gleneagles in July, the week before the Open at Royal St George's for which he is entered.
Though his eyes are mainly on the lucrative US Seniors Tour, Jacklin also plans to lend support to the more recently established European Seniors circuit.
His first seniors outing, however, may well be in Japan, where qualification is based on a player being in his 50th year, rather than his actually having reached the 50 mark.
In the Scottish Professional Championship, Jacklin will be joined by, among others, Eyemouth's Craig Maltman, the Kenyan Open champion and, it is hoped, by international stars such as Colin Montgomerie.
They will challenge Paul Lawrie, the young King's Links man, for his title and the £10,000 first prize which goes with it.
Jacklin has not won a title since recording the last of his 14 tournament victories on the European Tour in the 1982 PGA Championship.
Tony Jacklin: makes his Tartan Tour debut in Scottish Professional Championship
Hughes earns ticket to Jamaica
BRADLEY HUGHES' victory in the Australian Masters on Sunday has earned him a place in this year's Johnnie Walker world championship in Jamaica, the organisers said yesterday.
The Australian is the third player to qualify for the 28-man event, which will again be held in December.
World No1, Nick Faldo, is assured of a place as defending champion, while American Davis Love qualified by winning the Tournament of Champions last month.
Hughes beat  compatriot , Peter Senior, on the first hole of a sudden-death play-off in Melbourne to earn a chance at the $550,000 first prize in Jamaica.
Phil Mickelson, a 22-year old rookie, won the Buick Invitational of California tournament at La Jolla by four shots, for his first victory as a professional.
Mickelson, who as an amateur won an Arizona tournament in 1991, shot a final-round, seven-under-par 65 to record a 72-hole score of 278.
The victory was worth $180,000 for the resident of nearby San Diego, and was his second on the PGA Tour.
Dave Rummells, who took a one-stroke lead into the final round, shot a 70 and finished alone in second at six-under 282.
Payne Stewart finished third at 283.
SCOTTISH starlet, John Higgins, gained a surprising but deserved victory on the opening day of the £250,000 Wickes British Open at Derby yesterday.
Higgins, 17, a practice partner of Stephen Hendry, knocked out the 1979 world champion, Terry Griffiths, 5-2 to reach the last 32.
‘It doesn't rank as my best win, but it was one of my toughest,’ said the Wishaw-based Higgins.
‘It was scrappy all the way through and both of us can play a lot better.’
Higgins's next opponent is Englishman Nick Terry, who beat the 1989 British Open finalist, Dean Reynolds, 5-3.
London's Danny Smith, provisionally ranked 297 in the world, produced another upset by beating the former runner-up, Neal Foulds, 5-4.
‘I'd never clapped eyes on the guy before,’ said a stunned Foulds.
Smith, a second-season professional from Crouch End, not surprisingly described his victory as ‘the best so far.
In truth, I was just hoping to give him a good game.’
The 19-year-old almost fell victim to a great comeback, however.
Foulds came back from 4-0 down to take the match into a decider.
‘I fancied my chances then,’ added Foulds.
‘The adrenalin was pumping and my experience should have stood me in good stead.
But all credit to Danny, he held himself together superbly.’
The defending champion, Jimmy White, had a 5-4 victory over Canadian Brady Gollan, helped by breaks of 107 and 117.
Australian veteran, Eddie Charlton, dashed off a 5-0 victory over Welshman Colin Roscoe, while his fellow countryman, Warren King, came through 5-2 against former European Open champion, Tony Jones.
Willie Thorne came from 3-2 down to beat Jimmy Michie 5-3. — PA 
Exiles in turmoil as players take over coaching
By Harry Pincott
A PLAYERS' revolt at London Scottish has led to the resignation of the coaching staff and the First XV taking over the coaching in the run-up to the last four league games.
When Alastair McHarg left for a month's business trip to India last week, he left sevens supremo and club stalwart, Andy Cushing, along with Mike Lovett, in charge of the coaching until his return next month.
However, a players' meeting, led by captain Richard Cramb, decided that they had no confidence in the two left to mind the shop in McHarg's absence.
As a consequence, both Cushing and Lovett resigned, as did the 44-times capped McHarg when the news was relayed to him in India, which is a sad way to end a relationship which stretches back for well over two decades.
It's not the happiest of positions for London Scottish, who have to win three of their remaining four matches to make sure of staying in Division I of the Courage League.
Their first game is against Saracens on 13 March, and that is followed by London Irish, Bath and Northampton.
A spokesman for the club said yesterday that the players realised the serious nature of their action, but that they wanted their fate in their own hands.
‘If they stay up they will take the kudos, but they will also accept the blame if they go down.’
In addition to doing without their coaching staff, London Scottish will also be minus the services of their two Scotland sevens squad members, Mark Appleson and international flanker Iain Morrison.
The two are not being played in the First XV at the moment because they will not be available for the league matches, as they will be in Australia and Fiji with the national squad.
However, prop Paul Burnell will be back for the league games, while Allan and Margot Wells will continue in their role of fitness and speed trainers.
It will take a super-human effort on the part of the players to survive in the top bracket, but they know that it is all down to them now — they will have no excuses if they fail.
John Mackay, Royal Mail's genial director and general manager, handed over the £1,000 cheque to Brian Rookley, the SSRU president, at the weekend.
Over the past four years, Royal Mail have poured more than £11,000 into all levels of Scottish rugby in a combination of local sponsorship and sports awards.
Lewis could defend in Glasgow World champion looks past Tucker
By Hugh Keevins
SCOTLAND now has at least a tenuous connection with the WBC heavyweight championship contest between the holder, Lennox Lewis, and Tommy Tucker in Las Vegas in May.
The contracts for the first defence of the title given to Lewis when Riddick Bowe was stripped of the distinction by the WBC were signed by the fighter and his manager, Frank Maloney, in Glasgow yesterday and faxed to Tucker's handler, Don King, in New York.
Lewis's connection with Scotland in general(he fought as an amateur during the Commonwealth Games in Edinburgh) and the city of Glasgow in particular may soon be strengthened beyond the use of a fax machine.
The first Briton this century to hold a world heavyweight title appeared before the media yesterday at the start of a promotional tour of the ‘if this is Monday, it must be Glasgow’ variety and hinted that his next visit could be in his working apparel.
Making Tucker the 23rd opponent out of 23 to lose to Lewis as a professional is the champion's main objective.
Beating Bowe, whom he defeated at the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul, is clearly next on his list of priorities and a fight in Glasgow's Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre, which has proved itself an ideal venue for world title contests, could be a possibility.
Lewis, whose whistle-stop tour of the UK is designed to bring him closer to the public, sceptics and supporters alike, was born in London's East End in 1965 but emigrated to Canada with his mother, Violet, who accompanied him yesterday, at the age of 12.
When he turned professional in 1989, Lewis, who had won Olympic Gold wearing the Maple Leaf on his vest, embraced the Union Flag once again.
The British, Commonwealth and European titles he has won since then were all taken while fighting in London.
It would be churlish to suggest Lewis fights under a flag of convenience or that his status as world champion has only been able to be enjoyed by default.
Lewis earned a shot at Bowe's title after destroying ‘Razor’ Ruddock in October and the WBC acted honourably when stripping the champion of his title for reneging on his promise to fight the number one contender.
The man who has reversed the image of the horizontal heavyweight from Britain now has a clearly defined picture of the future in his head.
‘I'm building up my credibility by fighting someone like Tony Tucker while Bowe loses his by taking on people like his last opponent, Michael Dokes,’ he said.
‘I will meet Bowe somewhere down the line and prove he's a paper tiger.
He's been shooting off his mouth about me and I'll close it for him.
Bowe is running scared.
He's chicken.’
The fight with Tucker, in the meantime, will earn Lewis a contractually agreed 80 per cent of £6m and with a clause in the agreement which gives him and his management access to the courts if King indulges in the questionable manoeuvres for which he is not unknown.
King's head for funny business has him periodically indulge in what Lewis describes as the ‘tactics of fear’ and the latest example has been to publicly demean Maloney's management of Lewis.
‘He is mischief-making on behalf of Tucker but that is only because King likes to hear himself talk,’ said the champion, who is both personable and articulate.
Once he has completed the tour of personal appearances which will take him to Newcastle, Leeds, Birmingham, Manchester and Cardiff, Lewis will, as usual, retreat to the mountains in Pennsylvania to train at altitude, play chess for recreation and focus his mind on performing the not inconsiderable feat of silencing King through the removal of his client.
Money, though it would be naive to dismiss a cut of more than £4m as an irrelevance, is not, Lewis maintains, his primary motivation for fighting Tucker.
‘People will not remember me for the amount of money I have accumulated so much as the titles I have won.
‘That is why I can say the only fear I know inside the ring is the fear of losing.
As yet, I know of nobody who could beat me.’
Mike Tyson, currently appealing against his sentence for rape, would spring to most people's minds as a formidable challenge to Lewis's assertion, but until Tyson's personal problems are sorted out, the WBC champion will concentrate on those who are available to question his belief in himself.
‘My objective is to win this fight against Tucker and then the one after that and the one after that.
We'll talk about Tyson when he comes out of prison.’
Lewis's respect is mainly reserved for his mother.
‘She brought me up well, gave me self  respect and an open mind.
Watching her struggle to overcome so many struggles gave me ambition.’
The guiding light in Lewis's life then went with her son to speak to the pupils of Bellahouston Academy and visit a retail development on the outskirts of Glasgow before he rounded off his day in the male only setting of the St Andrew's Sporting club by watching Scotland's Kris McAdam fight.
Surrounded by his manager, personal conditioner and other members of the Lewis entourage, the champion, who readily admits to having modelled himself on Muhammad Ali confessed to ready participation in the media circus.
‘The ordinary people supported me before I was made WBC champion and I now owe it to them to let the public see me,’ he said.
The next time Lewis moves among the Scottish public, it is hoped he will still be undefeated, the undisputed heavyweight champion of the world and an obvious magnate for ticket buyers.
‘I will meet Bowe somewhere down the line and prove he is a paper tiger.
He's been shooting off his mouth about me and I will close it for him’ Lennox Lewis DONALD MACLEOD Lennox Lewis: ‘The only fear I know inside the ring is the fear of losing.
As yet, I know of nobody who could beat me’
Italians call up veterans ITALY, weakened by injuries and suspension, yesterday named the veteran defenders Mauro Tassotti and Pietro Vierchowod in their team for Wednesday's World Cup tie with Portugal.
Sampdoria's Vierchowod is drafted into the heart of defence to replace suspended AC Milan sweeper Franco Baresi while fellow 33-year-old Tassotti will win his second cap at right back.
Milan's Tassotti, who last October became Italy's oldest debutant, substitutes injured Sampdoria man Moreno Mannini.
Lazio midfielder Diego Fuser will make his international debut while gifted Juventus striker Roberto Baggio has shaken off a thigh strain to play up front.
Brady and his players face test of character
By Hugh Keevins
CELTIC will tonight visit Dundee against a background of suspicion that all may not be well between the manager, Liam Brady, and elements within the boardroom.
Worsening results have prompted a discussion between Brady and the directors, who appointed him nearly two years ago.
Michael Kelly, the director whose company is responsible for Celtic's public relations, yesterday confirmed that the manager has been asked to report back to the board with his observations on how the club's performances can be improved.
Kelly, however, ventured the opinion that asking the manager for a statement on where the club were headed did not constitute a threat to Brady's position.
‘We would not ask someone for his future plans if the intention was to get rid of him,’ stressed Kelly.
Brady was yesterday reluctant to say too much on the subject of his meeting with some board members, but it was obvious that the details of what ought to have been private business becoming public knowledge had disturbed the manager.
It is expected, however, that the Irishman will make known his views at a later date.
What can be said in the meantime is that, in the current climate at Celtic Park, this internal strife is a hindrance the manager could certainly have done without.
The feeling at directorial level is that while the board accepts responsibility for the running of the club it is entitled to quiz Brady if a problem has been identified with regard to team matters.
Kelly chose not to be specific over the precise areas for concern other than to point to bad results.
‘Club directors are laymen and not football experts, which is why Liam has been asked to look at the team's problems and advise us about what he is going to do about them.
‘The manager was told when he was appointed that his was a pressure job and that the pressure would increase with good results or bad.
What I would say is that Liam was inexperienced in management when he took over at Celtic Park.
He is now an experienced manager and we want that experience to be put to Celtic's use.’
Kelly will not have it, however, that Celtic's finances have any bearing on the manager's performance.
‘Any analysis of big clubs who have tried to buy success would show that it is only a tiny minority who succeed in doing so.’
Celtic's problem is that Rangers are one of the tiny minority and they have been the pre-eminent team on a domestic level, while the other half of the Old Firm have gone four years without winning anything.
Brady does not absolve himself from criticism over his part in that state of affairs.
‘The match with Dundee is a test of character for me and my players,’ he stated.
‘It is only fair that I take the criticism.
I signed a lot of the players and I train them every day.’
The manager's problem tonight is to find a replacement for the injured Brian O'Neil, while looking for a wholehearted performance against a side whose manager, Simon Stainrod, is as relaxed as Brady is uncomfortable.
‘Celtic have problems that won't be sorted out over 90 minutes at Dens Park and Dundee will not go into this game as the underdogs,’ said Stainrod.
‘There is now a heart and a soul at this club.
When I came here at first, the side were top of the First Division, but there was no apparent feeling for the game.
Changing that attitude has brought about the biggest improvement in the team.’
The defender, Steve Pittman, now free of suspension, will be added to the Dundee side who won at Easter Road on Saturday.
Motherwell's task against Rangers at Fir Park will be to join Dundee in continuing to put plenty of distance between themselves and the clubs, Falkirk and Airdrie, who are at the foot of the table.
The Lanarkshire side are on a tidy run that has seen them lose only one of their last ten matches and they now have a strong squad to choose from after the massive injury problems of earlier in the season.
Rangers remain the model of consistency, aiming tonight for their 38th successive match without defeat.
But Walter Smith, the Ibrox manager, counselled caution as the best ally at Fir Park.
‘People will look for the same kind of victory there as Rangers got in the Scottish Cup in January.
I have always thought that league results are what matter most to Motherwell and I expect a harder game than were given that day.’
Injuries to David Robertson and Stuart McCall are delaying Smith's selection and Dale Gordon, Trevor Steven, Scott Nisbet and John Brown have been added to the squad who drew at Tannadice.
McCall's injury has returned because of the insufficient recovery time between matches and the Rangers' secretary/director, Campbell Ogilvie, is now investigating the matter of what should be done about the free Saturday that has been left in the programme before Scotland's next World Cup qualifying tie, against Portugal on 28 April.
If it is a choice between asking to play a fixture that day and cramming Rangers domestic and European games into an even tighter schedule, the decision will be an obvious one for the Ibrox club.
Gooch's misery continues as Test series whitewash looks inevitable
GRAHAM GOOCH's Indian tour of misery reached a new low yesterday as England's batting slumped again in the third and final Test in Bombay.
The England captain was out for eight — his middle stump uprooted — as a second innings collapse to 34 for three left his side struggling to avoid a 3-0 Test series whitewash.
Gooch played the shot of a weary man, completely foxed by a slower ball from Manoj Prabhakar that drifted in through a large gap between bat and pad.
He has now scored only 47 runs in his four innings during this series, with England starting today's final day on 108 for three, needing another 136 to make India bat again.
Another Test defeat, to follow the eight-wicket loss in Calcutta and the innings and 22 runs thrashing in Madras, would be difficult for Gooch to bear.
But everything has gone wrong for him since he changed his mind and toured just one last time.
The ten-week India campaign could hardly have started on a worse personal note when it was announced, just as England flew in on 29 December that his marriage was over.
Yet it was still a tour which promised to be the peak of Gooch's great 18-year international career.
His 100th Test would be the opening match of the series in Calcutta, and he also left England with 99 first-class centuries to his name.
Why, Gooch could even post his 100th hundred in his 100th Test.
But then the International Cricket Council ruled that a century for the rebel South African Breweries XI against South Africa in Johannesburg 11 years ago was not first-class.
Then there was the  controversy over how many centuries Gooch had scored and eventually it meant that the ton Gooch scored against India Under-25s at Cuttack at the end of last month was, in fact, the 99th, and not the magical 100th.
His hopes of a memorable 100th Test appearance lay in ruins a few days later.
A sick Gooch should not have played in Calcutta with a debilitating virus which developed into a chest infection.
He made only 17 and 18 but so weakened himself that he was forced to pull out of the following three-day fixture in  Vishakhapatnam .
Then, on the eve of the second Test in Madras, Gooch had his infamous encounter with a poisonous prawn that laid him low for several days and was out of the match with diarrhoea and sickness that laid him low for several days.
His team, too, have clearly been below par without Gooch's usual dependability at the top of the order.
It has been his failure and his absences which have made the batting look especially shaky.
After all, before this tour Gooch had averaged 63.31 from his 26 previous Tests as captain scoring 2,849 runs with nine hundreds and 12 fifties from his 47 innings in charge.
Gooch, now, will have to wait until this summer for that elusive 100th first-class 100.
After today there are only four one-day internationals in India before the team transfer to Sri Lanka.
And that's when Gooch will say farewell, having decided before the tour not to stay for the final fortnight.
Just before the Calcutta Test Gooch admitted that it was only the actual cricket, and not the bit in between, that he enjoyed from touring these days.
But on this trip Gooch has not even had that pleasure and it is imperative now for England's chances of winning back the Ashes from Australia this summer that their weary 39-year-old captain quickly recovers in health and spirit when he returns home on Saturday week.
Apart from Gooch, seamer Prabhakar also removed Alec Stewart and Michael Atherton as he followed up India's first innings 591 by taking three for eight in 22 balls.
Robin Smith and Mike Gatting, on 39 and 31 respectively, survived to give England some hope, though television replays showed that Gatting should have been run out when 22.
In India's innings — their highest Test total on home soil — 21-year-old Vinod Kambli converted his overnight 164 into 224, failing by just 12 runs to equal Sunil Gavaskar's individual Indian Test record.
He failed by just 12 runs to equal Sunil Gavaskar's individual India Test record the 236 not out he made against the West Indies at Madras in 1983-84.
But Kambli did beat the previous highest made against England by an Indian, Gundappa Vishwanath's 222 in 1981-82.
India added a further 194 runs yesterday with another local youngster, Praveen Amre, scoring a quickfire 57 from 74 balls and adding 101 with Kambli.
Bombay boys Kambli, Amre and Sachin Tendulkar totalled 359 runs between them in their first Test appearances on their home ground.
Home heroics: Local batsman Vinod  Kambli acknowledges the cheers after reaching his double century in Bombay
TEST CARD
Brain teaser for some Judy Yorke asks parents to try this maths test set for 13 and 14-year-olds
THERE IS something about maths that frightens the life out of otherwise normal adults.
Yet around 105,000 13 and 14-year-olds up and down the country took part in a maths challenge organised by the UK Mathematics Foundation earlier this month.
‘Adults should be able to do the questions — but many have a phobia about maths,’ said Dr Tony Gardiner, director of the maths foundation, which set the questions and organised the annual test.
‘There's a view that maths is a bag of tricks.
It isn't.’
The aim of the challenge was to encourage children to think for themselves.
‘The maths lessons for most of the year are not very thrilling,’ says Dr Gardiner.
‘We are providing an alternative view.
We are trying to encourage people to get involved in ‘real maths’.’
But even Dr Gardiner had trouble doing the last question which was one of the hardest on the whole paper.
‘The answer is important but the way you get to it is more important,’ he commented.
Here is a selection of the questions.
Answers at the bottom of next column.
1.
Which number is not divisible by four?
A.
2,345,678
B.
2,468
C.
123,456
D.
1,248
E.
8,765,432
2.
In ‘conker’ arithmetic, when a 3-er plays a 4-er, only the winner survives, and is then called an 8-er (since 8=3+4+1).
If five 2-ers play until only one is left, what will the winner be?
A.
10-er
B.
11-er
C.
14-er
D.
15-er
E.
17-er
3.
In 1991 Carl Lewis set a world record of 9.86 seconds for the 100 metre sprint.
What was his approximate average speed in miles per hour?
A.
14mph
B.
17 mph
C.
20mph
D.
23 mph
E.
26 mph
4.
Piffling Pizzas sell pizzas with diameters 4inches, 6inches, 8inches and 10inches for 2, 4, 8 and 12 people respectively.
If the pizzas all have the same thickness, which size will give the most pizza per person?
A.
4inch
B.
6inch
C.
8inch
D.
10inch
E.
All the same 
5.
Gill has now started primary skool and is learning to spell.
We got her to help by writing out this queschun for us.
We gave her a score of 100 to start with, and deducted 10 per cent of her running total each time we found a word spelt rong.
What was her final score?
A.
70
B.
72.9
C.
80
D.
81
E.
90
6.
How many pears can I buy for £1.08 if 70 almonds cost the same as 50 chestnuts, 48 chestnuts cost the same as one pomegranate, 18 pomegranates cost the same as 28 lemons, 10 lemons cost the same as 25 pears, and 108 almonds cost 9p?
A.
12
B.
75
C.
108
D.
358
E.
Not a whole number
Test card answers: 1a, 2c, 3d, 4b, 5b, 6b
Currie striving for top sevens event
By Graham Law
CURRIE are embarking on a three-year campaign to raise the profile of their sevens tournament which again is to be sponsored by the Caledonian Brewing Company.
This year's event, on Sunday, 4 April, sees three guest teams — the Co-optimists, Tynedale and a President's VII.
The Co-ops are likely to be a shadow Scotland seven preparing for the Rugby World Cup, at Murrayfield, from 16-18 April.
The Currie president, Gordon Bell, said his aim was to make Currie the major tournament in Edinburgh and one of the premier club attractions in Scotland.
Five teams (from Divisions II-IV) have been dropped from last season's event and Currie hope that in the future both Melrose and Gala will be able to participate, though the uncertainty over the pair's national league match precluded their involvement this year.
Bell noted: ‘We faced the same quandary clubs rapidly going through divisions encounter with their XV-a-side fixture list.
It is a very difficult decision to leave someone out yet, that said, we are striving towards quality and improving the quality of games and players.’
Gordon Smith, Caledonian's sales director — the company is increasing its sponsorship though it remains coy on an amount — said it viewed the association with Currie as long term.
‘We hope, between us, to gradually build up the tournament,’ he added.
Scotland full-back and captain Gavin Hastings joined Currie skipper Ally Donaldson to make the draw yesterday.
Derek Turnbull (head wound) and Iain Morrison (hamstring) are both likely to be included in the Scotland team to play England on Saturday week when it is announced today.
Medical opinion is that both will be fit for the Triple Crown and Calcutta Cup bid.
Lee back in Scottish Students XV
SCOTTISH Students include five members of the national under-21 XV defeated by Wales last week in their side to face their English counterparts at Basingstoke on Friday, 5 March (3pm), writes Graham Law.
Kenny Milligan, Derrick Lee, Graeme Burns, Gordon Rigby and Nick Penny are all enlisted, though Lee played against Irish Students earlier in the season.
There is no under-21 fixture against the English this season, which also explains the presence in student ranks of Stewart Campbell, who missed the final under-21 encounter because of flu.
The students, supported by Midland Corporate Banking (Scotland), will train at Cramond on Sunday and Thursday before their coach trip south.
Scots set to make impact in Europe
By Elspeth Burnside
REFLECTING the Scots' growing influence in top level squash, five players — Mark Maclean, Peter Nicol, Derek Ritchie, Martin Heath and Emma Donaldson — will be on the trail of world-ranking points at events throughout Europe within the next few weeks.
Nicol, the Scottish champion and winner of the North Open last weekend, faces the stiffest programme with the Vitafit Open in Germany, the Odense Open in Denmark and the Portuguese Open within the next three weeks, and seems certain to emerge with a higher ranking than his current 52.
Since the turn of the year Ritchie, who lost to Nicol in the Scottish Championship final last month, has won world-ranking titles in Portugal and Switzerland, and will be chasing the hat-trick in the Swiss Open in Geneva next week.
The tournament will also register Heath's debut on the Professional Squash Association circuit, and his fortunes will be watched with interest.
Arguably the player who has made most progress since the European triumph last May, the 19 year-old Glasgow University student is already planning a full-time career in the sport following his graduation this summer.
Almost certain to be snapped up by a National League side, Heath will move to England — probably Manchester — next season, while his summer plans may include a trip to the North American leg of the PSA circuit.
Maclean and Donaldson are more experienced world circuit travellers, but that will not lessen their respective ambitions in the Spanish and Guernsey Opens.
Maclean opens his account in Madrid against local player Alberto Codina a week today, while for Donaldson, who reached the semi-finals of the Danish Open last month, the Guernsey event at the end of next month marks another breakthrough in that it is the first time she has gone straight in to the main draw for a Grade A tournament.
Derek Ritchie: aiming for title hat-trick in Geneva
Date clash hampers talks
FOR some time now, the Scottish Amateur Rowing Association's executive has been seeking input for the updating of its Development Plan, and to serve this purpose, an all-day session of discussion groups has been arranged for Sunday, 21 March, at Strathclyde Park.
Included in the programme will be the half-yearly general meeting of the association.
However, the meeting will clash with the London Eights Head — on the afternoon of the 20th, and usually heavily supported by Scottish crews — and the universities will be on holiday.
Although input will now obviously be curtailed by the absence of the crews in London and the students on vacation, any good ideas arising will be incorporated into the plan for presentation to the Annual General Meeting in November.
Meanwhile, the first side-by-side racing of the year will take place at Glasgow Green on Saturday, when the Glasgow University students put on their annual charities regatta.
For some time now, the SARA Executive has been seeking input more generally from the rowing population for the updating of its Development Plan, but what might have been a good idea to achieve this seems set for a less than successful conclusion.
Based on a model which has been used profitably by the Ulster branch of the Irish Amateur Rowing Union, an all-day session of discussion groups has been arranged for Sunday, 21 March, at Strathclyde Park.
Included in the programme is the half-yearly General Meeting of the Association.
But, even with the carrot of a free lunch, it is debatable if the occasion will attract an attendance of the quantity and quality desired, for two reasons.
The London Eights Head is on the afternoon of the 20th, and is usually heavily supported by Scottish crews.
They will be on the long road home on the following day, and few could afford to fly.
Also, the universities will generally be on vacation.
Very often students' inventive turn of mind can be useful at such formats, and they will largely be absent.
The Executive is not unaware of these problems, and vice president Neil MacFarlane has been delegated to do all he can to obviate them.
There are no restrictions on attendance, except for voting rights at the general meeting.
The strategy is to incorporate any good ideas from the occasion into the final Plan, which will be put to the Annual General Meeting in November.
Meanwhile, the first side-by-side racing of the year will take place at Glasgow Green on Saturday, when the Glasgow University students put on their annual charities regatta.
All profits are given to good causes.
New fears as Her Honour fails test
FRESH fears of a doping scandal emerged yesterday when it was revealed that Martin Pipe's Triumph Hurdle candidate, Her Honour, had failed a post-race drug test.
The filly tested positive to a prohibited substance after finishing 40 lengths behind Indian Quest in the Walton Novices' Hurdle at Kempton last month.
The result, confirmed by the Jockey Club 24 hours after it had sought to head off rumours of a doping scandal, heightens speculation that horses are being ‘got at’.
Fears that a team of dopers, similar to the one which nobbled Bravefoot, Norwich and Flying Diva in 1990, was in operation surfaced following a sequence of poor performances by favourites.
David Pipe, the Jockey Club's Director of Public Affairs, would not comment on suggestions that Her Honour had been administered a fast-acting tranquiliser.
‘It will probably take a few more days before we know the source, but it would be up to the Disciplinary Committee to decide whether it will be made public,’ he said.
Positive tests can be attributed to feedstuffs or medication, but Martin Pipe emphasised: ‘I am implying that that is not the case.
But it is up to the Jockey Club to release the full details.’
David Pipe added: ‘I have no comments to make as to how the substance could have been administered.’
Michael Roberts has picked up a two-week ban in South Africa for the second time this winter.
The British champion jockey was found guilty of two offences when riding at the Vaal last Thursday.
Roberts hit Classic Review five times on the ear before the horse won the second race of the day.
He also allowed his mount to drift out by six horse widths during the first 200 metres, which is forbidden on the straight Vaal course.
The dates of the ban have yet to be decided, but it is unlikely to prevent Roberts scheduled comeback in Britain on 25 March.
He returns to this country on 10 March.
— PA
More and more chances to hit the jackpot
ONE OF the beauties of doing the football pools over the years has been their simplicity, writes Mike Aitken.
X marked the spot where you expected a draw to take place.
And if you ever came up with eight of them on the one coupon, you could also mark X in the box for no publicity as you made plans to spend, spend, spend.
As from Saturday, the Pools Promoters' Association, including Littlewoods, Vernons and Zetters, have decided to change, change, change.
The old treble chance has got the order of the boot.
From 27 February, eight score draws will no longer be enough to crack open the champagne.
In order to scoop the magic figure of 24 points, punters now need to identify eight 1-1 draws.
In the new points system, 1-1 draws will get three points, other score draws 2 points and no-score draws two points, with 1 points for home and away wins.
Otherwise, the method of filling in the coupon is the same.
The changes, according to the pools companies, will increase the number of jackpot winners.
Littlewoods expect the alterations will help them to make big payouts of as much as £2 million on a more regular basis.
The new system is expected to restore frequent big wins at the expense of large numbers of small dividends.
Since football became more defensive, there has been an increase in the number of score draws, which has reduced the number of jackpot payments.
The organisers of the pools believe that huge jackpots are their best weapon in fighting the threat posed by a national lottery.
The lottery will create at least 52 new millionaires each year, and possibly more if the weekly draw takes off in a big way.
The pools people argue that unless they are given ‘a level playing field’ to compete with the lottery, two of the three leading firms could go out of business, with the loss of thousands of jobs.
The new system will mean job security for Littlewoods' 500 workers at the firm's Hillington premises.
But is tinkering with the format, which encourages 12 million players to ‘do the pools’ every week, the best method of broadening its appeal?
I know that many choose numbers at random, using birthdates and the like, but there are also serious students of form.
How, in future, the followers of form will be able to forecast a 1-1 draw from, say, a 2-2 draw is beyond me.
Luck has always played a key role in doing the pools, but half the fun was thinking that skill mattered.
As the leading firms prepare to meet the challenge of the national lottery, the irony is that the first revamp of the format in 24 years will make the pools themselves more of a lottery.
Lara ends S African hopes with 111
BRIAN LARA cracked an unbeaten century to steer the West Indies to a nine-wicket win over South Africa in Bloemfontein yesterday.
Lara's 111 not out off 140 balls gave the visitors victory with more than five overs to spare, and sent the South Africans tumbling out of the triangular one-day series, which also features Pakistan.
The result left the South Africans with only four points from six games and no chance of making Saturday's final.
The West Indies and Pakistan both have six points from five games, and their last game in Cape Town tomorrow will be a rehearsal for the final in Johannesburg.
Chasing 185 for six, Lara and fellow opener, Desmond Haynes, put on 152 and looked capable of winning the match by themselves until Haynes was dismissed for 57.
West Indies' winning total was 188 for one, after 44.3 overs.
Former England paceman, Mike Hendrick, has defended Nottinghamshire's decision to sack four of their most senior players.
In a speech to the club's annual general meeting, Hendrick, who took over from John Birch as Notts' team manager midway through last season, says the county's decision to dismiss Chris Broad, Eddie Hemmings, Kevin Cooper and Kevin Saxelby was taken in the interests of progress.
Officials came under fire at the meeting from disgruntled members who expressed concern about the club's prospects.
But Hendrick insisted: ‘We are not a rest home.
This club has some very talented young players and it would be terrible to frustrate them.’
Disastrous tour poses leading questions Following so many mistakes by the England selectors, Jeremy Allerton suggests that it's time for changes at the top
H L MENCKEN once wrote that ‘every normal man must be tempted, at times, to spit on his hands, hoist the black flag, and begin slitting throats.’
Newspaper owner Rupert Murdoch, not content with reducing everyday tales of monarchy to the level of Dallas or Dynasty, has cast further gloom via his BSkyB live transmissions of England's chastening defeats in India.
There is nothing like a monumental disaster to stimulate the critics.
Certainly, England's errors and omissions have provided ample scope and targets for throat- slitting.
When a campaign goes badly wrong, it is invariably the poor bloody infantry that gets the blame, while the leaders remain sublimely unaffected.
The appointment of Stewart as vice-captain, opening batsman and wicketkeeper collapsed when Gooch missed the second Test, with Blakey consequently keeping wicket in two Tests when he was intended only for the one-day internationals.
Russell supporters gain one point.
Fairbrother's performances in the first two Tests were encouraging, but not enough to quieten the Gower camp.
England's first choice spinners, Emburey and Tufnell, did not take a wicket between them until the third day of the third Test.
Predictably, Salisbury was too loose, inaccurate and expensive, and none of the spinners looked remotely as threatening as India's.
DeFreitas, when not ill, was also off beam, while Malcolm's errant unpredictability seems to have declined into a corridor of mundane certainty.
Only Lewis and Jarvis will return with their bowling reputations enhanced.
And so on.
But what of England's leadership, batting and prospects for the Ashes series this summer?
There must now be a severe question-mark against Gooch leading England against Australia.
One of the inherent weaknesses of the modern squad system is that a close-knit clique becomes impervious to failure and criticism.
Cricket, like golf, is bedevilled by the vagaries of form and confidence, and yet player power can all too often maintain the status quo, particularly in Botham's heyday.
Gooch has stamped his method and selection policy on this squad, and prior to this tour it had worked pretty well.
Since assuming the captaincy, his own form has dramatically improved, but in India time has caught up with him.
His marital difficulties cannot have helped, while his form and reflexes are patently awry, and he has failed to uplift his team.
The selectors, and Gooch himself, may see how he starts the English season or, ever the realist, he may just decide to go.
But in this squad system the axe does not fall easily.
There is a case for saying that chairman of selectors, Ted Dexter, and Gooch have both had their day and that new management should take over.
At the heart of the debate over a squad system lies the virtue of continuity versus the flexibility of selection.
The England players' early view of Sidhu as a slogger and Kambli as a chancer is a wretched reflection of the typical English professional's attitude that time and experience must precede promotion.
What would Emburey now say about Tendulkar and Kambli?
Talent is what matters.
Gooch and Emburey have found that age brings insidious doubt and suspicion of difficulty where youthful confidence sees none.
The batting failures were mainly due to a lack of experience on dusty, turning wickets where the normal technique of hitting through the line with heavy bats from a static base was wholly inadequate.
The plus points were that Hick has gained his confidence and should now bat at three, and Fairbrother should be persevered with.
Lewis has begun to fulfil his promise.
The other batting places will be fought out between Smith, Gower, Gatting, Moxon and maybe Lathwell.
If Gooch is dropped then there will be plenty of debate over his replacement as captain and it may be that Gatting's experience will gain the vote over Stewart, though I would not completely discount Moxon.
As with the British economy, there are not a great number of options and no amount of breast-beating or hair shirts will alter that fact.
But when confronted with such a defeat, changes at the top are needed, if only to revive enthusiasm and ideas.
UDO WEITZ/AP
Jumping for joy: India's Kiran More celebrates as England's Richard Blakey is bowled first ball by Anil Kumble in the third Test in Bombay yesterday.
Report, Page 24
Final-set disaster for Duff
IRVINE's Jim Muir and former Scottish international colleague, Hugh Duff, lost their second-round matches in the Midland Bank World Indoor Singles Championship in Preston yesterday.
Duff, who won the title when representing Auchinleck back in 1988, but now resident in England and representing his new country, looked to be heading for the quarter-finals when he opened up a 6-1 final-set lead over Dennis Catunarich.
But the Australian indoor champion produced a great finishing burst of 2, 2, 1 and 1 to take the set 7-6 and clinch his quarter-final spot.
‘There's no doubt I had chances to nail it in the last set, but you've got to hand it to Dennis.
He played an incredible amount of really good pressure bowls,’ said Duff later.
Muir was next in action but, after losing a tight opening set to twice former winner, Tony Allcock, bowed out 6-7, 3-7, 5-7.
The Scot forged into a 6-5 lead after eight ends of the opening set but Allcock grabbed the double he needed for a 7-6 win, before quickly putting the second out of Muir's reach.
An opening single followed by a maximum 4 gave him a commanding advantage and a double, three ends later, gave him the set.
Allcock moved 5-2 ahead in the third, but Muir tied the score at 5-5 on the fourth end, before Allcock picked up a double at the next to book a quarter-final place.
ATHLETICS Challenge tonic for road running
THE flagging fortunes of British endurance running were revived yesterday with details of the Northumberland Castles Challenge.
The event will comprise road race meetings at Warkworth on 3 April, Bamburgh on 2 May and Alnwick on 8 May.
Athletes from Belgium, Norway, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Germany, France, South Africa and the US have been invited.
BOXING
Schwer confident
BRITISH and Commonwealth lightweight champion, Billy Schwer, is confident of a successful first defence of his titles against challenger Paul Burke at Wembley's Grand Hall tonight.
MEN'S HOCKEY
Third time lucky
ENGLAND, Russia, France, Poland and hosts, India, will compete for the twice-postponed Indira Gandhi Gold Cup in Bombay next month.
TENNIS
Evert Cup sees Austin return
THE Evert Cup tournament in Indian Wells, California, has been hit by the loss of top seeds, Steffi Graf and Jennifer Capriati, who both withdrew because of pulled stomach muscles.
Twice US Open champion, Tracy Austin, is expected to make her comeback at the event.
Top seed and world No2, Pete Sampras, withdrew from the men's tournament in Scottsdale, Arizona, with a stress fracture of the right ankle which could sideline him for up to two months.
Boris Becker and Ivan Lendl have both withdrawn from the world indoor tournament in Rotterdam.
Becker has a stomach virus while Lendl has a back injury.
Learning time for spirited Small
CHRIS SMALL made a spirited showing in the Wickes Home Improvement British Open in Derby last night before bowing out 5-3 to Mike Hallett.
The Leith-based Small, 19, who reached the last 16 of the 1992 Embassy World Championship, said: ‘This is my last event of the season, but I have still learned a great deal and I'm sure it can only benefit me in the years to come.’
While the Scot won the opening frame he lost the next three, but his highest break of the match, 74, suggested Hallett had a problem on his hands.
The Grimsby professional, however, responded to the challenge and took the last frame 100-17.
The former world champion, Steve Davis, who won the European Open in Antwerp on Sunday, completed a 5-0 victory over Les Dodd.
Davis, who had a break of 71, commented: ‘I had to adopt totally different tactics to my last match.
Les is a top opponent and it was a hard graft to beat him.’
Rookie professional, Steve Lee, continued his purple patch with a 5-2 victory over world No10, Steve James.
The 17-year-old, who reached the quarter-finals of last week's European Open, reeled off the last four frames and now faces New Zealander Dene O'Kane for a place in the televised stages.
Doug Mountjoy, who was whitewashed 5-0 by Ronnie O'Sullivan in the last 16 of the European Open, again lost to one of the game's promising young players, crashing 5-2 to Anthony Hamilton.
One member of the old guard, 1986 world champion Joe Johnson, beat Cork's Anthony O ‘Connor 5-2.
Weakened Italians on dangerous ground
ITALY, weakened by injuries and suspension, could face a torrid time in tonight's World Cup qualifier against a Portuguese side fired up for their first home match in the series.
Portugal, with star winger Paulo Futre back in the side after being dropped, will have been encouraged by Italy's recent poor form which saw them held to a goalless draw in Scotland and then struggle to overcome Malta 2-1.
With Group I leaders Switzerland setting a stirring pace, defeat for either side in Oporto would compromise their chances of reaching the finals in the United States next year.
Switzerland have dropped only one point in four games while Italy have drawn two of their three matches and Portugal have three points from two games.
Italy, without suspended captain and influential sweeper Franco Baresi, of AC Milan, and injured Sampdoria full back, Moreno Mannini, are confident that the importance of the game will lift their performance.
It was announced yesterday that the Glasgow Cup tournament will be played this season for the first time on an all-weather pitch.
That will enable double- headers each Sunday during March, with the final going ahead at Ibrox in April.
The five clubs taking part — Rangers, Celtic, Partick Thistle, Clyde and Queen's Park — will field their youth sides.
The venue will be the city's Helenvale Park, which has a capacity of 1,200, and it is likely that the match between the Old Firm will be all-ticket.
Hearts’ forward, Colin Walker, has been called into the Scotland squad for their European youth championship tie next week against Italy.
Jacklin aims for US Seniors Tour but pledges support for Europe
By Ian Wood
HARD on the heels of his commitment to play three tournaments on the Tartan Tour this season, Tony Jacklin gave a colourful example of the potential of Seniors golf when the PGA European Seniors Tour schedule was announced in London yesterday.
Jacklin instanced the case of Jim Colbert, a good friend and a solid journeyman professional on the regular US Tour in his heyday, who has now made $1.8 million on the US Seniors Tour and pays his caddie $140,000 a year just to drive his clubs around the course in a golf kart.
‘Ten years ago I couldn't understand why people wanted to watch old geezers hitting a ball about, but now I do,’ said Jacklin.
‘The public still have the names of players from 20 or 30 years ago on their minds.’
Jacklin reports that he's still hitting the ball well and ‘feels hungry’ again.
Anything the former Open and US Open champion achieves on the US circuit will surely reflect on the European Tour which he is also pledged to support and which continues to flourish.
Prize-money this year totals £800,000 over 12 tournaments as opposed to £600,000 over ten tournaments last season.
The new events are the Shell Scottish Seniors Open at Royal Aberdeen in July, and the Senior Zurich Pro-Am/ Lexus Trophy in October.
The attractions of the European tour will increase as more well-known names in British and European golf come through the pipeline.
Jacklin will be available from next year and ‘new faces’ expected on this season's circuit include Malcolm Gregson, the former Ryder Cup man and 1967 PGA champion, and John Morgan, winner of the Jersey Open in 1986.
From Spain come Angel Gallardo, six times a World Cup player, and Francisco Abreu, who won the German Open in 1973 and the Madrid Open in 1976.
The season's most lucrative tournament is the Seniors British Open, won last year by the South African, John Fourie, who went on to top the Order of Merit with close to £48,000 — £14,000 ahead of Tommy Horton.
The tournament returns to Royal Lytham in July and carries prize money of £220,000.
Angel Gallardo: Spanish newcomer to Seniors Tour
TENNIS
Top seeds out
THE Evert Cup tournament in Indian Wells, California, has been hit by the loss of top seeds, Steffi Graf and Jennifer Capriati, due to pulled stomach muscles.
Twice US Open champion, Tracy Austin, is expected to make her comeback at the event.
VOLLEYBALL
Glasgow's title slipping away
TEAM Components Bureau took a giant step towards their first Scottish women's league title when they beat champions Glasgow Powerhouse 15-11, 15-9, 15-3 in a Royal Bank Scottish League match in Whitburn last night.
Components Bureau must win two of their last three matches to clinch the title.
Aberdeen walk a tightrope at Pittodrie
By Hugh Keevins
EVERY league game which Aberdeen play is, given the gap between them and Rangers at the top of the Premier Division, an invitation to flirt with disaster so far as the championship race is concerned.
Dundee United, who face them at Pittodrie tonight, present the equivalent of a tall building as Jim McLean's team have, over the course of their last four league visits to Aberdeen, won by the only goal of the game each time.
Earlier this season, a last- minute goal from Duncan Ferguson did the damage and the return of the tall striker to the first team after resolving his personal problems is another reason for Aberdeen's manager, Willie Miller, to view the game with caution.
Miller's team will have Theo Snelders back in goal after missing Saturday's win over St Johnstone.
The manager has taken to ruining his reputation as a steely-eyed ruler with a fist of iron as the circumstances of Snelders' non-appearance at the weekend prove — the Dutchman was given compassionate leave to attend the birth of his first child, a son, on Saturday night.
Mixu Paatelainen was shown the same consideration earlier in the season and the word from the maternity unit at Pittodrie is that Mrs Duncan Shearer is next in the gynaecological line.
The next thing you know, Willie will be baby-sitting!
What is evident, to children and adults alike, however, is that Dundee United are, after Rangers, the biggest problem for Aberdeen.
A total of seven points out of eight were lost to the Tayside club last season and Aberdeen's only point from United this term came at Tannadice in December after they had held, and then surrendered, a two-goal lead.
‘United have been enjoying a decent run and will arrive at Pittodrie looking for both points,’ said Miller, who has told his players to forget all about their recent Scottish Cup win over McLean's team.
Ferguson missed that match, which fell when communications between the player and his manager were under repair.
‘My players know all about him (Ferguson) and his ability.
He will get the respect he deserves.’
Snelders apart, Aberdeen's team is unlikely to alter much, if at all, from the one which won at Perth with goals from Eoin Jess and Scott Booth.
Paul Sturrock, United's spokesman on team matters, said: ‘Both teams have the best young players that Scotland has to offer, with Ferguson and Billy McKinlay from our place complementing Jess and Booth.
‘Ferguson will give us more threat up front than we had in the cup tie, when our performance, particularly in the second half, was shocking.’
The return of Jim McInally in midfield — he also missed the cup-tie because of suspension — will also bolster Dundee United and increase the strain on Aberdeen not to make any false moves that could fatally injure such title aspirations they may harbour.
Top Scot fined and given stern warning
By Ian Wood
COLIN Montgomerie was yesterday fined £1,000 and told to get his act together by the European Tour chief executive, Ken Schofield, who was upset by his fellow-Scot's criticism of the King's Course at Agadir in last week's Moroccan Open.
‘He has every right to criticise the Tour if he feels criticism is in order,’ said Schofield in London yesterday, ‘but it would be preferable if he'd make his complaints to us.
We are sensitive to members openly criticising sponsors and golf courses, particularly after they've just taken 77’— Montgomerie's second-round score.
‘He has been fined £1,000,’ said Schofield, ‘and if he goes on we'll double it.’
The fine is the maximum for what is considered to be a minor breach of Tour conduct.
The Troon man, who declared early in the tournament that the lack of atmosphere in the absence of players such as Nick Faldo, Fred Couples and Greg Norman did nothing for his game, went on to denounce the event as ‘a bit of an amateur sham’ and suggested it should not be among the counting tournaments for Ryder Cup selection.
Yesterday, Schofield countered: ‘The Moroccan Open carries a purse of £375,000 — there's nothing amateurish about that.’
The course, he said, was ‘fantastic’ and in terms of play, the quality had been outstanding.
‘I can appreciate that conditions were frustrating, with the high winds and the small greens,’ he said.
However, at a time when the Tour was attempting to extend the early part of the year's schedule, players had to be tolerant, added Schofield.
The Tour chief was concerned that negative headlines had been carried when the golf of David Gilford, the tournament winner, and the joint runners-up, Jamie Spence and Stephen Ames, should have been the news.
Schofield has already had cause to caution Montgomerie — in 1991 — and yesterday he said: ‘He is a fine golfer and is clearly going to be a major figure in the game for as long as he remains active in it, but he has to be able to take it on the chin.
‘I want him to reach the stage where he will be talked about for his golf and not for his petulance — we've had enough.
It's time for him to match his maturity with his golf and realise he's not going to win every time.
Maybe he should have dinner with Sandy Lyle.’
French want piece of Wembley
THE French are forking out to learn the secrets of Wembley's hallowed turf.
Wembley plc has undertaken a lucrative consultancy agreement with Parc de Princes in Paris, home of the French national football and rugby teams, as part of the group's determination to spread the stadium gospel.
It is the second major success for Wembley which, last month, were awarded a contract to manage the 40,000-capacity Hong Kong Stadium, currently under construction.
In both cases, turf maintenance is high on the agenda — and head groundsman Steve Tingley is already is Paris.
Wembley will also advise on security, tickets and merchandise and be heavily involved with the mechanics of staging a variety of events at the stadia concerned.
‘The tremendous progress made at Wembley Stadium over the past five years is very impressive and is much admired in France, where it was recently described in glowing terms as ‘La Tempe du Football’,’ said Lionel Dreksler, director of the French national stadium.
‘Parc des Princes is our heritage.
It, too, has the potential for magnificence and it is important that we begin with the logical starting point and create a lush playing surface to rival the finest in the world.’
— PA
Payton's goal enough to take pressure off manager and team Dundee0 Celtic1
CELTIC'S victory at Dens Park last night was worth just the usual two points.
But for their  beleaguered manager, Liam Brady, it could mean much more, such as keeping his job.
After recent events this was a game Celtic simply had to win.
But with Dundee currently enjoying their best run of the season victory was certainly no foregone conclusion.
At the end of the day, however, Celtic just about deserved their triumph, though Dundee made them fight every inch of the way.
Andy Payton's 46th minute goal was enough and it certainly lifted the morale of Celtic.
However, it must be said the visiting supporters did their bit, too.
Even before the goal.
They may have rounded on their heroes on Saturday, but last night they got behind Celtic from start to finish.
And what a start it was!
Celtic had three players booked in the first 20 minutes to illustrate just how fired up they were.
Frank McAvennie was first after he twice refused to stand far enough back to allow Vreto to take a throw-in.
Mark McNally followed for bringing down Kiwomya in full flight and then Slater left referee Morrison no option after tripping Wieghorst, having been previously warned for a similar offence.
Mike Galloway joined them later after pulling back Dundee skipper Dodds.
Despite this physical start Celtic were nervous, too.
Andy Kiwomya's pace caused them all sorts of trouble as Dundee made the early running.
However, as Celtic gradually got to grips in midfield the service to Kiwomya dried up.
Dundee also suffered a major blow when player/manager Simon Stainrod limped off seven minutes from the interval.
Stainrod has scored six goals from just five starts and has been a major influence in Dundee's recent run of good form.
Celtic finished the half well on top, though the closest they came was from the powerful long range shooting of Polish defender Wdowczyk.
A minute after the interval, however, they went ahead.
Payton raced on to a well weighted pass from Wdowczyk, held off Bain, and then drilled the ball low past Mathers.
Though Celtic dominated for the next 15 minutes they failed to kill Dundee off and almost paid the penalty.
Following the incident in which Galloway was booked, Steve Pittman deceived Bonner with a curling free kick from 22 yards.
However, the ball rebounded to safety from the far post.
The disappointing crowd of just 7,370 certainly had value for money.
The game was played at a hectic pace with chances at both ends right to the final whistle.
Celtic skipper Paul McStay had a glorious chance to kill off Dundee two minutes from the end, but Bain cleared his shot off the line.
Then in injury time Pittman again came close with an angular shot across the face of the goal.
Unfortunately for Dundee it went past the wrong side of the post.
Deadly duo start Rangers' late goal rush
Motherwell 0 Rangers 4
By Hugh Keevins
GOALS from Ally McCoist, Mark Hateley (2) and Alexei Mikhailichenko in the final 15 minutes at Fir Park last night enabled Rangers to equal a 17-year-old record and negotiate 38 successive matches without defeat.
It was a costly night against Motherwell, however, because Richard Gough and Trevor Steven were both taken off after suffering groin injuries which will cast doubt on their availability for the immediate future.
Over the next ten days, Rangers have a league match with Hearts, a European tie in Belgium and the quarter-finals of the Scottish Cup at Arbroath.
The recurrence of Gough's injury looks, if the reaction of his team-mates was a reliable barometer, to be a serious one and is the latest blow sustained by the Ibrox captain in a season that has been punctuated by mishaps.
Rangers nevertheless extended their lead over Aberdeen in the championship to ten points after a performance which had seemed destined to go unrewarded before the floodgates opened.
Dykstra was in exceptional form for Motherwell but Rangers' persistence paid off just as persistent fouling put Motherwell's new recruit, Ally Graham, into the referee's notebook on his debut.
The 6ft 3in Graham was bought yesterday from Ayr United for £50,000 plus Fir Park reserve, Steve Bryce and played from the start.
With 20 minutes gone, his debut might have entered the dream category but for a fingertip save from Andy Goram.
O'Connell's header found Graham completely unmarked inside the penalty box but Goram did enough to touch the ball on to the bar.
At the other end, Dykstra saved at the feet of Hateley after he had been allowed to break free after a misplaced pass-back by Nijholt.
The first-half, however, may be best remembered for what happened to a player who hardly touched the ball.
Trevor Steven, brought back into the side after missing Saturday's match because of illness, suffered a groin injury and was replaced by Mikhailichenko.
Given Rangers' heavy schedule, most importantly next week's European Champions League match with FC Brugge in Belgium, the sight of Steven departing the field was a depressing one for Rangers, certainly more so than the booking of Ian Ferguson before the interval.
The home side's well-organised defence kept Rangers largely at bay after the break and Dykstra appeared when all else failed.
A neat move of one-touch football from Mikhailichenko gave Huistra a promising opening, for example, but his compatriot made a fine save.
Rangers got no joy, either, from a referee who had turned down a first-half penalty claim for hand ball and was similarly unmoved when Huistra fell after making contact with Dykstra.
Mr McGilvray was much more generous, however, when he overlooked Ferguson's late challenge on McKinnon.
The offence merited the second yellow card that would have put Ferguson off the park.
Cooper was booked instead after the Motherwell player gave full vent to his feelings about that decision.
Controversy aside, the fact that Dykstra was called upon so often vouched for Rangers' ascendancy but the Hateley/McCoist goal machine seemed to have developed a mechanical fault.
The repair work was carried out by the substitute, Neil Murray, who had replaced Gough.
Murray's cross from the right in the 67th minute was precise and evaded everyone except McCoist, whose header was turned towards Dykstra's right-hand post and was as finely judged as the ball that set up the chance.
In the 82nd minute, Hateley guaranteed Rangers' win with a goal that heralded an unfortunate end to the night for Dykstra.
The goalkeeper lay injured following a collision with a team-mate when Mikhailichenko gathered the loose ball on the byeline and squared it to Hateley for a goal easier come by for Rangers than had seemed possible in the early stages of the match.
To add insult to injury, Dykstra was beaten again twice in the dying seconds — Hateley turning in a cross from McCall and, with the goalkeeper in obvious distress, Mikhailichenko stealing in to score the fourth.
Blunder lets in Brechin
BRECHIN stretched their lead at the top of the Second Division with 1-0 win over their nearest rivals, Clyde, thanks to an amazing blunder by the home goalkeeper, Scott Howie, in the 67th minute.
Ralph Brand sent a looping header towards goal, and though the Scotland Under-21 goalkeeper caught it above his head, he stepped back one pace and over the line.
Brechin had midfielder Doug Scott sent off after 60 minutes for his second booking.
Arbroath's recent winning run continued thanks to a last-minute winner from Kevin Tindall against East Stirling.
Stuart Sorbie put the Gayfield side ahead on the hour but Mike Geraghty equalised two minutes later.
In the First Division, Dumbarton eased the threat of relegation thanks to a two-goal win over Cowdenbeath.
Mike McAnenay (40min) and John McQuade (86) gave Dumbarton their third successive triumph over the bottom club, who are looking for their first home win of the season.
Doubtful for Europe
RICHARD GOUGH and Trevor Steven will be examined by Rangers' medical staff today but the injuries sustained at Fir Park last night have made them doubtful for the European tie with FC Brugge.
The Ibrox manager, Walter Smith, said: ‘It is obviously a worrying wait to see if they will be fit for Belgium but we have had to overcome injury to both these players at other stages of the season and I can only hope we are able to do so again.’
Payton strike enough to take pressure off manager and team
Frank McAvennie was first after he twice refused to stand far enough back to allow Vrto to take a throw-in.
Mark McNally followed for bringing down Kiwomya in full flight and then Slater left referee Morrison no option after tripping Wieghorst, having been previously warned for a similar offence.
Roots
HOW dare Nellie Rogers attack me personally.
She may have known my parents, but she certainly did not know me, for I was mainly brought up by my grandparents in 26 Grove Street.
In all my past letters to the News, never ever have I forgotten or denied my roots.
Why should I?
I have nothing to hide or be ashamed of.
Where does this vitriolic woman get her information from?
As for the unemployment issue, I have never, never, uttered one word about this sensitive and intensely sad situation.
She adds insult to injury by using the phrase ‘I'm all right Jack’.
That may be part of her  gutteral language: it is certainly not part of mine.
With intense anger, I repeat, how dare she cast a slur on my character?
A difference of opinion, or criticism of a topical subject matter is one thing, but an unjustified attack on my character is something else!
I am entitled to an apology from Mrs Rogers for her defamatory letter, but knowing her erratic behaviour, through the pages of the News, I needn't hold my breath.
Personal
NELLIE Rogers should shut up when it comes to interfering in somebody's personal life.
Yes, Mrs De Luca has her own opinions about certain things, but she has never dwelled on their background or personal lives.
Her letters are harmless, Mrs Rogers' are not.
They have caused a lot of upset in our family.
An apology wouldn't go amiss.
Nellie Rogers — how about it?
Unjust
I AM proud of my mum for her courage.
Over the years, she has written many letters to the News.
Mostly she deals with moral issues, though some are topical or ‘tongue in cheek’.
Like anyone else who writes, she is open to criticism.
Justly so.
Everyone has a right to his or her opinion and mum has received her fair share of opposition.
But to the lady who recently wrote a very personal attack on her, I say this:
By all means, have your say on the content of her letters.
That is your privilege.
But to accuse her unjustly, is quite another matter.
I am witness to the very hard graft of both my parents, namely fish and chips and confectionery, over many years.
They have never disowned their humble roots.
I think at the very least my mother should receive a public apology.
Yacht pic
WHEN the Royal yacht Britannia berthed at Leith I went down to take a photograph but the police said no one was allowed in.
Did any News reader obtain one and would they sell me a copy or allow me to pay for a loan of a negative?
John Gilhooly, 44 Pendreich Avenue, Bonnyrigg.
Big day
THE St Andrews Community Council has started a campaign to have St Andrew's Day declared a public holiday in Scotland.
We would urge those who support this to write to MPs and local authorities.
Racers blame the ref!
by Nigel Duncan ICE HOCKEY REPORTER
FURIOUS Murrayfield Racers boss Robert Adams is set to call time on top referee George Nicolson, whose handling of Sunday's game with arch rivals Fife Flyers incensed him.
Adams said: ‘Some of his decisions were laughable — and that's putting it mildly.
We're considering asking that Nicholson does not referee any more of our games.’
Racers won the game 11-7 but had three key players sent off.
Adams also had a blast at the opposition, saying: ‘Everyone could see the way Fife wanted to play the game.
They played in an abrasive manner.
‘Unfortunately, the referee completely lost it and we had three players sent off.’
Adams also claimed that top points scorer Tony Hand was ‘gooned’ and added: ‘Someone was put there to take him out.’
He also claimed that player-coach Newberry was given an early bath for ‘questioning a decision’.
Then Adams hit out at the dismissal of defenceman Mike Ware, saying: ‘We're told Mike went for a Fife player — he never hit him.
He just pushed him.
‘We now have three players out of the Nottingham game on Saturday.’
Renwick agony
by Bill Lothian RUGBY REPORTER
BRIAN RENWICK, a former Scotland under-21 rugby forward who once spent £3500 on private knee surgery to resurrect his rugby career, has suffered another devastating injury blow less than two years later.
Chosen for next month's Scotland sevens tour of Australia, Fiji and Hong Kong, Renwick is battling to overcome a cracked thumb sustained while playing for Hawick in a friendly match at the weekend.
He is now undergoing specialised magnetic therapy treatment — normally used on horses — in a desperate battle to be passed fit for the sevens tour.
Hawick club secretary John Thorburn said: ‘Brian is devastated by this latest setback.
Just when it seemed things were going his way again this has happened.’
Hawick's hooker and captain Jim Hay, a former B cap, has torn a hamstring and will miss his club's match this weekend with relegation threatened Heriot's at Mansfield Park.
Meanwhile, Scotland today stole a march over Australia who will be sectional rivals when the World Cup sevens are held in Edinburgh from April 16-18.
Following their success in a Dubai tournament in November, the Scots have been seeded first for an event in Canberra on March 13 which opens their tour.
The Australians have had to be content with the second favourites slot in front of their home crowd.
Third seeds are Western Samoa, whose preparations for Murrayfield include a special training camp in Auckland, and if the draw goes according to plan Scotland will face fourth-seeded Fiji in the semis.
The Canberra draw pairs Scotland with Canada and an Australian Capital  Territories team in the preliminary pool.
LAID LOW: Brian Renwick is fighting to overcome another injury blow.
Christie at the helm
by David McCarthy FOOTBALL REPORTER
CAMPBELL CHRISTIE will be named as the new chairman of war-torn Falkirk tomorrow.
The general secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress will need all his negotiating skills to bring together a Board ripped apart, following the sacking of three directors by major shareholders George and Hamish Deans last week.
Two remaining directors, Jim Johnston and Sandy Moffat, are backing hundreds of Falkirk fans who are demanding that the Deans sell their shares in the club — but all four have agreed that Falkirk-born Christie, a Bairns fan, is the man for the chairman's job.
Johnston said: ‘We met with the man we want last night and he has agreed to join the club.
On his request, the club is delaying an official statement until tomorrow morning.’
Johnston, a repeated critic of the Deans family, added: ‘Two years ago, I told Hamish Deans that if his son took over Falkirk, he would either be accepted for life by the Falkirk fans or hounded until he left.
‘He has lost their trust and the Falkirk fans are not going to rest until they have seen both Deans off the premises.’
Meanwhile, Falkirk will take more than a passing interest in two Premier Division matches tonight, and hoping that the Old Firm do them a favour by beating fellow strugglers Dundee and Motherwell.
Celtic, who have problems on and off the field, travel to Dens Park without injured Brian O'Neil.
Dundee will welcome back tough-tackling left-back Steve Pittman after suspension.
Rangers go to Motherwell knowing that if they avoid defeat they will equal their best unbeaten sequence of matches — 38 — set back in 1975/76 when they won the domestic treble.
Trevor Steven and Dale Gordon have recovered from flu, but there are doubts over David Robertson and Stuart McCall.
Motherwell are without Chris McCart, while Neil Simpson, Dougie Arnott and Jim Griffin are doubtful.
Campbell Christie takes over the reins at Brockville tomorrow.
Budgie back
by News Reporter
JOHN BURRIDGE is in line for a Premier League comeback for Hibs against Airdrie at Easter Road on Saturday.
The controversial veteran goalkeeper, out in the cold since a pre-match bust-up with boss Alex Miller — ironically against Airdrie — will replace injured first-choice ‘keeper Chris Reid.
Miller, speaking from Jersey where Hibs beat an island select 6-0 last night, confirmed that Budgie will be back in goal if Reid fails to recover from the ankle injury that forced him out of the trip.
He said: ‘Jason Gardiner played for us over here last night and he did very well, but Airdrie in the Premier League is a different proposition altogether.
‘With Chris being injured, I would have brought Budgie over here for this match.
But he has the flu and that is why he did not travel.
‘He is an experienced keeper and I have no worries about playing him, although Jason did his chances no harm last night.’
Miller was delighted with the manner in which went about their business in front of a 1300 crowd in St Helier's Springfield Stadium.
The highlight of the match was a brilliant Mickey Weir hat-trick, with Keith Wright notching two and Steven Tweed grabbing his first goal with a brilliant strike.
Miller said: ‘Weir was superb, while Wright's two goals were expertly taken.
Big Tweedy's was a replica of the goal scored by Carlos Alberto in the 1970 World Cup Final so he is walking around feeling very pleased with himself this morning!’
Mickey Weir hit a brilliant treble for Hibs in Jersey last night as the Easter Road outfit cruised to a 6-0 victory.
The Hibs players have been given the day off today and will train in Jersey tomorrow morning before flying back to Edinburgh.
But there is no rest day for Miller — he is taking a coaching course with the cream of Jersey's young talented footballers today.
England's agony is complete
by Mark Baldwin PRESS ASSOCIATION
ENGLAND'S India cricket tour nightmare was complete today when they lost by an innings and 15 runs in the third and final Test in Bombay.
India bowled out England for 229 to clinch their 3-0 series whitewash 45 minutes after lunch.
England captain Graham Gooch offered no excuses for his team's humiliating defeat, saying: ‘We set off for this series with high hopes but nothing has gone right for us.
‘We have not played well enough in any department and we have got to hold our hands up and say we were not good enough.
‘I don't think anyone on the tour can be happy with their overall performances and we must all take  responsibility for these defeats.
‘As captain I feel very responsible.
I have a great input in the selection of the side and, when things go well you take the credit, so when they go badly you must take responsibility.’
Anil Kumble took four of the seven wickets to fall today and England could only quibble with one of them — when Graeme Hick looked to have been wrongly given out for 47, caught off bat-and-pad at short leg.
Otherwise it was India's spinners who ruled the roost yet again, with leg-spinner Kumble finishing with figures of four for 70.
As in Calcutta — where England were beaten by eight wickets — and Madras, where they lost by an innings and 22 runs, the English batsmen had no answers to the spin bowling.
The 3-0 defeat of England is a first for India and it is also the first time they have recorded a 3-0 win against any other country.
Hearts hit the jackpot!
by David McCarthy FOOTBALL REPORTER
HEARTS are on the verge of announcing two major big-money deals in a bid to offset the loss of £200,000 in sponsorship and TV cash this season.
One of the deals, being kept under wraps until an official announcement in a few weeks, is believed to be a lucrative shirt sponsorship package — but chairman Wallace Mercer is refusing to say if it involves current sponsor Strongbow.
He commented: ‘Our revenue is down £200,000 this year because there is no league sponsorship money and no income from BSkyB.
Naturally, the loss of this sort of money is a blow to us, but every club is feeling the pinch.
‘However, I am pleased to say that we will be making two major announcements within the next month, both of which are very good news for the club.
Mercer added: ‘We are one of six clubs in the Premier Division whose shirt sponsorship deal expires at the end of the season and I will be delighted to be able to make an announcement about this in the near future.’
Meanwhile, Hearts are continuing the countdown to Saturday's vital clash with Rangers by training in the sunshine of Southern Spain.
Doubts remain over the fitness of striker Ian Baird and midfielder Derek Ferguson, both of whom are suffering from hamstring injuries.
Ally Mauchlen, substituted on Saturday with a groin strain, is also struggling to make it.
Rangers have asked the Scottish League to consider giving their match at Tynecastle on Saturday, April 24, the go-ahead — only four days before Scotland's World Cup crunch clash in Portugal.
The League had decided to keep that Saturday clear to help national coach Andy Roxburgh prepare for the match.
Hearts chairman Wallace Mercer, who has revealed that two big deals are in the pipeline
by Bill Lothian RUGBY REPORTER
KENNY MILNE today looked ahead to Scotland's vital Triple Crown duel with England at Twickenham on Saturday week and declared: ‘This fixture must never be built up into a war.’
Football clashes between the age-old rivals have ground to a halt partly because outpourings of nationalism have sometimes got out of hand.
Milne said: ‘The beauty of rugby is that fans have always been able to have a pint afterwards.
‘I'd hate anything to ever happen on the terracings that would spoil that.’
The 24-times capped Herioter has noticed an alarming trend developing in the way a match which will carried the added prize of the Calcutta Cup is portrayed.
Recalled Kenny: ‘Before a previous Scotland-England game, one of our coaches, Jim Telfer, stepped in with a reminder to everybody that it was just a game of rugby we were going out to play and that we all had responsibilities.
‘Telfer was right to take that approach.’
It can be argued the flames have been fanned in part by attitude displayed by Milne's hooking rival, Brian Moore, who once summed up the England approach by saying: ‘Nobody likes us and we don't care.’
But Milne spoke up for Moore.
‘Brian is a very amenable bloke whom I'm looking forward to meeting up with at Twickenham,’ he said.
Said Kenny: ‘Brian is a very committed Englishman and there is nothing wrong with that.
A committed Scotsman is a hero.
Why should an Englishman who takes rugby as seriously be any different?
Milne assessed the Twickenham bid by saying: ‘It is a mammoth task.
Part of the secret of any success we've had so far can be found in the fact that nobody really expected to us.
‘Wales beating England has done us no favours.
We will have to cope with a backlash.’
‘The beauty of rugby is fans have always been able to have a pint afterwards.
I'd hate anything to happen that would spoil that’
GALA have turned down an invitation to Currie rugby sevens on Sunday, April 4 — anticipating that they will be involved in a title decider with Melrose three days later.
First Gala have to dispose of Dundee High this weekend.
Announcing the draw for the Caledonian Brewery-sponsored Currie Tournament, club president Gordon Bell said: ‘Gala and Melrose are unable to compete this year because they have their own cup final the following Wednesday.’
If Melrose beat Currie this weekend and Gala lose to Dundee High the title race could, however, be over apart from a mathematical possibility of Edinburgh Accies stepping in.
Currie draw: Kelso (holders) v Glasgow Accies; Watsonians v President's Seven, Currie v Dundee High; Heriot's v GHK; Jed v Stewart's/Melville; Tynedale v Stirling County; Co-optimists v Selkirk; Boroughmuir v Musselburgh. 930219
Flood of tributes to Bobby Moore
BOBBY MOORE, the football hero who lifted the 1966 World Cup for England, died yesterday after a two-year fight against cancer.
He was 51.
His family said he died ‘peacefully and painlessly’ at his London home.
The man who played more than 100 games for England announced just 10 days ago that he was fighting cancer, which had been diagnosed in his liver and colon.
Members of the 1966 World Cup-winning side spoke of their shock and sadness last night as everyone from the Prime Minister to Pele paid glowing tribute to Moore.
Mr Major said: ‘He enhanced sport by his example and his behaviour as well as his skill,’ adding: ‘Bobby Moore will always be one of the immortals of soccer.’
Bobby Moore played a thousand games at senior level, 544 of them for West Ham between 1958 and 1973, then 124 more for Fulham, and won 108 caps for England.
But the apex of his career was that afternoon in 1966 when he hoisted aloft the World Cup for England.
When Moore announced he was fighting cancer, he vowed to work on as usual.
Only a week ago he was at his usual commentary position for Capital Radio when England took on San Marino in a qualifying match for the next World Cup.
Yesterday's statement said the funeral would be private and a memorial service would be held later.
It requested donations be sent to the Imperial Cancer Research Fund.
Dubliner who was outstanding in his field
Mary Miller learns more about John Field, the incredible Irish composer, born in 1782, who influenced Chopin
IT IS music just to listen to pianist John O'Conor talk in his Liffey-soused Dublin lilt.
And for those whose familiarity with the Irish composer John Field has been but a brief bumble through the simpler of his nocturnes, to hear O'Conor's enthusiasm is to experience some of the ripple of Field's remarkable melodic flow.
For Field's piano concertos, two of which O'Conor is playing with the Scottish Chamber Orchestra this week, contain astonishing music, material which it is hard to believe was conceived at the turn of the 18th to 19th century.
Chopin, in a letter to his father from Paris, said: ‘Things are going well — do you know, they have even compared me with John Field!’
Liszt greatly admired him, and Rubenstein, too, commended Field to his pupils as ‘a perfectionist who would practise a passage a thousand times.’
But Field's career had little impact on his native turf, let alone upon his British neighbours.
He was born in Dublin to musician parents, who, says O'Conor, observed his precocious talent, lied about his age, and pushed him onto the platform, to enjoy the profits from his concert success.
His father, however, did have the wit to apprentice his son to Clementi, the composer and piano maker, and so Field, in his early teens, was sent to London to study.
Clementi, too, was shrewd in business.
He realised that when Field played his pianos in City salerooms, business boomed.
So he took his protege off to Europe, to Paris, Vienna, and finally to St Petersburg.
Business boomed, and Clementi sold countless new pianos.
But there, Field, feted as a celebrity, and roundly fed up of his employer's parsimony, began to build his own career.
He remained in Russia for the rest of his life, to be buried in Moscow, aged 55.
He was, says O'Conor ‘prone to the Irish vices — wine, women…but his composition was the most phenomenal success throughout Europe.’
He made one tour in the early 1830s, when already ill and enfeebled.
This was a disaster, as by then he could barely play and he was retrieved from Naples by a Russian family, who took him home to die.
For works written at a time when Beethoven was still in his middle period, the lyricism in the works is extraordinary.
O'Conor points, too, to the folk influences in many of the melodies, the use of Scotch snapping rhythms (the first concerto has variations on the tune Edinboro' Town).
Chopin was only four when the second concerto had its premiere — listening to its long-spun lines, its confident forays into high registers and its complex first movement harmonic excursions, one might more readily place Field as a companion of the virtuoso's old age.
Though O'Conor refers to Field as the first of the true piano romantics, he doubts if it is possible to define the major influences on Field's development.
It is likely that he listened to the sentimental ballads of the time, and married them to the classicism in which he was trained.
What is sure is that Field, with his access to the latest English pianos at an early age, at no time played the harpsichord, and this, perhaps, above all helped him to develop the use of the pedal, which he would often sustain through changes of harmony, for the sake of the colouring of the phrase.
O'Conor himself has played a restored Longman and Broderip piano — one which Field favoured, and says that it produced ‘a unique tinkling sound — no wonder he exploited those high notes.’
Field's form though, O'Conor admits, is suspect —‘when he does shift into extraordinary keys, he sometimes doesn't stay there long enough.
The orchestration, too, is odd — lyrical, then suddenly four square.
It's a pity that someone didn't take some aspects of his education in hand, to tame his more bizarre flights of fancy.’
Though O'Conor and the English pianist Frank Merrick have worked intensely on the scores, the SCO rehearsals, O'Conor says, have been fraught with interruption, as wrong notes are traced, discussed and righted.
The fruits of their labours, we'll hear in the Queen's Hall tonight, with Sir Charles Mackerras conducting.
O'Conor won't claim to have practised Field's florid passagework a thousand times, but his researches, clearly, have brought him peculiar satisfaction.
‘Every Irish kid is reared on Field nocturnes,’ he says, ‘and would you believe, there's a nun in Dundalk who claims to have uncovered the source of every one of his folk melodies.’
But for O'Conor, one suspects, following Field's flights of fancy have been the best part.
For, for the piano, he's re-discovered a veritable crock of gold.
When the unexpected appears to be all part of the plan
Alan Hutchison reports on the behind-the-scenes organisation for yesterday's visit to Edinburgh by Prince Charles.
POLICE motorcycles revved into action and strategically-placed plain clothes officers exchanged last minute information over their walkie-talkies.
But just as the security net began to tighten in the grounds of the Palace of Holyroodhouse in Edinburgh yesterday a group of Japanese tourists made an unscheduled appearance.
They had come on a sight-seeing visit and, of course, they had their cameras with them.
It was 9:30am and they had landed lucky.
They were about to be handed the photographic opportunity most tourists only dream of.
Inside, having finished breakfast, the Prince of Wales was receiving a final briefing on his visit to see various projects aimed at improving the quality of life in one of Edinburgh's deprived housing estates.
In an adjoining room a small group of businessmen and community activists — invited to join the prince on his coach trip to Craigmillar to show the fruits of a successful partnership between commerce and local organisations — were also comparing notes.
A few anxious glances at watches showed that it was time for the invited party to take their places.
It was 9.55.
The introductions would be made on the coach.
For His Royal Highness, it was yet another official engagement but for those getting a close-up look at the behind-the-scenes activity, the precise nature of the planning was both effective and impressive.
Minutes later a flurry of Japanese cameras signalled the emergence of Prince Charles.
He paused to speak to the surprised group and their wide smiles of acknowledgement started the day off well.
Craigmillar beckoned and the prince created a relaxed atmosphere as he discussed the development of projects designed to improve housing, social and employment opportunities.
‘It makes such a difference to train people to operate in an interview,’ commented the prince.
He listened intently as Helen Crummy, the founder of the Craigmillar Festival Society, told him that it was a group of mothers — determined to do something for their families because of their frustration at a lack of educational, cultural and employment opportunities — which had led to the start of the organisation in 1962.
The coach had now reached the estate and Barry Sealey, vice-chairman of Scottish Business in the Community — which aims to stimulate and assist companies to become involved in meeting the needs of communities — pointed out that bleak areas still remained to be tackled.
Prince Charles was to see for himself.
As the Press and television cameras waited a short distance away at a community centre, the coach slipped quietly into Niddrie Mains Drive and on to Wauchope Terrace.
Eyes turned to boarded up windows and rubbish strewn in gardens and the depressing picture moved the prince to say: ‘This is why I have been going on for so long about architecture in the environment.’
Cheering and smiling children waiting outside the McGovern House community centre in Niddrie House Park lifted the mood.
The prince chatted and joked with his well-wishers before he and his coach party met another group of community representatives and private and public sector figures who had earlier made a tour of the estate.
Then it was on to see another side of Craigmillar — a refurbished district council flat occupied by Sheila and Gerald Robinson.
Mrs Robinson invited the prince to take a seat and he chatted privately to them for several minutes.
The coach was filling up now.
The two groups of businessmen and community leaders filled with air with continuing discussion on how best to provide support and resources for such estates.
A practical example was illustrated at Castlebrae High School, where the prince watched a car maintenance class.
With equipment and a trained mechanic loaned by the maintenance firm Kwik-Fit, students gain hands-on experience as part of their curriculum.
A switch to an official car and into the centre of Edinburgh, where the prince joined a meeting of chairmen of his business and youth trust organisations in Scotland.
He was not scheduled to address them but just to prove that even the most carefully planned trips have an element of flexibility, he did rise to speak, without the use of notes, for 15 minutes.
His audience were delighted and inspired.
It made their day, just as he had earlier put a smile on the face of many in Craigmillar.
Happy and glorious: cheering and smiling children waiting outside the McGovern House community centre in Niddrie House Park gave a lift to the mood of Prince Charles's visit yesterday
Bobby Moore: legendary England captain
A FOOTBALL legend in his own glorious lifetime, Bobby Moore, OBE, will above all be remembered as the man who lifted the 1966 World Cup for Alf Ramsey's England.
‘There's people on the pitch.
They think it's all over…
It is now…’ exulted the TV commentator Kenneth Wolstenholme when Moore's West Ham colleague Geoff Hurst burst clear for the Cup-clinching goal against West Germany.
Sadly for Moore, who played 108 times for his country, it is now all over after a brave two-year battle against cancer.
But the memory of him holding the Jules Rimet trophy triumphantly aloft is etched on the memories of millions.
With the help of Hurst — who scored a hat-trick on that famous Wembley afternoon almost 27 years ago — and a third ex-Hammer, Martin Peters, Moore drew an everlasting reward for his supreme qualities as a player and a leader.
It confirmed Moore's place alongside the all-time greats such as Pele and Franz Beckenbauer.
He was a respected statesman of the game, and when he retired as a player in 1977 one tribute likened football without Moore to London without the Houses of Parliament.
His retirement took him away from the intense glare of publicity but he retained the admiration and affection of those who loved football — and those who knew little about the game but recognised a true gentleman and outstanding sportsman.
Off the field, he conducted himself with the same composure and dignity as he did whenever he pulled on the white shirt of England or the claret and blue of West Ham.
His legendary calm never failed, even when his health began to deteriorate.
He had surgery in April 1991 when a growth was removed.
The cancer later spread to the liver.
He kept his illness private until 10 days ago, when he issued a statement  in response to the increasing number of inquiries about his health.
Characteristically, however, he announced his intention to carry on as normal.
Moore was the original East End kid made good.
Born on 12 April, 1941, the only son of an electricity board worker, he was snapped up by his local club West Ham, and made his debut for them as a 17-year-old against Manchester United in 1958.
He took the number six shirt of another product of the Upton Park academy of soccer greats, Malcolm Allison — and Big Mal never got it back.
Moore's authoritative style of play soon brought him to the notice of the England management.
Moore made eight Under-23 appearances and his full debut was in 1962 against Peru.
Shortly after that, Ramsey took over as England's manager, and for the next 12 years the fortunes of the two men were inextricably intertwined.
A year later Moore captained England for the first time, against Czechoslovakia.
And his imperious, impeccably calm style of leadership on the football field epitomised an era of supremacy that England had not experienced before — or since.
Moore won an FA Cup winners' medal with West Ham in 1964, and led their successful European Cup Winners' Cup campaign in the next season.
The climax of his national captaincy, of course, came on that day in 1966 when he skippered England to their 4-2 triumph over West Germany at Wembley.
In 90 games under Moore as captain, England won 57 games, drew 20 and lost just 13.
Only one player, Peter Shilton with 125, has surpassed Moore's total of caps.
Criticised for a lack of pace and heading ability, Moore continually confounded the pundits with his uncanny speed of thought and cool authority under pressure.
He was in magnificent form in Mexico in 1970 as England unsuccessfully defended the World Cup — despite the scandalous off-the-field distraction of being falsely accused of stealing a gold bracelet from a jewellery store.
England's failure to qualify for the 1974 World Cup finals saw Moore's departure from the national scene.
Ramsey, too, went as an era drew to a close.
Moore left West Ham in March 1974 and moved across London to lend his still impressive skills to Alec Stock's Fulham side.
In 1975 they reached the FA Cup final, only to be beaten — by West Ham.
He was expected to slip into management with ease, but instead Moore moved into business, running a pub.
Then, in 1979, he had a brief spell as manager of non-league Oxford City.
In 1982, he became chief executive and team manager of third division Southend.
Two years later came a much-publicised split with his wife of 21 years, Tina.
Moore left Southend in May 1986 for ‘personal reasons’, and for a spell became sports editor of the new Sunday Sport newspaper.
Later that year came the first signs of health trouble when he was taken to hospital with a heart problem.
In December 1991 Moore married an air stewardess, Stephanie Parlane-Moore, but there was bad news with the collapse of a sports business.
Recently, Moore had been commentating for London-based Capital Radio at football matches, as well as working as a partner in a sports marketing company, preparing for the 1994 World Cup.
— PA 
In a tribute, West Ham United FC said Bobby Moore was their greatest-ever player.
‘Bobby was the people's captain and was extremely proud to lead his club and country and he achieved the ultimate goal of raising the World Cup in the summer of 1966.
Off the field, he was a true gentleman and a person his family can be proud of.
The club and all its supporters send their deepest sympathy to Bobby's family and friends and our thoughts are with them at this time.
‘The club are honoured to have been associated with such a great player and his memory will live for ever around Upton Park.’
Bobby Moore: supreme qualities as player and leader
InterCity winners
THE following ten readers are the winners of our recent InterCity Contest.
Each wins two Executive InterCity tickets Edinburgh/London and return as well as accommodation in the Stafford Hotel in St James, London.
The answers to the contest are: 1 — 393 miles 2 — St. James's Palace 3 — 175th Anniversary.
Mrs Ella Linton, Duns, Berwickshire; Mrs Elizabeth Kidd, Edinburgh; Ms Hilary Cameron, Edinburgh; James Wilson, Edinburgh; Mrs Marie Morton, Edinburgh; Rev Tom Urquhart, Edinburgh; Mr Ray Flint, Fife; S Young, Falkirk; M Archibald, Perthshire; S Lesley, Haddington, East Lothian.
First of the new season
TOP roadmen Martin Coll (Velo RT) and Graham McGar (Aberdeen Multi Sports) taken on the mountain bikers at their own game when the Scottish racing season opens at Eglinton Country Park, Irvine, on Sunday.
All categories will compete in the same field over a course which includes two water splashes.
Juveniles will cover two laps and seniors and juniors two for a race of about one hour's duration.
Organiser Bill Moore, for Fullarton Wheelers/Irvine Cycles, has an entry of 40 but unlike roadmen and time triallists, the mountain bikers have a turn-up-on- the-day attitude and the field will be much larger on the morning.
One off-road specialist already on the start sheet is John Walker (Loudon RC) who was second in both Scottish and British MTB veterans championships.
Local interest will centre on the Fullarton Wheelers pair of Andrew McKinlay and junior Ian Giffen.
The start is at 11am and not as in the Scottish Cyclists Union handbook, and entries will be accepted up until 10.30am.
Sheppard, Pendrich go their own way
By Elspeth Burnside
IGNORING the threat of disciplinary action, Alison Sheppard and Angela Pendrich head for High Wycombe this weekend to continue their bid for Speedo British Grand Prix titles.
The pair have gone against the wishes of management staff by opting for High Wycombe in preference to a ‘compulsory’ Commonwealth Games get-together at Inverclyde Centre, Largs.
Their decision will be discussed at next month's Scottish Amateur Swimming Association council meeting.
The fact that one of the Games squad, Graeme Smith, had earlier applied, but then accepted the refusal of leave of absence to compete in the Grand Prix, means that action will need to be taken.
On Saturday and Sunday, however, Sheppard will be concentrating on making a good start to the long-course season, and improving upon her seventh place in the sprint freestyle Grand Prix category.
The 20-year-old defending champion gained full points at Cumbernauld last November, but has lost ground by missing the Gloucester and Leicester Meets.
If she is to go to the Superfinal in Cardiff in May as leading qualifier, she must at least return home with gold and silver from the 50 and 100m freestyle this weekend.
Pendrich, the London-based 17-year-old, heads the distance freestyle category, but she could yet lose the top qualifying spot to Samantha Foggo.
Last season, it was Foggo who pipped the Scot for the British Olympic 400m freestyle spot, so revenge would be sweet.
For the Largs-bound SASA squad — 11 swimmers, three synchronised swimmers and two divers — there will be three training sessions, plus a chance to mix with leading competitors from all the other Games' disciplines.
‘The main benefit will be to start building up team spirit,’ said team manager, Danny McGowan.
‘It is good to get the three aquatic disciplines together, and for youngsters like Paul Latimer and Graeme Smith it is a first chance to be part of the senior squad.’
Win fuels Austin's comeback hopes
TWICE US Open champion and former teenage sensation Tracy Austin began a comeback yesterday by winning her first match in nearly nine years.
Austin beat Rennae Stubbs, of Australia, 7-5, 6-4 in the first round of the Evert Cup at Indian Wells, California.
Evening rain interrupted top seed Mary Joe Fernandez and fellow American Rachel Jensen at the beginning of their second-match with the score at one set apiece.
Britain's Clare Wood beat tenth seed Rosalyn Fairbank-Nideffer, of South Africa, 4-6, 6-2, 6-1 in a first-round contest, while fifth-seeded Helena Sukova trounced American Caroline Kuhlman 6-1, 6-3 in a second-round encounter.
Austin's win helped lessen disappointment over the withdrawal of the tournament's top two entrants, Steffi Graf and Jennifer  Capriati , before the event began.
Austin now faces second seed Katerina Maleeva, of Bulgaria, in the second round.
The 30-year-old Austin, winner of the 1979 and 1981 US Opens, last won a tour match on 26 February, 1984, at an indoor event in New Jersey.
She attempted a comeback in 1989, but lost in the first round of both events she played before being sidelined by a car accident which required surgery on her right knee.
Austin, once ranked No1 in the world, said she was excited just to be playing tennis, let alone winning a match.
‘I thought I'd be a nervous wreck, but I felt very eager and excited to get out there,’ she said.
‘It felt good to be out there.
There were so many thoughts entering my mind, everything from looking back to my car accident to thinking about how hard I have been training.’
Veteran Chris Evert, who gave her name to the tournament, watched the first set of Austin's match from the stands.
‘I'm thrilled for Tracy,’ she said.
‘I know the first match is the hardest to get through.
I'm especially pleased Tracy chose the Evert Cup for her comeback and that she had her first success here.’
Tracy Austin in Evert Cup action against Rennae Stubbs
Dope test: police ready to act
DEVON and Cornwall police are on stand-by to join the investigation into the dope test failure of Martin Pipe's Triumph Hurdle challenger, Her Honour.
The force has been informed by the Jockey Club's security team of the inquiry, and is awaiting further information.
Detective Superintendent Michael Walsh said yesterday: ‘The Jockey Club has been in touch with the force, and further discussions will be taking place.
‘There may be an investigation when we are in full possession of the facts.’
Experts are still attempting to establish what caused the filly to test positive to a banned substance after her 40-length defeat by Indian Quest at Kempton last month, for which she started 6-4 favourite.
Martin Pipe suspects that the filly, who subsequently bounced back to land a novice hurdle at Taunton last week, was ‘got at’ probably with a fast-acting tranquiliser, administered at the racecourse and not at his Nicolashayne yard.
But there was no further information from the Jockey Club today.
Spokesman David Pipe said: ‘Our investigators are continuing their inquiries and everything is in their hands.
‘If there is any suspicion at all, it is normal practice to inform the local police.’
Kempton clerk of the course Michael Webster is satisfied with the level of security at his track.
‘The situation here is no different from what it was before the results of the analysis were known,’ he said.
‘The test has shown positive, but as far as we know at the moment it could have come from many different sources.’
— PA
Kelso clerk of the course Johnnie Fenwicke-Clennell was fined £150 by the Jockey Club's disciplinary committee yesterday for inadequately briefing staff who incorrectly dolled off a fence at the 3 October meeting.
Suspended Ramprakash given hint of Test reprieve
THE Middlesex batsman, Mark Ramprakash, will be considered for the summer series against Australia after being effectively suspended for the current tour to India and Sri Lanka.
England manager Keith Fletcher yesterday confirmed that the 23-year-old had been omitted from both the senior trip and the A team tour to Australia for disciplinary reasons.
Ramprakash, who was given a £15,000 winter contract last summer, was left out after two incidents with Middlesex.
He was fined £700 for swearing at a Cambridge University student, Marcus Wight, in April, and disciplined again in mid-August after clashing with a spectator at a Sunday League fixture.
Fletcher said he had spoken several times to Ramprakash this winter in an effort to help point the highly talented player in the right direction.
‘Ramprakash is a lad who could be a superb player, but there are standards you have to abide by.
If you are an England player you have to behave in a certain way.’
Ramprakash looked to have established himself in the Test side with a series of fighting knocks against the West Indians in 1991.
But he lost his Test place in New Zealand last winter and was also left out of the World Cup squad.
He played in last summer's first Test against Pakistan — getting a first ball duck — and was dropped again before being recalled for the final two Tests.
Fletcher also indicated that England's batting line-up might be shaken up after the humiliation by India.
He mentioned the experienced David Gower and Allan Lamb, plus the promise of Graham Thorpe and Mark Lathwell — as well as Ramprakash.
‘It might not be exactly the same players who line up against Australia,’ stressed Fletcher.
‘We have got to get back home and then think about who are the best XI to regain the Ashes.
‘As we said at the time of this tour's selection, David Gower's Test career is not necessarily finished.
And Allan Lamb is another pretty useful batsman.’
Fletcher also spoke of the role Graeme Hick can play after his successful tour.
‘Graeme has the ability to become a top-class performer and I rate him highly.
‘We brought him on this tour so he could develop, and I believe he could be the player to hold England's batting together for the next ten years.’
Finally, Fletcher insisted that Graham Gooch will be in charge against Australia.
‘Graham was very  disappointed to lose the Test series 3-0.
But he's the captain in charge, he's the No1.
He will be leading England against Australia and he's happy with that.
MIKE GATTING yesterday warned his England team-mates that the winter tour's second leg in Sri Lanka will be not be easy after the torrid time in India.
But the former England captain, who admitted he was a ‘little bit disappointed’ with his batting form during the 3-0 series defeat, believes England can still regain some pride in the remaining 3-weeks of the tour.
Gatting, who made 219 Test runs against India at an average of 36.5, said: ‘It's not going to be easy for us in Sri Lanka either.
People will say we should beat them but we've seen how difficult this trip has been so far.
India in their home country are very tough and I always thought we would have a difficult task here.
‘But people should not think that the end of the Indian Tests is the end of the tour.
It isn't, because there is still a lot left to play for.
We must get it together in the four one-day internationals against India before we get to Sri Lanka.
‘Personally, I would liked to have done a little bit better in the Tests.
It hasn't been a disastrous trip for me, but I got in a few times without going on to a really big score.’
‘We have not discussed the captaincy, but as far as I'm concerned it is not a thing that needs discussion.
I think everyone has got to shoulder the responsibility for defeat, not just Graham.
The whole management is responsible and so are all the players.
‘Graham has made it perfectly clear he doesn't want to go to the West Indies next winter — but he's said those sort of things before about touring and has ended up going.’
England take on India again tomorrow (frid) in the third one-day international of a six-match series, having flown to Bangalore from Bombay yesterday.
Fletcher added: ‘If we can win the one-day series it will be very pleasing after what has gone on so far, but it's not going to be easy.
‘We shall be getting together in a team meeting so that we can get people's heads up.
We need to show fighting spirit and determination.’
Mark Ramprakash: problems with discipline
Grant denies rift with Brady over boardroom leak
By Hugh Keevins
THE Celtic manager, Liam Brady, and Tom Grant, the director who leaked information about the Parkhead board requesting a meeting with Brady to discuss the team's performances, yesterday sat together at a press conference designed, apparently, to show a united front.
However, Grant refused to apologise for the embarrassment caused to Brady even after the manager stated his belief that boardroom matters involving the manager of any club should remain confidential.
The explanation given by Grant was that attempts to contact Brady ahead of making public the board's move had failed, though he accepted that it was only right the manager be the first to know.
‘There is no rift between Liam Brady and myself,’ said Grant, the youngest member of Celtic's seven-man board, who last season survived an attempt by fellow directors to have him removed at a special general meeting.
‘There is no fight, no feud and I do not want one, either,’ he remarked.
Brady did his best to let the director off the hook by saying: ‘Tom (Grant) is an emotive man and likes to speak his mind.
This episode has not changed my attitude to the job of managing Celtic and I will be going before the board at a later date to give them my plans for the immediate future.’
The meeting between Brady and the directors has been made to sound more like a summons than a request.
Either way, Brady says he does not feel threatened as Celtic move towards the end of a second successive season without a trophy under his management.
‘I expected something to be said to me by the directors after recent results.
The board want answers and I want to prove that my relationship with them in general, and Tom Grant in particular , remains a good one.
‘There is no need for speculation about our relationship.’
Journalists were asked by the manager to attend a midday conference at Celtic Park in the expectation that Brady would be commenting on his dismay over anonymous, directorial criticism of the team's progress.
Thirty minutes after the appointed hour, Brady arrived to say he would be a further ten minutes.
Forty minutes later, manager and director appeared together.
I understand that Brady has been given no specific date for his meeting with the board.
However, the areas he must address do not concern the first team alone.
In the boardroom, doubts exist about the efficiency of Celtic's backroom staff — as reflected in the club's poor performance at reserve and youth team level.
Of more pressing necessity, however, is Brady's need to draw up a list of the players he would like to see departing from, and arriving at, Celtic Park.
This will need to be done in weeks rather than months because the sale of season tickets pre-occupies the directors of a club deep in debt and in need of that revenue during the summer.
The directors understand they have a credibility problem with the supporters who called for the sacking of the board at the end of last week's drawn home game with Partick Thistle.
Grant and the rest, however, believe the fans should know how the board feels about Celtic's crisis, but it is thought that no-one on the board wants Brady's resignation.
The manager is also being backed by Celtic's captain, Paul McStay.
‘The players have to take a heap of responsibility for what has happened at Celtic Park,’ he said, ‘but the squad is also made up of footballers who want to play in the manner Liam Brady has adopted as his philosophy on the game.
‘We hope he succeeds because the game is supposed to be an entertainment.’
McStay does not absolve himself from blame for Celtic's poor season.
Neither, though, does he regret re-signing for the club last summer after intense speculation that had him moving under  freedom of contract to an assortment of clubs in England or the continent.
‘I have no regrets and I remain very happy with Celtic.
I have had an indifferent season but I always give 100 per cent effort and so do the other players.’
Frank McAvennie, meanwhile, will today give his answer to the offer of a contract that will take him up to the end of the season and with the promise of a more substantial agreement if his progress is satisfactory.
‘This episode has not changed my attitude to managing Celtic and I will be going before the board to give them my plans for the future’ Liam Brady
Continued support for club event
By Martin Dempster
AMATEUR golf in Scotland received a boost yesterday when it was announced that Martell Cognac, sponsor of the Scottish Club Championship for the past three years, has extended its support of the event until 1995.
The new deal is worth around £25,000 to the Scottish Golf Union, whose president, Douglas Rae, welcomed the sponsor's renewed commitment in Glasgow yesterday.
‘We have been trying to raise the profile of the SGU and nothing, as far as I am concerned, raises it more than the Scottish Club Championship,’ he said.
‘Golf, in my opinion, is all about the club golfer.
He is the salt of the earth as far as the game is concerned and the Scottish Club Championship is the event he relates to.’
The popularity of the tournament — founded in 1985, it is a scratch stroke-play team event — has grown since Martell Cognac took over the sponsorship.
Whereas 296 clubs competed in 1990, the entry last year, when Barassie, represented by Jim Milligan, Gordon Sherry and Leslie Crawford, took the spoils in the final at Scotscraig, was 322.
Like the Barassie trio, this year's winners will go forward to represent Scotland in the European Club Cup, to be played in Spain in November.
In an effort to raise awareness of the Scottish tournament — this year's final will be played at Helensburgh on 26 September — Martell Cognac will present a special plaque to the winning club in each of the regional finals.
The overall winners will also receive a specially designed flag for their clubhouse.
The all amateur team of Bob Allan, Damion De Luca and Bill Turner won the fifth East of Scotland Golfers Alliance team tournament for the Tappit Hen Trophy at Craigmillar Park yesterday.
Lewis camp to fight WBC over purse
BRITAIN's heavyweight champion, Lennox Lewis, will lose £420,000 of his huge purse for fighting America's Tony Tucker in May if moves fail to overturn a World Boxing Council ruling.
A special vote of the Mexico City-based WBC agreed that Lewis should receive 75 per cent of the £9 million-plus windfall instead of 80 per cent(£6,777,622) as laid down in their rules for a champion defending his title in the challenger's country.
The clash goes ahead in Las Vegas on 8 May, but Lewis's handlers and the British Boxing Board of Control will not be taking the WBC verdict lying down.
Tucker's promoter, Don King, who earlier this month won the bidding for the fight, argued that ‘special’ circumstances should apply as Lewis did not technically win the title in the ring.
Lewis's manager Frank Maloney is consulting his American lawyers over the issue, while the British Board intend to make ‘strong’ representations to the WBC.
Maloney said: ‘I've been informed that Lennox's share will now be 75 per cent.
We will be reserving our rights and I'm talking to our legal people in the US.
‘But there is no question of the fight not going ahead.
It's certainly not in jeopardy.’
Meanwhile, Riddick Bowe, the WBA and IBF world heavyweight champion, could meet Evander Holyfield in a re-match in June.
Bowe dethroned Holyfield in November and should the fight go ahead, he will donate his proceeds to help the famine in Somalia.
The latest world rankings show a timely improvement in status for Drew Docherty, the British bantamweight champion who will be on the bill that is topped by Nigel Benn at next week's promotion in Glasgow's SECC.
Docherty, who is undefeated as a professional, is now ranked fifth in the world in his weight division.
It is hoped the fighter's manager, Tommy Gilmour, will today name an American opponent for Docherty in Glasgow on 6 March.
After that contest, Docherty expects to fight Vincenzo Belcastro, ranked fourth in the world, for the European title and also use that contest as an eliminator for the right to box for the world crown.
Former WBC International bantamweight champion, Donnie Hood, agreed terms last night to top Katherine Morrison's bill on 26 March at the Hospitality Inn, Glasgow.
Hood, 28, faces Northern Ireland's Conn McMullan.
Don King: has won round one
Corsie's great escape keeps him on title trail
RICHARD CORSIE's hopes of becoming the first player to secure a third World Indoor singles title since the game went open back in 1981 remained intact yesterday.
But the 26-year-old Edinburgh man had to produce one of the greatest-ever fightbacks in the history of the championship to beat English title- holder, Mervyn King, in five sets.
King drew first blood when he took the opening set 7-5, thanks mainly to counts of 3 on the first and third ends, but Corsie's reply was immediate: a 7-1 second-set triumph in five ends.
King then moved ahead again when a last end 3 gave him the third set 7-5, but then the Corsie fightback began.
He forged into a 6-5 lead in the fourth set but then saw King draw two shots close to the jack on the eighth end for a match lie.
Corsie drew shot, but King beat it to tie things up at 6-6, before Corsie prevailed on the next end to take the set 7-6 and force the decider.
However, it was the English champion who dominated the opening exchanges, with Corsie's weight temporarily deserting him.
With five ends completed, King stood within one of victory, leading 6-1 and Corsie's title hopes looked in tatters.
The Scot picked up a double on the sixth end despite failing with a great chance to add a third with his last bowl, drew a match-saving shot on the next end and then produced the shot of the match.
With King 6-4 ahead and lying two shots around the jack, Corsie produced a perfectly weighted bowl that threaded its way between King's two counters to take shot.
Corsie then added a double on the next end to take the set and complete a remarkable victory.
‘I don't think I've played as many match-saving shots in the one game — I'm very relieved to still be in the title hunt — I can hardly believe it.
My overall form was a bit scratchy.’
Corsie's semi-final opponent tomorrow will be Gary Smith who beat him in the final of the UK Championship five years ago.
Smith hit back to beat last year's beaten finalist and former champion, John Price, from Port Talbot, 6-7, 7-2, 5-7, 7-2, 7-0.
Crucial Paris meeting holds key to future
A FINAL blueprint of reforms and plans to determine the future of world motor sport is expected to be unveiled at an unprecedented meeting in Paris today.
The leaders of international motor sport's ruling bodies meet after a winter of controversy and argument, followed by the imposition of revolutionary rule changes in Formula One.
They are expected to announce changes to F1 regulations introduced by International Motor Sports Federation (FISA) president Max Mosley at an F1 Commission meeting two weeks ago.
The Paris meeting brings together for a rare joint pronouncement  International Automobile Federation (FIA) president Jean-Marie Balestre, Mosley and Bernie Ecclestone, Formula One Constructors' Association (FOCA) president and FIA vice-president in charge of promotional affairs.
The rule changes follow subtle lobbying by many teams worried by the effects of the new regulations introduced without the support of them all.
Unanimous support is generally understood to be needed for any changes under F1's Concorde Agreement.
The two new rules most likely to be modified concern the number of sets of tyres allowed at a grand prix and limitations on the use of spare cars.
Edinburgh routed after interval Durham Univ41 Edinburgh Univ0
EDINBURGH's chances of reaching the semi-finals of the University Athletic Union competition were buried when they were overwhelmed by Durham at the Racecourse Ground yesterday.
Although Edinburgh, for whom captain and scrum-half Johnnie Crombie had an outstanding game, were losing only 7-0 at the interval, they were swamped in the second half as Durham ran in five tries and kicked four conversions and a penalty.
The visiting students were unable to create scoring chances and couldn't find an effective method of stopping Durham's outstanding performer, full-back Tim Stimpson, who scored 28 points — three tries, five conversions and a penalty.
Despite losing so heavily, Edinburgh tried hard to play enterprisingly and in scrum-half Crombie, possess a player with the ability to perform at the highest level.
At King's College, Loughborough University, the holders, beat Aberdeen University 51-6.
The English visitors dominated up front with their 6ft 6in lock, Derwyn Jones, cleaning up at the lineout.
Mark Nicholson, who plays for Scottish Students next month against the English Students, ran from his own 22 to put Gareth Williams over for the first of the visitors' seven tries.
Montgomerie finds sympathiser in Seve
From Mike Britten Cadiz
SEVE BALLESTEROS yesterday extended the hand of sympathy to Scotland's leading golfer, Colin Montgomerie, who has been fined £1,000 for comments he made about last week's Moroccan Open.
The Spanish star, who is ‘hosting’ the Turespana Masters on the Novo Sancti Petri course he designed on the Bay of Cadiz, said: ‘Colin is still young and has much to learn.
‘When I was his age I said contentious things like he did last week, but I did not speak English very well so I did not get into trouble.’
Montgomerie, one of the leading contenders for this first event of the year on the Spanish mainland, was reluctant to react to the fine announced from Tour headquarters at Wentworth.
‘I have not decided whether to appeal because I have not yet officially been informed as to why I have been fined’ he said.
‘At the moment the least said the better.’
Montgomerie will talk with the Tour's executive director, Ken Schofield, when he arrives in Cadiz at the weekend.
Meanwhile, like the rest of Europe's professional golfers, he is pondering how to contend with the examination that Ballesteros, the architect, has set his contemporaries.
The Atlantic coast course, part parkland, part links, measures more than 7,100 yards and wind is always the dominant factor whether the levante from the east, or the poniente from the west.
Most of the fairways are affected by crosswind which yesterday gusted to 30mph, making the par-5s genuine three-shotters, and the quartet of par-3s anything but short.
To reach the sixteenth green from the championship tee required a full driver over a lake of 230 yards.
Montgomerie hit a 3-wood to the 200-yard fourth and failed to reach the target.
‘It is a long, demanding test and it is bound to favour the long hitters.’
The majority verdict is that Seve's handiwork is difficult but fair, and tournament director, Andy McFee, aims to keep it that way by utilising a variety of tees, including some of the ladies', to strike the right balance.
He will also keep the greens watered, anticipating a wind for all four rounds of the £350,000 promotion, the first of four by the Spanish Tourist Board.
Jose-Maria Olazabal, Seve's Ryder Cup partner, missed the pro-am because of a heavy cold but expects to be fit to join Germany's Bernhard Langer in the line-up.
Langer, recently a father for the third time, has prepared for his 1993 European debut by skiing in Utah, and practising in Florida.
He also appears in Valencia next week.
Sam Torrance partners Ballesteros in the first two rounds and needs to start his personal Ryder bandwagon rolling.
Sam currently lies 33rd with 41,247 points whereas Montgomerie already has over 220,000 to his name.
Seve Ballesteros: ‘Colin is young and has much to learn’
ATHLETICS
Coe to run London marathon
SEBASTIAN COE is to come out of retirement to run the London Marathon on Sunday 18 April.
The former Olympic hero, now MP for Falmouth and Camborne, will run to raise money for the charity of which he is chairman, ADT Healthquest.
Sinead Dudgeon, the Scottish senior indoor 200m champion, spearheads Scotland's schools' team for Saturday's challenge match against Scotland, Northern Ireland, Scottish Universities and English Universities at Glasgow's Kelvin Hall.
CYCLING
Strike halts Tour of Sicily
THE Tour of Sicily cycle race ground to a halt yesterday when the whole field of more than 100 riders staged a strike in protest at dangerous conditions.
The riders refused to begin on a series of circuits around Sant' Agata Di Militello on the east of the island at the end of the penultimate fifth stage of the race.
It is not clear whether the final stage will go ahead today.
FENCING
Scots quartet in GB team
FOUR Scots are included in the British team to compete in the Challenge Martini World Cup Series to be held in London: Alasdair Baker, from Dunfermline, Eric Usher (Edinburgh), Kyle MacDonald (Stirling) and Todd Lindsay (Dalkeith).
FOOTBALL
New chance for Livingston
SPRINTER Jason Livingston, banned for four years by the British Athletics Federation, is to be given the chance of a new career as a footballer.
He will have trials with second division Wigan next week.
Manager Bryan Hamilton, who offered the 21-year-old Londoner the opportunity, said: ‘He is looking for a change of direction while his athletics career is on hold and we are giving him the chance to prove his worth as a footballer.’
MEN'S HOCKEY
Brother internationalists
SEVENTEEN-YEAR-OLD James Spreng, captain of Stewart's-Melville XI, and his brother, Gerald (15), who plays in the same side, have been selected for the Under-18 and Under-16 Scotland squads respectively for the home schools' internationals in Cork at the end of next month.
SAILING
Knox-Johnson closes the gap
ENZA New Zealand, jointly skippered by Robin Knox-Johnston and Peter Blake, sailed 474 miles in one 24-hour burst — the highest daily mileage she has managed so far — and has now covered 8,300 miles in the first 24 days, to take 150 miles out of the lead of French challenger Commodore Explorer.
TENNIS
First whitewash for Agassi
WIMBLEDON champion Andre Agassi has scored his first-ever professional whitewash in the men's tournament in Scottsdale, Arizona, by beating Australian Sandon Stolle 6-0. 6-0 in just 51 minutes.
Miles Maclagan, of West of Scotland, beat Frenchman Lionel Barthez 2-6, 6-3, 6-4 in the first round of the LTA Men's Indoor Satellite at Telford, while Davis Cup player Mark Petchey, of Essex, defeated Juan Pino (Cuba) 4-6, 6-3, 6-4.
VOLLEYBALL
Krawczyk concedes title
VINCE KRAWCZYK, coach to Scottish women's champions, Glasgow Powerhouse, has conceded the league title to rivals Team Components Bureau.
Although Components Bureau believe there is still some work to be done in their final three matches, Krawczyk believes the league race is over.
‘They will make worthy champions,’ he said.
‘Although it is not official yet, their win over us on Tuesday is as big a guarantee as you can get that they will win the title.’
RICHARD CORSIE's hopes of becoming the first player to secure a third World Indoor singles title since the game went open back in 1981 remained intact yesterday.
But the 26-year-old Edinburgh man had to produce one of the greatest-ever fightbacks in the history of the championship to beat English title- holder, Mervyn King, in five sets.
King drew first blood when he took the opening set 7-5, thanks mainly to counts of 3 on the first and third ends, but Corsie's reply was immediate: a 7-1 second-set triumph in five ends.
King then moved ahead again when a last end 3 gave him the third set 7-5, but then the Corsie fightback began.
He forged into a 6-5 lead in the fourth set but then saw King draw two shots close to the jack on the eighth end for a match lie.
Corsie drew shot, but King beat it to tie things up at 6-6, before Corsie prevailed on the next end to take the set 7-6 and force the decider.
However, it was the English champion who dominated the opening exchanges, with Corsie's weight temporarily deserting him.
With five ends completed, King stood within one of victory, leading 6-1 and Corsie's title hopes looked in tatters.
The Scot picked up a double on the sixth end despite failing with a great chance to add a third with his last bowl, drew a match-saving shot on the next end and then produced the shot of the match.
With King 6-4 ahead and lying two shots around the jack, Corsie produced a perfectly weighted bowl that threaded its way between King's two counters to take shot.
Corsie then added a double on the next end to take the set and complete a remarkable win.
‘I don't think I've played as many match-saving shots in the one game,’ he said.
Corsie's semi-final opponent tomorrow will be Gary Smith who beat him in the final of the UK Championship five years ago.
Smith hit back to beat last year's beaten finalist and former champion, John Price, from Port Talbot, 6-7, 7-2, 5-7, 7-2, 7-0.
However, Corsie's double hopes disappeared last night when he and Graham Robertson went down 7-4, 1-7, 2-7, 7-5, 7-6 in a five-set marathon to Irish pair Stevie Adamson and Ian McClure.
McNish to test-drive for Benetton team
By Jim Dunn
ALLAN McNISH received a late night boost to his Formula One hopes last night when he was summoned by Benetton-Ford team owner, Tom Walkinshaw, to test-drive the team's new Grand Prix car at Silverstone today.
The 24-year-old Scot had all but shelved his Formula One ambitions for a year when the Pacific Racing team, with whom he had negotiated a deal, postponed their plans for a year after a last-minute sponsorship hitch.
Though McNish would not be drawn on the exact reasons for the call, it is believed to be for the vacant post of team test driver and understudy for Michael Schumacher and Riccardo Patrese.
The position of the team test driver, which McNish has occupied for the last two years with Marlboro McLaren, can lead to a permanent seat in the team — as happened to Damon Hill, who has replaced Nigel Mansell alongside Alain Prost with Williams-Renault.
The Benetton test job had appeared to be destined for fellow-Scot David Coulthard but he, apparently, has recently been approached by Frank Williams to take over from Hill.
‘Silverstone is my home track so I will be playing my own game, on my own terms, on my own patch,’ said McNish.
Jones wants FA fine cut
VINNIE JONES will today ask the FA to reduce the record £20,000 fine imposed for his part in the video Soccer's Hard Men.
The Wimbledon defender will also request a cut in a six-month playing ban, suspended for three years, which was imposed at the same time.
Jones is not challenging the verdict of the FA commission, which found him guilty of bringing the game into disrepute, but he hopes for a reduction in the heaviest punishment ever imposed on an individual player.
— PA
The fine was over £11,000 more than the previous highest on Paul McGrath (Aston Villa) for newspaper criticism of former club Manchester United.
After the original hearing Jones said: ‘The decision has been taken and I want to get it over with.
I suppose I will have to start saving up.
I don't intend to appeal.’
But Wimbledon owner Sam Hammam was furious with the FA and seems to have been behind the change of heart.
Hammam described Jones as a ‘mosquito brain’ for agreeing to be involved with the video nasty.
After the hearing he said: ‘The FA wanted to show law and order but they went  over the top.’
Hammam said Jones was a Sheffield United player at the time the video was compiled and that Wimbledon were unjustly being made to suffer because of the suspended sentence.
It is that sentence the club will most want to see cut.
Maradona to face showdown with club
DIEGO MARADONA's future with Spanish club Sevilla is in doubt after he flew home to Argentina without permission.
Just five months after returning to football after a lengthy ban for failing a drugs test, the temperamental star faces a showdown tomorrow with Sevilla officials.
Maradona upset his club last weekend when he returned from an international match in Argentina a day late and just hours before the team's first division game.
After a notably listless performance, he flew back to Argentina on Monday, along with Argentinian team-mate Diego Simeone, without permission from the club.
‘All could turn out well when they come back tomorrow and we talk the matter over.
It depends on Maradona's attitude,’ club chairman Luis Cuervas said.
‘But if he wishes to break the contract, then the contract will be broken.’
Cuervas, who started disciplinary proceedings against both players yesterday, added that Maradona could play for Sevilla ‘as long as he behaves in a dignified manner’.
The chairman was clearly annoyed at Maradona's claim that he had had no time to notify him on Monday before returning to Argentina for the friendly against Denmark.
Madonna is reported by several South American news agencies as saying: ‘I am not afraid of anything.
Cuervas is boss at the club and he will know what he is doing.
‘In any case, I've already said that I don't want to fight any more with anybody.
If I have to go then I'll go.’
— AP
Club football in Brazil is in a mess.
Last year, attendances slumped as fans tired of a proliferation of championships, chaotic organisation, rocketing ticket prices and punch-ups on the pitch.
The situation became so drastic that one leading club, Botafogo, played a midweek game in the afternoon to save on the bill for floodlights.
Only 365 people turned up and to add insult to injury, the lights had to be turned on in the second half when a storm blew up, plunging the ground into darkness.
Players, coaches and the media agree that drastic changes are needed.
But as the 1993 season gets into swing it is becoming clear that little, if anything, will be done to breathe new life into the domestic game.
— Reuter
‘In Europe, everything is done to try and bring the supporters to watch football,’ Flamengo goalkeeper Gilmar said.
‘Here the directors do everything to try and keep them away.’
Players say that saturation television coverage, crazy kick-off times — 2130 on weekday nights or mid-afternoon on blazing hot Sundays when people prefer to be on the beach — and the fear of hooliganism combine to make soccer an unappetising prospect for all but the most fanatical supporters.
‘One week last year they showed games Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday — in the same competition,’ said Brazil's national team coach Carlos Alberto Parreira.
But that is just the tip of the iceberg.
The formats of the championships — which usually involve a complex system of stages and phases and bonus points — are too complicated and badly written causing endless confusion, critics say.
Three years ago Vasco da Gama and Botafogo left the Rio championship final claiming to have won the title and completing laps of honour.
The two clubs interpreted the rules differently and the title was eventually decided by a tribunal.
Last year Vasco da Gama and Olaria took the field for a match wearing identical strips.
Club officials spent half an hour arguing over who had the right to wear their first strip.
Then there are the championships themselves.
Any European fan coming to Brazil and expecting to find a national league and knockout cup as in his own country is likely to be bewildered by a combination of 27 regional competitions, a nationwide cup, a national championship, pre-season tournaments and three South American club competitions.
Some clubs can find themselves playing three to four times a week as they struggle to fulfil the fixture list.
The regional championships last six months but most of the participants are minor, semi-professional clubs with no hope of winning.
Take Flamengo, Brazil's best-supported side.
Ten of their 13 opponents in the Rio de Janeiro championship are minor teams, which means a series of games in tiny stadiums on bumpy, pot-holed pitches and rarely more than a couple of thousand fans.
‘The small clubs deliberately maintain bad pitches to bring the big clubs down to their level,’ said Gilmar.
‘The directors could not do worse if they tried,’ commented Fernando Calazans, a leading newspaper columnist.
‘To organise a championship like this…is stupid.
To repeat the same formula next year is suicide.’
But that is exactly what has been done.
In contrast, Brazil's national championship, in which the big clubs finally get to face each other, lasts only three months once the regional competitions have finished.
Parreira, Gilmar, Calazans and many others maintain the championship has enormous potential if it was to run all year with matches just on Sundays, as in Italy.
Flamengo's average attendance during last year's Brazilian championship was 42,000, including away games.
But this year organisers have gone in the other direction, increasing the number of participants from 20 to 32 while shortening the length of the competition.
‘20 was an ideal number,’ said an exasperated Parreira.
‘Now I don't know what they will do.
They could have eight groups of four or four groups of eight or something else.’
Directors justify holding regional competitions by saying Brazil is too big for a fully blown national championship.
Players and coaches refute this, saying what is really needed is a change of direction by the directors.
‘We can all see what is wrong, but the directors simply have a different mentality,’ Gilmar said.
Asked if he thought the situation would change for the better, Parreira shrugged his shoulders and sighed.
‘I've been involved in football for 24 years and we have been talking about this problem for all that time.
But in 24 years nothing has been done.
It's getting worse and worse.’
REUTER HOM LM
Victory is perfect tonic for McManus
By Trevor Baxter
ALAN McMANUS, fifth on the latest provisional world rankings, had more problems fighting off flu symptoms than coping with Jason Prince in Derby yesterday.
Troubled by swollen glands and a sore throat, the 22-year-old Glaswegian's 5-2 third-round win in the £250,000 Wickes British Open was the perfect tonic.
‘I picked up a bug in Germany at the weekend’ explained McManus, who contested a European League game in Augsburg, where more than eight inches of snow fell in 48 hours.
‘I don't like making excuses, but I haven't been able to practice as much as I would want.
I'm just glad to get this game out of the way and hopefully I'll be feeling better for my next match.’
In fact, McManus returns to action today against the local favourite, David Roe, while world champion Stephen Hendry faces Australian Eddie Charlton on Saturday — if he overcomes Jason Ferguson.
Hendry, beaten by Steve Davies in last Sunday's European Open final, made the perfect start last night.
He took the opening three frames in 52 minutes, including a 131 break in the second frame.
A third Scot, John Higgins, 17, of Wishaw, captured three of the opening four frames against Nick Terry, of England, in a fourth-round contest.
Willie Thorne made light work of the promising Nottinghamshire youngster, Anthony Hamilton, as he eased into the last 16.
Thorne, a beaten finalist at the Assembly Rooms in 1986, defeated his 21-year-old opponent 5-1, but was still scathing about his own performance.
‘I'm just glad to get that out of the way because at the moment I've got no confidence,’ said Thorne.
‘But I was pleased that I showed some fighting spirit.’
Nigel Bond, Thorne's new practice partner, is still a round behind, despite over- coming Tony Meo.
The Derbyshire professional dropped the first frame, but then won five of the next six.
Moore: the golden boy of a golden era
BOBBY MOORE made his first appearance for England against Peru in 1962.
It was an entry to international football as perfectly timed as any of the crisp, balanced tackles he made in the course of his remarkable playing career.
The tall, blond player who had joined West Ham at the tender of age of 17 some four years earlier, had done more than choose the right moment to emerge, he'd nicely anticipated the coming of the right man, Alf Ramsey, who took over the England management shortly afterwards and began to forge the national side which would win the World Cup in 1966 and in which Moore would play an anchor role.
It is a significant measure of Moore's qualities as a player and a captain, that he was so readily incorporated into the Ramsey plan.
Indeed, in many ways the imposing young man epitomised the direct, drilled, power football towards which Ramsey so doggedly, often ruthlessly, directed his efforts.
When the day came, 11 years after that international debut, that Moore's powers showed signs of waning, Ramsey reacted typically by consigning his ‘golden boy’ to the bench for a World Cup warm-up game against Austria at Wembley.
By then, however, Moore had won 107 of his 108 caps and had passed, with Ramsey, into the realm of football legend.
As the tributes flowed in yesterday, Sir Alf said: ‘If people say England would not have won the World Cup without me as manager, I can say it would have been impossible without Bobby Moore as captain.
He was the heartbeat of the team in 1966…my lieutenant on the field, a cool, calculated footballer I could trust with my life.’
The present England manager, Graham Taylor, said: ‘My enduring picture of Bobby Moore will always be him lifting the World Cup in 1966.
As a young professional player myself, that day he was captain of all of us, not just the England team.
That image will always remain with me.’
Moore's 1970 World Cup in Mexico was blighted by the wretched bracelet business in Bogota which smouldered on and on.
The disbelief in the England camp was summed up by Tottenham Hotspur's Alan Mullery who, told of the false accusation of theft, remarked: ‘Are you kidding?
Moore has so much money he could buy the entire hotel.’
At last football reasserted itself and Moore was talked about again for his prowess on the field.
The Brazilian, Pele, described the Englishman's performance in the group match between the two countries, played at Guadalajara and won by Brazil with the only goal of the game, as ‘one of the best we will see in the championship.’
In return, Moore's respect for the Brazilian was total and the two exchanged jerseys after that game.
Yesterday, Pele said: ‘Besides being a player, he was my friend.
It is very sad to lose a good friend.
The world has lost one of its greatest football players and a great gentleman.’
Finest hour: Bobby Moore is held aloft after England had won the World Cup at Wembley in 1966
Scots unchanged for Triple Crown showdown
By Graham Law
SCOTLAND will bid to lift their third Triple Crown in nine years when they travel to Twickenham on Saturday week with the same line-up which did them proud in the 20-0 victory over Wales.
Thus, assuming all goes well in this weekend's national league games, Scotland will have used a mere 16 players during the course of the campaign, Peter Wright's introduction for the injured Alan Watt proving the only alteration over the four games.
The same number of players were utilised during the 1990 Grand Slam and for all the flak to which they have been subjected, such consistency reflects creditably on the selectors.
It is, after all, hard to argue against results.
Scotland's success rate at Twickenham has been as elusive as the Chancellor's green shoots of recovery: in 35 visits since 1911, the Scots have enjoyed a mere four victories, with five matches drawn.
It will be the ninth occasion that Twickenham has represented the last hurdle in Scotland's attempt to capture the Triple Crown and only once — Wilson Shaw's match in 1938 — has the elusive prize been garnered.
Given that, Duncan Paterson's assertion that ‘England must be favourites’ is hardly gilding the  lily .
Paterson's personal record at Twickenham is rather better, however, having played a key part in the 1971 win and spectated both when Tom Smith scored the decisive try in 1983 and when a draw was registered in 1989.
He has only seen one defeat at the ground.
‘Much of the talk of our record at the ground tends to be irrelevant,’ he said.
‘It goes without saying that it will be a very difficult job but much in the manner of playing any away international.’
Scotland captain Gavin Hastings — as talk of his likely Lions leadership reaches a crescendo — also sought to keep matters in perspective.
‘We have perhaps exceeded most people's expectations by the way we have played this season, yet we are very conscious that we still have one more game to go,’ he reasoned.
Paterson reckoned the selectors had had rather more faith in the available material and in the quality of coaching at Scotland's disposal this season than many of the pundits, particularly after the lacklustre A international win over Italy in December.
‘We were never as despondent as many others, knowing that the benefits of the squad system would compensate for some of the retirals of senior players,’ he added.
That said, the integration of the new players has gone better than the selectors must have hoped even in their most Panglossian moments.
Much of their time now will be devoted to the back-up squad with an A international against France next month and the summer tour to the South Pacific hoving into view.
All connected with the Scotland squad are anxious to convey their respect for the talent in English ranks: the common theme is that the defeat in Cardiff against Wales does not create a poor team.
Nor does manager Paterson think the month between games will necessarily be detrimental to England's chances.
‘I'm sure they will be only too intent to get back on the rails,’ he observed.
Four players were listed as unavailable through injury for the Scotland team: Alan Watt (who has resumed training), Rob Wainwright, Dale McIntosh and Alan Sharp.
Wainwright may play this weekend, McIntosh certainly will but London Scottish do not anticipate Sharp featuring in their first XV for the rest of the season as he is still troubled by his leg break.
The match will be refereed by 39-year-old Belfast primary school headmaster Brian Stirling.
It will be his first Five Nations contest though in his debut international the graduate of the University of Ulster dismissed two Fijians for dangerous tackles against England.
Stirling controlled Scotland's last B international win over France at the Greenyards in 1989, when the Boroughmuir pair Derek Stark and Peter Wright were in the Scottish party.
Young stars serve up New Firm thriller
Aberdeen 0 Dundee United 0
By Mike Aitken
THIS was a first-rate match, full of incident and controversy, which was not done justice by the goalless scoreline.
Both sides could make out a case that they deserved to win and should have been awarded penalties.
Over the piece, however, United took more out of the game.
A point dropped at Pittodrie did nothing for Aberdeen's pursuit of Rangers.
The absence of Brian Grant, the under-rated midfield player who is probably the best uncapped footballer in Scotland, was a major blow to Aberdeen.
They missed his knack of threading the play together and didn't produce their usual rhythm.
When United held the upper hand, which was for most of the first half, they were more dominant than Aberdeen were after the interval.
Not even the introduction of Scott Booth near the end was sufficient to break the deadlock and Rangers were left nine points clear at the top.
There is more to the Premier Division, of course, than just the mathematical outcome of the championship.
In this game, for example, there was considerable pleasure to be derived from watching some of the finest young footballers in Britain go through their paces.
No fewer than eight recent Scottish Under-21 internationalists were included by Aberdeen and Dundee United in their line-ups.
If Jess has attracted the lion's share of publicity since his promotion to the national team, it was the man many believe will be his future Scotland partner, Ferguson, who caught the eye with a display of determined jumping and powerful running.
United showed more appetite for the game and should have gone in front after nine minutes when Ferguson got on the end of Clark's free-kick.
The big striker's flick was sufficient to put Connolly in between Smith and McLeish.
As Snelders tarried in his six-yard box, Connolly stabbed the ball wide.
In a separate incident, Ferguson also showed Irvine a clean pair of heels.
But, as the striker moved in for the kill, the defender retrieved the situation with a splendid recovery tackle.
There were chances at both ends and Aberdeen were unfortunate not to be awarded a penalty when Shearer went to meet a Paatelainen cross only to be barged from behind by Narey.
The Finn also threatened in the air when he came in for headers at the back post.
The quality of football was high in the first half.
Both sides were committed to attack — Aberdeen supported Shearer and Jess with Mason and Paatelainen on the flanks while United conjured up support for Ferguson and Connolly from Crabbe and O'Neill — and the result was a game that flowed.
Ferguson's overhead scissors kick with his left boot from O'Neill's cross almost wrongfooted Snelders.
There was no doubt that United were a much more effective side than on their recent visit to Pittodrie in the Cup.
and Irvine had their work cut out containing the United forwards.
But for a goal-line clearance from Mason — O'Neill had met Crabbe's corner with a firm shot — United would have led on merit at the interval.
The worry, though, for the visitors was that they had created much without converting chances into goals.
Aberdeen, who missed the diligent foraging of the injured Grant, strung more passes together in the second half.
While Jess had a quiet match by his standards — he shot straight at Main from a promising position in the 58th minute — Richardson was in the thick of things as usual.
His tussle in midfield with McKinlay was one of the highlights of an absorbing contest.
These North-east derbies have a habit of being decided by a single goal.
So, when Connolly threatened to break clear on the right, McLeish paid the price of a yellow card rather than allow the striker to advance towards Snelders.
O'Neill was also cautioned as tempers frayed.
Some of the discipline went out of the play, but as others tired Jess picked up the pace of the game and finished looking as likely as match-winner as anyone.
Higgins completes good day for Scots
By Trevor Baxter
TEENAGER John Higgins last night capped an excellent 24 hours for Scottish snooker at the £250,000 Wickes British Open in Derby with a nerveless 5-3 win over England's Nick Terry.
The 17-year-old Cuemasters youngster from Wishaw has now reached the last 16 of a ranking tournament for only the second time in his fledgling career.
‘It is better than my earlier victory over Terry Griffiths because I played much better,’ said Higgins, who produced a mature break of 99 in the eighth frame to kill off Terry's revival as he battled back from a 3-0 deficit.
Just beating Higgins to the finishing line was world champion Stephen Hendry, happily back to form after his 10-4 defeat by Steve Davis in last weekend's European Open final.
Hendry whitewashed world No62 Jason Ferguson, of Mansfield, for the second year running, making an excellent 131 break in the second frame.
‘It's nice to win easily for a change’ said the 24-year-old South Queensferry-based world champion.
‘I haven't had to analyse my defeat by Steve.
He played well and I played badly.
It was as simple as that.’
The double British Open champion next faces ever-green Australian Eddie Charlton before the television cameras on Saturday.
‘I've never played Eddie before but I know he will be trying his best just like he has done throughout his career.’
Hendry and Glaswegian Alan McManus are a round behind countryman Higgins.
McManus plays in the last 32 this morning against local player David Roe after a 5-2 victory over Ulsterman Jason Prince.
‘I don't like making excuses but I picked up a bug in Germany at the weekend and haven't been able to shake it off,’ explained world No13 McManus.
Three-goal Italy shatter Portugal
Portugal 1 Italy 3
ROBERTO BAGGIO stunned Portugal with a goal after two minutes to spur Italy to an outstanding 3-1 World Cup victory in Oporto last night.
Victory lifted Italy to within a point of Group I leaders Switzerland and three points clear of Portugal.
Scotland face the Portuguese in Lisbon on 28 April.
Italy were 2-0 up within 24 minutes when Baggio's Juventus team-mate, Pierluigi Casiraghi, slammed home a pass from Demetrio Albertini.
Portugal pulled a goal back in the 56th minute when Fernando Couto headed in a corner from Paulo Futre but Italy wrapped up the game when Dino Baggio scored with a powerful 25-yard shot in the 73rd minute.
Netherlands 3 Turkey 1
THE Netherlands moved level on points with England in Group II after beating Turkey 3-1 in Utrecht.
Marc Overmars made a dream debut for the Dutch by putting them ahead after just four minutes but Feyyaz equalised with a 36th-minute penalty.
The Netherlands regained the lead within a minute through Rob Witschge and he made the game safe with his second goal after 57 minutes.
Spain 5 Lithuania 0
SPAIN scored three times in the opening 18 minutes on their way to a 5-0 rout of Lithuania.
The victory stretched their Group III lead to three points over the Republic of Ireland.
Spain's scorers were: Cristobal Parralo (5), Jose Bakero (13), Aitor Beguiristain (18), Thomas Christiansen (86) and Adolfo Aldana (90).
McAllister injury worry
THE Scotland midfielder, Gary McAllister, is extremely doubtful for the World Cup qualifying tie away to Portugal next month after sustaining a hairline fracture of a forearm in Leeds's goal-less draw against Arsenal last night.
The stalemate enabled the fallen champions to end a nine-match run of away defeats and extended Arsenal's poor home run.
George Graham's team have not won a Premier League game at Highbury since 7 November and have scored only four goals in the last 13 league games.
— PA
Forest revival continues
A GARY CROSBY goal after 70 minutes gave Nottingham Forest a 1-0 win over QPR at the City Ground and ended 169 days' misery in the Premier League's bottom three.
It was Forest's fifth win in seven league games and lifted them above Middlesbrough and out of the relegation zone for the first time since the beginning of September.
Hammocks were comfortable, secure and private Iain MacLaren's letter (Points of View, 20 February) about his experiences as a National Service army medical officer will no doubt bring a flood of memories back to many readers regarding those ‘halcyon days’ when they served Queen, or King and country.
May I correct Mr MacLaren on one small historical point where he states that ‘the Royal Navy had abandoned hammocks not long after the Second World War’?
I was fortunate enough to serve my two-year stint from 1956-1958 in the Navy, 18 months of which were spent on a frigate in the Mediterranean, happily bedded most nights, or when off-watch, in a hammock.
After leaving the Navy, it took a little time to become used to a normal bed again, as the hammock had proved to be such an ideal sleeping arrangement.
It was comfortable, warm, created a mental sense of security and privacy, and for the purposes of the very limited space of a mess-deck, it was the ideal solution to the multi-purpose use of a small area.
At night the sleepers were four or five feet high, thus keeping decks, tables, etc clear for alternative use.
By day the hammock was lashed-up and stowed in a convenient corner, again keeping the decks clear.
In effect, its use was an excellent example of successful space planning, and in a rolling, pitching ship ensured that blissful, undisturbed suspension which can never be matched by a static bunk!
Mr MacLaren suggests that persistent enuretics on board a warship would create even more serious problems than in any army barracks, and I would agree with that proposition.
However, I never knew of any among our crew, and would suggest that the reason may lie in the contrasting modes of rest ie, the luxurious, all-encompassing comfort of the hammock as opposed to the cold, hard and impersonal barrack-room bed.
I am not certain of the date when the Navy finally abandoned the general use of hammocks, but to my mind it must have been as retrogressive a decision as that taken when abandoning the tot of ‘Nelson's blood’ at 12 noon every day!
Just a brief response to a small part of Iain MacLaren's letter, where he refers to the Royal Navy abandoning hammocks not long after the Second World War.
I still recall ‘'umping me ‘ammock ‘n kitbag’ as late as 1961, all the way from Pompey to Rosyth, where I joined a minesweeper on which such sleeping gear was passe.
As for the bunks that replaced them (morgue slabs more like), they had just enough space if you played dead.
The hammock was the best hole in the world after a rough night ashore, bar none!
Breathtaking
In your issue today John Major is quoted saying: ‘We are determined to bring unemployment down, and we will.’
Should this not read: ‘We are determined to bring unemployment down, and we will, but just don't hold your breath’?
Incongruous
Today I attended the Scotland/Wales rugby international at Murrayfield with several of my under-15 team mates from Preston Lodge High School, East Lothian.
At the turnstiles my bag, containing a snack for half-time, was searched.
Being aware of the strict alcohol regulations, I did not object to this, although I did think it rather unfair that a school-friend was obliged to dispose of his soft drink before he entered the ground.
It seems somewhat incongruous that the official programme contains half a page outlining regulations concerning the ‘prohibition of alcohol and controlled containers within Murrayfield stadium’, while at the same time giving over no less than four pages to the advertising of alcohol.
The inclusion of a hip-flask covered with the official Scottish Rugby Union tartan and registered emblem on a page advertising the official SRU collection, also surely requires some explanation.
Dress-sense
In your wedding article today (‘All the frills of the fair’) you state that to buy a wedding dress can cost between £500 and £2,500.
Why do you not suggest that brides, or their mothers, make their dresses?
Even if they had to take sewing lessons first it would still be less expensive and the idea of hiring a wedding dress must be unappealing to many brides.
I made my daughter's dress from pure silk and lace for £80!
Memories are made of this, I think
‘I told the doctor I had sat opposite a man the night before and had to mentally flick through every male name I knew in order to locate his.
‘Do you know him well?’ he asked.
I said ‘I have been married to him for 15 years.’
LAZY long weekend in Northumberland.
Sun shining, birds singing, me propped up on the pillows idly chatting.
Husband wandering about opening curtains, running a bath.
Idly we discussed the day: riding lessons for the children?
Lunch in Alnwick?
Then, as he bent over the still-unpacked weekend bag to retrieve his clothes, I had a blinding vision.
I could see his jeans, shirts, jerseys, everything he needed to wear for the next two days, neatly folded in a drawer in Edinburgh.
I pulled the duvet over my head.
I said.
‘I didn't do it on purpose.’
He said: ‘That makes it worse.’
I said: ‘You know as I drove along Princes Street to pick you up from the office I had a feeling I left something behind.
At least now we know what it was.’
He did not seem to share my relief that the mystery was solved.
I have got this little problem you see.
Sometimes I forget.
And the trouble with ‘sometimes’ is that you never know when to expect it.
Vagueness came to me with pregnancy.
A sort of bovine preoccupation enveloped me when Rebecca was on the way.
People would occasionally point out that I was wearing odd shoes, but it really didn't seem to matter.
In any case, I couldn't see my feet.
But when she was about six weeks old things got a bit more serious.
One morning I strolled home from the supermarket at the end of the road and made myself a cup of coffee.
I drank it while I read the newspaper.
But it struck me that I hadn't had time to do this for ages.
In fact I only had time now because I had left Rebecca parked in her pram outside the supermarket.
She was fine.
Absolutely fine.
I was a  gibbering wreck.
Since then I have refused to subscribe to the view that there is something malevolent or subconsciously deliberate about forgetfulness.
If further proof were needed, I could cite my encounter with a blind man.
I was helping him across a busy six-lane road in north London.
I guided him to the traffic island in the middle.
And then we stood for ages while streams of cars whirred rhythmically past.
It must have lulled me into a day dream.
Anyway I was back in the office when I suddenly felt hot and faint…you see I had left him on the island, with three lanes still to cross.
I ran straight back but there was no sign of him.
I pray quite often that some kind soul rescued him.
And I don't ever listen to hedgehog jokes.
There is no act of will involved at all in forgetting.
I think of it as a sort of leak in my brain, like a slow puncture.
And it only affects certain things.
Names are worst.
You can drop them around me like flies and my response will be ‘Who?’
Not the greatest asset in this business.
Sometimes I am a real power pack of efficiency; then I hit a bad patch.
I got a real complex a couple of years ago.
It started when some people dropped in unexpectedly for a drink one evening and simply would not go.
We ran out of crisps and conversation and were growing increasingly legless and puzzled.
Eventually at about 10pm she slurred: ‘What time did you say we would have dinner?’
Then I found myself sitting outside my daughter's school waiting to pick her up.
There were no other cars, no signs of emerging children.
I looked at the clock.
It was only 10.30am.
Then it dawned on me.
I had an appointment.
The route to it took me past Rebecca's school.
I had stopped without thinking.
And at the end of the Easter break I brought the family back from holiday, rescued the uniforms from the dry cleaners and rang the friend who shares the school pick up just to say: ‘All set for tomorrow?’
She said: ‘All set for tomorrow week!’
Have you ever had to tell your family you ended their holiday a week early?
I had to have a lie-down.
But when it got seriously worrying I went to my doctor.
I said: ‘I have Alzheimer's.’
I told him I had sat opposite a man the night before and had to mentally flick through every male name I knew in order to locate his; ‘George, Andrew, Jack…
’ The doctor said: ‘Do you know him well?’
I said ‘I have been married to him for 15 years.’
(I'm sorry to say that this is a true story.)
I thought he would slide me into the strait-jacket right away.
But he was very calm.
He asked me what I had to do each week.
How many hours did I work?
A lot.
How many domestic duties fell to me?
Quite a lot.
How many responsibilities of a disparate nature did I have to hold in my mind at the same time?
Many, many.
How long had I been doing this without a break?
Years.
He said that, like any machine, the mind needed rest otherwise it would show signs of stress.
One of the earliest signs was short-term memory loss.
Most high flying executives, he told me, could not survive a day without a list in lieu of a memory.
So instead of a slap on the wrist I got promoted to high-flying executive symptoms.
I sat there with his words washing over me like warm water, I wasn't mad.
I just needed a holiday.
I had a holiday, nothing glamorous, just a few weeks with no deadlines, no pressures.
My sanity and my memory returned.
That is until last weekend.
So I thought it no less than my duty to book us into somewhere special on the west coast for a week.
But all my husband said was: ‘How much will it cost?’
Well I just told the truth: ‘I simply can't remember.’
Colette Douglas-Home
Aberdeen University Union is offering a special attraction for its ‘cheap drinks night’, as advertised in Gaudie.
You can pick up the cure, while getting the illness.
Southern Comfort is a remarkable 75p, whereas it's only 85p to buy ‘Pills’.
Len Thomson: former provost of Selkirk
FORMERLY one of the best-known and most diligent members of local government in the Borders, LGW Thomson, died in Edinburgh Royal Infirmary yesterday at the age of 77.
Len, as he was known to his legion of friends, was elected to Selkirk Town Council in 1956 and served on it for 18 years, as well as on the then county council for 14 years.
He performed a variety of roles in both councils and played a large part in steering through the regional and district reorganisation in 1974.
One of his proudest moments came when he was appointed provost of the Royal Burgh of Selkirk, a position he was to hold for seven years, He was the town's last official provost before regionalisation.
During his term of office as provost Councillor Thomson had a major role in attracting the Exacta Electronics firm to the town.
It is now Selkirk's leading employer.
A firm believer that party politics has no place in local government, he was elected to represent Old Selkirk on the new regional council in 1974 as an independent, and served as vice-convener.
He lost the seat in May 1982, but regained a regional seat in November that year by winning a by-election in the Forest division.
He also served as a district councillor for eight years, before retiring in July last year.
He was a deputy lieutenant of Selkirkshire and an honorary sheriff substitute.
Involved in all aspects of his native town, Len Thomson took a particular interest in its ancient crafts and corporations.
He joined the historic Merchant Company in 1947 and became Master.
He was also the company's standard bearer at the town's annual common riding and as a former Master upholsterer he previously represented the Corporation of Hammermen in a similar capacity.
A devoted churchman, he was chairman of the local Congregational Church Board.
He was also an enthusiastic sportsman, and was recently appointed an honorary chairman of Selkirk Cricket Club.
He was a past committee member of Selkirk Rugby Football Club, having been a keen player in his youth.
During the war he served in the RAOC as a senior quartermaster and was mentioned in dispatches while on service in Egypt.
He is survived by his wife, two sons and a daughter.
Lady Hoy of Leith
NANCY Hamlyn Rae McArthur, widow of Lord Hoy of Leith, died at the Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, yesterday after a short illness.
Lady Hoy was born in Edinburgh on 16 April, 1908, the daughter of John McArthur, one of the founding members of the Labour movement in Central Edinburgh.
She was active in the Labour Party from the 1920s.
In 1942 she married James Hoy who gained the Leith parliamentary seat for Labour in the 1945 general election.
Lady Hoy was a strong support to her husband in Leith throughout his 25 years in the House of Commons and during his years as Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food from 1964 until 1970.
She continued that support after his elevation to the House of Lords in 1970 and during his service as joint chairman of the Southern Flank of NATO and as a Deputy Lieutenant of the city of Edinburgh.
Lady Hoy is survived by her son, Councillor Ian Hoy, chairman of the Conservative group on Edinburgh City Council.
PCM 
Stark is looking for one more win
By Isobel Cunningham
IAN STARK and Randolph Place face a highly significant run in tomorrow's Land Rover Men's Open race at the Berwickshire point-to-point, Friars Haugh, Kelso.
The Olympic dual silver medal-winning three-day event rider and the Edinburgh Woollen Mill's pensioned-off steeplechaser require to add one more success to their comprehensive pillar-to-post victory at Bogside, Irvine, last Saturday, to become eligible for a tilt at the Foxhunters Hunter Chase at jump racing's Cheltenham National Hunt Festival in 20 days' time.
If the all-important win is achieved in the Berwickshire race, Stark will find himself uniquely double-handed, as he also has a stake in the national final of the £6,000 Land Rover Gentleman's point-to-point championship at Towcester on 11 May.
This is only 48 hours after the close of the Badminton three-day event horse trials, undoubtedly the top national final in Stark's other chosen sport.
Ian Stark: hopes to secure place at Cheltenham
Humble seaside senors create a Spanish sensation
Rupert Widdicombe reports on the revolution that has taken Deportivo from obscurity to the top of the league
TOMORROW evening, the streets will be deserted in La Coruna, a pretty seaside town on the north-western tip of Spain.
In bars, restaurants or at home, the vast majority of the inhabitants will be glued to television sets as their team take on mighty Real Madrid and 80,000 whistling fans in the daunting Bernabeu Stadium.
Will history be made, or will the magic fade?
After nearly 20 years in the lower echelons of the second division and without a major title to their name, the team with the grand sounding name of Real Club Deportivo de la Coruna have elbowed their way past the giant clubs which year after year dominate the Spanish League, and have made a bold bid for the title.
A few games past the halfway mark, Deportivo have a two-point lead over Real Madrid and four on Barcelona; they have beaten both at home this season.
Last weekend, the 25,000 ecstatic fans that packed into Coruna's shabby Riazor Stadium witnessed a massacre as Superdepor put five past John Toshack's struggling Real Sociedad.
When Deportivo stormed to the top of the league early in the season, vocal sceptics in the big clubs said it wouldn't last.
They have had to eat their words.
This is a revolution that might have gone unnoticed had it not been so swift and successful.
Four seasons ago, Deportivo were bankrupt and on the brink of relegation to the third division.
Three presidents came and went in those turbulent times.
Then, the club's luck changed.
Cesar Lendoiro, the 47-year-old director of one of the town's largest schools, was elected as club president on the strength of his success with — believe it or not — the school's roller hockey team, which under his direction had become European and world champions.
Lendoiro secured a loan to wipe out the club's debts and give the club some clout in the transfer market.
He then managed to increase the club's fee-paying members, from 6,000 to 22,000, and bargained with the local council to rent the stadium for the princely annual sum of one peseta.
He also managed to coax Aresnio Iglesias out of retirement.
A former Deportivo player and, in two previous stints, head trainer, Iglesias, 61, had left the job from sheer exhaustion after another failed season.
Together, the pair devised a series of three-year plans — the first was to put the club back in the first division, the second to get the club established in the top third of the table.
Their plans have come to fruition rather sooner and more dramatically than expected.
The dynamic duo's real coup came last summer, when they managed to snatch two Brazilian internationalists for the comparative bargain price of £2.85 million.
The powerful midfielder, Mauro Silva, was the playmaker they had been looking to build the team around.
To fill the hole up front they got Bebeto, now the league's top scorer with 20 goals.
Two other key signings to add to an already sturdy defence, and a winning team were built.
‘I must admit I was a bit worried about coming to La Coruna,’ says Mauro Silva.
On the wall of his surprisingly modest flat, a street away from the stadium, is a framed picture of him in the hallowed yellow shirt of Brazil, taken before one of his 25 international appearances.
Both he and Bebeto, who has 55 caps, turned down offers from Italy and Germany.
‘Bebeto was more reluctant than I was, but the president and I managed to persuade him,’ said the midfielder.
Together, they revolutionised the team.
‘Deportivo had quite a good team before we came, but they didn't believe in themselves.
We were able to help the team to believe they could win,’ says Mauro Silva without a trace of vanity.
Both Brazilians say they are happy away from the pressures of a big club and that they want to stay.
Though Bebeto and Mauro Silva are the biggest stars, the whole team, the president and the trainer, are all gently mobbed at every public appearance.
The record attendance at a midweek training session stands at 2,000.
The success of the team has worked wonders for morale in the aftermath of December's tanker disaster, which devastated the local fishing industry, one of the region's main employers.
Tomorrow, all eyes in this far corner of Spain will be on Madrid.
Walker named for Irish hurdle
WALES yesterday chose Olympic hurdler Nigel Walker in place of Llanelli's Wayne Procter in a bid to pull a fast one on Ireland in the Five Nations Championship at Cardiff on 6 March.
Walker, who has scored 14 tries in 15 Heineken League matches in his first full season for Cardiff, is the only change from the team defeated 20-0 by Scotland.
He competed in the 110m hurdles in the 1984 Olympics and won a bronze medal in the 60m hurdles in the World Indoor Championships three years later.
Ireland, bidding for their first championship win, have axed stand-off Niall Malone in favour of new cap Eric Elwood of Lansdowne, and switched wingers Richard Wallace and Simon Geoghegan.
Elwood, 24, has played for Ireland at under-21 level and spent a season in New Zealand.
— PA
Doping ring fears as Jockey Club admits new positive test
CLEAR SIGNS that a doping ring may have been in operation emerged yesterday when the Jockey Club admitted that Surrey police are investigating the ‘nobbling’ of a horse at Yarmouth last August.
After days of speculation, during which racing's ruling body had said that there was ‘no evidence of skulduggery’, a statement from the Jockey Club confirmed trainers' worst fears.
Flash Of Straw, trained at Epsom by Geoff Lewis, tested positive to a prohibited substance after finishing sixth in the HMS Cromer Handicap on 20 August.
His defeat thwarted a substantial gamble on the gelding, heavily backed on the morning of the race from 25-1 to a starting price of 4-1 favourite.
Coral's spokesman Wally Pyrah recalled: ‘There were bundles of cash for Flash of Straw.
Bookmakers were ultra-cautious because the horse had no apparent form.’
The source of the substance is not being revealed, but the news is bound to fuel the belief that other horses have been ‘got at’.
Investigators are still attempting to establish what caused the Martin Pipe-trained hurdler Her Honour to fail a dope test after her flop at Kempton last month.
The Jockey Club expects to ‘clarify that situation shortly’ and Pipe, who believes the horse to have been administered a fast-acting tranquiliser, is anxiously awaiting the results.
‘I watched the Kempton race on SIS, and was shattered by the way Her Honour ran.
Yet in her next home gallop, she was a racehorse again,’ he said yesterday.
‘The first I knew of the positive test came in a letter from the Jockey Club.
‘I don't know what I can do to improve my security, it's already 100 per cent.
Staff remain with the horses at the races — but they have to pop to the loo now and again.’
‘I'm very concerned this has happened to one of my horses, but I don't know if the problem is widespread.
The police have not spoken to me.
I'm waiting to hear from the Jockey Club again.’
The doping of Flash Of Straw is the first confirmed case since 1990, when Norwich and Bravefoot (at Doncaster) and Flying Diva (at Yarmouth) were ‘got at’.
A Jockey Club statement yesterday said: ‘In order to put an end to any further speculation which is harmful to racing, it is confirmed that Flash Of Straw tested positive to a prohibited substance at Yarmouth on 20 August, 1992.
‘It has since been established that the horse was doped.
‘The decision not to reveal this information was part of a deliberate policy to allow the Jockey Club security department and the police to follow up leads, and carry out inquiries without publicity.
‘The overwhelming priority is to catch those responsible, and it was agreed with the Surrey constabulary that this could best be achieved by quiet investigation.
‘It was to protect this operation that the press were not given a full briefing when the recent doping allegations were made.
‘It is stressed that this is the only confirmed case of doping into which an inquiry is being conducted at the moment by the Jockey Club.’
Police in South Yorkshire were never able to charge anyone in connection with the Doncaster dopings, and their Surrey colleagues face a similarly difficult task.
A Surrey police spokesman said: ‘There are a lot of people still to talk to, and we are in close communication with the Jockey Club.’
Lewis said: ‘I wasn't at Yarmouth and there is little I can say.
It is in the hands of the Jockey Club and police.
‘I have good security, and no other horse in my yard has been interfered with before.
I believe it must have been done outside the stable.’
Last night David Pipe, the Jockey Club's director of public affairs, said: ‘I do not think there is any cause for alarm.
The integrity of British horse racing is very high and we feel these are unrelated incidents.’
In spite of the Jockey Club's apparent determination to play down the doping cases and its hushing up the Flash of Straw investigations until now, it does seem that there is a sinister element at large in British horse racing.
Racing, Page 25
BASKETBALL
Bulls appeal
LIVINGSTON Bulls have appealed against the four-game ban on Iain Maclean after incidents in the Scottish Cup final earlier this month.
BOXING
Lewis accepts cut
LENNOX LEWIS yesterday signed new contracts for his first defence of the WBC heavyweight title against Tony Tucker in Las Vegas on 8 May, after the WBC sup- ported fight promoter Don King's demand that the champion should receive 75 per cent— not 80 per cent .
CYCLING
Bartoli best
ITALIAN Michele Bartoli clinched victory in the six-day Tour of Sicily yesterday by winning the 187.5km final stage in 4hr 33min 47sec.
CURLING
Stranraer come out on top
GAIL McMILLAN's Stranraer won the Henderson Bishop Trophy at Ayr yesterday, beating Janette Wilson's Stirling 10-4 after eight ends of the final.
MOTOR SPORT
French reprieve
THE French Grand Prix was yesterday restored to the 1993 Formula One schedule after settlement of a dispute over an anti-smoking law.
In addition, Williams received the go-ahead to compete in this season's world championship.
SKIING
Japan's double medal success
JAPAN held off Norway yesterday to take their second Nordic world championship gold medal at Falun, Sweden.
Kenji Ogiwara, who won the individual combined competition, led his country to victory in the team event.
David Cook, Emma Carrick-Anderson and Shona Robertson will represent Britain at the world junior Alpine championships in Italy from March 1 to 7.
SQUASH
Ritchie wins again
SCOTLAND's Derek Ritchie collected his third world ranking title of the year when he beat Australia's Gregory Laurence 3-0 in the final of the Aveiro Open in Portugal.
Heriot's hope to make most of Hawick's plight
By Harry Pincott
WHEN a club are desperate for two points, Mansfield Park is not normally the best place to go looking for them.
But these are not normal times and Heriot's will, no doubt, be thankful for that.
For tomorrow's Division I game, Hawick will be without the injured Nick Bannerman, Scott Welsh, Greig Oliver, Jim Hay and Brian Renwick, while Tim Stokes, David Taylor and Derek Turnbull are rated as very doubtful, especially the Scotland flanker, who had four stitches inserted in a head cut last Saturday.
Among those called up to face Heriot's — on the six-point mark along with Selkirk, Glasgow High-Kelvinside and Stirling County — are Stewart Irvine, Kenny McAllan and Derek Willison.
Heriot's only change is the recall at tight-head prop of Stewart Paul for Jock Bryce.
Two long-term injury absentees are due to make comebacks in the Edinburgh Academicals v Selkirk encounter at Raeburn Place.
Rob Wainwright, who could well have picked up another four caps this season, has recovered from an Achilles tendon operation and hopes to turn out for the home XV, while David Hunter is at full-back for Selkirk.
Hunter had his spleen removed after the Students World Cup last summer, and it's been a slow process working back to full fitness.
But he could not have come back at a more opportune time as far as Selkirk are concerned.
As luck would have it, Stirling and GH-K meet at Bridgehaugh, and both were not finalising line-ups until after training last night.
The home side have doubts over Kenny Logan, Matt McGrandles, John Wright, Jim Brough and Brian Robertson; among those on standby are teenage winger, Colin MacRobert, and Mark McKenzie.
Though Alan Watt is back training, he is not included in GH-K's 24-strong squad, which includes a French No8, Franck Gruel, who has been playing for the 2nds.
Bottom-placed Dundee HSFP set a few hearts pounding with that fine win over Kelso, and another against Gala at Mayfield would really upset the relegation apple-cart.
Neil Ritchie continues at No8 for the home side, while Gala, still minus Michael Dods and Jimmy Turnbull, are along their usual lines.
Kelso field the XV who thrashed Heriot's last Friday, Graeme Aitchison remaining at stand-off with Neil Heseltine at centre, for their home match with Boroughmuir, who play Alan Nisbet at lock.
A former member of the  Scotland Under-18 squad, Nisbet, a PE instructor in the RAF, made a pleasing debut against Llanelli.
Props Grant Wilson and Peter Wright have not yet had a chat about any possible switch, but are likely to do so before the game.
Melrose move Doddie Weir back to No8, with Ewan Simpson recalled at lock, for their home fixture with Currie.
That means a seat on the bench for Andrew Redpath.
Currie, who may have the assistance of Irishman David Beggy for the sevens, have Bruce Macnaughton at scrum- half for the injured Rory Dickson, and Mark Blair could return at lock.
Watsonians have Ian Smith and Roddy McLeod back in their XV to face Jed-Forest at Myreside, where the visitors list the side who lost to a Craig Chalmers injury-time drop goal two weeks ago.
Derek Turnbull: international injury makes him very doubtful for Hawick tomorrow
Scots pair in final mission
BLANTYRE's Jim McCann and Richard Corsie, from Edinburgh, go into action in today's semi-finals of the Midland Bank World Indoor Singles Championship attempting to set up the first all-Scottish final for four years on Sunday.
McCann joined Corsie in the last four yesterday when he edged out East Lothian's Graham Robertson 7-6, 7-6, 1-7, 4-7, 7-6.
McCann came from behind to take each of the first two sets before Robertson began to find his touch.
The East Lothian man took the third set 7-1, came from 1-4 down to take the next 7-4 and then opened the decider with three singles.
‘I felt then that the game was slipping away from me,’ said McCann later.
‘But I was still reasonably happy with the way I was playing.’
McCann's perseverance saw him move 5-4 ahead after seven ends, but a double on the next restored Robertson's advantage and pushed him within one of the winning line.
The Blantyre man produced two excellent draw shots on the next end, and when Robertson failed to beat either of them with his four deliveries, McCann was through.
‘That's the first time I've managed to beat Graham in four matches — and I picked the right one to do it in.
I'm sure Graham would swop his last three wins for this one,’ added McCann.
Robertson said: ‘It was one of these matches that could have gone either way, but it's very disappointing to lose all three sets on a 7-6 scoreline.’
McCann's semi-final opponent will be twice former winner, Tony Allcock, who claimed his third successive 3-0 win when he beat Australia's Dennis Katunarich 7-5, 7-3, 7-5.
Today's opening semi-final is a repeat of the 1988 United Kingdom final, with Corsie looking for revenge over England's Gary Smith.
Maleeva upset by Austin
TRACY AUSTIN continued her comeback with an impressive 6-2, 2-6, 6-3 upset of second seed Katerina Maleeva in the second round of the Evert Cup in Indian Wells, California.
In the first round Austin, the 1979 and 1981 US Open champion and former world No1, won her first match in nearly nine years.
She attempted a comeback in 1989, losing in the first round of both events she played, but it was cut short by a car accident which required knee surgery.
Austin and Maleeva contested most of the points from the baseline, exchanging angles and deeply-hit ground-strokes during the entire match, but the American's mobility and concentration on the crucial points clinched victory.
Britain's Clare Wood, still buoyant after beating tenth seed Rosalyn Fairbank-Nideffer in the first round, continued her good form with a gutsy 5-7, 7-5, 6-2 victory over American Kathy Rinaldi.
Rangers close in on title, and new record
IT ALL adds up now to a fifth successive Premier Division championship for Rangers, writes Hugh Keevins.
Aberdeen's draw with Dundee United on Wednesday means that Rangers, who are nine points ahead of the Pittodrie side, would need to lose five of their remaining league matches to suffer fatal damage to their prospects.
Walter Smith's team have lost only six matches over the last 18 months, covering 74 league fixtures.
Imminent and uncharacteristic collapse does not seem likely at Ibrox, where tomorrow Rangers will attain a post-war Scottish record if they draw with, or win against, Hearts.
A 39th successive game without defeat would better the previous record, set by Rangers' treble-winning side from the 1975-76 season.
Richard Gough will miss the game with Hearts because of the hamstring injury that also threatens his place in the team to play FC Brugge in the European Champions League in Belgium on Wednesday.
No decision has been taken yet on the fitness of Trevor Steven (groin injury) and Gary Stevens (foot).
The unheralded return of Ian Durrant, who scored a goal in Wednesday night's win for Rangers reserves at Dumbarton, may yet turn out to be significant.
Durrant was sent to Florida last month to recharge his batteries.
The Ibrox manager, Walter Smith, was in France last night to see another of his side's European opponents, Marseille, lose 1-0 at Monaco.
A first-half penalty by Jerome Gnako was enough to take the home team back to the top of the league.
The goal, however, was against the run of the play, and Monaco's goalkeeper, Jean-Luc Ettori, had to make some great saves.
Chic Charnley yesterday lost his appeal to the SFA against being thrown out of St Mirren.
The midfielder had his contract terminated in December, because of his disciplinary record.
Charnley then appealed to the Scottish League, but the management committee decided that it would support the Paisley club.
Charnley is now a free agent.
He recently had a spell in Sweden, and is hoping to sign for a club there.
The former Cowdenbeath manager, John Brownlie, who was sacked in controversial circumstances last May, will be making his case for unfair dismissal at an industrial tribunal in Edinburgh next week.
Jones will be a further £250 out of pocket, as he must also pay costs of the hearing, and forfeit his £50 appeal fee.
Jones landed in trouble over his commentary on a football video glorifying violence and dirty tricks.
— PA
Officials warned to look out for banned runner
BRITISH athletics chiefs are to step up their policing efforts in a bid to stop the banned drugs offender, Robert Hamilton-Jones, from competing under assumed names in track meetings.
But Tony Ward, British Athletic Federation spokesman, admitted that the 22-year-old Bournemouth runner was providing the sport's hierarchy with a headache by his continued flouting of a four-year ban.
Hamilton-Jones, an unknown club runner when he was banned in 1991 after refusing to take a drugs test, finished third in a 1,500m race at a low-key meeting in Glasgow on Wednesday.
It was the second time he had ignored the ban — he competed in a road race in Cardiff last month.
The latest sighting of Hamilton-Jones at the Kelvin Hall prompted Ward to report yesterday that senior officials would meet quickly to discuss methods to prevent him from competing.
‘I believe he is bringing the sport into disrepute.
Clearly, we are going to have to warn officials about the possibility of a banned runner entering races under a pseudonym and to be on the look-out for him.’
That could be easier said than done.
British officials made similar noises after he ran in Cardiff, but Hamilton-Jones said that no official had challenged his participation on Wednesday.
Ward said: ‘He is causing a bit of a headache for us, but he's been able to get away with it so far because he has been unknown, but it will be increasingly difficult for him if he keeps trying.’
But Ward agreed that it would still be very difficult to stop Hamilton-Jones competing in big road races or marathons in which thousands of runners take part.
One problem for BAF is that many athletes are still sympathetic to Hamilton-Jones's cause, believing him to be an unwitting victim of an anti-drugs policy designed to catch bigger fish.
The runner, who has always protested that he is innocent, insists that the only reason he did not provide a sample at the 1991 GRE Cup meeting was that he did not have time before he had to go to work.
World record holder Mike Powell of the United States produced the best long jump ever in Australia last night when he leapt 8.23m to win the event at the NEC International track and field meet in Melbourne.
The former Cowdenbeath manager, John Brownlie, sacked in controversial circumstances last May, will be making his case for unfair dismissal at an industrial tribunal in Edinburgh next week.
Jones must pay fine
WIMBLEDON's Vinnie Jones yesterday lost his appeal to the Football Association over a record £20,000 fine.
The midfielder will be a further £250 out of pocket, as he must also pay costs.
Jones landed in trouble over his commentary on a football video glorifying violence.
BASKETBALL
Bulls in charge
WITH Iain Maclean scoring 29 points after a last-minute appeal against his four-game ban, Livingston Bulls kept their unbeaten record in the Scottish first division, beating Edinburgh Burger Kings 96-71 at the Forum last night.
BOXING
Grant impresses
Frank Grant retained his British middleweight title in emphatic fashion at Bradford last night, stopping John Ashton in the seventh round.
Seve slumps to sad 77 on his own patch
From Mike Britten, Cadiz
THE best-laid schemes of Seve Ballesteros went sadly awry in the first round of the Turespana Masters here yesterday.
The eminent Spaniard took 7 at the first hole of the Novo Sancti Petri course, of which he is the architect, and finished his first round ten shots behind Ireland's Des Smyth who had not seen the course until he stepped on to the first tee.
Smyth, the 40-year-old former Ryder Cup player, had two eagles in setting a course record 67 to lead by one shot from Argentine Eduardo Romero, Spaniard Miguel Martin, and Swedish newcomer Anders Gillner.
The Surrey-based Gary Orr was the leading Scottish professional, on 70, after scoring five birdies to catch the group that included Germany's Bernhard Langer, and the Edinburgh-based former English champion, Andrew Oldcorn.
Ballesteros wore a protective belt to cushion his aching back, caused by hitting too many balls in practice in Morocco last Friday.
But he refused to attribute his 77 to his discomfort, saying: ‘After hooking out of bounds with my first drive to take 7, I was always struggling.
It was just a bad day.’
Rival Spanish star Jose Maria Olazabal twice chipped in for eagles, at the eighth and eleventh, to provide the  excitement his Ryder Cup partner failed to produced.
Olazabal had got out of his sick bed to play, but though he had three birdies, he could manage only 71 because of his mistakes from the tee.
He went down with influenza symptoms on Tuesday evening.
Like Ballesteros, he envied the cool control of the veteran Smyth, who was 12th in Morocco last week to enjoy his best finish on the European tour for two years.
‘After two weeks away, I wanted to spend an extra day at home with my wife and three children,’ said Smyth.
‘That is why I did not arrive until late on Wednesday evening.
It may not have been the ideal preparation but after 20 years as a professional, I have got my priorities right.’
His eagles came from a 15-yard bunker shot at the eighth and a putt of similar distance at the eleventh.
Then he holed from 12 feet to keep his slender advantage after being bunkered at the sixteenth.
Scotland's Colin Montgomerie and Sam Torrance had contrasting fortunes.
Montgomerie's par 72 was notable for a pair of 20-foot birdie putts at the fourteenth and eighteenth.
They were offset by 6s at the long eleventh and seventeenth, the first from three putts and the second the result of a flyer with his wedge.
He came home in a regulation 36 to show that his relative lack of length need not be a handicap on this king-size seaside course.
Torrance has been working recently on improving his technique on short putts with which he has a problem because of the pendulum action of his broom-handle putter.
He missed four short ones in a 74 but rolled home a 25-foot birdie putt on the last green.
Brian Marchbank made a welcome return to form with a 73 as did Stephen McAllister who was alongside Torrance at two over par.
Bill Longmuir and Andrew Coltart both had 76s, Adam Hunter a 78.
Paul Lawrie, who is working on a reconstruction of his long game, has still not found the key to consistency.
He handed in a nine-over-par 81 and only two players, the Dane, Steen Tinning, and Irishman Philip Walton, who had a 9 at the twelfth, had a worse return.
World Cup draws southerly pressure for change
By Graham Law
MOVES are afoot in the southern hemisphere to make changes in the ‘draw’ for the 1995 Rugby World Cup in South Africa.
New Zealand's Russ Thomas, chairman of the RWC board, said last night it was considering adjustments to the schedule announced — without prior notification to the SRU — in Cape Town in January.
A decision is likely to be reached at the meeting of the International Rugby Football Board in April, though no-one at the board's Bristol HQ was available to comment yesterday.
The fact that changes are being contemplated might illustrate to the directors of RWC the folly of arriving at such arrangements in cabals rather than conducting open draws — which are more exciting and include seeding to prevent geographical or quality imbalances.
Under the current format, it is impossible for New Zealand and England to meet in the final, while Australia could not play either France or South Africa in the final.
Altering the structure of the semis would solve that problem.
Thomas said his committee was open to suggestions.
If the game benefited from a change in the format, it would be considered.
Needless to say, his latest pronouncements came as a surprise to the SRU, whose secretary Bill Hogg told The Scotsman: ‘This is all news to me.
The SRU committee would obviously have to discuss such a suggestion.’
Norbert Byrne, one of the Australian delegates to the IRFB, described the situation as ‘too silly for words’, and noted the support of Australia, South Africa, Argentina and New Zealand for a revised format  incorporating a semi-final crossover.
‘When you seed teams four years in advance, you cannot take into account what will happen closer to the tournament.’
Meanwhile, the itinerary has been finalised for New Zealand's 13-match tour of Scotland and England next season.
Nine matches will be played in England including two under lights and one — against England A — on a Sunday.
Scotland clash is ‘make or break’ for Portugal
By Hugh Keevins
THE World Cup qualifying tie with Scotland in Lisbon was yesterday billed as Portugal's last chance of going to America in 1994.
The summation was offered by Scotland's assistant manager, Craig Brown, in the wake of Italy's 3-1 away win over the Portuguese on Wednesday night.
Scotland travel to Portugal for the vital tie on 28 April.
While Andy Roxburgh, who had watched the midweek match in Oporto, travelled back to Scotland last night, Brown, a witness to Portugal's one-goal win over Malta at the start of the year, foresaw pressure increasing on the side who are now one point worse off than Scotland.
‘The  Portuguese coach, Carlos Quieroz, may now think his side have to beat Scotland in the Stadium of Light to have any prospect of qualification,’ said Brown.
‘If we should score early, as the Italians did on Wednesday, that could make the Portuguese wonder about their own capabilities.’
Quieroz said after the match: ‘Losing a goal after only two minutes to Roberto Baggio was fatal.
It broke the concentration of my players and led them into serious defensive errors.
Italy won because they made fewer mistakes.’
The Portuguese coach has had a trouble-strewn qualifying section so far.
Portugal struggled to score just one goal in Malta for their only win to date and after that game the Maltese manager, Phillip Psaila, said the Portuguese lacked the nerve to live with Switzerland, Italy or Scotland.
Co-incidentally, it was Paulo Futre's fragile temperament which caused Portugal's most dangerous player to miss the match in Malta.
Futre had been substituted in a warm-up match prior to departure for Valetta and had subsequently fallen out with Quieroz and was left at home for being ‘not in the correct frame of mind’ to play a World Cup tie.
Futre's mood was no better after a £5million transfer from Atletico Madrid to Benfica, though he was recalled to the team who lost to Italy.
‘Andy (Roxburgh) and myself always thought that Switzerland and Italy had to be considered the favourites to qualify but there is now a dog-eat-dog contest involving three countries for second place,’ said Brown.
Scotland, therefore, are not without hope in spite of a disappointing start that brought only two points from the first three games.
Last week's win over Malta at Ibrox has left Brown in a determined frame of mind.
‘The key match might be at home to Switzerland in September.
Scotland can reverse the earlier defeat in Berne and bring Roy Hodgson's team into the scrap for second place.’
Roxburgh's efforts on Scotland's behalf have often been accompanied by his rivals conveniently falling on occasions when they  need to remain upright.
It was France's inexplicable failure to do better than draw with Cyprus in Limassol that helped Scotland to qualify for Italia '90 ahead of Michel Platini's team.
Qualification for the European Championship in 1992 came after Romania drew with Bulgaria in their last match when a two-goal win would have sent them to Sweden instead of Scotland.
Anything that the likes of Switzerland and Portugal can do to hinder their own progress is to be welcomed by Roxburgh and Brown, particularly when they meet each other in Berne on 31 March.
The feeling in Portugal is that if Quieroz's side should lose that game they will lose all interest in Group I, though a draw would be even more beneficial to Scotland.
Roxburgh's team for the friendly match with Germany is likely to exclude all English-based players and there is now a doubt over the availability of Leeds United's captain, Gary McAllister, for the meeting with Portugal.
The midfield player broke an arm during the midweek draw with Arsenal and will be in plaster for six weeks.
A break of the recreational variety might be no bad thing in the case of McAllister, however, assuming he can be ready in time for Lisbon.
The player was only a shadow of himself in Scotland's first World Cup qualifying tie, blaming a surfeit of matches at club, European and international level for his unsatisfactory display in Berne.
McAllister, of course, then missed a penalty kick for Scotland in their last Group One match, against Malta.
He has been caught up in his club's poor form, the former English champions having slipped into the bottom half of the Premier League.
Roxburgh will now wait with interest to see if McAllister's present discomfort can yet be turned to Scotland's advantage.
‘If we should score early, as the Italians did on Wednesday, that could make the Portuguese wonder about their own capabilities’ Craig Brown
Wembley is booked for Moore tribute
ENGLAND could face a star-studded Rest of the World team at Wembley in a tribute match for former World Cup captain Bobby Moore.
Wembley chairman Sir Brian Wolfson has given permission to the former England captain's family for a match in his honour.
The stadium was the scene of his greatest triumph — the World Cup final of 1966.
Franz Beckenbauer, former West German captain who was on the losing side in 1966, is willing to take part in anything planned — and Brazil's Pele is also being lined up.
Other ideas put forward include renaming the stairs to Wembley's Royal box as the Bobby Moore steps, or introducing a Bobby Moore trophy.
FA chief executive Graham Kelly said the ruling body would want to speak to Moore's family before planning anything.
— PA