

Mentally ill open door to visitors
SCOTLAND'S first guest house run by people with mental health problems was opened in Edinburgh yesterday by the Scottish health minister, Lord Fraser, writes Alison Daniels.
The guest house, in Stockbridge, is being organised by the Edinburgh Community Trust on a commercial basis.
According to the trust's Andy Hunter, the aim is not to treat or rehabilitate people but give them an opportunity to work.
Lord Fraser said the project reflected the Government's aim of providing help more suited to individual needs.
‘The Government is determined that as many people as possible with mental health problems live in the community.
With correct support, confidence and independence can be gained and health and quality of life improved,’ he added.
Preaching to the despairing with shock tactics
Father James Morrow makes no apology for his uncompromising attitude when he feels it could help to save lives.
Frank Urquhart meets the controversial pro-life activist
FOUR days ago a diminutive figure dressed in black called at the Yorkshire home of Allan and Barbara Bland, parents of the Hillsborough disaster victim, Tony Bland.
Standing on the step was Father James Morrow, the Roman Catholic priest and pro-life activist who has threatened to bring a private prosecution for murder against the anguished couple if their son is allowed to die.
Father Morrow felt it his duty to try to appeal face to face to Tony's parents to allow their son to live.
Time and again he has used persuasion — and on occasion shock tactics — to try to prevent young girls having abortions.
He carries a picture taken by anti-abortionists that depicts the decapitated head of a fully formed foetus, recovered from a rubbish bin behind a clinic in New York.
Father Morrow pointed to the harrowing photograph and said: ‘The Americans have been very assiduous in getting hold of the garbage after abortions.
Sinners, prostitutes, and thieves can understand in a second the power of that argument.
Sadly police, magistrates and MPs take a lot longer.’
He is convinced that abortion is evil and that the historic Lords ruling will open the floodgates to mercy killings and euthanasia.
His campaign has led to him being held in two jails, Strangeways and Pentonville, and at least £2,000 in fines for public order offences which he stubbornly refuses to pay.
Incarceration has been no barrier to his relentless campaign.
‘I just show the prisoners a picture of an aborted baby and I say to them if I had done that to a baby I deserve to be here, but what I am trying to do is prevent it happening.’
He wanted to tell the Blands that there were people willing to take care of their son for the rest of his life, if they would allow it.
The door of their Leeds home, however, remained firmly closed.
Father Morrow spoke yesterday of his visit to the Blands' home after returning to his base at Humanae Vitae House, a former 18th century Catholic chapel in the Deeside village of Braemar which has become the focus of his national campaign.
He said: ‘People must not attempt to alleviate suffering by murder.
There are all sorts of ways in which one can attempt to alleviate suffering but killing your son by any method, whether starvation or some quicker execution, is not among them.
‘I wanted to tell Tony Bland's parents that they will prolong their own suffering if they go ahead with this.
It will eventually dawn on them that they have killed their son and they will suffer for that reason.’
He added: ‘Once they have got  euthanasia well under way it will be wholesale victory for the anti-God forces.’
Father Morrow, 58, a native of Paisley, arrived in Braemar in 1980 as a priest at the village's St Andrew's Church.
Ten years later he quit as a parish priest to concentrate on his pro-life activities.
His work with the pro-life movement had begun in 1966 with Sir David  Steel's Private Members Bill to legalise abortions.
‘I began campaigning there and then,’ he said.
‘Abortion is inherently a total rejection of all that Christianity stands for.
‘Christianity says love God above all things and your neighbour as yourself.
Abortion says love God if you like, love the neighbour you can see, but there is absolutely no need to love your unborn neighbours — you can do them to death with impunity.’
Father Morrow is uncompromising in his stand against abortion.
There is, he states, no justification for killing an innocent unborn  child under any  circumstances , whether the mother has been the victim of rape or her own life  is threatened by her pregnancy.
‘It is not possible to draw a line between human and human and say some do and some do not have the right to life,’ he said.
For almost a decade he has led a series of protest demonstrations outside abortion clinics throughout England, running foul of the law on countless occasions.
Last year, he claimed, as many as 70 girls were persuaded not to have abortions.
DEREK IRONSIDE
Campaigner: Father James Morrow at the former 18th century Catholic chapel in Braemar which has become the base for his national campaign
As at the last general election, and under the UK system of government, Labour, with 39 per cent of the vote, has 68 per cent of the Scottish parliamentary seats, whereas the SNP, with 21.5 per cent of the vote, has 4 per cent of the seats.
As we don't have PR this clearly gives Labour the mandate ‘to put up or shut up’, to quote Gerry Hassan (Points of View, 9 February).
John Smith, who has aspirations to be prime minister of the UK, has stated that the Tories have no mandate in Scotland to privatise water.
On the basis of this argument, however, were Labour to win the next election on the numerical strength of MPs returned from Scotland, he would then have to agree that Labour have no mandate in England!
In my view, the positions of the SNP and Labour are  irreconcilable in spite of MP John McAllion's apparent attempt to draw parallels.
In fact the distinctions are obvious, between Labour's Scottish parliament within the UK and the SNP's vision of a nation state in Europe.
Smoked out
An extraordinary new species has been sighted in the centre of Edinburgh recently.
It appears to favour grouping on city pavements outside office blocks and is most commonly seen around mid-morning or between 12 noon and 2pm.
It scuttles out of office doorways with a desperateness that is quickly dispelled by sucking on a white, smoking cylinder.
I believe it has been identified as the ‘puffout’, a distance cousin of our old favourite, the ‘puffin’.
It has been forced to reveal itself due to strict new regulations for healthier office environments and appears quite harmless!
Potholes on the road to democracy
WELL, Happy Anniversary.
It's now exactly two months since the morning after the march before.
And have our esteemed political classes had a meaningful meeting?
Is the road to Scottish-style democracy and a Scottish parliament just plain littered with members of opposing parties linking arms and striding towards the new tomorrow?
Well, ahem, not exactly.
But for all that and all that there have been some interesting stirrings in the undergrowth which may well have the effect of concentrating the minds of the opposition party leaders.
This morning for instance the Scottish executive of the people's party will have an opportunity to examine the fruits of some of the labours of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, which has been functioning as the honest broker following the swiftly evaporating euphoria of the 25,000 souls who turned up on 12 December.
Some of the thinking which has emerged underlines the impatience of the Scottish electorate with the party spokespeople who claim to have their best interests at heart.
It's clear that the many non-party political groups which sprang up in the wake of the election, bodies such as Common Cause and Scotland United, are now prepared to work together in a coalition to stage further events highlighting the deficiencies of the current constitutional arrangements.
At the moment they are prepared to work with the political parties in keeping up the momentum December generated, but it's clear they intend to progress with their agenda whether or not the formal politicians continue to drag their feet.
In the immediate term they're determined that there should be no vacuum following publication of the results of the government's stocktaking of the Scottish condition, expected later this month.
To that end they plan a brief conference on the first Saturday after any pronouncement.
The opposition parties will be invited to make individual contributions on that day, and to send a small number of delegates.
Neither are the civic groupings planning to hang around much longer waiting for an inter-party meeting to establish common ground and communal tactics.
A civic-led summit is also on the spring agenda.
There are also all manner of other plans involving not just pan-Scottish events to allow a wider constituency to respond to the implications of the democracy march, but initiatives which will flag up Scottish concerns across the European parliamentary scene.
At this juncture you may just have noticed a slight differential in pace between the ‘amateurs’ in this democracy game, and the alleged professionals.
Spot the ditherers and win a cash prize.
Though it would be fair in this instance to absolve the Scottish Liberal Democrats from charges of time-wasting.
Jim Wallace has also been active in trying to put together a political format with which both Labour and the Scottish Nationalist leaders can live.
For behind the public posturings, there's no doubt that both of these gentlemen have been having more than a little local difficulty with their respective parties.
Mr Salmond has to appear pure in heart to his diehard fundamentalists by never again having truck with four letter words like devolution.
There is also the small matter of resolving the conundrum of targeting Labour-held seats in an electoral context while standing on common ground over matters such as the taking of stock.
The water privatisation saga provides a useful metaphor for the greater debate within Labour and SNP ranks.
In theory, both are as one in opposing water passing from public ownership and control.
In practice they are at daggers drawn as the furore over Tom Clarke's pronouncements on the subject this week amply illustrates.
Yet it is precisely that kind of issue that the coalition would like addressed in a coherent and collaborative fashion.
Tom Clarke, meanwhile, has to persuade a hard core in his own party that acting in concert with the SNP on certain occasions does not equate to dancing with wolves.
In essence that has been his difficulty over responding positively to the clarion cry made in December for a recall of the Scottish parliament.
Whatever his views on the subject, Labour's Scottish leader is not in the market for appearing to waltz to any tune called by his Nationalist counterpart.
But these issues, which so often seem to dominate the debate in Scotland at party political level, are frankly of little moment to the electorate at large.
Most voters wish a fraction of the energy expended on internecine warfare between fellow opposition parties could be expended in opposing those aspects of Government policy they feel are detrimental to Scotland's future.
But even in the midst of these minefields, assiduous efforts have been made to fashion a safe passageway.
A formula has been devised where instead of any attempts at recalling the Scottish parliament, the three parties convene their own summit as a parliamentary forum for debate on issues such as future water and sewerage delivery.
If strenuous attempts were also made to involve Scottish business in a real debate, then the mixture of the council and the coalition could be said to reflect a pretty broad national consensus.
This would, in effect, finally sound the death knell for the Convention.
But then it was a creature of its time, and its time and the work it did were about the last election, not the next one.
I suspect that is now the view of the Liberal Democrats, so if Labour were to hang on trying to breathe life into the corpse while the Democrats tiptoed from the funeral parlour, then it would lose all legitimacy as a multi-party device.
If Labour's executive  brethren are also disposed to look at new options and new deals today they will doubtless incur some internal wrath.
If they don't, they will find the attention of the electorate turning to fresh pastures anyway.
Tree planting
Steve Rodrick's comments (Points of View, 4 February), together with those of John Palmer today, on recent progress made by the Central Scotland Woodlands Countryside Trust help to shed some light on the difficulties faced by the organisation.
Institutional problems are one thing; the problem of interfacing with local communities quite another.
Both Mr Rodrick and Mr Palmer briefly mention that the local people should have a say, presumably in the planning and implementation of the community forest, but the mechanics of how this will come about are far from clear.
With the best will in the world by all involved agencies, environmental transformation, through the planting of trees in the central belt, will only become a realistic objective when the support of landowners and local people is enlisted.
While it would be churlish to pass over the considerable tree planting effort already wrought in the central belt by the trust, the results of a three-year research project undertaken at the University of Edinburgh reveal little evidence that the needs and wants of local people have provided the vehicle for environmental change.
As a result, as far as farmers are concerned tree planting has not been integrated into their work patterns or land management, nor has it led to enhanced levels of interest among previous participants.
Significantly, much confusion has derived from the apparently different economic and social priorities set by government employees, other planners, conservationists and farmers.
If local communities in towns and villages are to be involved in tree planting and management, governing institutions need to summon their interest by ensuring that individuals will know how they will benefit from involvement.
Farmers in the region are deeply committed to their livelihoods, stock and crops.
Transfer of such commitment to trees and woodlands would be necessary to ensure the successful promotion of the community forest.
It would require, furthermore, that the current apathy among farmers towards tree planting proposals, which stems from, among other things, economic constraints, lack of confidence in the future of farming and the social hiatus between farmers and their urban neighbours, be addressed at source.
Vision is hardly the word that I would have used when considering John Smith's speech, reported on your front page (8 February).
He, like the rest of us, has seen the effects on this country of 14 years of continuous Tory rule, resulting in the present economic chaos and farce.
His only solution, that he now offers, is to adopt those self-same Tory policies.
Clearly there must be something in the water at Westminster which inevitably drives all our politicians into the realms of fantasy!
Heartening
May we congratulate the Scottish Office on two recent crucial decisions in the cultural sector, first, in increasing the grant to the Scottish Film Council and Film Production Fund by over £300,000, and secondly, in announcing a £300,000 annual grant to the crafts in Scotland.
In case anyone should question these financial allocations, can we point out that they only move the film and crafts sectors towards the level of support long enjoyed in England and Wales.
SALVO began campaigning on these issues in 1989.
Since then, meetings, election arts manifesto commitments, letters to ministers and MPs and information to film and crafts workers to develop their own pressure points have all been sustained, as bulging files show!
Now, five years later, the battles are won (significant skirmishes remain, but it would be unwise and ungenerous to detail them at this point).
This basic message is heartening for democracy.
If there is a sound case which can be backed up by facts, if one is willing to be patient, determined and constructive, then politicians will listen and can be persuaded.
Britain's secret society
MARK FISHER
ON 19 February, MPs will vote on whether Britain should have a freedom of information act.
The Right to Know Bill, which I am introducing in the House of Commons, would lift the blanket of official secrecy that so often keeps us in the dark.
Take safety.
After many of the recent disasters we later learned that the authorities knew there was a problem all along — but the public didn't.
In 1985 more than 50 people died in a fire at Bradford City Football Club.
Later it was discovered that the council had written to the club months earlier demanding action to deal with the hazard.
But the correspondence was confidential.
After the  Marchioness river boat sank in the Thames in 1989 it was revealed that the ship that crashed into it — the Bowbelle — had been involved in three previous river accidents.
The accident reports had been kept secret.
After the 1987 fire at Kings Cross underground station which killed 31 people, the official inquiry reported: ‘Many of the shortcomings…had in fact been identified before by the internal inquiries into escalator fires.
They were also highlighted in reports by the fire brigade, police, and Railway Fire Prevention and Fire Safety Standards Committee.’
No-one knows whether openness could have prevented these tragedies.
But if the public had known about the problems, they could have demanded improvements — and something might have been done.
We should be able to see the files held on us by public authorities — to check that they are accurate and fair.
But most of them are confidential.
We can see what has been written on our medical records after November 1991 — but have no right to the earlier information.
Nor can we see our social security or employment records.
The Government refuses to publish reports showing whether the tobacco industry is keeping to the voluntary agreements that restrict tobacco advertising near schools.
We cannot see the official tests showing which cars cause least pollution or have the best safety features.
Ministers refuse to publish the list of environmentally sensitive areas which RAF pilots are told to avoid during low flying exercises.
The penalties handed down by police disciplinary hearings are secret.
The Iraqgate affair demonstrates how secrecy lets Government get away with dangerous dishonesty.
Ministers relaxed the guidelines on the exports of arms equipment to Iraq, but kept the new policy secret, to avoid criticism.
Three businessmen were then prosecuted for selling Iraq machine tools for making weapons — but confidential documents showed that they had told ministers what they were doing and had been encouraged to carry on.
One of them was actually working for the intelligence services.
Yet the prosecution went ahead and ministers tried to suppress these documents.
Unbelievably, the court was told that they would not help the defence case — a demonstrable falsehood that could have landed the three in jail.
Not just the quality of public debate, but even our liberty, may depend on the right to know.
Britain is one of the few democracies that still doesn't have a freedom of information act.
American, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, France, Denmark, Holland, Norway and Greece all have them — Sweden has had one for more than 200 years.
Often we can learn more about Britain under the American information law than we can from Whitehall.
The Right to Know Bill would open up the files of government and official bodies.
Of course some information should be secret.
The bill protects details of people's private lives, and information which could harm defence, law enforcement or genuine commercial secrets.
It also amends the Official Secrets Act to allow someone who had been prosecuted to argue that releasing information was in the public interest.
It would give people the right to see their employment records.
And it would force companies to say in their annual reports whether they had broken laws on consumer protection, safety, the environment and discrimination.
The bill has the backing of MPs of all parties — but it is vital that they actually support it in the Commons on 19 February.
If you care about your right to know, ask your MP to vote for it.
Tom jumps in at the deep end
THE Shadow Secretary of State for Scotland has two demanding and very often unrewarding jobs.
As effective leader of the Scottish Labour Party, he has to weld that frequently fissiparous organisation together, to set his stamp on its policies for Scotland, and to campaign against the Government, adopting a high profile for himself and the opposition.
As shadow secretary, he has a duty in the House of Commons to cross-question his opposite number and to turn a relentless searchlight on his public pronouncements.
In both of these roles he is himself exposed to close scrutiny at the hands of other politicians and the media.
as if this was not enough, Tom Clarke, newly returned to politics after illness, has another difficulty, which is to represent a party in the process of remodelling itself.
His leader, John Smith, has announced a conversion from the traditional Labour policy towards state control of industry to one in which the question of ownership is ‘largely irrelevant.’
It was not, therefore, surprising to find Mr Clarke somewhat exposed when facing some pressing questions on BBC Scotland about Labour's plans for returning water to public hands at some point in the future.
Instead of gently deflecting the point, he conceded that removing private companies might be hard to do.
Aha! said Mr Clarke's critics (and there are a few around), a clear betrayal of Labour's commitment, an act of treachery, an exposure of Labour's essential hypocrisy, etc.
That was all fairly predictable, and unlikely to prove of lasting damage.
Mr Clarke is not, after all, the first, nor will he be the last politician to find himself caught on the hop by a shrewd interviewer.
However, the shadow secretary's remarks to the Scottish Trade Unions for Labour in Glasgow last Friday may take a little more explaining.
This after all was a prepared speech.
In it he said that the Scottish financial sector did nothing to help the country's economy, that it benefited only a selected minority, and that it put little back into Scotland.
This is a fairly staggering claim, not least for the 200,000 odd people employed by an industry which has expanded to the point where Scotland is currently the second biggest financial centre in the EC.
Even ignoring its importance as a local employer, to say that a sector which earns 15 per cent of GDP, which finances most of the small business start-ups in Scotland, which provides capital for companies great and small, which finances pensions and insurance for thousands of Scots, as well as backing for a quarter of the UK's institutional funds, does nothing to help the economy, is to carry ideology to the point of folly.
More than this, however, it devalues Edinburgh's reputation for probity in financial dealings which is a vital counterbalance to some of the excesses of the City of London.
Another statement of ‘clarification’ may well be in order from Mr Clarke and his advisers.
Shadow boxing
THE apparent squabble between the South African government and the ANC over the precise nature of their agreement on the immediate political future is more show than anything else.
Having reached a consensus on the shape of the interim administration, which is to steer the country to full democracy, and what that democracy should look like, they have come under pressure from the others involved in the stalled multi-party discussions about South Africa's future.
Now President de Klerk and the ANC leadership are trying to tone down the outcome of the talks in order not to appear to have pre-empted a decision before the others have had a chance to have their say.
If one looks behind what is being said by both sides, there is in fact little that divides them.
It is more a question of terminology than anything else.
While the government negotiator Fanus Schoeman insists that the ANC has agreed to share power because a government of national unity is power-sharing, the ANC leader Nelson Mandela said on Saturday that an interim government of national unity was not power-sharing and that the body would include all parties who have won a certain proportion of seats in a constituent assembly.
But that is what Shoeman indicated as well.
Indeed, a similar interpretation was put forward by President de Klerk yesterday when he said that there had been no firm agreement on power-sharing and stressed the need for the resumption of multi-party talks.
With convergence also on the issue of regional autonomy, it is hard to see what all the fuss and bother is about.
However, with an eye to the other organisations, the sound of pedals being rotated backwards has been deafening.
Already de Klerk has emphasised that Inkatha participation in any negotiations is fundamental to the process, following dire threats of political violence — not to be discounted — from its leader, Chief Buthelezi.
At the same time Mandela's remarks indicate that he, too, recognises the need to involve all the parties in the democracy negotiations if they really are to be democratic.
Realistically, it has to be recognised that without some sort of consensus between the two largest players, the government and the ANC, about key points, the talks would have been doomed anyway.
Having clearly sorted out most of their substantial differences, these two must now return to the multi-party negotiations and ensure that all voices are heard and taken into account.
School saviour finishes bottom of the clash
Schooling in New York was in turmoil so Joseph Fernandez was appointed as a troubleshooter — but strife was rife and he was sacked.
Michael Pye reports
JOSEPH Fernandez just sat there, his face sometimes reddening, all day.
He is New York's schools chancellor, head of the public schools system, and he found himself last week on public trial.
A man called him the devil, some parents shouted ‘We Want Joe’ and the talk was all about condoms, AIDS and innocence.
When the evidence was in, the seven members of the board of education did what everyone knew they would.
They fired the man who, two years before, was reckoned the finest educator in the United States.
That was when Fernandez was hired from Miami for $195,000 a year and a basket of pension plans that would excite a baseball player.
He was going to save New York's schools.
Now nobody is quite sure they can be saved, not while such a huge organisation answers to this board of education.
And with the top schools job vacant in New York, Los Angeles, Chicago and Boston, the fearful thought is this: can anyone at all save the schools of America's cities?
The story is much the same in all four cities: social conservatives trying to push their ideas through school boards, parents frustrated that schools have fancy ideas but don't seem to teach children to figure, write or read.
The combination is explosive.
And Joseph Fernandez's old job has other complications: being second-guessed continuously by an unelected board of education that puts its small moral agenda above all else, sabotaged by the remains of corrupt school boards, starved of federal money and unable to settle on a contract with the teachers' union.
The job was this.
Fernandez was hired to end 20 years of chaos caused by decentralising New York's huge school system.
The notion was that communities should have a say in what was taught, and the hidden agenda was to end the undeclared war between predominantly white and Jewish teachers, and an increasingly black and Hispanic body of pupils.
The consequence was that good old New York tradition: cronyism, corruption and graft.
Ads on the subways asked us to call a confidential hotline if we knew what crimes our local school board was committing.
At the time half the city's school boards were distracted by criminal investigations — into how a grand piano went home with a board member, how their election hand-outs came to be printed by school members on school presses, why others dealt drugs and what exactly was the price of a promotion ($10,000 could get you a deputy principalship in the Bronx).
School board superintendents complained they had to hire the buddies, allies and nephews of board members.
Others complained about the superintendents.
Annie Wolinsky, who superintended Board 9 in the Bronx, left behind $13,000 worth of postage stamps hidden in a drawer, a warehouse stuffed with unreported supplies, eight staff members whose only job was to videotape board members on request, and a phone bill into the thousands of dollars which consisted mostly of calls to the various city porn lines.
She also failed to notice the board had hired a teacher with convictions for exposing himself to schoolgirls, or ask why a probationary principal was still in place despite pleading guilty to a $21,000 welfare scam.
At least she was spared the ignominy of the board in Washington Heights, in upper Manhattan, where a teacher was arrested in his schoolyard — carrying cocaine, marijuana, valium and a switch-blade.
Fernandez seemed the answer to this.
He was a New Yorker, for a start, and a Puerto Rican.
What he didn't say, until he published his autobiography last year, was that he was also a high school drop-out who'd been a heroin addict, a splendid example of rising out of the rot of the inner city.
He took office on 2 January 1990 and within three weeks he'd demanded the right to approve the boards' choices for school superintendents, a notion which later fell foul of the courts.
By March, he'd won the right to remove incompetent principals — like the one in the Bronx who had been convicted of possessing crack cocaine.
In October he felt strong enough, buoyed by public support, to tackle the mayor on the matter of budget cuts which, he claimed, would cripple the school system.
Even his supporters began to notice something curious.
Instead of lobbying at City Hall, he liked to turn up early to civic events and leave, ostentatiously, just before the mayor arrived.
It wasn't political.
It wasn't tactful.
It turned out to be all too typical.
The point was to chat, nudge, persuade.
He refused to listen to Norman Adler, the political consultant hired by a local foundation; ‘He simply puts on his army boots and marches ahead,’ Adler says, regretfully.
All this matters in a system with overlapping powers, with a tendency to divide Manhattan and its liberal politicians and the mayor from the concerns of the outer boroughs.
Ironically, Fernandez was a brilliant lobbyist in Washington for more federal funds for New York schools, and he'll be sorely missed, but he couldn't find the time to play the politics of his own backyard.
Worse, he didn't call in on schools.
Whole sectors of the city never saw him.
He did give power to schools and parents, but that made him enemies.
He did try to give parents the right to choose a school for their children and not just accept the one that happened to be closest; this mattered, since property values soar where schools are good.
He announced a significant improvement in city-wide maths scores in 1991, a decline in the drop-out rate from 20.8% to 17.2% which at least made a bad situation less appalling.
But he missed something obvious.
For years, social conservatives — who may be fundamentalists, part of Pat Robertson's Christian Coalition, good Catholics — have seen school boards as a political powerbase, somewhere to challenge liberal orthodoxy on matters like queers, evolution and birth control.
The board of education is appointed — five members by the five borough presidents, two by the mayor — and it's a wonderful place for politicians to win points by appointing the respectable and the conservative.
In New York, the board could easily find allies.
Schools aren't safe.
A friend who teaches both in Brooklyn and at the jails on Rijkers Island says she feels far less secure in school.
The journey to school can be a matter of daily terror in some areas.
And these schools don't work too well.
Reading scores are low, maths scores are low and the amount of repair work needed when kids get to college, if they do, is phenomenal.
A drop-out rate of 17.2% is nothing to brag about, although Fernandez did.
Add all this together and you have a formidable coalition of parents — black, Hispanic, Asian as well as the mainly Catholic groups like the Italians and the Irish — who want schools to be orderly, their children to be safe, the teaching to be orthodox and to concentrate on reading, writing and arithmetic.
On 14 December 1990 Fernandez proposed to distribute condoms in schools without parental consent.
He argued that the spread of AIDS among teenagers was too obvious and too wide for inaction.
On 26 November, 1991, New York became the first American city to hand out condoms.
We'll never know how many lives were saved, how many teenage pregnancies were avoided, how much sexually transmitted disease wasn't transmitted as a result.
But we do know what enemies Chancellor Fernandez made.
Fernandez was in trouble, but he didn't see it that way.
He went on to propose a Rainbow Curriculum — without actually reading it first — which tried to teach tolerance for all, but in the process had to discuss homosexuality with kids of eight.
The ceiling fell.
One Queens school board refused to teach the curriculum.
Gay activists and ladies with steel hair shouted each other down.
On Thanksgiving last year, the borough president of Queens, Clare Shulman, called Fernandez to suggest an academic panel rework the Rainbow Curriculum, just to cool the issue.
Days later, Fernandez suspended the Queens school board that refused his curriculum, and ten days after that the board of education reinstated them all.
Fernandez back-pedalled on the Rainbow Curriculum, and waited for New York State to confirm that teachers couldn't be forced into spending half their time for sex education on counselling abstinence.
But it wasn't enough.
Everyone — everyone who matters in Manhattan, that is — says the system will have to change.
Maybe each borough should run its own schools, maybe the mayor should have greater powers, maybe school districts could be small and autonomous.
Someone's got to wipe out the graft and incompetence.
Someone's got to allow teachers to teach, not act as glorified security guards.
But if Fernandez can't do it, then who can?
Joseph Fernandez: he was in trouble, but he didn't see it that way.
He went on to propose a Rainbow Curriculum which tried to to discuss homosexuality with kids of eight Parents are frustrated that schools have fancy ideas but don't teach children to write or read
Page 3 models and rubber fetishists with a slave on the side flickered before our very eyes
Screen love: How was it for view?
Anthony Troon spends St Valentine's Day — or rather weekend — in bed with his television
AN INTERNATIONAL conference of sociologists and camp followers once defined love.
It is: ‘the cognitive-affective state characterised by intrusive and obsessive fantasising concerning reciprocity of amorant feeling by the object of the amorance.’
I have a feeling that an international conference of television executives met some time later, hoping to improve on this.
It came up with: ‘26 hours 45 minutes of medium-to-low budget television, mostly played for laughs.’
As this Monday dawns and the debris of St Valentine's Day starts to fade in the nation's flower-vases and chocolate-boxes, some of us are waking up and wondering where we are, that almost-forgotten sensation of the wild-oats years.
We have been in bed with the box.
Channel 4, which has a feeling for grouping progs together into ‘themes’, identified St Valentine's Day (sorry, weekend) as a possible banker.
Among the terrestrial channels, Channel 4 has in any case taken on the mantle of the senator for adult-intelligent viewing: in other words, the place where you can watch randily beneath a  thinnish veneer of knowledge and a deeper understanding of self.
In pursuit of this, the channel released a veritable blizzard of love and sex, 18 hours and 25 minutes of viewing, of which the most bizarre 20 minutes was surely The Naked Chat Show.
Was this going to be the ultimate in body language, or a pointless gimmick?
A bit of both, but quite revealing.
The issue was: we are ashamed of our bodies, but why?
Before a generally topless audience and a modestly genitalia-flaunting panel, the matter was explored with a seriousness so profound that it became unconsciously hilarious.
It was amusing to see one middle-aged panellist's efforts to keep a piece of paper judiciously positioned on his lap, while another revealed that flaps of loose skin other than the ear-lobes and the nostrils can be pierced with decorative pins.
Page three models and married rubber fetishists, with a slave on the side, flickered before our very astonished eyes.
Sensibly the presenter, matinee idol-manque Richard Jobson, kept his dinner suit on.
Is television, like sex, 95 per cent anticipation and 5 per cent realisation?
I suppose it depends who you're having television with.
It seems that BBC2 responded to Channel 4's Love Weekend by scheduling A Night of Love, totalling seven hours 20 minutes of programmes.
If we have to make a comparison between the individual approaches, I think that channel two felt we had to be punished for our sins while Channel 4 took the more sanguine view that for so long as love and sex exist, television might as well look on, an electronic voyeuristic intermediary.
But there were exceptions.
Channel 4 started its enormous love-bite on Saturday with the truly horrendous 1987 American box-office film Dirty Dancing, one of those excruciating grapples with the twin obsessions of yoof culture and family values — yet which, with predictable weasel-writing, had a thoroughly deflating happy ending of school prom dimensions.
BBC2, on the other hand, unleashed the magnificent if not majestic if not ultra-enormous comedienne Jo Brand to launch their seduction.
Sprawled on a long-suffering double-bed like a beached whale, she dissected with witty, worldly sarcasm a series of clips from films and television which showed love being suspected, pursued, required and abandoned by performers as disparate as Frank Finlay and Sid James.
The title of Tie Me Up and Bind Me Robin was derived from a quote from Maid Marion in the wholly innocent 1955 series Robin Hood.
It was a brilliant touch that stole a chunk of Channel 4 thunder.
There has been little escape from St Valentinism on television, with even two of the dreaded soap operas niftily timing weddings for around now.
Brookside is going for a double-whammy — sorry, two weddings; Eldorado on the other hand is heading for one.
But on Friday night, guess what?
Not a single one of these love matches was going smoothly.
It's surely an indication that St Valentine has borrowed St Nicholas's pocket calculator, and is determined to turn his eternal dream into a business.
Television is terminally lovesick.
The old Egyptian remedy, apparently was to drink beer from an old shoe, which is why I'm sitting here untying my laces.
Old angle on modern ills
The knowledge and experience of witch doctors is helping scientists, says DAVID SIMPSON, in the search for new drugs
THE recent successful launch of an American company, Shaman Pharmaceutical, on the New York and London Stock Exchanges highlights the renewed interest in finding cures for modern diseases by using centuries-old remedies often based on the natural properties of rare plants.
The issue was oversubscribed and we will see other companies in this field coming to the market this year.
A shaman is a much respected and highly-skilled member of the so-called primitive Indian tribes still to be found living in remote areas of the Amazonian rain forests.
Most often known to us as witch doctors or medicine men, it has now been realised that their accumulated knowledge and experience of which natural substances work in the rapid healing of wounds, or alleviation of pain, is a major resource which modern science can use to good effect in producing ‘new’ drugs.
My daughter, Dr Ann Mitchell, who got her PhD at Heriot-Watt University in microbiology, spends much of her time in the Caquita Medio region of the Columbian Amazon, living and working with the Uitoto y Muinane Indians observing their healing techniques and categorising and collecting plant specimens.
She is one of many young researchers involved with the Expedicion Humana 1992 programme run by the Javeriana University in Bogota, which, in turn, is part of a worldwide project supported by the Royal Geographic Society to track down and codify the enormous body of information still existing in traditional native cultures worldwide.
There is great urgency to complete the work because of the well-publicised rapid and irreversible erosion of ancient cultures and environments.
Already many of the herbs and plants used by the world's first effective medical organisations — that of the Hippocratic Greeks — are lost to use forever.
An organisation called the Foundation for Ethnic Biology (FEB) was officially launched at Oxford University earlier this month specifically to provide a central clearing house for information on how natural substances and ancient cultures can help modern medicine.
The FEB will try to build up a £10 million fund to create companies that can develop and licence pharmaceutical products.
The problems of sifting out the valuable and proven ingredients of native medicines are formidable.
The practitioners frequently have no form of writing and their multitude of languages present great problems for translators.
The people are generally friendly but shy and it takes a long time to gain their confidence to the point where they will teach a visiting scientist the secrets of their art.
For people like my daughter there is also the ethical dilemma to be faced on the funding needed to support the research work.
Finding a potential wonder drug in the root of some Amazonian plant might easily excite the giant pharmaceutical industry players but there is then the risk that over exploitation would change the way of life of the natives and potentially destroy the very environment one is trying to preserve.
For example quinine, extracted from the bark of the cinchona tree, was used by the South American Indians to reduce malarial fever long before the Spanish invaded in 1500.
Cinchona used to grow in profusion on the eastern slopes of the Andes but over-cropping caused the trees to die out by the mid 1800s.
Synthetic drugs such as quinacrine and chloroquine, were developed to replace natural quinine but some strains of malaria are found to be resistant and doctors are using quinine again to treat malaria in Vietnam, fortunately, trees grow well in Java which is now the main global source.
Obviously not all shaman practices are applicable in the modern world, one procedure involved blowing tobacco smoke over a sick person because it was believed to have magical healing powers — I can't see that selling too well today!
Scotland has a well established relationship with the pioneering work in the Colombian Amazon and Dr Sandy Gray, of Strathclyde University, makes frequent visits there.
The Botanic Gardens in Edinburgh also has had a long involvement with the cultivation and development of plants with medicinal properties and we have our own Scottish traditions of herbal cures for a long list of ailments.
Given that there does not seem to be the same reluctance to imbibe proteins made from plants as there is to be using the proteins in the milk of Dr Ron James' transgenic sheep or Scotgen's ‘humanised’ mouse antibodies, there may be a good case for a local entrepreneur to transfer an Amazonian shaman's technology to make a Scottish national wonder drug.
Financing such an enterprise should be possible since James's Pharmaceutical Proteins and Scotgen both raised several million dollars of venture capital — admittedly from American and French sources.
Home-grown: Edinburgh's Royal Botanic Garden also has had a long involvement with the development of plants with medicinal properties
No business with words of lurve
VALENTINE'S Day reached a new low in bad taste this year when the Diary received a truly awful business Valentine card with a twelve-line poem that was excruciatingly awful.
Even if the consultants William Mercer Fraser are as good at business as they claim to be and the answer to everyone's communications problems, the style is a guaranteed turn-off.
Use of donors' blood supplies in private hospitals
Recently, in these columns I repeated the claim that commercial hospitals are being subsidised by the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service, a division of the NHS.
Professor Ronald H Girdwood, the chairman of the Scottish Blood Transfusion Association, took me to task in a letter at the end of last month.
He is a renowned and honourable man, but with regard to this matter he is either being naive or obtuse.
Here are the facts: For the first 40 years of its existence, the blood transfusion authority in Scotland provided the private sector with blood on request and without making any charge whatsoever.
It had no idea if the private hospitals were in turn charging their patients.
This subsidising of profit-making medical establishments was not mentioned in SNBTS annual reports.
Parliament was not aware of the practice; voluntary donors were never informed.
Then in the early 1980s, as a result of a campaign by local health councils and trade unions, the Government introduced a minimal (less than £20 per unit) handling charge.
At the time Professor Girdwood's association (the prime aim of this charitable, voluntary body is to ‘promote the interests of donors and pass their worries to Government’) refused to take any part in this move for overdue reform.
In the last decade, the handling charge has been raised slightly.
The contention of many is that the charge should be at three or four times the present level.
This would end the gifting by the NHS to the private sector in Scotland of not less than £200,000 each year (over £2 million south of the Border).
Meanwhile, it would be fairer and franker of the SNBTS to mention in its information leaflets and at its collection centres that a donor's blood might end up in the private sector.
At the same time a check should be made to ensure that the private sector passes on only the handling charge to its patients.
Lastly, it should not be beyond the capacity of the SNBTS (undoubtedly the most efficient in Britain and, therefore, quite possibly the world) to devise a system whereby those who wish their blood to stay with the NHS can be satisfied.
Filling the vacuum
CRIME is no longer something that happens to other people.
The chilling pictures of tiny James Bulger being led away to a brutal death have touched millions, not just because of the tragedy that befell a little boy but because they have made people realise how much their own lives have become defiled by fear of crime.
Parents deny their children the outdoor play that they themselves enjoyed.
Householders return home apprehensive of having been burgled.
People stay in at night to avoid the shadows of the city streets.
Car-owners disable their vehicles every time they park.
A mother takes her eye off her toddler in a shopping mall and he is murdered.
We are all victims.
We all want something done.
But the trouble is that people, unable to understand why it is happening, tend to look backwards, not around them, for answers.
They presume that changing values are declining values and seek some malign influence to blame.
Take yesterday's comments by two former Home Secretaries, Kenneth Baker and Lord Merlyn-Rees, about the Bulger case.
Many would endorse Mr Baker's diagnosis of the ‘moral vacuum’ surrounding some young people.
But what is his prescription?
New forms of detention, fewer trendy clerics and, familiarly, less violent television.
Lord Merlyn-Rees, too, believes that violence on television incites violence in the young.
Both stop short of demanding censorship, though Mary Whitehouse is characteristically less tentative.
The problem with this sort of approach is that it can make standards yet more remote from those most in need of them.
Dissuade churches from social comment, and all that is left is abstract philosophy.
Take all violence out of television drama and you disconnect it from reality, leaving it unable to portray anything deeper than its own bonds.
Some performance art does contain gratuitous violence.
But it is not generally the stuff that appears on television, where self-restraint has become the norm.
It is the stuff in the video shop, to which people have consciously turned in preference to what is broadcast.
That, sadly, is a market at work, and suppressing it would only bestow the seedy glamour of the underground.
Even if, as is open to question, screen violence really does invite emulation, that is the wrong approach.
The challenge is to attract the alienated young back into the heart of society, not reduce its appeal for them still further.
There can never be an excuse for what happened to James Bulger, but we should all hope that some day there will be a better understanding of why it happened.
Recession cure
Most economists, industrialists and politicians seem to agree that the cure of recession and unemployment must depend on reducing interest rates to boost economic growth, personal consumption and industrial investment.
That recipe may have been appropriate in the past when personal consumption was largely met from the output of labour-intensive British industries.
But nowadays much of any increased consumption will be met by extra imports from countries with more efficient industries or cheaper labour, and by extra output from British industries generated by greater automation and productivity per employee rather than by increased employment.
And extra investment in industry will be directed to still further improving that productivity and minimising the need for manpower.
The main penalty of recession is unemployment, and what we need is more jobs, not more consumption.
We already have too much consumption, particularly of things damaging to health and the environment: of sugar, confectionery, fatty foods, alcohol, tobacco, motoring, noisy entertainment, pornography, prostitution, and the toys and knick-knacks produced by polluting industries.
Rather than a boost to consumption, we need some redistribution of wealth from the employed to the creation of jobs for the unemployed.
We should increase taxes on inessential, unhealthy and damaging forms of consumption and use the proceeds to fund socially beneficial forms of employment.
There should be a heavy excise duty on sugar, higher taxation of motor fuel, and an extension of VAT to all but the necessities for healthy life, principally unsweetened cereal products and raw fruit, vegetables, fish, meat, eggs and pasteurised milk.
The proceeds should fund the creation of extra jobs in the construction of crime, fire and rot-resistant housing, the improvement of public transport, a strengthening of the law enforcement agencies, supervision of school areas against bullying, removal of litter and graffiti from public places, and labouring in schemes of environmental improvement.
Present policies seem likely to yield too few extra jobs for the price that will ultimately have to be paid in renewed inflation or higher taxation of earnings and savings.
Treaty protocol
In a diary item (12 February), Fordyce Maxwell accuses me ‘of having trouble with the facts’.
Even a cursory examination of amendment 27 to the Maastricht Bill will show that it is not me but Mr Maxwell who is having trouble.
For the record, I stated on Radio Scotland, ‘that amendment 27 if carried would not be a vote for the Social Chapter.’
I went on to say ‘it would be the exact opposite.’
Amendment 27 seeks to delete the protocol on social policy from the Maastricht Treaty.
The social protocol, if implemented, would simply give the UK's permission to the other 11 community states to use community institutions and funds to meet the cost of administering their separate social agreement.
Consequently, to delete the protocol would prevent this happening.
So a vote for amendment 27 will be a vote to prevent the social chapter being administered.
Which is why, I will have no difficulty in supporting amendment 27.
The message in Clinton's rhetoric
WHEN President Clinton unveils his plans for the US economy in full today, Americans will already have a fairly clear idea of what faces them.
On Monday evening he gave fair warning of an increase in taxes, and spending cuts to reduce the expanding federal budget deficit.
Both were necessary, he said, in order to build the foundation for an improvement in the standard of living.
Short-term pain for long-term gain — or in his words, ‘this is nothing less than a call to arms, to restore the vitality of the American dream’.
It is a bold move, since it throws into reverse one of Clinton's central election pledges.
During his campaign, he promised not to raise taxes for the middle classes; he is now faced with the realisation that if he is to cut the deficit and fulfil his promises to improve social welfare, education and training and to overhaul health provisions, then tax increases which extend beyond the seriously wealthy are unavoidable.
By appealing directly to his fellow-citizens and banking on a generous response, the President may just have gambled correctly.
It was certainly a more honest confession than George Bush ever managed, and by saying that he has been forced into this decision by an expanding deficit which has gone ‘beyond even the worst official government estimates from last year’, he is also confronting Americans with some central truths about their economic situation.
By rights, Wall Street should have responded well.
Here, after all, was a President prepared to take the economy seriously and to begin the long process of hauling it back into some semblance of order.
Instead, the dealers took the short-term view, judged that Clinton's credibility would suffer, and began selling.
Whether the steep falls of yesterday turn into something more serious remains to be seen.
But as the speculators wait for the President's more substantive statement, they might reflect that the average middle class voter will probably see things rather differently.
This, after all, is a programme designed to cut the US budget deficit and boost the economy.
It is moving in the right direction.
There are those who argue that the signs of a recovery obviate any additional action by the administration to boost the economy.
Indeed, that hands-off approach underlay the whole ‘trickle down’ philosophy of the Reagan and Bush years.
But given the current high levels of unemployment Clinton must be right to take positive action.
As well as the pain of tax increases, the president is also proposing a stimulus of $16 billion in spending on public works projects and $15 billion in tax breaks for businesses as an immediate step to get the economy moving and combat unemployment.
This will be followed by longer term steps.
These are sensible measures, and Clinton deserves better from the Wall Street panic-merchants.
He is likely to find a more solid and reliable reaction from the public opinion polls later this week.
They will tell him what middle America thinks of a President who is prepared to face reality.
Right's desperate search for a new Renaissance
THE National Front published its ‘300 measures for a Renaissance of France’ on Monday.
A year ago it would have made headline news.
Today, with just over a month to go before the general election, it only merited a few lines on the inside pages.
For the past decade the almost continuous and often spectacular rise of Jean-Marie Le Pen's extreme-right party has been the great talking point of French politics.
Now it appears to have gone off the boil.
Its propositions are no less outrageous; its leaders' language no less extreme.
But the novelty has begun to wear thin, and the nation is turning its attention to other matters.
Even the normally ebullient Mr Le Pen has had to lower his sights.
Before the regional elections a year ago he was constantly predicting that his party would win 15-20 per cent of the vote.
Now, in the run up to the general election, he is talking more modestly of its showing a ‘progression in votes.’
In fact, it will be lucky to do even that.
The latest opinion polls are predicting that the National Front will get between 10 and 12 per cent of the vote — down both from the 14 per cent it won in last year's regional elections and from Mr Le Pen's own record score of 14.4 per cent in the 1988 presidential elections.
The immigration issue, the National Front's favourite political battering ram, is still there.
Some 100,000 immigrants continue to pour perfectly legally into the country every year.
Nine million (16 per cent) of France's 57 million inhabitants are now first or second generation ‘immigrants.’
But the continuing slowdown in the economy, coupled with a rise in unemployment to an all-time record of just on 3 million (10.5 per cent of the workforce), has pushed these concerns into second place.
And the French public no longer accepts the National Front's simplistic equation of immigration with unemployment.
In a poll, published last week, asking voters to rank in order of priority the issues they most wanted discussed during the election campaign, unemployment came top by a long way, followed by worries about the funding of the badly-indebted State pension and social security fund, and then education and training.
Immigration was mentioned only in fourth place, followed by urban crime, and then the environment.
The National Front has been suffering from two other developments on the French political scene.
On the one hand, the two mainstream right-wing parties, the neo-Gaullist RPR and the centre-right UBF, have succeeded in stealing some of its thunder by themselves espousing more extremist positions on immigration and by adopting a more overtly nationalist and populist tone on other issues like Maastricht.
At the same time, the rise of the Greens has robbed the National Front of its role as the main anti-establishment, protest party.
Twenty three of the ‘300 measures’ in the National Front's new programme are devoted to environmental matters.
But the Greens are still a good 5-8 points ahead of the Front in the opinion polls.
Just over a year ago everyone got a bit of a scare when an opinion poll showed that one third of the French agreed with the extremist ideas supported by Mr Le Pen — priority for the French (as opposed to immigrants) in jobs, housing, and family benefits; the abolition of all income tax and its replacement with higher rates of VAT; the reintroduction of the death penalty for murderers and drug traffickers; and the expulsion of the immigrant long-term unemployed; the banning of tourist visas for Arabs and Africans (to stop illegal immigration), and so on.
But most publicity was given to the finding in the same poll that two-thirds of the French regarded Mr Le Pen as a positive ‘danger for democracy’, while three quarters believed his party was ‘incapable of governing France.’
The latest polls showed that 82 per cent have a poor opinion of the National Front — the highest rejection rate for any party.
Nevertheless, Mr Le Pen should not be under-estimated.
He remains a formidable political operator and is usually at his best on the hustings.
Although support for his party seems to be stagnating and may even be on the decline, it still has an important following, mainly among the poorer working and artisan classes and the retired.
The election campaign has only just got under way, and Mr Le Pen may yet reclaim the limelight.
But there is not much he can really hope for in the present elections.
Under the system of proportional representation used in the 1986 election, his party managed to win 35 parliamentary seats with just under 10 per cent of the vote.
But with the return of the two-round majority voting system, it is unlikely to win more than one or two seats this time, even if it succeeds in equalling its previous best score of 14 per cent.
In the past the National Front has sometimes managed to enter into local pacts with the two mainstream right-wing parties.
But now, buoyed by the prospect of a landslide victory in March, they no longer want to have anything to do with the disreputable Mr Le Pen.
In future, the danger of extreme-right policies is more likely to come from within the victorious mainstream conservative ranks than from outside.
When judges lean too far towards leniency
Prof Ross Harper supports legislation to give the Crown the right of appeal against sentence in Scotland
SENTENCING is one of the most important functions of a judge.
The word judge, for the purpose of this article, includes sheriffs and magistrates.
They pass judgment on an accused taking into account the gravity of the crime and the circumstances of the accused.
Sentences vary from an absolute discharge to life imprisonment, and include deferred sentence, admonition, probation, fines and community service.
In Scotland, we do not have the English system of suspended sentences.
In England, the Crown may apply to review a sentence — as they are contemplating in the recent case of rape where the accused was told to give £5OO to the victim ‘for a holiday’.
At present in Scotland there is no right of the Crown to appeal against too lenient a sentence.
There is, however, a bill currently going through Parliament which will change that situation.
Most often our judges are totally right.
Unhappily, in some cases they are hopelessly wrong.
Sometimes, judges have bad days.
We all do.
Sometimes, a judge will be particularly impressed by a mellifluous and seductive plea put up on behalf of an accused and will sentence leniently to the point of mistake.
Sometimes, a judge may suffer from irrational horror at a particular case and sentence too severely — to the point of mistake.
Mistakes can be made, and if we do not allow correction we are fooling ourselves.
If a judge has slept badly, has had an indigestible breakfast, tripped over the cat, has been roundly abused by his wife and scolded by his children, or if his mind has been distracted by the children's school reports, a narrow defeat at a curling match or whatever, he may be temporarily off form.
Where probation is appropriate a prison sentence may mistakenly be imposed or vice versa.
If the judge makes a mistake by imposing too severe a sentence, then the accused can, and often does, appeal to a higher court.
If the High Court agrees that the sentence is too severe, then that sentence may be amended.
This is proper, this is just and, as importantly, it is the law.
But if a judge errs the other way and fines a rapist a few hundred pounds, or puts on probation a bank robber with previous convictions who clearly ought to go directly to jail, nothing happens.
Simply because the Crown does not have a right of appeal against sentence.
That is what the Government is changing.
In my view, rightly so.
Many argue that such an appeal by the Crown against too lenient a sentence is simply not cricket.
If an accused person hears that he is going to be sentenced to one year in jail, it is argued that it would be distinctly unfair for a prosecutor to appeal.
Personally, I am not in favour of mammoth jail sentences except for the deserving few — and that's not so much a matter of punishment as a means of keeping society free from their future depredations.
But society has an interest in the determination of the case.
I readily acknowledge that in Scotland the Crown has no direct interest in sentence in as much as it doesn't, in contrast with Russia or America, request the court to impose a specific sentence.
The prosecutor presents the facts fairly and cogently to the judge who, after hearing the defence submissions, reaches a conclusion as to sentence.
Whether the Crown should have an interest in sentence or not is, of course, another matter.
I am personally seduced by the prospect of the Crown and the defence being able to agree a sentence prior to a plea, especially in the case of large complex fraud trials.
But that's another major debate.
But why on earth should the Crown not be allowed to appeal?
If we accept that mistakes in sentencing can be made and accept that sentencing is a matter of considerable interest, importance and relevance to society, and accept that the prosecution represents society, then it is simply monstrous that an appeal does not lie at its hands.
In many criminal cases there are victims — casualties of assault, rape, theft or fraud.
Sentencing process encapsulates the interest of all.
The victim does not have a special place in the criminal court.
The victim is not represented, nor indeed necessarily consulted.
The victim has no right of representation.
Since sentencing is a matter of societal process and since we engage in an adversarial system, a right of appeal which is given to one side should not be denied to the other.
By doing so, I readily acknowledge that we are changing, ever so slightly, the role of the Crown with regard to sentencing.
I personally welcome that change.
Sentencing is too important to be left in the hands of one person without recourse to a higher authority.
While supporting change to allow the Crown the right of appeal against too lenient sentences, I would advocate another change.
I abhor sentences being increased sneakily.
And this can happen.
When I was very young, and indeed Malcolm Rifkind, who was even younger, was my counsel, we represented two individuals who were charged with a serious assault.
They were both old lags and were sentenced each to ten years imprisonment.
We thought this was an exceptionally high sentence and both of them appealed.
One of the accused withdrew his appeal, the other proceeded with it.
His sentence was increased to one of 12 years!
This, in my view, is totally wrong and contrary to my notions of natural justice.
By all means let either side appeal, but you cannot, in all conscience, increase the sentence of some poor beggar who avers, often acting with appropriate legal advice, that the sentence is already too high.
Fair's fair.
Taking note of sex and the single student
As university teachers suggest a code of conduct, Dea Birkett recalls a personal encounter with a lecherous lecturer
AS EVERY student knows, affairs with lecturers are as much a part of university life as examination nerves, drunken parties and late night deliberations on the Romantic poets.
But as long as these extra-curricular affairs are conducted discreetly behind closed departmental doors, the academic establishment turns a blind eye.
At last the Association of University Teachers (AUT) has brought the subject of staff-student sexual relations out into the open.
In a draft policy statement entitled: ‘University Consensual Relationships’ published last week, the AUT recommends lecturers officially report romantic or sexual involvement and cease professional responsibility for the student concerned.
The AUT statement is designed to protect students from sexual harassment and lecturers from charges of favouritism.
As the statement makes clear: ‘Students who are involved in sexual/romantic relationships with staff and who do not consider their involvement to be truly consensual should have the right of complaint under a sexual harassment policy.’
But in the hierarchical world of academia, drawing a line between consensual and non-consensual sex is far from easy.
As the AUT statement recognises: ‘to embark upon a sexual/romantic relationship with a student involves serious difficulties rooted in the unequal power, and hence choice, of the parties concerned.’
My own experiences echo these difficulties.
When I was a 22-year-old Edinburgh University student, a tutor made unwelcome sexual advances to me in his office.
From my perspective, it was a clear cut case of abuse.
But at the same time as my accusation was being assessed by a prestigious board of Edinburgh academics, just a departmental door away a female student and her male lecturer were engaging in clandestine consensual sex.
There was nothing forced or unwanted in their relationship; they fancied each other, mentally and physically, and as two reasonable adults indulged their desires.
She felt no grounds for grievance, and many years later still has no regrets.
Now a lecturer herself, her former lover is a good and supportive friend.
Not all academic alliances are as equal.
I remember one dashing lecturer who regularly took his pick from each year's fresher intake.
All of his young women would have regarded their conduct as consensual.
The lecturer may have been 20 years older, wealthier, and inevitably wiser, but that is often why the student chose to sleep with him.
Power, even academic power, is very sexy.
The AUT's draft policy statement points to this imbalance.
But is it the role of trade unions to monitor how equal personal relationships are?
Should an office worker's union draw up guidelines requiring bosses to declare  publicly if they see their secretaries after hours?
Perhaps the relationship between academic staff and student is essentially different so that regulation is required.
It is only the medical profession that legislates for sex between doctors and patients.
The General Medical Council advises that if a medical practitioner engages in a sexual relationship with his patient this may be considered an abuse of privilege and lead to charges of serious professional misconduct.
The AUT's discussion paper points to many qualities — trust, confidence and dependency — shared by academics and doctors.
In addition, it argues that in the academic arena, a single affair can affect more than two people: ‘Fellow students and colleagues and the learning and working environment will be affected, especially when conflict of interest and unfairness are involved.’
In the United States, some colleges implement policies which bar staff from engaging in any sexual conduct with a student, however consensual.
The AUT has rejected recommending such strict policing of personal relationship.
A motion supporting a code of conduct ‘preventing consensual relationships as constituting an abuse of power’ was dropped in favour of a more softly-softly approach.
The member of staff must report, but need not terminate, the relationship.
The AUT's code is an implicit recognition of the right of university students to bed down with the partner of their choice.
Women should not simply be seen as smitten fools in need of protection; when they accept the advances of those professionally above them, they know the murky pond in which they plunge.
Yet still many choose for reasons — good or bad but their own — to sleep with their academic teachers.
We cannot separate power from sex.
But we can distinguish between wanted and unwanted sexual attention, especially important in universities where futures are forged.
Staff-student sexual relationships are not role models, but nor are they necessarily deplorable; sexual harassment of a student is.
My own case dragged on for months, swamped with innuendos — if another student was having a clandestine consensual affair, why couldn't I have been too?
Eventually my case was supported and the tutor asked to resign.
By opening those departmental doors, the AUT guidelines provide a powerful weapon against the hidden crime of sexual harassment in the ivory towers.
Getting smart on skiving
Paola Buonadonna and Douglas Fraser look at the measures being taken to combat truancy in schools and colleges
‘We have actually saved money because the system saves the work of a teacher and a half.
We are able to identify absentees and use the extra time to tackle the problem’
SCHOOL pupils skipping classes to play with the latest piece of Sonic the Hedgehog software could find another computer is at work to track them down.
Their absence may be noted by devices like ‘optical mark readers’ and ‘swipe cards’which log them in and out of each lesson.
Students, too, are already finding further education colleges are tracking them electronically, with interest likely to grow as universities become aware of poor attendance at lectures.
The use of information technology to keep tabs on truants is receiving particular encouragement south of the Border, where the Department for Education is putting £8.6 million into stepping up the fight against truancy, while Scottish Office research has put emphasis on identifying the varied causes.
Three main programmes have been tried and tested so far in schools and colleges on both sides of the Border.
Smart cards are perhaps the best known of the devices in the fight against school-dodging and they also contribute to security and safety.
The electronic identity cards are swiped through readers stationed in every classroom at the beginning of each lesson.
The system, developed by the Dundee-based company Offcome Data, costs around £10,000 to install, including the computers, the readers and the cards.
Its advantages include the virtual elimination of the time-consuming registering routine and its versatility.
It can be used to gain access to libraries or computer rooms in the buildings.
And in the event of fire, it offers immediate and reliable information on the number and location of people to be evacuated.
Satisfied customers include Perth College of Further Education which installed the system five years ago.
Jack Gardner, director of the management and information system unit at the college, says: ‘We needed a faster and more accurate registration method and this works exceptionally well.
Our main concern was not truancy, but our students still need to show high attendance to guarantee their fees.
‘The system invested them with this responsibility and there is no room for errors or excuses.
We paid for it ourselves, but covered expenses by cutting soul-destroying administrative jobs which only involved keying in names.’
The system has its drawbacks as a response to school truancy.
It would be quite easy for a pupil to swipe in several cards allowing his friends to truant.
But its time-saving qualities — up to 30 minutes each day for each teacher — attracted the St George's School for Boys in Southampton, which has been piloting the system for two years.
DEPUTY head teacher Brian Musk says: ‘We have actually saved money because the system saves the work of a teacher and a half.
We are able to identify absentees immediately and use the extra time to tackle the problem with academic counselling.
Our pupils are conscious of being awarded responsibility and there has been no abuse of the cards at all.’
The Optical Mark Reader, produced by Johnson and Pinnock, at £5,000 to £6,000, is a cheaper and more effective way of keeping track of students.
Its drawback is the time involved, as it requires teachers to take register at each lesson by marking pink sheets that are then read into an optical mark reader.
Francis Howlett, of England's National Council for Educational Technology, explains: ‘The system can give teachers comprehensive information on attendance at the push of a button.
That could include not only how often each pupil is absent, but also which lessons are being missed, which teachers are being avoided, and even which ones tend to be absent when the local football team plays at home.’
Robin Chambers, the principal of Stoke-Newington school in South London, where the programme has been used for two months, says: ‘We are ironing out a few difficulties, for instance getting the individual answer sheet completed in the correct way and working out who has the time to do it.
‘But the machine saves a great deal of time in that it automatically produces statistics and its print-outs clearly show patterns in the absences.
We are able to spot problems earlier on and take action.’
The most recent development in anti-truancy technology is the Electronic Attendance Registration System (EARS), produced by Bronton Computers at prices varying between £8,000 and £15,000.
Teachers retain control of registration — keeping the important element of one-to-one contact — and perform it in the usual time, but instead of noting absences on paper, they feed the information directly onto a portable electronic register which then passes it to the central computer.
The system will be piloted starting from next week by North Westminster Community school, in London, with funds provided by the local authority.
According to Guy Corbet, from Broncom: ‘EARS allows excellent cross-reference of attendance throughout the school at any time at a fingertip.
Students are not given chances to cheat, disappearing after the first registration and retain personal contact with their teachers every day.’
Of course the system is expensive and while it saves paperwork it does not appear to reduce registration times as such.
Meanwhile many secondary schools north of the Border are opting for a cheaper option, the Scottish Computerised School Administration Programme, or SCAMP.
This is a set of databases which collect all the pupils' details, from absences to courses taken and exam presentations.
SCAMP speeds the process of filling the absences for the day and by 10am, the school has a complete map of absentees whom they can then begin to check on.
Its main drawback is that it does not discriminate between authorised and unauthorised absences.
But how do children react to this new electronic scrutiny?
‘There's scope for any system to be alienating and oppressive,’ says Eric Blyth, director of the Centre for Educational Welfare Studies at Huddersfield University.
‘But we're talking about a generation much more computer-literate than the last and today's children are very unlikely to react badly.’
He does point out, however, that the technology simply measures attendance — it does not improve it.
The answer to that may lie closer to home with parents.
Eric Blyth says the best option is to use the technology along with efforts to make children want to be in school.
White Hart Lane School in London used this approach when attendance had slumped to just 72 per cent.
Paul White, the project manager, says: ‘We have rooms set aside with comfy chairs, music and  televisions where pupils can go during break or before school.
We've also introduced rewards for good attendance like pens and key rings, which are very popular — they've even got ‘street credibility’ status.’
Since the pupil-friendly approach to truancy was introduced, attendance has improved by 15 per cent.
There has also been an unexpected spin-off — teacher attendance at the school has improved by 5.1 per cent.
The anatomy of a classroom truant
WHATEVER our image of a truant may be — layabout, glue-sniffer, petty criminal — a recent report from the Scottish Office urges us to dispel a few misunderstandings about truancy.
The term covers a vast range of reasons for not attending school, including phobias, parental pressure and the absence of realistic incentives for fourth-year leavers.
Although poverty and family problems enhance the risk of truancy, this is not the major factor.
A child's personality, be they shy, violent, arrogant or insecure, can also lead to skipping school.
Low motivation to attend school has very diverse causes: truants may be bored with unchallenging courses or scared by too demanding ones.
In extreme cases they develop a real school phobia, for reasons ranging from bullying by classmates to schoolwork anxiety.
Parental attitudes are fundamental in determining the response to truancy.
Some parents may be encouraging their children to help at home or even take up work instead of going to school.
For these reasons it is suggested that in tackling the problem, good monitoring arrangements should be coupled with an early involvement of school and parents.
The report says home phone calls can be useful but only in high phone-ownership areas, and they may be regarded as intrusive.
Home visiting is an expensive but helpful alternative for persistent truants.
It urges links between guidance teachers and other agencies, such as social work, education welfare officers and children's panels, and to work on a flexible approach to the curriculum, enabling fourth year leavers to follow particular classes while performing work experience and voluntary work in the community.
Most importantly, it has been shown that a positive school ethos and high staff morale will increase pupils' involvement in school activities and combat a lack of motivation.
Message of strength from life's struggle
Easterhouse for enterprise and vigour?
Peter Jones hears positive words for a Labour policy forum
‘I HOPE that the commission will not gain from Easterhouse the usual negative view,’ said Bob Holman, a community worker.
‘When photographers come here, they always want to take photographs of the worst flats.’
The members of the Commission on Social Justice, who had flown from south-east England in airline comfort yesterday morning and now were seated on hard chairs in the decrepit surroundings of the Salvation Army hall, nodded amiably.
Their mission: to find a policy for tackling poverty as radical as the welfare system founded by Beveridge 50 years ago.
It is as awesome a task as the work in Easterhouse by the Salvation Army captain Eric Buchanan is daunting.
The hall is surrounded by 30,000 people and for most of them the state housing and welfare system is a failure.
This was the commission's first visit to meet people at the sharp end of the system.
It was set up last year at the behest of the Labour leader, John Smith, but has an independent life under Sir Gordon Borrie, former director-general of the Office of Fair Trading.
Leading the commission group, Patricia Hewitt, a former aide to Neil Kinnock, explains they are not just looking at social security, but at barriers to economic opportunity and how to help local people and local groups to overcome those barriers.
Bob Holman, who works for a voluntary group, FARE (Family Action in Rogerfield and Easterhouse), pleads for the usual underclass stereotype to be ignored.
‘This is a strong area with strong people,’ he says.
Listening to the personal stories of the half-dozen Easterhouse people gathered in the hall — stories of drug addiction, crime, alcoholism, unemployment, poverty — it is hard to ignore his appeal.
But, listening to what they are actually doing, another story emerges — one of determination, vigour, single-mindedness, struggle and enterprise.
Carol tells of a life going downhill after she became pregnant at 14, of a descent into doctors' prescriptions (‘Largactil, Valium, you name it…
I was terrible on drugs, shouting, swearing…‘), of her daughter being taken into care and being kept there when she come out of hospital after getting off the doctors’ drugs.
Now back with her daughter, with a husband and a sparkling bright wee boy, she says that the social workers still think of her as she was.
As for the social security office, ‘You would think it was their money.
They make you sit for hours.
I've seen people sitting there for hours and hours, their weans soaking and starving.’
Carol, who has learned to manage her meagre budget as carefully as any accountant, exemplifies the deeper problem of Easterhouse behind the unemployment, said to be 30 per cent, but much higher when the unemployed 16- to 18-year-olds, those on invalidity benefit and people who do not register for non-existent work are taken into account.
Once people like Carol have spent their money on rent, the poll tax and heating damp houses, Mr Holman explains, they have nothing left and hence there is no cash economy on which business and work can be based.
But there is self-help.
Sister Margaret introduces Ruby, who helps with a credit union.
People join the savings club and after 12 weeks' contributing can get loans at 1 per cent interest.
Another woman explains how a food co-operative has been set up, buying in bulk and selling at no profit to members.
They were intended to compete with the vans that circulate the scheme.
‘We sell bread at 29p, it can cost maybe 50p from the vans.’
The vans have had to reduce their prices, she says, but there is some hostility.
The credit unions, the food co-ops and an incipient knitting business which Sister Margaret is working on, could do more, but there is the problem of suitable premises, or lack of them.
But they would not cure the endemic unemployment problem.
James, 19, working in the hall under a community service order, has had a few months' work for the council since leaving school.
Apart from two schoolmates whose fathers had a business, he cannot think of any with a job.
‘I get £67 a fortnight on the giro,’ he tells Donald Dewar, shadow social security secretary, who will have the eventual task of turning the commission's work into Labour policy.
‘I have to give £50 to my girlfriend who I live with.
‘When I was 17 I had nothing, I sold drugs to make money.
See if I had a job?
It would be brilliant.
But there's 100 folk after every job.
If it wasn't for Captain Eric here, I'd be getting into trouble.’
And if it wasn't for Captain Eric, Sister Margaret and a few others, there would be precious little of a toehold for people like James, Carol and many others in their struggle to build something of a life in Easterhouse.
How to give such support is the crux of the problem, Ms Hewitt muses as she heads back south.
STEPHEN MANSFIELD Jean Smart, a volunteer for the Easterhouse food co-operative, talks to Donald Dewar and Patricia Hewitt, of the Commission on Social Justice, yesterday
Living rough: Stewart has been on the streets in Edinburgh for three years, sleeping wherever he can find shelter and surviving on a mixture of benefits and begging.
He is among at least 35,000 Scots now without a home.
Unable to find work after leaving the army, which he joined at 16, he has travelled as far as Holland in search of a job — but to no avail.
Returning to Scotland, he was forced to live on the street.
A brief stay at a house provided by the district council ended after just two days when everything he had was stolen.
Stewart, now 27, is scathing about attempts by officialdom to tackle homelessness and says ministers like Peter Lilley, the Social Security Secretary, need to experience the problems of the homeless directly.
‘Mr Lilley should go to any city in this country and try to live with nothing…find how degrading it is to go to those places and ask for blankets and ask for food.’
Chilling facts of death rise
By Alison Daniels
POVERTY and cuts in social security payments are linked to the high number of deaths in Britain each winter, campaigners will tell the Health Secretary, Virginia Bottomley, today.
Delivering 40,000 ice cubes to the minister, representing the extra number of people who die each winter compared with the number of deaths during the summer, the Campaign for Cold Weather Credits hopes to draw attention to the plight of the poor and the elderly.
In its report, the organisation denies the Government's claim that there is a significant decrease in the number of winter deaths.
It says that evidence shows a sustained increase in deaths since the reform of social security and the withdrawal of heating additions in 1988.
In Scotland, it estimates the death toll has risen by 7.5 per cent between 1988 and 1991.
According to Damian Killeen, from the campaign, there are seven million households in Britain without adequate heating, with the unemployed, those on low incomes and elderly women, the most vulnerable.
The report states that those who have lived on state pensions, income support or low pay, are most likely to live in the most energy-inefficient homes which are incapable of being heated to a minimum comfort standard.
It adds that many cannot afford the fuel required to keep even one room warm.
It also claims that the UK's winter death rate is twice that of cold countries such as Sweden, Finland and Denmark, and suggests that this discrepancy between the UK and other countries, puts in question the Government's focus on factors such as the effect of low temperatures on blood circulation.
Mr Killeen said the organisation was calling on the Government to support proposals for regular weekly payments towards fuel costs for all households in receipt of means tested benefits.
‘People in the south-east of England would receive payment of £1 while those in the North of Scotland  would receive £6.
We also want to see more money spent on the Government's home energy efficiency scheme, with all houses in poor physical condition upgraded to a minimum standard.’
He said the cost of the proposals would be offset by the resulting cut in National Health Service expenditure.
‘At present the NHS spends £1 billion treating people with illness related to cold, damp housing.
We want to see resources redirected.’
Motoring under a dangerous illusion
Jane Fowler appreciates her own failings as she takes to the open road with an advanced driving instructor
WITH nearly 20 years of trouble-free driving behind me, I was relatively confident and assured when I switched on the ignition for my first lesson in advanced driving.
I entertained the hope that while one or two lazy habits may have crept in, the passage of years will have added a certain maturity to my conduct behind the wheel.
I never anticipated humiliation.
But Jack McKellar, one of the most highly qualified advanced drivers attached to ROSPA, the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents, is not entertained by my driving.
He is, in fact, appalled.
‘Foot off the clutch, hands at ten to two, mirror, offside mirror, signal, gear,’ he barks before I have gone ten yards.
‘Don't sit at a roundabout in first.
Your shoes are wet, your foot might slip.
Hand brake on, change to neutral, wait for the gap and then change gear.
What do you see ahead?’
‘A red car in front, then traffic lights.
‘Yes, and you should be able to see the bottom of the rear tyres of the car in front to be able to manoeuvre round it if need be.
You won't be able to.
You should also see a newsagent on your left, so anticipate a man crossing the road with his nose in a newspaper and children darting across with ice-creams or sweeties.’
Desperately, I scan the road for a newsagent.
Where is it?
Oh, there it is, miles ahead.
‘Exactly,’ says my companion, reading my mind, ‘and that's where you should be looking.
Try to see five miles ahead on a country road and at least two to three hundred yards in a built-up area.
Anticipation, observation and concentration should be your watchwords.
‘There's a garage on your right so look for exhaust fumes — someone's about to move, they may pull out without looking.
A school, so watch out for children, especially five minutes after the bell has rung.
Wee Johnnie's late and he'll belt across that road no matter what.
There are parked cars to your left so look out for moving feet — children might dash out.
Now tell me what signs we've just passed?’
I try to engage my brain as well as my gears.
‘Er, I don't know.’
‘Well, you should.
Signs exist to make driving safer, not to keep the regional council amused.
You are approaching an access road to your left, a side road to your right — what is the speed limit?’
Now I want a sign, I can't see one.
‘Forty miles an hour?’
‘Thirty, so why are you doing forty-two?
Ninety per cent of accidents are caused by people going too fast and there is never, never an excuse for speed.
‘I was late for work’— too bad.
I didn't stand a chance — he ran right out in front of me.’
Wrong, you didn't anticipate that someone might run out.
Now what does this sign mean?
‘A wiggly bend,’ I offer, triumphantly.
‘There is no such thing as a wiggly bend,’ comes the swift rebuke.
‘You mean a sharp double bend, first to the left, then to the right.
So why aren't you in second gear?’
The exasperation is growing now.
‘And why do you insist on driving over every pothole?
You missed one then — why don't you go back and get it?’
Why not indeed?
Why not drive straight home here and now and escape this humiliation for which I have, inexplicably, volunteered?
Because I am aware that 95 per cent of road accidents are unnecessary and that, given the indices of probability, unless I improve my driving I too will join the crash victims.
With three young children usually ensconced in the back of my car, this is a prospect I do not relish.
But here I am without the distracting offspring and driving, or attempting to do so, with care and concentration.
What is going wrong?
‘You're no worse than the rest,’ says my instructor, offering one small crumb of comfort.
‘But we live in a society where we are ruled by the clock.
A few seconds delay at a junction and we regard it as minutes.
We race constantly so it is not surprising that 90 per cent of accidents are caused by excess speed.’
Five hundred people are killed annually in Scotland alone and the Lothian branch of ROSPA are currently running ‘better driving’ courses every Wednesday evening.
These are free and demand has been so great that what was initially planned as a single four-week course has been extended to sessions running until the spring.
Drivers are offered talks illustrated with videos followed at the end of the course by an assessment of driving with an advanced instructor.
Positioning, motorway and winter driving are some of the subjects covered but the night I attended the subject was speed.
The videos, which did not include the guts and gore of crashes, were nevertheless disturbing.
The lectures were delivered in an unpatronising way with useful information.
Take the fact, for example, that a quiet residential road is one of the most dangerous since the driver has a perception of being in a wide, open space and feels he is driving slower than he actually is.
One video shows two drivers on a private circuit.
Both attempt to go as fast as possible.
The good driver accelerates well, corners well and understands his car.
The bad driver goes even faster but shows no acceleration sense and skids repeatedly.
As in the best of parables, the good driver wins — he who drives more carefully actually gets there faster.
Perhaps a little contrived but Paul Richardson, a road safety officer taking the class, cites a more practical example.
‘Take the journey from Edinburgh to Glasgow, say from the Newbridge roundabout to the outskirts of Glasgow.
Imagine you did the entire 45-mile journey at 70 mph, you would take 41 minutes.
Drive it at 90 mph — and you would take 36 minutes.
What do you do with your extra five whole minutes, if you actually make it?
Have a cup of tea to recover?’
IT is stressed that the braking distances learned for that driving test many years back are not idle theory.
Most people naively imagine they will stop immediately when they jam on the brakes.
Yet at only 30 miles an hour, the braking distance is 45 feet.
Stopping distance — that is, the time it takes for the brain to register the need to stop and the time it takes for the brake to take effect — is at 70 miles an hour a frightening 315 feet.
I revise my decision to abandon my first lesson and ask Jack McKellar if any drivers are particularly to blame — business people, lorry drivers or journalists with three children?
‘Anyone who drives too fast,’ is his simple answer.
‘In America, they call advanced driving ‘defensive driving’— and that's what it is.
Learn to decelerate out of trouble rather than accelerate into it.’
As we continue our lesson, I manage to keep my speed down, keep my foot off the clutch except when changing gear, take heed of the signs — well, most of them — and watch for potential hazards both near and far.
I feel I am making progress.
‘You're doing a million things wrong,’ is Jack's final summing up.
‘If I point out all your mistakes, I'll shatter your confidence.’
The key to good driving is care, concentration — and watching the speed
The ugly truth about being a glamour puss
My thighs are so wobbly that each day I thank God that my stomach covers them
WHAT IS happening today?
Has someone turned the clock back 100 years and forgotten to tell me?
Perhaps I have just become too comfortable with the cheering notion that women are far too busy getting on with their careers and their lives to crucify themselves worrying about ragged cuticles or the size of their ankles.
Stupidly, I presumed that the ancient axiom that females were put on this planet for purely decorative purposes or that being pretty (or perhaps a spot of procreation) were the pinnacles of achievement had forever died out alongside the bustle and/or the bubble car.
But no.
We're still talking about Fiona Armstrong's calves and debating fulsomely about the length of hemlines.
And how enervating, how disappointing, how absolutely…crushing to realise that nothing has changed — over the last few decades at least— and that for many women, their primary response is still to be beautiful rather than brainy.
And why the hell not?
The current status quo demands that others remain more interested in the size of one's bust rather than the size of one's IQ.
And — good grief — the news that it is successful and powerful females saying this is enough to make strong women weep into their double gins.
Or should that be double chins?
This latest bulletin is so depressing, I put on 6lbs just thinking about it.
And do you know something?
I don't care.
Really, Fay Weldon of all people should know better.
In a volte-face that makes Germaine Greer's change of heart look like a tiny emotional trifle, the former feminists' champion has switched from the red corner to the blue corner without a blush in the process.
The author of The Fat Woman's Joke and The Life and Loves of a She Devil has suddenly decided that being one of Britain's highest paid and smartest novelists who can command fees of £200,000 per book simply isn't enough.
‘I used to think that you should always be yourself but now I like to be made up, smile and look like a woman should,’ preens Fay.
she added: ‘Looking good on your book jackets means that more people will read you.’
Oh really?
I can't recall Alexander Solzhenitsyn, Jeffrey Archer, Frederick Forsyth and Uncle Tom Cobley and all looking luscious on any of their best-selling titles.
There is, of course, nothing wrong with trying to look your best, but for the born-again Weldon to refuse to see anyone unless she spent half the day in the hairdressers and then proclaim that she's only doing it to further her career (oh, please) smacks of hypocrisy of the very highest order.
What she is really saying, after all this time, is that it is more important for a woman than a man to look good.
Sadly, this makes all her high moral stances and her bonny sights of yesteryear come tumbling down like a house of cards.
And weep, once more, for Steffi Graf who was hot off the baseline this week with a whingeing moan about her physique.
Graf is one of the world's top tennis players whose supreme athleticism and guts have put her at the top of a very tough profession.
Is this enough?
Of course not.
‘I am no fan of my muscles,’ she bleated to a German magazine.
‘I hate my size.’
What on earth does she think has powered her to the top of her sport and put millions of deutschmarks into her bank account?
Her winning smile or her pretty blonde hair?
Not that you're interested, but my thighs are so wobbly that each day I thank God that my stomach covers them.
If I had a physique as powerful and beautiful as Graf's, I'd use the strength to knock some sense into her daft head.
Who does she want to look like?
Vanessa Paradis or Michelle Pfeiffer?
Sometimes despair is the only option.
And what about Body Shop supremo Anita Roddick, the woman who has been feted for the last ten years as some kind of environmentally conscious feminist icon.
I have always been deeply suspicious of Roddick and her cliche-ridden slogans and highly-publicised efforts to save the world, while quietly amassing a fortune on the side.
I never bought that stuff about her ever-expanding conscience and I certainly never bought any of her beauty products.
Life, for me, is certainly not too short to stuff a mushroom.
However, it is at least ten million years too short to spend an evening piddling about with peppermint footbaths or rainforest elixir ear-lobe exfoliators.
But wait!
Anita the fabled feminist has a complaint she want you all to hear.
She thinks it is simply awful that being successful and (reading the ill-camouflaged sub-text) gorgeous means that men won't chat her up, admire her breasts or perceive her as a sexual creature.
Anita doesn't want to save the planet any more.
She wants to save her self-esteem.
She has decided that pretty compliments from members of the opposite sex are what, after all, is important in this life.
Anyone viewing all this nonsense from another planet — as most men do — can be forgiven for assuming that women are a bunch of mixed up crazies who don't know what they want, but do know that they want it all, both ways and with jam on the top, too.
No-one can deny that being pretty helps — no female on breakfast television would have a career otherwise — but I cannot believe that we are turning back to the dark days when it was deemed the most important thing of all.
The recent controversies over both the Maastricht amendment and Workfare serve to betray the Conservatives' real economic aim of making Britain the low wage centre of Europe.
Suggestions of obligating the unemployed to work for their benefits are quite in keeping for a Government which has done virtually everything else it can to ensure that millions of Britons will work for derisory incomes.
The hobbling of trade unions, the abolition of wages councils, and the refusal to legislate for minimum pay levels demonstrate that John Major is quite willing to oversee the worsening of living standards for a large part of the population.
Any Workfare or similar scheme will heighten the problem by providing a cheap labour pool which will discourage the creation of real jobs with acceptable conditions.
Tied in by their own dogma, the Conservatives refuse to take any steps to build a genuine base for sustained economic growth.
Unless the Government crosses this ideological barrier and invests in education, training and infrastructure, then the spiral of increasing unemployment and low pay looks likely to continue.
Bland case
Without in any way making light of the distress of the parents of Tony Bland, it is very important to keep a firm hold of the fact that Tony himself was not reported to be in any pain or distress; so any change in the treatment he was receiving was not for the purpose of relieving acute suffering of the patient.
One must wonder, therefore, how his dignity was to be maintained by the withdrawal of feeding.
The case is not entirely a private family matter since it has very serious implications for society as a whole.
What we have now had thrust upon us is a precedent to hasten death, not really to help the patient die with dignity but to accommodate the judgment of others that the patient's life is no longer possessed of ‘quality’.
A ‘hard case’— and I am not disputing that for the Bland parents it is indeed a very hard case — has been found which can, and I believe will, be skilfully exploited to justify the ‘dignified’ removal of a subtly-expanding range of people who will be deemed to be living lives which are below some ‘expert's’criterion of an acceptable standard.
Prophets do not have a track record of popularity star-rating but they prove, in the end, to have seen important realities which their contemporaries failed to grasp.
I believe Father James Morrow will come to be numbered among them, long after some, the currently-celebrated illuminati, have been relegated to obscurity.
Gross bias
Phillip Whidden (Points of View, 3 February) addresses my earlier criticism of the report by the Association of Non-Smokers Rights claiming that ‘passive smoking’ causes over 10,000 deaths annually in Britain.
He justifies failure to cite critics of the Wells paper (on which the ANSR estimates were based) because ‘these critics were mistaken’.
Whether or not the criticisms were mistaken (and many were not), failure even to notice them, let alone reply to them, indicates gross bias in the ANSR report.
Mr Whidden cites the US Environmental Protection Agency report as support for his view that ‘passive smoking’ causes deaths from lung cancer in non-smokers, stating that it ‘ran the gauntlet of scientific criticism’.
Certainly there were many criticisms of earlier drafts.
I attended two open meetings in Washington in which the EPA received comments from numerous sources.
It was notable that many valid criticisms, including some from its own scientific advisory board, were totally ignored in the final report.
It is interesting that Mr Whidden does not cite the EPA report as regards heart disease or other cancers; diseases which contribute nearly all of the total of ANSR's spurious estimate of deaths.
Could this be because the EPA, like the UK Independent Scientific Committee on Smoking and Health, did not conclude that an effect of ‘passive smoking’ was demonstrated?’
It is also interesting that Mr Whidden fails to point out that no authoritative report has claimed ‘passive smoking’ causes chronic bronchitis in adults.
The solicitors for Stockport Metropolitan Borough Council, which paid out £15,000 compensation to Veronica Bland, have confirmed that reports in the media may have given the false impression that such a relationship has been established.
Neither, for the record, was there any admission of liability and in no way was it conceded that ‘passive smoking’ caused her alleged illness.
The country is horrified by the upsurge in violent crime, typified by the killing of young James Bulger.
But what is the cause?
Brian Pendreigh explores the many arguments which lay the blame on television and films, and Audrey Gillan reports on a computer playing a vital part in the search for the Merseyside murderer
Screen violence put to the test
STATISTICS show violent crime is on the increase in Scotland, but we have only bald statistics.
We don't have any helpful little footnote explaining why.
Meanwhile, the public is not only horrified but also mystified by the killing of a two-year-old in Merseyside, last seen with two older boys.
Again people are asking why, while politicians' knees are jerking frantically.
Not one but two former homes secretaries have blamed television and films for what is happening in society.
Lord Merlyn-Rees, a former Labour minister, suggested children are copying what they see on television, while the Conservatives' Kenneth Baker claimed children faced a moral vacuum and that television and film are at least partly to blame.
Television bosses maintain they have tight controls on TV violence, while the film censor claims to operate one of the toughest regimes in the western world.
Lethal Weapon 2 got a U certificate in France, but the British censor wouldn't even pass it for over-18s without some of the violence being cut.
Baker expressed grave concern at the Bootle killing and attacked various institutions for the fact that society has become more violent and selfish.
He suggested the Church should concentrate its message on violence rather than offering a view on the Social Chapter.
There is one group that politicians seem reluctant to blame and that's themselves.
There have been several cases in the past where it appeared people were acting out violent scenes from films.
It was suggested the Hungerford killer Michael Ryan was influenced by the film character Rambo.
But there is no evidence of such a direct link between the Bootle killing and screen violence, and many people may find such speculation insensitive and distasteful at this stage.
Some maintain violent programmes do encourage violent behaviour and something needs to be done.
Some argue that violent programmes are cathartic, a safe release for aggressive feelings.
There's no shortage of opinions.
Hard evidence is difficult to come by.
Recent studies have posed the question as to whether there is a link between film violence and real violence and have come up with the answer that the majority of people think there is, though at least one study concluded the opposite.
But such research only reveals people's perceptions.
It doesn't evaluate whether they are right or not.
John Davies, professor at Strathclyde University's Centre for Occupational and Health Psychology, says these studies merely muddy the water.
He accepts it's extremely difficult to come up with conclusive evidence that violent films cause violent behaviour, but that a series of studies in America 20 years ago suggested it was a factor.
The US research employed observation of children, questionnaires and long-term case studies.
Nevertheless the results were highly controversial and Sue Elliott, the official in charge of children's television at Britain's Independent Television Commission watchdog, says: ‘Extensive research on both sides of the Atlantic has not established a clear link between watching violent television and violent behaviour.’
Many people would say that even the possibility of a link would justify action, but the ITC already has detailed restrictions and before jerking one's knee it's necessary to know the nature of the material that may be subject to cuts.
Elliott says: ‘Television is an easy scapegoat for people's anger when inexplicable acts of violence shock society…
Politicians should hesitate before reaching for the handy ‘blame television’ solution.
They know less about and watch less television than anyone else in the country.’
Scottish Television produces about 40 per cent of ITV children's programming.
Alistair Moffat, the station's director of programmes, says: ‘The superheroes have gone, He-Man and wham-bang-crash has gone…
The shows that top the ratings are soft, for example we make Rupert the Bear and that gets a 60 per cent share of the kids’ audience.’
Older children prefer humour to violence, says Moffat, and when it comes to watching adult television, they like nothing better than soaps like Neighbours and Home and Away, which may tackle tough issues, but approach them with a certain old-fashioned morality, and contain little violence.
Anything shown before 9pm is regarded as family viewing and Elliott says the ITC has done extensive research on The Bill, a police drama, to check the impact on its sizeable audience of children.
Moffat reckons the real cause for concern is satellite television and video.
‘Some kids will take the video club membership card out of mum's purse and will go and get Texas Chainsaw Massacre and play it on video.’
EXCEPT they won't.
Leonard Maltin is just one respected American critic who regards it as a ‘classic and influential suspense-comic-horror film’, but it's banned both on video and in the cinema in this country.
James Ferman, director of the British Board of Film Classification, says: ‘We are one of the most censorious countries in the world regarding violence.
We are very concerned about violence and always have been.’
This is in spite of the fact that he believes there's no evidence that watching violence on screen leads to violence in real life.
‘There are some cases where the link appears to be quite close.
Sometimes it's a matter of the drip, drip, drip effect and seeing too much violence and not being as sensitive to violence as one should be.
Certainly our classification policy is very much based on what kind of violence is safe to be seen at various ages.’
Although media attention has focused on specific films, such as Reservoir Dogs, which show graphically realistic instances of violence, it may be the more routine violence of the Lethal Weapon and Die Hard action movies that should be causing most concern.
The hero uses violence in an almost casual way and the consequences are never properly addressed.
It's a type of violence that falls between realism and fantasy.
The ITC guidelines make it clear that it doesn't see ‘sanitised’ violence as innocuous and Ferman expresses greater concern about Lethal Weapon 2 than Reservoir Dogs.
Ferman believes every possible factor must be considered after the Bootle killing, including films but also parental responsibility.
‘One of the things that worries me is too many parents allow their kids to see videos classified 15 or 18.
Something has to be done about it to make parents realise that these are classified as unsuitable for children because they genuinely are unsuitable for children.’
Davies says there is some evidence to suggest that showing the consequences of violence is preferable to not doing so.
But he feels it all has an effect, including Tom and Jerry, which is after all non-stop violence.
He recalls that US researchers came up with a list of programmes of which they approved, including The Waltons, and those of which they disapproved, including the old Batman series, with its camp humour and captions saying ‘Pow’ when he punched the baddie.
Pressed on whether he would ban Tom and Jerry, Davies says he wouldn't.
He recalls one study suggested that if you present youngsters with a diet of relentlessly insipid programmes then that in itself may stir up aggressive tendencies and encourage violence.
Addressing aggression: the British censor wouldn't pass Lethal Weapon 2 for over-18s without some of the violence being cut
CENTRAL Edinburgh does not, at a glance, look like an unemployment blackspot.
It appears prosperous, with busy corner shops, crowded pubs and numerous restaurants and take-aways.
But pick any street and the curse of unemployment lurks behind the front doors.
Take St Leonard's Bank, looking out on to Salisbury Crags — a quiet, well-maintained residential street about half-a-mile from the Royal Mile.
At one end is a row of tenements, in the middle are stone family houses and at the far end a council-run hostel for people with alcohol-related problems.
We examined how unemployment has hit its mixture of families, students, retired people and young professionals.
The majority are employed, but about a fifth have suffered a period of unemployment in the past.
Most agreed the experience had dented their confidence and morale, leaving lasting memories of isolation and frustration.
St Leonard's Bank falls within the boundary of the St Giles ward, where unemployment stands at 19 per cent: the problem is growing.
According to Edinburgh District Council, this is typical of the capital's centre, where hostels, students and young people are prevalent.
But although the ward's unemployment rate is higher than the city average of 12 per cent, the council says the real unemployment blackspots are still the peripheral housing schemes.
Edinburgh University's professor of social policy and social work, Adrian Sinfield, says the heaviest burden of unemployment is still hitting poor people in poorer areas.
However — as we found down St Leonard's Bank — other sectors of the Edinburgh community are not immune.
Lack of jobs ‘leading to new underclass'
No.1:
MARTIN COWAN, 48, is a musical instrument technology student who is well aware that his own particular skills may not be in demand when he finishes his training.
He believes that unemployment is socially divisive and is leading to the creation of an underclass.
However, he thinks the suggestion of a workfare programme might help the long-term unemployed if it were relevant to the skills that are needed to find work.
No.2:
HANS Wagenknecht, 24, is a physics student from Germany who will be looking for work in a few years.
‘Unemployment is higher in Scotland than in Germany and I think it's a lot worse here than in the rest of Britain.’
‘In Germany there is more emphasis on technical skills and I learned bricklaying while completing my education.
‘However, life in Germany, whether you're working or not, is more stressful and aggressive than over here and I don't think students here appreciate what they have.’
No.14:
JENNY HEAD, 37, is a part-time shiatsu [massage]therapist and her husband, Mike Fourman, 42, a computer science professor at Edinburgh University.
‘Neither of us have been made redundant but I am aware of unemployment and its effects.
‘I've heard from my husband about graduates not getting jobs, even with a degree in computer science.’
She says working as a shiatsu therapist is also risky because the treatment is expensive and people are not always willing to pay when money is short.
Where the champagne lost its fizz
By Gillian Harris
NOT so long ago Bill Bentley's wine-bar in Bishopsgate was alive to the sound of mobile phones and chattering stockbrokers.
Champagne was guzzled like lemonade and flexible friends took care of the bill.
Since those heady days the bar and its clientele have undergone a transformation.
Heavy job losses in the City have had a huge impact on the lifestyles of people working in the finance sector.
Those who have escaped so far wait nervously, fearing the worst.
In the first six weeks of this year, 10,500 redundancies were announced in the United Kingdom financial sector.
According to the Banking, Insurance and Finance Union, the future looks gloomier still.
‘Considering that we have been looking at 30,000 job losses a year recently, this could be the worst year ever.
It has certainly been a bad start,’ said Richard Lynch in BIFU's London office.
From the end of the Eighties, when unemployment in the City was negligible, the number of people out of work in the Square Mile has climbed steadily.
In December 1991 there were 112,000 unemployed.
A year later it had jumped to 149,000 and looks set to rise again this year.
For Remo Mongiat, the manager of Bill Bentley's, the changes forced some hurried menu alterations: whole lobster has been replaced by haddock, vintage French wine by cheaper plonk.
‘The amount people will spend on lunch has dropped drastically,’ he said.
‘In 1988 someone would come in and spend £40 per head without even looking at the bill.
Now they would pay no more than that on a meal for two.’
Champagne, the tipple of the Eighties, is shunned as hedonistic and not in keeping with the belt-tightening Nineties.
‘Nowadays the only time anyone orders champagne is if it is their birthday,’ mourned Mr Mongiat.
‘I try to keep prices to a bare minimum so as to still allow people to have lunch without spending a fortune.
We want to look after our customers so that they will be around when things get better.’
However, not everyone believes things will get better.
Derek Edwards, the managing director of Sanders and Sidney, a management consultancy firm, thinks the changes taking place go beyond recessionary cuts.
‘Whole levels of management have disappeared,’ he said.
‘Partly that has been caused by the recession but it has also been triggered by technological advances.
The City has been hit by hi-tech, probably more than other employment sectors.’
Mr Edwards also detects caution in employers who are recruiting: ‘They hire people for a specific period, maybe one or two years, so that at the end of that time they can decide whether or not to renew their contract or make them redundant.
There is a move away from jobs for life.’
Employees who do lose their jobs are also no longer guaranteed a generous redundancy package.
Mr Edwards said: ‘There was a time when bonuses would be generous and the person might work several months notice.
‘Now packages are being refined and people are being asked to leave more quickly.
It is partly the recession and partly companies taking a realistic look at how much they can afford.’
Many of the people who were made redundant during the first wave of financial job losses in 1990 have found work in other fields.
Administrative posts have been snapped up by stockbrokers and merchant bankers.
‘Nobody feels secure any more,’ said Mr Edwards.
‘Younger people coming into jobs now have a different attitude.
They do not regard it as offensive to say they want a quality of life more than they want challenge and promotion.’
THE UNEMPLOYED
No.4, top floor:
NATALIE HUNTER, 27, has been unemployed since December after working as a graphic designer for four years.
She is looking for work and thinks she may be forced to move to London in search of a job.
She has also considered re-training and thought about enrolling for a college course.
She feels the worst part of being unemployed is her inability to plan for the future.
‘At first it was quite good having loads of time, and money wasn't really a problem, I just stopped buying things.
However, it's easy to get a very negative self-image and lose your confidence.
‘It's still a social stigma to be unemployed and employers wonder what you've been doing.’
She is appalled by the suggestion that the unemployed should work for their dole money.
‘It's really terrible.
People should be entitled to basic benefits.’
No.4, ground floor:
ELECTRA SCORGIE, 33, is an unemployed rock musician who is attending a training course on computers.
An American who has lived in Britain for 15 years, she has experienced the ‘devastating’ effects of unemployment.
‘If you're forced to live on benefits you're thrown on to such a low level that you can't dress properly for interviews or even afford the travel involved.
‘You don't have the sort of upbeat good humour you need to compete for jobs.
‘There doesn't seem to be any safety net for laying people off and there is the belief put about by certain politicians that full employment would cause inflation to rise.
It's all very manipulative.’
She feels people in Scotland who have lost their jobs are not so eager to find work because wages are low, whereas in the States people are prepared to do two or three part-time jobs to support themselves.
She is not impressed at the concept of working for dole money and says it might be a better idea to give people a minimum wage for doing community work.
No.24
THE SIX residents of Thornybauk hostel for those with alcohol-related problems are all unemployed and will begin looking for work once they have dealt with their difficulties.
Hamish Reilly, 35, worked for an electronics firm in Livingston before moving into the hostel 14 months ago.
He is not optimistic about his chances of getting another job in electronics and says he would consider doing something else.
‘There are a lot of people out there looking, it's a bit of a joke really.’
Morag French, 27, is more optimistic about a job, although she did experience a few brief spells of unemployment before entering the hostel a year and a half ago.
No.2, first floor:
LISA, 18, is a student of English who has been unemployed twice, including being made redundant when only 16.
‘Unemployment is really degrading, I felt like I wanted to spend money all the time to cheer myself up, but of course I didn't have anything left over from my bridging allowance.
My mum helped me out a bit, but not everyone has parents who will help.
The Government should back up young people more because there are those who have to leave home.’
‘Even if you get a flat you worry about delays in your housing benefit.
It's all right if you've got a nice landlord who'll wait for the payment to come through.
‘If not it's just another hassle you face if you're on the dole.’
No.4, ground floor:
GILLIAN LEDSON, 19, is a retail business student who has had the experience of being made unemployed twice in five weeks.
Her summer job at Harrods in London lasted only one week after poor sales in the sports department meant she was no longer needed.
Working in Habitat on Kings Road proved to be depressingly similar and again Ms Ledson was paid off, that time after three weeks.
‘Unemployment is very likely to cause people a lot of stress and I feel quite concerned about how depressed friends can become when unemployed.
‘I don't think people should have to work for their dole money, although some sort of ‘workfare’ programme might help some people in terms of references or whatever.’
No.4:
ROGER LINTON, 27, is manager of Dunbar's tourist information centre and was unemployed for three and a half months before finding a job.
‘Although he feels his job is secure in spite of forthcoming local government reorganisation, he has not forgotten how his brief spell of unemployment affected him.
‘There are two sides to unemployment, on the one hand it can be a productive time as you start to question things and think harder about what road you want to go down.
‘However, it can also make you disorientated and you start to apply for less and less appropriate jobs as you get desperate.
You start to see yourself in terms of an application form.’
Like others in the street, he is not enchanted with the idea of working for dole money.
‘To me it sounds similar to youth training schemes — a disgrace.
‘Some sort of scheme would be reasonable, but only if there was training involved and a decent wage.’
No.11:
DIANE LECKIE, 39, is divorced, with a daughter and works as a teacher.
She vividly recalls being made redundant several years ago.
‘I felt devastated at losing my job.
I had gone through a marriage break-up and had a lot of financial commitments.’
‘I had worked in recruitment so I knew what I was in for: it can be a nightmare.’
She feels there is a real shortage of teaching jobs and says if she were to lose her job tomorrow she would want to do something.
‘I would try and turn my hand to anything but it must be very hard if you leave school at 15.’
No.12:
MATHEW REA works in Edinburgh University's chemical engineering department and his wife Jenny Haslam works as a part-time social worker.
They have two young children and moved to Edinburgh after Mr Rea experienced difficulty in finding work in Sheffield.
He says being unemployed meant feeling cut off.
‘One of the things I missed was having access to things like phones and being able to make contacts.’
His wife mentions lack of status.
Mr Rea says jobs at universities are no longer as secure as they once were.
‘People are often taken on short-term contracts, proper jobs are very hard to come by.
There are a lot of very qualified people who can only find work on a short-term basis.’
Swedish lesson
J R Hall (Points of View, 12 February) is right to suggest that British Rail would be able to make a profit if the Government took full responsibility for funding the provision and maintenance of railway infrastructure as it does roads.
This view is substantiated by experience in Sweden, where such an arrangement has existed since 1988.
As a result, the state railways turned a loss of 416 million  kroner (about £40 million) that year into a profit of 28 million  kroner the following year, which grew to 372 million  kroner in 1990 and is expected to go on rising.
The state railways pay a user charge to the track authority, which is broadly equivalent to the charges faced by road users and covers only about a third of total infrastructure costs.
So successful has the state system been that it has lost only about 1 per cent of its operations to a private competitor under the system of tendering for the provision of local passenger services that was also introduced by the 1988 rail reforms.
It is misleading, therefore, of the Government to hold up Sweden as a model for its madcap rail privatisation plans.
Indeed, Swedish railway executives have publicly condemned the proposals as unworkable.
Town allergies
Professor A Seaton suggests (Points of View, today) that the Rev J L Leckie's view that traffic pollution has caused the rise in the prevalence of asthma in Aberdeen school-children is simplistic.
But Mr Leckie must be partly right.
Professor Robert Davies, of Bart's, has pointed out that exhaust pollution explains the curious fact that city dwellers these days are more affected by hay fever than those in the country.
Both these allergic conditions have the same underlying cause: a dysfunctioning immune system.
Therefore all immunosuppressive factors can play a part.
These include chemical allergens (exhaust fumes and tobacco smoke among them), food allergens (too often overlooked by asthma specialists), and physical and psychological stress.
Their effects are cumulative; there is no single answer in cell-mediated allergy.
The problem of congestion on the Forth Road Bridge and on the approaches to Edinburgh remains unresolved.
Some people suggest that the removal of tolls would help to solve the difficulties to a great extent.
They may well be right, but are unable to prove their point.
Let us suspend the tolls for a period of say, 14 days, so that we can all see if they are right.
If they are, there will be no need for an extra bridge and the projected cost of a second bridge could be used to strengthen the present structure.
Compared with the billions being spent out of the road fund in England to make the motorways even wider, the cost would be chicken-feed.
Infallible way to obtain release from military service
As a former National Service army medical officer, I was much entertained by Albert Morris's reminiscences (‘Conscripts who altered the script’, 8 February), of the various ingenious methods used by unwilling conscripts to obtain their discharge from the service.
Having spent some weeks in 1951 as medical officer to a basic training regiment in Aldershot, I recall with amusement many of the subterfuges and deceptions described by Albert Morris.
However, I am surprised that he failed to mention persistent bed-wetting which, in my experience, was the one absolutely infallible method of obtaining release from military service.
During my time in the army a regimental quartermaster who was repeatedly having to exchange soiled blankets would protest so vehemently to his commanding officer that drastic action had to be taken.
This initially meant that the bed-wetter would be made to sleep in the guard-room, where during the night he would be wakened hourly for toilet purposes.
If after perhaps two weeks of this regimen the bed-wetting continued, then the enuretic National Serviceman would probably be referred by the unit medical officer to the local military hospital for exclusion of urological, neurological or psychiatric disorders.
This process, of course, usually meant several hospital visits, with consequent very welcome respite from tiresome and disagreeable activities such as drill parades, guard duties, cookhouse fatigues and physical training.
These medical investigations hardly ever revealed any physical or mental abnormality and if the bed-wetter continued thereafter to deplete the quartermaster's stock of blankets then the British Army had no answer to this situation other than to discharge him honourably from the service without a stain on his character, whatever there might be on his bedclothes.
I do not know how the RAF dealt with bed-wetters in the days of National Service, but I am certain that even although the Royal Navy had abandoned hammocks not long after the Second World War, a persistent enuretic on board a warship would create even more serious problems than he could in an army barracks.
Workers' rights
It can only be a reliance on public ignorance that can allow the Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, and other Tories, to spread lies about the social chapter of the Maastricht treaty.
Mr Hurd has talked about these articles as if they were about the imposition of old East European ‘socialism’(with Chancellor Kohl leading the way?).
Article 2, which sets out the general areas of workers' rights, simply spells out many rights that already exist in law, or have been present in well-unionised work places for years before Thatcherism.
Article 6 reinforces the legal rights on equal pay obtained by women in this country, in 1970.
Without any exaggeration, it would be true to say that, apart from Tory ideologues, the overwhelming majority of people in this country would agree to this legislation, if they were given the chance to read it and in more simple terms.
The Tories, and their ruling-class supporters, wish to keep the ordinary worker from knowing what the substance of this social chapter is, how it really just gives more backing to much of what they have already gained through industrial struggles for nearly 200 years, and the extension of these rights to every worker, especially the more isolated ones.
The Tories want to trample over the workers, particularly through the instrument of unemployment which has already frightened workers into accepting wage cuts such as at Cambuslang.
The social chapter would not provide any protection here as pay policy is excluded, apart from the equal pay issue; but in terms of social security and employment conditions, it would be an important advance.
However, what is most galling is the inactivity of the party which is supposed to represent labour.
A high-powered focus on this issue, alongside the campaign on the health service, would undoubtedly have won the Labour Party the general election.
Bridge across Labour's class divide
Should he stay or should he go?
Labour needs Tom Clarke to remain shadow Scottish secretary, says Peter Jones
AT least one Labour MP, and probably a few more, think that Labour leader John Smith should ditch his troubled shadow Scottish secretary Tom Clarke, who went back to work in January after a three-month illness and promptly inflicted two unnecessary controversies upon himself.
That Labour MP is, however, bound to be disappointed.
It is not in Smith's interests, or the Labour Party's, for Clarke to be summarily dispatched like some allegedly politically incorrect Daily Mirror employee.
For the issue at stake is not necessarily whether Clarke is good or bad at his job, something which is indeed a topic of conversation among MPs, not just among the media's ‘very well-paid political hacks’, as Clydesdale MP Jimmy Hood asserted this week.
It has much more to do with control of the party's thinking and its power structures; the debate about modernisation of ideology and whether or not the Scottish party should become more or less independent of the rest of the UK Labour Party.
These debates, especially the ideological one, are difficult enough for Smith to manage, and they would get worse in Scotland if Clarke was put to the sword.
They would also be worse than the ruckus stirred up by Clarke's remarks on firstly, the improbability of Labour being able to renationalise a privatised water industry, and secondly, the worthlessness of the Scottish financial industry.
The first was a mistake which, all politicians will tell you, is easily made and relatively simple to correct with a few carefully worded statements and some abuse of the media.
The second is not so easy to explain away, for it implied a fundamental incomprehension of the financial industry, many of whose 200,000 employees are Labour voters in marginal Edinburgh seats.
And it is that point which has raised questions in the minds of some MPs who hitherto have been relatively happy with Clarke.
Still, one bad speech does not merit a sacking.
And although there are some MPs who think Clarke should go now to prevent any worse gaffes, it is only on past events rather than future possibilities that such decisions can be made.
And certainly there would be the most almighty row if Clarke got the push.
What was interesting about those MPs who were swift to defend him was that they come from the traditional working-class wing of the parliamentary party — people like Jimmy Hood, or Aberdeen North's Bob Hughes.
Now they are the sort of MPs who are most likely to support traditional Labour policies, which Clarke, on the hypothetical question of water renationalisation, was implicitly rejecting.
Clearly, on the evidence of Hood's letters of defence in the press this week, they support him, not because of what he says, but because of what he is — from, and still part of, a traditional working-class background.
According to Hood, the criticisms of Clarke are ‘born from jealousy and political snobbery’.
It has to be said that there has been for some years within the Labour Party something of a class divide — a working-class element resentful of a middle-class takeover by lawyers and the like.
The divide has been bridged in a number of ways, one being shadow Cabinet elections putting people like Tom Clarke or John Prescott into the upper echelons.
Neil Kinnock also bridged that divide, but John Smith is definably and obviously on the middle-class side of it.
Smith therefore needs people like Tom Clarke in the shadow Cabinet.
Turf him out of it, and the debate between ‘traditionalists’ and ‘modernisers’could well turn into a conflagration.
The row over what Labour would do with the water industry is a graphic first flare-up in that debate.
It is potentially hugely divisive given the Scottish party's left-wing sensibilities, but less so if working-class traditionalists like Clarke can go down Smith's route to modernity.
The water debate, when couched in terms of the Scottish party's rights to determine policy in specifically Scottish areas, also directly affects the current internal demands for more Scottish party autonomy, even unto independence.
This argument, that the Scottish party should elect its own leader, raise its own funds, hire and fire its own staff and sit in a Westminster coalition with the English and Welsh Labour Party, is something which acutely interests a few hundred activists, but not many MPs, and one guesses, precious few voters.
But if John Smith was cavalierly hiring and firing the shadow Scottish secretary, some more MPs might start taking an interest, which would be wholly  undesirable in the leader's office.
So Clarke will stay.
But he has done himself some damage and will need to work hard, and with some care, if he is to secure re-election to the shadow Cabinet in November.
For, according to the soundings taken by The Scotsman this week, he would not win re-election now.
‘For a lot of the mums it's a chance to do the day over again' Here comes the bride…probably in a coach and four, and cocooned in all the marital candyfloss that is now ‘de rigueur’ for the perfect day, writes Joan McAlpine All the frills of the fair Pictures by DAVID MITCHELL
THE thinning man with the single red rose and the worried expression is resigned to his fate as father of the bride.
‘We're not talking swans in the bath at this stage.
But I don't expect much change out of £6,000.’
His pal looks slightly shocked.
‘Six thou!
You'll be lucky.
Do you want a bargain?’
Ian and John are among the very few unchaperoned males attending the second Scottish Bridal Fair.
Still only 39, Ian confesses to adoring his wife — hence the silk rose for Valentine's Day — and a determination to put the love boat out in style when his 20-year-old daughter gets married next year.
Wouldn't he prefer the blushing apple of his eye to do the decent thing?
Shack up with her boyfriend and save daddy a fortune?
Or she could at least get it over in the registry office with a couple of rounds of Spanish bubbly in the pub later?
‘Oh no, it serves the marriage well if it's built on something.
She's my only daughter and I took out an endowment for her at birth in preparation for this.
It should be a day to remember.
‘I'm determined to do it right.
If I had £40 million I'd get Spielberg over to direct the video!’
Ian may be a romantic, but the cupids and violins have not quite destroyed his sense of the absurd.
He freely admits the increasing extravagance of the average suburban wedding has more to do with keeping up with the girl in the semi next door than sticking to tradition.
‘I agree it's all: ‘Jenny got a coach and four so we'll get six’…
We're going down the path of our US cousins, where they have wedding co-ordinators running round the garden marquee with walkie talkies.
Fortunately our family isn't at that stage.’
Judging by the display of satin and tat at the Scottish Exhibition Centre last week, we are in grave danger of being swallowed in a cloud of marital candyfloss which could only be born in the USA.
Remember the days when a big do was a white dress made by the bride, the luxury of one bridesmaid and a spread of sandwiches in the Co-operative Halls afterwards?
Neither do I. Tradition is being manufactured at breakneck pace.
Perhaps it's because so many people are opting not to bother.
The wedding industry has to get as much cash as possible out of the remaining couples who choose to tie the knot with the blessing of God and every florist in Britain.
They are all here today.
The bakers of wedding cakes and purveyors of finest Champagne.
Thinking of tossing your bouquet in younger sister's direction?
Forget it.
Too cheap by far.
Why not get it pressed by Bonnyton Designs of Eastwood?
Then display it in the nice rosewood frame above the mantelpiece in that new home you're now too poor to furnish?
And when we run out of local traditions to invent, we can import from abroad.
Italia Roselli runs the Bonbonniere Shop in Airdrie.
The good folk of Lanarkshire just cannot get enough of the Italian favours she makes with sugar almonds and layers of lace.
Roselli, aged 50, is a handsome, sallow woman with a delicate blue rinse.
Today she wears a Moschino-style blouse in splashes of primary canary and scarlet — a refreshing contrast to the oppressive pastels all around us.
Her own stand is dominated by a burst of swansdown in shades of pink ranging from cerise to baby blush.
There is a 2ft-high basket full of favours (48 in total) for the ladies attending a wedding next Saturday.
At £3 a go, this little bit of Naples will cost you £150.
It will probably cost the bridesmaid a lot more in back pain by the time she distributes them round the hall.
But it doesn't end there.
Just as Mrs Roselli's almonds have become de rigueur at every decent bash, a new element is being made indispensable.
‘The ladies at the top table get something special that they can keep.
We give them a little trinket box or a ring holder, it's traditional,’ she explains, in a charmingly deliberate Scots Italian voice.
She twirls a shimmering gold swan studded with imitation pearls ‘for her dressing table’.
Fashion even dictates the changing shape of cakes.
‘Over the past few years it's been your petal frilly or your heart-shaped frilly.
Peach and cream, definitely ,’ says Evelyn Hogarth of Top Tier designer cakes in Glasgow's douce Hyndland district.
Three tiers from Evelyn, complete with botanically correct, handmade sugar flowers — you can get them to match your bouquet — will cost £300.
Or you might prefer a Rennie Mackintosh square to complement your customised, Glasgow-style gown and stationery.
Hogarth also makes a miniature, three-tier ‘recession beater’, but has had little interest so far.
People want to spend their day forgetting about hard times — even if they pay it off in instalments over the next ten years.
‘Twenty years ago when I got married you could only get squares with royal icing and gold stuck all over them.
Now there is so much variety.’
One of her most popular lines is ‘Top Table’, which has fondue icing models of the wedding party sitting down to celebrate.
She usually makes the little figures to resemble the couple and their entourage.
‘I had a girl whose dog was the bridesmaid.
I didn't realise she was getting married in the church opposite the shop until I saw the life-size versions of the figures appear one morning — including this labrador in a pink dress!’
AH, the dress.
Sensible girls are hiring them these days.
After all, what can you do in a full-length silk dupion with cabbage roses and silver applique?
Cut it down, dye it red and press it into service for that next dinner dance?
Not any more.
Modern fairy tale dresses are unwearable in any other context.
Hiring the dress of your dreams from Glitterati in Bell Street, Glasgow, will cost anything between £75 and £325.
If you think that's a bit steep, consider the cost of the kind you keep.
Anything from £500 to £2,500.
‘Younger girls go for the full frilly dresses.
A girl in her late twenties, or early thirties will want something a bit more stylish and fitted,’ advises Betty from Glitterati.
And if your old school pal would like you to carry the train, now is the time to make your excuses.
‘For bridesmaids hyacinth and coral are the colours of the season.
People are fed up with your peaches.’
In Scotland we have our own particular marital madness.
If nothing else, the jamboree has done wonders for the national dress.
Kiltmakers have never been so popular with men who are not members of pipe bands.
But have you ever tried to find a garter in Tweedie tartan?
‘We get all sorts of requests to match the husband's kilt.
Tartan is getting more popular every year,’ says the lady from Norma Stewart's bridalwear.
But it's not just the bride who must be pampered.
There's the important matter of the ‘mother of the bride’.
All eyes are upon her, apparently, when they are not cooing over her daughter.
She cannot afford to make a mistake so she must leave herself to the administrations of Lady G, June's of Hamilton or Gina Smart in Ayr.
Gina is wearing a satin waistcoat in red and imperial purple with a matching skirt.
She understands the disasters ladies encounter with co-ordination.
‘They can make dreadful mistakes with their hats.
That's where we come in,’ she says in hushed tones.
‘Quite often the mother of the groom and the mother of the bride come in together because we can make sure they compliment each other.
We take them by the hand.
They need expert advice after all.
When we are finished, they are each matching from head to toe.
It's got to be a complete day.’
She points to a pair of pewter leather stilettos on her mannequin.
‘We can give ladies something that's a little bit different,’ says Gina.
GINA thinks the Royal weddings of the Eighties gave a real boost to ‘occasion wear’.
Does she think the Royal divorces of the Nineties will hit business?
‘No, people still want to make a splash for their daughters.
For a lot of the mums it's a chance to do the day over again.’
But how many Sixties and Seventies brides had to wrestle with a £500 stationery bill after the confetti had settled?
These days it's not enough to send out the invite and hope they reply.
Jackie from Marriage Lines takes us through day and evening invitations embossed with clinking champagne flutes and bordered in watered silk.
You simply must have matching place cards: ‘How else would the guests know were to sit?’
And your Order of Service?
A must.
Polite brides will hand out more cards to thank guests for sharing their special day.
And a napkin ring with the couple's entwined names is such a nice touch.
The girls who pile into the exhibition centre are usually accompanied by a flock of female relatives.
Lesley, 25, a clerkess from Greenock, is with her mother, aunt and two sisters.
Her mother Margaret disapproves of fancy weddings and strongly disapproves of evening invitations.
‘If you invite someone, you invite them for the whole day.’
Still, she will have all the traditional trappings, including four bridesmaids.
‘My cousin's coming from Canada.’
Doesn't she fancy a horse-drawn carriage from Ayrshire Equitation — just £200 including coachman and attendants?
‘If I left that at the door of St Joe's in Greenock it wouldn't be there when I came out,’ chirps Lesley.
She trips off to view the fashion show.
She quite fancies one of the new empire lines.
We mingle with the ladies in black velvet evening gloves selling Moet and the photographer promising to make the plain into cover girls for a day.
Brides with ‘Grace Kelly’ necklines glide along the passageways, making way for 20 year-olds modelling mother-of-the-bride outfits in startling shades of violet.
One stand is missing the love hearts and lace.
It has an enticing colour photograph of palm trees and white sand.
They are selling holidays in Fiji, where you can marry in a grass skirt — free from interfering relatives and fussy frills.
They do not have many takers.
Setting a peaceful precedent
JOHN HOME ROBERTSON
WORDS and pictures cannot describe the disaster that is unfolding in former Yugoslavia.
History will deliver a harsh judgment on the politicians and warlords who are fermenting this chaos but I doubt if there are enough prison cells in Europe to hold all the war criminals.
And we should not forget that ham-fisted European diplomacy contributed to the re-balkanisation of the Balkans by hastening to recognise unrecognisable states.
We cannot abandon people to the horrors of primitive siege warfare, so the ramshackle institutions of the United Nations will have to be drastically overhauled to cope with this crisis and others like it which are festering in an increasingly unstable world.
The official mandate of the United Nations Protection Force is to ‘ride shotgun’ with relief convoys, but the British battalion has stretched that mandate into a peacemaking role.
It is no criticism of the French, Spanish, Canadian and other contingents that the circumstances in their sectors have not permitted such tactics, but if the Vance-Owen plan is to be implemented we will need to apply the pro-active approach which is being pioneered by the Cheshire Regiment.
Characteristically, and with the benefit of years of experience in Ulster, this UK infantry regiment has extended its presence and its influence well beyond its camps and convoys.
Their supporting Engineers are making roads, rebuilding bridges and the Cheshires are imposing their influence on local factions by both persuasion and force.
That has meant returning fire to suppress Croats and others who fire on the UN force.
It has also involved brokering deals to reduce tension in other areas.
This, together with patrolling and gathering intelligence about the area, means that the UK element of UNPROFOR is doing the groundwork for implementation of the Vance-Owen settlement plan.
That has been achieved despite the restricted terms of the UN Resolution; despite hopelessly inadequate and confused UN structures; and also despite the half-hearted attitude of British ministers at the outset.
But for the initiative of General Morillon and his transplanted European NATO staff, and of the individual units in UNPROFOR and various aid agencies, the whole operation would be hopelessly bogged down.
Indeed, it is going to be bogged down unless the UN can get things moving with political and military action to make the peace plan work.
Things are bad enough now but if there is no sign of progress towards a settlement, the people who are still giving friendly waves to UN troops are likely to start throwing stones as they do in Northern Ireland.
The UN must start driving the momentum towards peace.
Indeed if they fail to take the initiative they might as well abandon the people of the area to a grim fate.
Two things are required: substantially more UN forces, almost certainly including Americans, and a UN supremo with direct authority from the Secretary General to drive the political, diplomatic, humanitarian and military process forward.
While US forces are needed, Yugoslavia is no place for a massive ‘Stormin' Norman’ style of operation.
The terrain and the highly armed militias would soon remind them of Vietnam.
The Americans would be well advised to learn from the British and others who have experience in the area.
And the operation must be seen to be multinational, so the UK contingent should ideally be increased to brigade strength — which underlines the case for reprieving the Highland regiments.
The need for better coordination cannot be overstated.
With inadequate communications between UN units, rudimentary command and control structures, governments interpreting the UN resolution in different ways, relief supplies being administered through a totally separate UN agency, and the Vance-Owen initiative developing at another level altogether, it is hardly surprising that the international effort can appear confused.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali must get the Security Council to agree an effective new Resolution and to appoint a special representative with comprehensive authority to do whatever is necessary to make a settlement work.
A top flight soldier with diplomatic skills would fit the bill.
We have avoided mass starvation in former Yugoslavia this winter; some time has been bought and soldiers and relief agencies have begun to develop strategies to begin to restore order.
It is vital that the United Nations should now act on that groundwork and drive the peacemaking process forward.
It is going to be difficult and expensive, but the only alternative is to abandon millions of people to an even worse fate.
If the UN can set a precedent for peacemaking in the Balkans we will have a real peace dividend.
John Home Robertson is Labour MP for East Lothian
Hoover: he merchandised the invented notion of the G-Men, the Feds from the FBI
J Edgar Hoover was America's top cop, is honoured as a national hero, but now the secret's out.
Michael Pye reports on the truth about the G-Man
The dirt on Hoover
THEY'RE running the director of the FBI out of town as I write.
William Webster stands accused of making phone calls on the company's phones, lending his limo to his wife, taking holidays on official planes and official time.
These irregularities amount, say his bosses at the Justice Department, to a scandal.
They must have forgotten Hoover.
J Edgar Hoover led the FBI from 1924 until 1971 — the nation's top cop, a movie-house hero, presiding over incorruptible straight arrows who saved America from Commies, thugs, hoodlums and perverts.
He's honoured as a national hero, he has a shrine in a Washington Masonic temple, he carried to his grave the tributes and the written gratitude of every president he ever served (at least one, Gerald Ford, was his informer; so was Ronald Reagan).
He was a keeper and dealer in secrets; it's not surprising the truth about him has emerged only slowly.
But with Anthony Summers's new book, Official and Confidential: The Secret Life of J Edgar Hoover, we have at last everything everyone says about J Edgar Hoover, including some of the wilder tales.
It claims more originality than it packs, but it is still a primer in the gap between actual virtue, and the official kind.
For Hoover didn't just make phone calls, or misuse a limo.
He had his house painted by the FBI Exhibits Section, listed his black servants as FBI agents, profited from books he had FBI employees write under his name.
His agents were as incorruptible, untouchable as any police force in the world; but Hoover bet with the Mob, took stock market favours, took free holidays from dubious businessmen.
He could be hysterical, and he kept power well into senility.
He faked much of his struggle with the gangsters, and failed in his wartime duty to fight imminent subversion; after the war, his genius was to stir up subversion he could quash.
He manufactured information and leaked it, sometimes ruining people.
And he was obsessed with deviants, with queers — this man with prissy steps and heavy perfume.
The male nudes in his parlour were balanced carefully by female ones in the games room.
His office desk was supplied with Playboy as well as more esoteric porn.
But, Summers insists, his deputy Clyde Tolson was also his lover.
The two men took lunch and dinner together every day, went on holiday together, were seen (once, and 50 years ago, by one person) holding hands in a limo; the evidence is only circumstantial.
But Summers suggests, ambitiously, that there was solid evidence which, he claims, was what stopped Hoover tackling the Mob before it came to awesome power in America.
Perhaps the hero cop was blackmailed into letting crime really pay.
Summers is assiduous in research, but less interested in politics; there are sides of Hoover's story whose ordinariness he misses because he finds them so shocking.
But one theme does emerge from this, as from other Hoover biographies in the past two years.
J Edgar Hoover was the cop who hated liberty.
We're still suffering from the liberties he took.
CONSIDER what J Edgar Hoover did for freedom.
He card-indexed half a million radicals just after the First World War, sent agents to intimidate newspapers which dared suggest, in the Thirties, that the banks were not entirely sound, arrested fighters in the Spanish Civil War long after the war was done.
He sent his men to infiltrate homosexual groups and smoke out deviants.
His agents leaned on lowly college professors to stay away from groups Hoover didn't like; otherwise their files went to their colleges, full of raw gossip.
He recorded Martin Luther King with women, and then tried, astoundingly, to present King as a homosexual.
Perhaps he wanted to feel this moral force of a man was really no better, no finer than him.
He inflamed the Black Panthers to violence and encouraged the Jewish Defence League to violence against the Black Panthers.
He tried to arm anti-war activists in the Vietnam era.
He investigated feminists as subversives.
For he was terrified of social change, any change.
Paranoia was a passion with him and he knew, just knew, the worst.
If the radicals couldn't think of something violent to do, his men would make suggestions.
If his targets weren't killers, he'd send guns.
From the start of his authority to investigate subversives, in 1939, the pattern was set: his first raids caught an unlovely bunch of anti-Semites, whose inspiration and weapons both came from a paid FBI informant.
His campaign lasted 50 years, deforming American politics, imposing a queasy notion of Americanism that was very close to 19th century nativism.
Its roots were personal as well as political.
Hoover was a meticulous, fussy man, determinedly cold, who thought control was the condition of his survival.
As a boy, friends said he was in love with the cadet corps.
As a man, he followed orders ardently.
He couldn't cope with imperfections — a leaf on his driveway, a smear on his shining shoes.
Life, to him, was a most deliberate business.
You can dredge in his childhood for the reasons.
His father went mad, and was confined to an asylum; maybe that was the disorder Hoover feared.
Or it may have been the sweet tyranny of his mother's childhood rules, never quite outgrown, which he tried to recreate in his rigid adult life.
Or it may simply have been that he was hiding: that his confused sexuality could at any time have brought him down.
At all events, his paranoia had resonances for most Americans.
You have to remember a nation where new immigrants were constantly adjusting the culture, the language, the sounds and smells on the street, and where new ideas — like socialism, like anarchism or Bolshevism — were associated with literal newcomers.
‘America’ seemed constantly at risk.
That feeling started Hoover's grand career, in 1919.
Revolution was an imminent fact.
Lenin came in loud and clear.
The nation had been buffeted by a wave of strikes.
Someone set a bomb at the house of the US Attorney General.
In this fearful atmosphere, Hoover was hired for the Department of Investigation.
His job was to make a card index of suspect radicals — anyone who wrote or talked against government.
Hoover threw himself into the campaign.
He presented the case for deporting Emma Goldman, feminist and anarchist, and sailed out into New York harbour to taunt her when she was loaded on a troopship bound for Russia.
He made himself the centre for information during the Red Raids that followed, brutal nights when civil liberties were swept aside.
On 2 January 1920, more than 10,000 people were arrested in 23 cities.
Almost all of them were released without charge, much later.
Their files, though, stood against them for ever.
And Hoover added to those files: he investigated any lawyers who dared defend those arrested.
He called Felix Frankfurter, later a Justice of the Supreme Court, ‘a disseminator of Bolshevik propaganda’ in a report which he later tried to disown.
He had learned two valuable lessons when, in 1924, he became head of the Bureau of Investigations.
Fear can break political movements; the Communist Party of America, a paper threat at best, lost 14,000 of its 20,000 members in a year.
And power lies in the files, in knowing, and making sure the knowledge cannot be checked or shared.
You don't even need a secret to fear being found out.
TO this devil's brew, Hoover added one more twist: publicity.
He'd weigh uselessly into investigations, like the kidnapping of the Lindbergh baby; he accused a pigeon of being a criminal's homing pigeon, to the shock of the ordinary cops.
He merchandised the invented notion of the G-Men, the ‘Government men’, the Feds from the FBI.
His columnist chums built up the Dillingers and Machine Gun Kellys of America, the small-time hoods, and the G-Men, with some difficulty, took them out.
The publicity and the facts were not always the same.
Hoover kept Dillinger's gun in his office, but the serial number shows it was made after Dillinger was dead.
Always, the hero of these stories was Hoover.
He burnished his reputation into cultism, as a White House report complained in the Seventies.
He invented the policeman as national hero, a notion which is conservative and deeply perverse; it implies the best a society can do is to resist disorder.
His fame is odder still when you consider this: Hoover was chasing small-time hoods at a time when organised crime was building an empire on Prohibition and its consequences.
Hoover did nothing to prevent the Mob taxing business in America, running drugs, vice and gambling.
Maybe he was a man so obsessed with hidden things that he simply couldn't see open criminality — which looked like business and politics almost as usual.
Hoover, the super-cop, had to be compelled by circumstances — the discovery of Mob bosses conferring in upstate New York in 1957 — even to acknowledge that the Mafia exists.
Within two years, he'd already tried to forget.
Or maybe he knew that the Mob had files of their own, that Meyer Lansky, the one-time bootlegger and now the gambling mogul, had pictures which could ruin him: Edgar and Clyde, for once unambiguously tangled.
Summers says so, but he hasn't seen the pictures, and there are always problems with stories that emphasise the power of Meyer Lansky; he became a kind of bogeyman, credited with old crimes to boost a reputation which helped people do what the Mob wanted.
Besides, rumours of pictures like this abound, usually seen by rivals in intelligence services; was Meyer Lansky bad at keeping secrets, even when a secret kept the head of the FBI in his power?
Hoover was certainly, Summers shows, spectacularly indifferent to those straight arrow standards he set for his agents.
He gambled at a time when the Mob ran gaming, and he never expected to lose.
He invested in oil companies, thanks to his buddies, and his investments were always covered; at his death, there were rumours of secret investment accounts.
He hung out with the likes of Lewis Rosentiel, a booze tycoon who had invested in Lansky's casinos.
And this association is the one which produces Summers's most bizarre evidence.
Rosentiel's fourth wife Susan spent ten years trying to divorce him, a decade of singular bitterness, involving his perjury and attempts to jail her.
She was willing to give evidence about his Mob links in 1970; today, she says he was an enthusiastic bisexual who involved J Edgar Hoover in sexual orgies just as the Kennedys were trying to make him take action against the Mob.
As you judge her story, you may care to remember her considerable grievances.
She says she was taken to the Plaza Hotel, to a party where Hoover sat in a fine black frock and insisted on being called ‘Mary’; after a while, he retired to the bedroom to be petted by two bought boys, one of whom prudently wore rubber gloves.
If you wanted to invent a perfectly stereotyped queer, this is the story you'd tell — down to the name ‘Mary’ and the fact that his sexual partners were young, and prostitutes.
And just after the supposed orgy, as Summers admits but in an end-note, the FBI began heavy surveillance of Meyer Lansky — supposedly the blackmailer-in-chief.
But if this really was the sum of Hoover's sexuality — sad, mean and sporadic, a slight release from the need to control himself utterly — he seems almost pitiable.
It helps explain his fixation on the details of other people's erotic lives, the keyhole stuff that filled his files, the anger — envy, perhaps — which made him project homosexuality onto all manner of public figures.
For J Edgar Hoover, happiness was just another kind of disorder.
AT first, the politicians thought they could run Hoover.
At the request of FDR, Hoover opened files on anyone who opposed the president's line on national defence and tried to intimidate press critics like the Chicago Tribune.
FDR allowed Hoover, an official, to by-pass Cabinet members and come directly to the president; in time, this back channel made Hoover uncontrollable.
And he extended Hoover's powers.
Wiretapping, technically illegal, was first authorised in 1940 (the FBI had used it, of course, before that).
What Hoover could not do, as usual, was the real job.
For that, he needed not just hundreds of incorruptible field agents writing down what they overheard, but also analysts able to detect when people were joking; some of the oddest accusations, like Eleanor Roosevelt's supposed affair with two lefty trades unionists, come from the agents' innocence of dirty jokes.
Hoover couldn't even see the point of intelligence reports which showed Japan's interest in how to attack a deep harbour, and how deep Pearl Harbour might be.
The OSS, fore-runner of the CIA, was born out of his obtuseness, and remained his bitter rival.
Hoover feuded with the CIA for decades and even, in 1970, shocked Washington by breaking relations between the agencies altogether.
That's a reason, incidentally, for caution on stories of photographs glimpsed at the end of dinners for OSS veterans — the pictures of Edgar on his knees, making love to Clyde.
If they exist, these pictures come from specialists in disinformation with a grudge.
But for all his incompetence in wartime, Hoover was now settled in the Washington game — privileged, sanctified, unbudgeable and with more and more information to use.
He'd tell presidents about their appointees, promise appointees and Senators he'd suppressed their files, let certain papers know — on plain paper, in plain envelopes — what he'd overheard or snatch-shot or been told.
This power, Summers says, was what brought Lyndon Johnson — Hoover's old ally, even though he called him ‘that queer bastard’— onto the ticket with John Kennedy in 1960.
Hoover knew how the Mob helped Kennedy buy votes; more to the point, he knew about Kennedy's skirt-chasing.
The Kennedy brothers went away to consider who'd be vice-president, and named their loudest rival, LBJ.
They promised never to tell why but it was, Summers says, Hoover's blackmail.
By now, Hoover was a politicians' nightmare — perceived by some as the perfect cop, but known at close range for his rants, his sexual obsessions, his card index and his file cabinets which by now contained all the sins, real and imagined, of the political world.
‘He's rather a psycho,’ Robert Kennedy said, off the record, in 1964.
‘I think he's become senile, and rather…frightening.’
But the Kennedys needed his special protection racket — to destroy phone company records when Marilyn Monroe committed suicide, for example, or to leak FBI reports that disproved stories suggesting John Kennedy, the good Catholic boy, was actually on his second marriage.
And when Kennedy was shot, the ‘psycho’ Hoover botched the FBI investigation personally, ignoring evidence that there might have been more than a single gunman involved, sending agents to question the background of the Warren Commission's staff, punishing his own agents for failing to spot Oswald's violent nature.
He went from briefing the new president that evidence against Oswald was too weak for a conviction to insisting that Oswald was the man.
It's tempting to scent conspiracy — did Hoover stall investigations which might lead to the Mob, who held those compromising pictures?— but there's no need.
What we have here is a senile man, desperate to be right; his story is all that holds the world together, he just knows.
His whole life was his office.
When Nixon threatened to take it away, Hoover, without warning or symptoms, died.
Summers drops hints about murder, or suicide, but the truth may be simpler and more terrible: Hoover was not a breath more than his job.
It did not take burglars and curious poisons to dispose of him.
AT the funeral, the flag that draped Hoover's coffin was presented to Clyde Tolson; there was, after all, no widow.
It was a curiously graceful, open moment in a history of secrets.
But to all who valued Hoover, of course, it couldn't mean a damn thing.
Official and Confidential: The Secret Life of J Edgar Hoover by Anthony Summers, published by Gollancz, £18.99.
Brave veterans can cruise through danger zone
VETERANS from the perilous Second World War Arctic convoys to the Soviet Union are to have the chance to relive their historic efforts — but without the hardship they once endured.
The former seamen, who risked their lives against the elements and German U-boats to ferry vital supplies to northern Russia, can enjoy a berth on a luxury liner for the return trip.
The voyages, two 11-night cruises to mark the 50th anniversary of the convoys to Murmansk and Archangel, will trace much of the old route.
The heroism of the merchant seamen who manned the convoys was marked after the war when the Russians struck a special medal for them.
The cruises were devised after Arctic veterans wrote to Saga magazine, published by the Folkestone-based specialist holiday company.
The editor, Paul Bach, said: ‘The convoys left indelible memories with all who were on them.
Many veterans have revisited Archangel and Murmansk in peacetime, but until now they have had to travel by air or overland.
‘We're recapturing something of their earlier experiences with a cruise around North Cape, skirting the Barents Sea and into the White Sea port of Archangel.’
As well as visiting the ports of Bergen, Narvik, Tromso and Honningsvag, the tour offers a strong Arctic Convoys theme with talks, videos and memorabilia on show.
Plea for new helpers for ‘shared care’ scheme
A CAMPAIGN to find people who are prepared to spend time with children and adults with learning difficulties has been begun in Strathclyde, writes Alan Forbes.
The region's social work department is appealing for ‘shared carers’ who can spend one or two days a month with people who have special needs.
The department has about 70 families and individuals acting as carers to give people chance to develop new interests and greater self-confidence and offering their families a chance to have some time to themselves.
James Burns, chairman of the region's child care subcommittee, said yesterday: ‘Many young men, women and children with learning difficulties want to use our shared care scheme and there is tremendous potential for it to expand.
It can only do that, however, if more people come forward to share their lives for a day or two each month.’
The department selects suitable carers and offers financial and practical support.
Further information is available from 041-227 6044.
In response to recent unbelievably horrific crimes, surely it is now time to introduce strict control on the depiction of extreme violence on films and videos.
There is a clear trend for films to become increasingly violent and sadistic, with each new film trying to outdo the last in savagery.
This must have a major part to play in the increasing mindless violence of young people, imitating what they have been encouraged to believe is ‘entertainment’, namely torture, murder and cannibalism.
The greatest danger comes from videos, where it is impossible to limit the age of the viewer.
What is now required is a law making it a crime to act in, produce, distribute or sell films and videos depicting cruel and excessive violence.
Those responsible should be charged with incitement to commit crimes of violence.
Even if only one innocent person's life is saved, it will be worthwhile.
The producers of films should be aiming to bring pleasure and entertainment, not pandering to the lowest savage instinct, however profitable that may be.
Respect for human life is surely worth more than easy profit.
Price mystery
I read (Farming, today) that farmers are being paid £10 a tonne for potatoes.
The cheapest I can buy them for my dinner is £2.50 per half hundredweight bag.
Where does the £90 per tonne difference go?
Emotional dirge
How often does it have to be demonstrated that Flower of Scotland is a good pub/folk song but is manifestly unsuitable as a national anthem?
At Ibrox on Wednesday night we heard the usual rammy of an unco-ordinated band and throng (and a pipe band, I regret to say, only compounds the offence), and pretty awful it sounded on the radio.
Gratitude that the Scottish Football Association and Scottish Rugby Union have apparently stopped insulting us with Scotland the Brave is not reason enough to allow them to inflict ‘the people's choice’ upon us.
This emotional dirge, albeit popular and heartfelt, is just not the ‘right stuff’.
Scots Wha Hae, which some may claim is another emotional dirge, has tremendous credentials (tune going back to the 14th century and words by our national bard).
It only needs a slightly increased tempo to be the great national anthem our country maybe doesn't deserve, but will surely grow into when we have cast off childish things and grasped the thistle of independence.
TV distortion of everyday world
According to your editorial today (‘Filling the vacuum’), ‘take all violence out of television drama and you disconnect it from reality’; whose ‘reality’?
Television is already about as divorced from the real, everyday world as it could possibly be.
Perhaps one of the reasons why we are faced with the menace of increasing savagery among a minority of the young is that they fail to realise that TV is not a ‘window on the world’, but a structure of small, angled, mirrors reflecting different viewpoints.
I remember the editor of ITN saying at a meeting in the 1960s that he sometimes wished he could precede every bulletin with: ‘Ninety-nine per cent of the people in the world went about their lives today without anything unusual happening to them.
This bulletin contains items about what happened to some of the other 1 per cent.’
Man's inhumanity to man makes nations interested.
This is why current affairs programmes concentrate so much on doom and gloom, even away from the big stories of the day.
The lives of articulate people can be more interesting than fiction, but in general they would bore viewers more than the new vogue of delving into every aspect of sexual behaviour in discussion programmes.
Why are these producers so fascinated by sex?
In a country where teenage rape and murder are on the increase, do we really need this salaciousness and is it responsible to show a programme which lingers over the grisly reminiscences of a psychotic serial murderer?
Again, bombarding the young day by day with fictitious views of the sordid side of human life can distort their view of the world.
Perhaps now that Morse, with its lack of overt sex or violence, has in recent weeks achieved the highest rating of any current programme, producers and writers may realise that delving into the same old muck no longer wins large audiences.
They may realise also that to do so is perhaps a reflection of their own inability to create the excellent plot structure, characterisation and atmosphere of this successful series.
Old chestnut
I felt a distinct sense of deja vu when reading JR Hall's letter (12 February).
Once again the hoary old chestnut of road transport not covering its track costs has been pulled out, this time in defence of BR.
It seems only a few weeks ago, but is probably about a year, since I, through Points of View, had to draw attention to the Department of Transport's annual statistics bulletin, The Allocation of Road Track Costs.
The current edition breaks down expected road expenditure and the tax-take from road users for the current financial year and shows, as previous editions have done, that road users cover their track costs by a factor of 2.4 to 1.
In other words users of all types, from motor-cyclists to the owners of the heaviest vehicles, pay almost two and a half times as much in taxes as is spent on all road costs from building, maintenance and signs, right down to the provision of police, traffic wardens and even grass cutting and hedge-trimming of the verges.
The expected figures this year are, income, £14,700 million; and expenditure, £6,030 million.
Even given that these are projected figures, it would take a massive error to even get close to a break-even, never mind a situation whereby track costs were not covered.
Britain's importance now lies in being part of one of the world's great trading blocs, the European Community
John Major will meet Bill Clinton for the first time tomorrow.
However, the ‘special relationship’ that marked the Reagan and Bush years has gone and there is plenty of scope for disagreement over a packed agenda.
Ewen MacAskill reports Face to face and an eyeful of the opposition
THERE are few guarantees in politics but it is a more than reasonable bet that John Major and Bill Clinton will both be smiling and behaving as if they are buddies when they give a press conference at the White House tomorrow afternoon.
Even if they have found the previous hour of talks  excruciating , finding they have little in common on a whole host of difficult issues, they will come out smiling.
There is apprehension in Downing Street and, to a lesser extent, at the White House over the first meeting between the new president and the Prime Minister.
The nervousness in Downing Street is evident in the extent to which Major and his officials have been stressing since Clinton's election that the two have a potentially good relationship.
Downing Street repeatedly points out the two have had friendly telephone calls.
But the more Downing Street protests, the greater the suspicion that Major is jittery about US-UK relations.
Major will spend tomorrow morning on Capitol Hill in discussion with party leaders and have lunch at the British Embassy with further US movers and shakers, including the head of the Central Intelligence Agency.
At 3pm, he will meet Clinton and the two will be together for the next six hours, an indication that the president regards the Prime Minister's visit as more than just a courtesy call.
They have a long agenda that includes the GATT trade talks and a host of foreign issues, including Iraq, Bosnia, Russia and, to British embarrassment, Northern Ireland.
But British officials yesterday put at the top of the agenda the personal relationship between the two men, how the two will get on face to face.
One official said that the two shared a similar background and were of a similar age and added that, knowing the Prime Minister, he was sure they would establish a rapport.
The initial problem is that Major is a Conservative and Clinton is a Democrat, and although party differences are not necessarily a bar to a good relationship, the problem has been compounded by two incidents during the US election campaign.
One was a visit by two Conservatives from Tory Central Office in London to give advice to the Bush campaign.
The Republicans had been impressed by Major's election victory in April, felt there were useful lessons to be learned and invited two political advisers.
Although the two are not regarded in London as senior Conservative strategists, their presence was resented by the Clinton camp.
The other incident was when the Home Office investigated files on Clinton's time at Oxford as a Rhodes scholar.
This was interpreted in the Clinton camp as the Major government attempting to give Bush a hand by digging up dirt on Clinton as a Vietnam draft-dodger or pot-smoker.
When Major visited Washington in December, he had expected to see Clinton.
But Clinton refused to leave his home state of Arkansas and this was interpreted as a snub to Major.
The Downing Street line on the Home Office incident was that it had been a junior official who had gone through the files to help answer journalists' inquiries about Clinton, not to help the Bush  Administration .
As for the Conservative Central Office foray to the US, the Government remains uneasy about this.
British officials, rehearsing for questions from US journalists, attempted to distance themselves.
Firstly, they pointed out that as government officials, party matters were not relevant to them.
More significantly, the Government yesterday made the biggest effort yet to defuse the row by saying the two Central Office officials' visit had been cleared by the Tory chairman, Sir Norman Fowler, but Major himself had known nothing about it.
Clinton is said not to be seeking revenge, but others in his  Administration are bitter.
A source at the US Embassy in London dismissed the whole affair as one that has got out of proportion and a diversion from a packed agenda.
Even if the Conservative involvement in the US election campaign is pushed into the background, there is plenty of scope on the agenda for disagreement, not least Northern Ireland.
Clinton wooed the Irish vote in his campaign by promising to send a peace envoy to Northern Ireland, a move regarded by Britain as an intrusion into a domestic issue.
Since the election, officials on both sides of the Atlantic have toned this down to a special envoy, one that would be on a fact-finding mission.
Although Britain still regards this as an embarrassment, it is putting a brave face on it by claiming that most Irish-Americans have a distorted, nationalistic view of the conflict and that such a mission might go part of the way to dispelling it.
On his visit to Capitol Hill, Major will meet Tom Foley, the House of Representatives' Speaker, an Irish-American who has been mentioned as leading such a mission.
The reaction from Ulster Unionists has been an almost automatic rejection, but Downing Street has been keen to point out that Foley has been vocal in his criticism of the IRA and his appointment might not be such a bad move.
In the bigger world, the GATT talks seem to have been going on forever, with Downing Street promising for two years that the end was in sight.
The fear must be that Clinton might unpick some of the deals, such as the one on agriculture, but this was thought to be unlikely, given his commitment to moving out of recession.
On the strategic front, there has been no coherent approach since President Bush dubbed the post-Cold War position as the New World Order.
In fact, western policy has been notable for its lack of order, particularly towards Russia.
On Bosnia, while Britain has welcomed US involvement, it has had to keep itself from dismissing as laughable the feasibility of proposed US airdrops.
The ‘special relationship’ has long been a myth, one which the UK has more of an interest in perpetuating than the US, where the reality is that Britain is regarded as a second-rank nation.
Major may have made it to the White House before Chancellor Kohl and President Mitterrand, but that does not mean he is regarded as being more important than either of them.
Talk of a ‘special relationship’ is a useful slogan, implying two countries that are close because of language and historical background.
In the world of trade and realpolitik, it counts for nothing.
Britain's importance now lies in being part of one of the world's great trading blocs, the European Community, not as the ever-dependable ally of the Reagan and Bush years.
One to one: there is apprehension in Downing Street and, to a lesser extent, at the White House over the first meeting
Hard times in Dundee
SEVEN years on, the bleak imagery of Wapping, that archetypal 1980s dispute, looks to be returning to haunt the nineties.
A workforce, on strike over lay-offs, is offered a return-to-work package which includes significant changes in conditions, among them a wage freeze.
It says it can accept these only under protest, a response apparently regarded as ungracious.
All 300, including a handful who had refused to strike, are dismissed.
Almost immediately, the company advertises for replacement labour.
Hunched figures, heads hidden by anorak hoods or bin-liners, start to be bussed through the security fences, safe from the muffled cries of the pickets at the gates.
Just to make sure the strikers get the message, court proceedings are begun against the shop stewards for allegedly allowing picket numbers to swell above six.
At the gates, frustration turns on the police, once again called on to enforce an industrial relations strategy.
These are the economics, not of efficiency, but of attrition.
They have much less to do with the demands of competitiveness than with the perversities of an industrial relations law whose imbalance was over-corrected during the 1980s.
The actions of Timex in Dundee exude an air of pre-meditation rather reminiscent of Rupert Murdoch's at Wapping: even down to the fortified perimeter installed by the new management team after it took over 18 months ago.
A strike over one issue suddenly becomes a whole different battleground.
Management talks about ‘securing the business,’ strike leaders about a calculated attempt to smash the unions.
Management can argue that the plant has been losing money: the unions can point to their (not always peaceable) acceptance of previous cost-cutting, which has reduced manning to just a few hundred from the thousands once employed there.
Following closely on the radical reforms which Hoover workers at Cambuslang were pressed into accepting, the cheerless events now unfolding at Timex are unlikely to improve the reputation in Scotland of multinational employers.
That is less than just, since many overseas-owned firms are fair and decent employers, just as some British companies are not.
The real blame lies with the licence granted to employers by a statutory regime which stacks every deck in their favour.
Still, a Government lately inclined to talk nostalgically about communities might well reflect on whether the actions of a Timex could be said to mesh well with the interests or values of a community which has long afforded the company a secure base and a loyal workforce.
Sadly, it is far from clear where, if anywhere, industrial workforces fit in Mr Major's sepia notions of community.
His determination to deny them the ‘improved living and working conditions, proper social protection, dialogue between management and labour’ aspired to by the Maastricht social chapter suggest he may have had a different community in mind from the sort outside the gates of Timex.
Are you being served?
Not very often
KAY BLAIR was recently shocked to find herself the recipient of high quality service
WHY is it that whenever I decide to don salopettes and head off in search of that damned elusive substance — Scottish snow — howling hurricanes decide to renew my acquaintance and pea-soupers that would have done Victorian London proud descend on the mountain?
This was Aonach Mor, Scotland's otherwise impressive new skiing facility based just north of Fort William.
The weather was ghastly.
The skiing conditions little better, with snow as soft as sand.
But through the murk there was a faint glimmer of light.
Throughout the day those working the lifts and keeping an eye on skiers actually — wait for it — smiled.
They helped load skis into gondolas.
They made sure children got safely on to the chairlift and picked them up and dusted them down if they fell.
They produced rather more appetising food than the normal congealed heap of pie and beans and dead sausage rolls which it is mandatory to decline at other resorts.
They even, praise be, asked skiers at the end of the day whether they had enjoyed the experience, hopefully so that they could take positive action if they had any complaints or worthwhile suggestions.
Could this at last be a Scottish leisure facility which was trying to put customer care into practice?
Not being a frequent visitor to the area I have no way of knowing whether this was a freak occurrence.
I hope not, because it actually felt as if this new resort was intent on getting to know its customers and providing them with a level of service in tune with expectations.
It doesn't happen often.
Given the sorry demise of Scotland's manufacturing base, we are all, if the good Baroness Thatcher's doctrine is believed, supposed to be imbued with a service culture which recognises the value of the customer and produces the kind of quality response required.
But, to quote one of Maggie's very own good and faithful servants: ‘Bunkum and Balderdash.’
We know the jargon.
We spout quality verbiage.
Corporate luminaries cackle on about the importance of quality, yet all too often use this management-babble as a substitute for effective leadership.
We pin up quality ditties on corporate walls to enthuse staff of our good and noble intentions.
We claim to produce quality this, serve quality that.
We witter on about quality initiatives and produce myriads of little forms to show just how quality-driven we are.
But how many have actually analysed just what quality is.
How many truly realise that quality is knowing your buyer, getting him or her to define quality, rather than producing some sort of static standard which demands slavish conformance?
And, more to the point, how many organisations have managed to convert their good ‘quality’ intentions into effective staff training which ensures that customers are treated with respect?
The sad fact is that many organisations would be unable to recognise a customer even if he or she fell in front of them.
According to a recent report from the market research company Mintel, customer perceptions of quality in products and service have more to do with their expectation that companies should get it right first time than with the belief that they should provide a safety net to protect consumers once things have gone wrong.
Consumers, says Mintel, regard quality as the totality of attributes of the product or service which combines to meet their needs and expectations.
And, when it comes to services, consumers are quite unanimous that quality is mostly down to the staff and how they behave with customers.
‘Consumers do not confuse the availability of good physical facilities with good quality; such facilities may tempt a consumer to choose a particular shop, but it is the quality of the staff which will determine whether the consumer will buy or return a second time.’
But, if the truth be told, although we would like companies to get it right first time, our experiences have led us to expect rather less.
We don't believe that British goods will be as good as foreign imports.
We allow ourselves to be served by surly shop assistants — and we don't complain.
Like stooges, we accept in silence.
Step out of line, demand better attention, and you meet tight-lipped disapproval.
Fellow sufferers move uncomfortably away rather than face similar embarrassment.
Aonach Mor may be a step ahead of the game because it is a new skiing resort with attitudes untainted by years of traditional working practices.
But, in spite of such typically awful Scottish weather conditions, I would go back, greenhouse effect permitting.
And that, surely, is what business is all about.
Resourceful woman of powerful persuasion
WHATEVER the good intentions and fine words about women doing anything a man can do, there are still industries where men would be surprised to find themselves dealing with a woman.
Grace Buckley, Scottish-Power's most senior woman executive, doesn't let it worry her.
As fuel and by-products manager, she is responsible for buying all the fuel the electricity giant uses — coal, oil, gas or even slurry — and selling the by-products of electricity, such as ash.
Her opposite numbers are almost all men.
‘If there are any advantages it comes from the background.
The reaction from the other side of the table is different because you are a woman, they expect you to do it a different way.’
Buckley probably does do it differently, working towards less confrontation and for a solution that will last.
‘That doesn't mean they will get an easier deal,’ she laughs.
The bruised executives of British Coal would testify to that after their run-in over the coal contract which ended up in court.
Buckley is unrepentant, arguing that what remains of the Scottish coal industry now has a more secure future.
‘Somebody had to take a stand.
We were expected to put our hands in our pockets and shell out regardless of whether or not we were getting value for money.
Perhaps we were seen as abrasive because we had the courage to say what everyone else was thinking.’
Buckley has been in this job since 1988 and in the department since 1981, but she started as a lawyer in private practice, a profession where equality is far more of a reality than in industry.
She joined the old South of Scotland Electricity Board in 1976 as a legal assistant — the first female solicitor it had employed — but by 1980 wanted to do something different and went back to university with the company's blessing (and a scholarship) to get an MBA.
When she came back she was put into contracts and purchasing in the knowledge that she was a potential candidate for management  succession , although no promises were made.
‘I was the right person in the right place at the right time.’
Buckley says she has never been aware of a problem of discrimination in the company, at least in a corporate sense, ‘but I think a lot of men found it a problem’.
‘When I first started going to open-cast sites I was unusual and it was pretty well guaranteed to stop operations in their tracks.’
Going first meant that Buckley did not have any role models or even mentors.
‘I just look at whoever is in the job ahead.
It is a question of whether they are good at managing.
If they are you use them as a role model.’
She knows that by virtue of her position many women see her as a role model and so is happy to give advice when asked for it.
Any problems she has encountered have not been because of her gender, but because she has had older people working for her.
‘What happens when women engineers come through may be a different matter.
They are dealing with power station staff and other engineers who don't make any allowances for you.
If you get sat on it is because you allow yourself to be sat on.
It is not because you are female.’
In any case she thinks it is just a matter of time before more women start coming through to senior levels, both because the company is taking on more female graduates and because they are a pretty self-confident lot anyway.
‘One of the women who works for me is one of the toughest women I have ever come across, and most of the women graduates are more than competent.
There are a lot of good young women coming up.’
WHERE difficulties can occur is in the matter of families.
Buckley, who is unmarried, admits that being successful in business is easier for a woman who has no children.
It is still assumed that it is the woman who will give up work to look after the children or take time off if they are sick, she admits.
‘If you are going to be in senior job you are going to put a lot of time in so you give up your social life a bit perhaps.
You feel pressure not to be seen to fail in the job.
You have got to show you are at least as good and a little bit extra to cover your back.’
Like many women who have crashed through the glass ceiling — or, perhaps, ignored it — she is strongly opposed to positive discrimination in favour of women and has little time for the argument that women don't succeed because they are women.
‘It is almost certainly the case you have to do a little bit extra because you are female but you don't have to prove you are twice as good.’
But how will we know when the glass ceiling has gone.
‘I suppose equality will come when you no longer notice whether it is a man or a woman across the table.’
Buyer of all she surveys: Grace Buckley finds coal comfort
No skirting the issue of inequality on high
Why is the fairer sex so unfairly represented in the top echelons?
PETER WOODIFIELD reports on the assault on the invisible barriers and speaks to one woman who has bypassed them
CHANGING attitudes to women in business is like changing course in a giant tanker.
Everything happens slowly but eventually change becomes apparent as more business leaders realise the nonsense of wasting the talents of a large chunk of their workforce.
The problem has been particularly acute in the top echelons where the blue and grey suits are rarely disturbed by a skirt.
Just 0.5 per cent of Britain's company directors are women.
In 1991 the Government launched Opportunity 2000 in an attempt to encourage industry and commerce to take the issue seriously and the past two years have seen two of Britain's top 15 companies — BTR and Sainsbury — appoint female finance directors.
But the focus on women at the top has tended to focus on entrepreneurs such as Anita Roddick and Scotland's Pat Grant and Ann Gloag.
At least that way there is no way you can be held back by the so-called ‘glass ceiling’— the phrase coined in the United States to describe the invisible barriers that allow women to rise only so far in an organisation.
On 9 March the Scottish division of the Institute of Directors, with Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise and supported by The Scotsman, is holding a seminar in Edinburgh to discuss the issue, covering not just the boardroom but also senior levels of management.
The IoD's Scottish membership, 68 women of 1,640 members, underlines the point.
Donald Hardie, the Scottish director of the IoD, feels the problem stems from the education system, with girls being discouraged from studying the subjects that would get them on to the business ladder.
‘The problem is that they are not there to be promoted.’
That is by and large true, but Hardie is not certain that men have taken it on board and he is keen for plenty of men to attend to get a better understanding of the position.
But while there may a shortage of suitable female candidates, it also becoming clear that there are women who have made it precisely because they refuse to be deflected from their chosen career.
Indeed, one of the speakers at the IoD seminar is Lesley Bale, the managing director of Aberdeen Airport at the tender age of 33.
For her and others like her it is a question of wanting it sufficiently, being prepared to put in the work and not expecting concessions because they are women.
The glass ceiling does not exist because they don't let it.
But not all women are like that.
Too many allow themselves to be steered into what are seen as traditionally female jobs, or suffer discrimination if and when they have children.
Women also tend to have a different, more consensual style of management, and often dislike playing by the corporate rules that are invariably laid down by men.
Douglas Kinnaird, of PA Consultants and one of the UK's top headhunters, makes the point that quite often women don't realise how hard promotion is to get and that men have worked for it for months, if not years.
‘If they want to get promoted they have got to fight tooth and nail.
They have got to find out the rules and then fight by the rules.’
A failure to realise just how tough it is means such women are held back more by their own glass hat than any supposed glass ceiling.
One reality that cannot be avoided in the whole discussion is children.
There is still an unspoken assumption that it will be the women who make the sacrifices when it comes to childcare and it is perhaps the thickest glass ceiling of all for many women.
Government statistics show that 74 per cent of women in managerial and administrative positions have no children, and that is hardly likely to be a coincidence.
As it is, women hold barely more than a quarter of all managerial and administrative posts, yet make up nearly half the workforce.
In the longer term, that particular barrier is likely to disappear through sheer economic necessity on the part of business.
Graduate recruitment in many businesses and industries now tends to be evenly split, and companies will not be able to afford to lose a large chunk of talent in which so much money has been invested, especially as women in any case tend to be less tempted by the ‘grass is greener’ syndrome.
But all that being said, there is a real problem right now.
Kinnaird, who is chairing the seminar, says he is regularly asked to find a woman for a senior management job ‘all other things being equal’.
The trouble is that things are not equal, and he can hardly remember placing a woman in such a job.
A headhunter for ten years, Kinnaird has just been commissioned by his first female client, which speaks volumes.
It is hardly surprising that he cannot find the people he is looking for when even the largest organisations have so few senior women.
The Royal Bank of Scotland has a record in this field to be proud of, being a founder member of Opportunity 2000 and also one of just 150 companies entitled to call themselves Investors in People.
It has also just won its second national training award.
Now 30 per cent of its junior management are women, although that figure falls away to a paltry 1 per cent at the highest levels.
The Royal has committed itself to increase that significantly in the next few years.
Dr Mike Mosson, director personnel at the Royal Bank, says the bank has a policy of ‘positive assistance’ and ‘positive encouragement’towards women, although he insists that it falls short of positive discrimination.
For some time it has had career breaks to help women (and occasionally men) with family needs and he says it has been successful.
But while corporately the bank has adopted a positive approach, Mosson admits this is not always reflected in individual behaviour.
He admits to being surprised at the split attitudes of middle-aged men — and even some of the younger ones — who want their daughters to have a proper career structure but then fail to apply that belief at work.
‘We are winning in the sense we are finding it easier for women to make progress in the organisation and they are not the exception any more.
I don't think we are moving fast enough, but being realistic we are winning.’
Most organisations are not so far advanced.
Perhaps more typical is Scottish & Newcastle, which has a high proportion of female workers.
Henry Fairweather, group personnel and services director, acknowledges that most of its female managers are in areas one might expect such as marketing, information services and personnel.
‘We have some in more traditional areas such as production but not as senior as we would like.’
S&N's executive committee has recently approved an initiative to find out what the situation is and is preparing an attitude survey to identify what managers are really thinking and what the problems are perceived to be.
At the moment, less than 10 per cent of S&N's senior managers are women, but none of them are directors of any of the subsidiaries, let alone of the main board.
Like the Royal Bank it is not setting specific targets.
‘At the end of the day it comes down to individual decisions about individual jobs,’ says Fairweather.
‘What we have to do is create a culture in which appointing women to senior jobs is easier,’ he says.
That may not be as difficult as S&N or anyone else fears given that women's more consensus-based approach to management is increasingly seen to be an appropriate style of management.
‘By encouraging people to manage in a certain way you make it seem more appropriate to appoint women.’
That may seem a softly-softly approach, but by making aspiring women managers and executives feel more comfortable with the management culture, it could prove effective in shattering the glass ceiling.
The sky falls in on American parent
THE parent company of American Airlines lost a lot of money last year, a record even before accounting rule changes drove the amount to $935 million (£635 million).
But AMR's balance sheet is strong, its fleet young and passenger traffic has been climbing in recent months.
So, when the company hosted 70 reporters for an annual review of business last week, few expected chief executive Robert Crandall to say the sky was falling.
But he did.
‘We are not going to be in business long term,’ Mr Crandall said at a dinner with the reporters.
‘At the labour costs we incur today, we cannot be in business long term.’
He was not predicting the end of American, the nation's largest airline, but Mr Crandall said changing economics may eventually force AMR to sell parts of American to people who can make it profitable.
Similarly gloomy comments by another AMR executive in a recent Wall Street Journal article prompted hundreds of travellers to call American about the soundness of their tickets.
Some worried employees even called news organisations in Dallas and Fort Worth to find out what was happening at the company.
The comments come as American negotiates a new contract with the union representing its 21,600 flight attendants.
But Mr Crandall said the company will not seek concessions because that would hurt employee morale, which he said must be maintained in a service business.
For months, American executives have been reviewing all aspects of the airline for cost savings.
The airline cut 600 managerial jobs in December.
American will not renew any expiring leases on Boeing 727s, a move that could affect as many as 65 short-haul jets.
And executives say they will decide by the end of March whether to ground up to 25 DC-10s or stop leasing a similar number of Airbus A300s.
Removing the wide-body aircraft will force American to cut some routes and possibly some hubs by summer, reversing nearly a decade of growth.
A delegation of North Carolina political and business officials, led by Governor Jim Hunt, will visit Mr Crandall later this week to offer the airline a $620,000 (£42,000) incentive package to keep open its hub in Raleigh-Durham.
‘I am not sure there is anything a state can do to change the economics of the airline business,’ Mr Crandall said.
— PA
Mr Crandall has repeatedly blamed competitors operating in bankruptcy for keeping air fares low since they have fewer costs to recover.
He said bankruptcy laws should allow a company just a year to restructure debts or get out of business.
— AP
Big Apple buffs itself up for Japan
New York's mayor has travelled to Tokyo to ensure that Japan's cash-conscious companies don't abandon the city that never sleeps.
DAVID THURBER reports
THE mayor of New York, David Dinkins, yesterday urged Japanese companies — who are cutting spending on foreign investment — not to abandon New York.
Mr Dinkins expressed an envy of Tokyo's cleanliness and low crime rate, but said conditions in his city were improving and urged Japanese companies not to pull out their investments.
Many Japanese companies face cash shortages because of plunging profits during Japan's recession, the worst in nearly 20 years.
Some have cut back on foreign investment.
‘It is our hope that they will not withdraw, and if anything will go the other way,’ and invest more, Mr Dinkins said.
Japanese companies already account for nearly a quarter of the 5,000 foreign-based companies operating in New York.
Mr Dinkins, who arrived on the weekend for his first trip to Japan, is leading a delegation of New York business executives and city officials on a week-long visit to buttress business and cultural ties.
At a joint news conference yesterday with Tokyo's governor, Shunichi Suzuki, he turned quickly to some of the many differences between the sister cities, and omitted a line from a prepared statement that had said ‘Tokyo and New York are more alike than any two cities on the face of the earth.’
Mr Dinkins said he wished ‘that we could do as well as Tokyo does’ in keeping crime low and hoped to learn how Tokyo has largely avoided New York's problems of high crime, drugs and unemployment.
But he stressed that crime was beginning to decline in his city.
‘We are familiar with stories of visitors from Japan and other Asian countries being mistreated,’ Mr Dinkins said.
‘We will not tolerate that.’
Mr Dinkins and Mr Suzuki signed an agreement on new sports and cultural exchanges between the two sister cities.
The New York mayor also met Japan's prime minister, Kiichi Miyazawa, and other officials, and was to begin several days of talks with business leaders today.
He devoted Sunday to sightseeing, including a ride on Tokyo's subway, a trip to Asakusa Temple and a tea ceremony at Takashimaya Department Store, which is to open a branch on New York's 5th Avenue this spring.
Mr Dinkins was asked if he would follow the example of his predecessor, former Mayor Ed Koch, who planned a dip in a Japanese-style bath together with staff members during a Japan visit.
‘Although much of what he did I applaud, not everything that my predecessor did will I emulate,’ Mr Dinkins replied.
Private companies are paying for Mr Dinkin's $650,000 ($448,000) trip.
— AP 
New York, New York: Japanese companies already account for nearly a quarter of the 5,000 foreign-based companies operating in the city
Belarus makes each-way bet on race to capitalism
One former Soviet republic is hoping for market reform, minus the Russian example of ‘shock therapy’.
ALEXANDER TKACHENKO reports
THE former Soviet republic of Belarus is hedging its bets on economic reform with a mixture of market moves and old-style administrative measures that makes Western analysts sceptical.
Government officials say they aim to reform the economy gradually while shielding the country's ten million people from the pain of full-blooded ‘shock therapy’ as attempted in Russia and elsewhere.
‘We live in a period of transition to the market.
Shock methods can provoke instability in society, that is why we will continue to correct reforms in the interests of the majority of the population,’ said first deputy prime minister Mikhail Myasnikovich.
The government's approach is reflected in a 1993 budget allocating 60 per cent of expenditure to social welfare and 20 per cent to farm subsidies.
State orders, the pillar of the old communist system, will vary between different industries from 19 per cent to 53 per cent of production.
More than half of all prices will be regulated.
But Western analysts are wondering out loud whether such an approach can work.
‘The Belarus economy is heading for a shock this year.
People in government are unwilling to understand clear, simple things,’ said one economist in the capital Minsk.
Belarus, formerly Byelorussia, was the fourth most powerful republic of the Soviet Union and accounted for 5 per cent of national income; 40 per cent of the economy worked in the defence sector, and the republic also specialised in meat production and machine building.
Politically conservative, Belarus earlier this month lifted a ban imposed on the Communist Party following the failed Kremlin coup of August 1991.
Most of the population is Russian-speaking and Russia is the country's closest economic partner.
Belarus has persuaded Moscow to sell it 16 million tonnes of oil this year — almost as much as the 20 million tonnes Russia will supply to Ukraine, whose economy and energy needs are much bigger.
But rises in the price of that Russian oil forced Belarussian inflation up to 45 per cent for the month of December, prompting the national bank to double its key interest rate in January to 30 per cent.
Production over 1992 fell by 9 per cent, compared with a slump of about 20 per cent in Russia.
The budget deficit was a moderate 4.3 per cent, helping to make Belarus's economic performance one of the best in the former Soviet Union.
Officials maintain that living standards here are higher than elsewhere in the former superpower, but rationing exists for cereals, sugar, butter, flour, petrol and other basic goods.
‘This is a result of strict government efforts.
We didn't lose hold of the management of the economy as happened in other republics,’ said Viktor Alampiev, head of parliament's economic reforms commission.
‘Businessmen are also-rans in Belarus,’ said Alexander Potupa, director of a private publishing company.
He said new businesses were fleeing Belarus to other countries because of its taxes of 22 per cent on profits and 28 per cent VAT.
The prime minister, Vyacheslav Kebich, defends the government's evolutionary approach to the market economy.
‘Our people don't like to make unreasoned decisions,’ he said recently.
Mr Myasnikovich said the government aimed to carry out price liberalisation, privatisation and structural transformation of the economy to reduce dependence on Russian oil.
‘Belarus will continue to move resolutely to market reforms,’ he said.
The deputy premier said there was no way back to the former Soviet Union.
‘But the whole world seeks integration and we also want it, first of all with Russia.’
Western economists, however, fear that populist government decisions, an uncontrolled money supply and the continuing rise in prices for Russian raw materials could prove a recipe for hyperinflation and the collapse of the Belarus economy.
‘The Belarussian government does not want to take responsibility for the results of market reforms.
Government attempts to avoid social tension will bring society to hyperinflation and slow economic reforms,’ three German economic institutes concluded in a recent survey.
‘There are no grounds to say that Belarus will move to market reforms.’
Russian relationship: Moscow, once an overlord, is now a valued market partner for the republic of Belarus
Two academics who helped parents find a cure for their dying son will relive the extraordinary story tonight
Celebrating a triumph of heart over mind
By John Smith
TWO scientists from Stirling University expect to shed a few tears at tonight's United Kingdom premiere of a Hollywood film that tells the extraordinary story of Augusto and Michaela Odone's love for their son Lorenzo.
One of them, Prof John Sargent, was among a band of eminent researchers in Britain, the United States, Canada, Italy and France who were bullied, cajoled and encouraged by the Odones to help in producing treatment that would save their son's life.
Lorenzo's Oil, starring Nick Nolte, Susan Sarandon and Peter Ustinov, is a moving account of how the couple came up with the theory that a specialised oil could be used to treat their son's condition, adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD)— and how they achieved unprecedented international scientific co-operation to ensure it was perfected and produced.
The rare genetic disorder strikes apparently healthy boys between the ages of five and 12 when myelin, the fatty insulating sheath that surrounds nerve fibres, begins to disintegrate.
The Odones were left stunned when they were told in 1984 at the Children's Hospital in Washington DC that their fun-loving, brilliant six-year-old son — he already spoke three languages — had ALD, and was under sentence of death.
Augusto asked a doctor if there were papers they could read, and was told: ‘Oh, I wouldn't bother.
You wouldn't be able to understand it anyway.’
From then on Augusto, at the time an economist with the World Bank, and Michaela — neither with a scrap of medical or scientific knowledge — read all the papers they could find on the disease, and research into its treatment.
After coming up with the idea of the specialised oil, Augusto Odone contacted a dozen scientists around the world working on myelin repair.
Two years ago, before he received an honorary doctorate at Stirling University, he told The Scotsman that the researchers had not been speaking to each other.
‘I told them to stop competing.
Now they are exchanging information right away, and not waiting till it is published two years later in a scientific journal.’
Now the Odones have raised more than $1 million for the Myelin Project, directed by Augusto from Washington DC.
Prof Sargent, head of the school of natural sciences at Stirling, said yesterday the Odones had defied much  scepticism from medical and scientific experts and had beaten seemingly impossible odds to find a treatment which had kept Lorenzo alive.
Prof Sargent said that for the past five years, Croda Universal — the British company which has produced the oil — had funded research on ALD at the university.
It had been carried out by himself, Dr Peter Brophy, and Dr Robert Wilson, who was also going to the premiere.
Work at Stirling, he said, had led directly to the development of a new and improved Lorenzo's Oil, Mark II.
He added that Croda-funded research at Stirling was now targeted towards developing a further ‘Lorenzo's Oil’ which it was hoped could be used in the treatment of multiple sclerosis.
In MS, a disease of the central nervous system, the insulating sheath which surrounds the nerve fibres is stripped away, much as in ALD.
Heroes: Augusto Odone, who refused to accept there was no cure for his son, and Nick Nolte, who plays him in the film Screen drama: Michaela Odone, played by Susan Sarandon, nurses her son Lorenzo, Zack O'Malley Greenburgh, in a moving scene from Lorenzo's Oil Prof John Sargent: helped pioneer treatment
Support for return of death penalty for wide range of serious crimes
Rapidly escalating violent crime figures are an indictment of British society.
They are also a reflection on those who administer ‘justice’ in our courts and on the legislation that gives guidelines with regard to punishment for various crimes.
Without question, many judges and sheriffs are far too lenient in sentencing people found guilty of violent crimes.
The soft option of imprisonment is not the answer!
Millions of British people support a call for the death penalty for a wide range of offences which, in my opinion, should include the following:
Murder, attempted murder, culpable homicide, rape, child abuse, possession of a deadly weapon with intent to use it, assault which results in permanent serious injury to body or mind, kidnapping, acts of terrorism and drugs' trafficking.
We have reached the stage where no-one is safe to walk our streets at any time of day or night.
This is an intolerable situation and society has to remove those who will not conform to reasonable standards of behaviour.
The argument that a small number of innocent people may be wrongly executed is far outweighed by the fact that thousands of innocent people are dying, being permanently maimed, or mentally scarred for life, as a result of acts of violence.
Moreover, millions of people live in constant fear of being attacked in the streets and in their homes!
Your editorial, ‘Filling the vacuum’(17 February), thoughtfully discussed the interconnections between increasing violence and changing social values.
Social values are difficult to define in a changing, pluralistic, capitalistic society like ours.
It is more to the point to examine social practices.
Politicians are wary of doing this, of course, because it forces them to accept their proper share of responsibility for the present state of anomie.
The keys to a less violent society are good child-rearing; good education and good employment.
Responsibilities must be shared, therefore, between parents, teachers and the Government.
The founder of the National Children's Bureau, Dr Mia Kellmer-Pringle, summarised the needs of children as love/security; praise/recognition; and widening experiences; widening responsibilities.
These needs remain with us, in extending forms, throughout our lives; they are basic to our self-esteem and our competence.
Meeting these needs produces mature individuals.
Only mature individuals can produce a mature society.
The moral vacuum cannot be filled by preaching, exhortation and moralisations.
It will require better parenting, better schools and far better social and economic policies.
Sacred principle
The Government, in threatening to ignore the will of Parliament in regard to the Maastricht treaty, is also threatening to break one of its professedly sacred principles, namely the sovereignty of Parliament.
I cannot think it is serious.
In the past, if a government lost a vote in Parliament over a major policy issue like the Maastricht treaty, it automatically resigned and  called a general election.
Not any more, it seems.
I am sure that many must, like myself, have the feeling that the small democratic element which still exists within the governmental and constitutional framework of this country is being cast aside in favour of what I can only call a self-perpetuating oligarchy.
May God forgive us our hypocrisy!
Global warming
In describing a proposed combined heat and power scheme, Auslan Cramb claims in a report today that carbon dioxide emissions contribute to the greenhouse effect (as if this was something to be avoided).
Carbon dioxide is certainly a greenhouse gas, but 99 per cent of the greenhouse effect (without which life on Earth would not be possible) is due to water vapour.
The remaining 1 per cent is due to methane, nitrous oxide, ozone, CFCs, and…carbon dioxide.
Perhaps Auslan Cramb meant to claim (as he has done before) that carbon dioxide emissions from combustion are causing global warming (a slight increase in the greenhouse effect raising the temperature of the Earth).
However, it has not yet been established that global warming is due to excessive combustion of fossil fuels.
It might be a natural fluctuation in the Earth's temperature, or even the result of the growth of the human and animal population.
Consequently, carbon dioxide emissions are not necessarily something to be avoided.
Skye bridge and islanders' rights
I was intrigued to note that Scottish Secretary Ian Lang, in his recent address to the Edinburgh University Politics Society, should choose to cite the Skye bridge development as an example of the great success of this Government's ‘non-interventionist’ approach to the future provision of essential public amenities.
It is not without considerable irony that he should choose an example which is so uniquely interventionist as to render his previous assertion almost meaningless.
This development, currently under construction, is an example of this Government's total disregard for the process of democracy and its equal contempt for the attendant principle of genuine accountability.
Far from being ‘non-interventionist’, in this case Mr Lang has not only acted as promoter of the scheme itself, but also as overseer of the setting up of the public inquiry.
Its reporter's attempts to implement even the most modest of safeguards for the people affected by the proposals, were simply dismissed by the Scottish Secretary, this time wearing the ‘non-interventionist’ hat of adjudicator on the inquiry's finding and recommendations.
Indeed, the only non-interventionist element in all these proceedings has been the Scottish Secretary's refusal to intervene to protect the rights of the people of these communities who must have the right, if it is their wish, to have a bridge built as an integral part in the overall development of an infrastructure serving the needs of the area.
This basic right has been denied to the people in a high-handed and cynical fashion.
Instead, they are to be shackled indefinitely to the burden of paying high toll charges which would not be tolerated in any other part of the country.
This is not simply for the purpose of recouping capital costs, but more importantly for the purpose of generating huge profits for the private sector developers.
The Scottish Secretary has chosen to pursue this ‘non-interventionist’ policy in the face of criticism, not only from the local communities, but from the National Trust for Scotland, the Royal Fine Art Commission for Scotland and the many other professional commentators who have expressed their opposition on a variety of grounds.
He has permitted this development, which if not in actual breach of European environmental law, is certainly at odds with its spirit.
He is supporting a scheme that is essentially a monopoly and does not allow for any genuine competitive challenge which, as we have all been informed, is the only real moderating influence on the free market provision.
The actions of the Government in this matter have been quite remarkable, not least in the degree of arrogance on display, but more distressingly as a result of a public rendered powerless by a Scottish Office unwilling to listen to its demands.
The crazy leader of the menopausal male pack
AT first you don't really believe you can do it.
You have the Haynes manual, you have the socket set, the spanners, the mole wrench, the hatchet and the sledgehammer.
You have the two hands of five fingers each, honed and hardened by years of typewriter and keyboard pounding.
But replacing the front wheel of a motorbike?
Are you kidding?
I was brought up to be mechanical, to make and repair things.
My father, brilliant at stripping cars and putting them back together, encouraged my interest in dismantling bicycles, old radios, antique clocks.
For me, though, the pleasure and amazement was in seeing how many bits you could get out of those once-neatly-assembled packages.
Then I got bored.
The bits would never fit properly.
A large hammer would be employed.
And that was usually that.
My attempt to make a bicycle chain run more smoothly on an expensive light alloy racing crank by hitting the pedals with a large axe probably summed up my adolescent mechanical bent best.
But as I get older patience, a commodity not particularly noticeable in the past, has gradually appeared in my personality, like a sandbank silted into place by too many frothing tides.
I have constructed a kitchen out of flatpacks with only one minor nervous breakdown and one remarkable shouting match involving my wife, her mother, myself and how a length of pine beading ought to be attached to several wall cupboards.
(They were right, and this is the first time I've admitted it.)
But I still wouldn't have attempted sorting the motorbike if a garage hadn't nearly killed me.
This is what happened.
The Orange Beast, recalcitrant hero/heroine (politically correct transsexual eastern European motorcycle and sidecar) of (cue shameless plug) book and soon-to-be-TV-series Spirit of Adventure had survived 2,000 miles of distillery-hopping with nothing more, it appeared, than a seized steering bearing and intermittent front brake failure.
To the garage the beast and I unsafely struggled, a place straight out of Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance: Bad Karma Department.
MZ250s are not glamorous bikes.
They are remarkably functional workhorses, two stroke, solid and very ugly.
The mechanic was not impressed.
It may have been the way the exhaust pipe stained his boiler suit.
Or perhaps he was anti-German for some deep-rooted racial or sexual reason.
Or anti-communist, my bike hailing from pre-reunification DDR days.
The steering was fixed.
The brakes, I was informed, had just needed adjusting.
As I rode away, I noticed that the front disc brake still faded erratically.
And the rev counter no longer worked.
Up the A9 towards home I rattled, reaching the scary speed of 60mph.
I turned off towards Munlochy, and near the Clootie Well, the entire front hub disintegrated in a shower of hot, broken alloy, and the bike headed straight for the hedge.
We survived.
I had been doing about 15mph when this traumatic event occurred.
The brake problems had been caused by the front wheel bearings having mostly ceased to exist, sending the whole brake assembly in and out of alignment.
The garage hadn't noticed.
I was determined no-one but myself would fix the beast, given what had happened.
The trusty Haynes manual, a completely eccentric MZ parts specialist in London (‘I got black mudguards and chrome mudguards.
The black's £40 and the chrome's £60.
But I'll give you the chrome for £25 'cause I got a lot of them.
Or the black for £30…where is it you live, mate?
Black Oil?’), the socket set and a large hammer, and to my astonishment I had fitted a new wheel and mudguard.
Later I removed the back wheel, refitted it, adjusted the chain tension and replaced a headlight bulb.
At last.
After all these years, I'd taken something to bits and successfully put it all back together again.
The sense of satisfaction was bigger than a prop's ribcage; the problems had been fewer than a hooker's braincells.
What next then?
Well, nothing actually.
It's taken a fortnight to get the oil out of my fingers, nightly doses of Ecover washing up liquid notwithstanding.
And I've had an allergic reaction to the oil and lithium grease, or maybe it's the Ecover.
Green detergent, indeed!
My hands are like pumice stones!
Bring back Fairy Liquid, old formula, that's what I say!
There must be some way of getting lanolin without killing whales, surely?
No, these days I'm concentrating on passing my motorcycle test — a complex business, even if you have been driving a car on and sometimes off the road for nigh on 20 less than accident-free years.
I say concentrating.
Actually, it's all theoretical stuff, as frankly it's too cold to do much motorcycling on my wonderfully rebuilt MZ with the chrome mudguard.
And there is no cold like motorcycle cold, no rain like an MZ rain.
When you've been driving a car, and hirpling about on motorbikes using L plates, as aged car users are allowed to with anything under 125cc or possessing a sidecar, you think you know it all.
Having recently braved the innard-freezing weather to sit my CBT (Compulsory Basic Training) motorcycle test part one, I am chastened.
For one thing, I'm so old they've changed the rules on driving.
You no longer signal when you're pulling out to overtake,(unless to warn fast-approaching traffic behind you); nor do you signal right when pulling out from the kerb.
You don't even have to do hand signals.
Bad habits surface like bits of forgotten oil slick in a salmon farm.
The lifesaver, it is called, that last look over your shoulder before making any kind of manoeuvre on a bike.
I've started doing it in the car, too.
It helps.
But I've now got a trapped nerve in my neck.
I remember the days of the old motorbike test, when you just rode around the block a few times while the examiner walked to various points and watched you.
In those days motorcycling was black leather and blood, sometimes helmetless.
Death rates increased all the time, as hormonally charged adolescents flocked to give it heavy Brando on Honda C50s.
Then came the CBT, a drop in deaths and the surest way of reducing youthful hooliganism on bikes: make it too expensive.
These days, you just can't get insured at all if you're young and a biker in certain areas.
Maybe they should introduce a CBT for climbers, those other willing dicers with death.
Impossible to administer, I know, but something has to be done to stop the unbelievable carnage on Scotland's hills.
Just as the motorcycling clubs became safety orientated and led the training initiative, so should the climbing clubs recognise their responsibility, even to idiots.
I am old, and cheap to insure as a motorcyclist — the classic early male menopause returner.
The thing is, there is nothing like a bike for sheer visceral excitement.
Dangerous it is.
Crazy it is, especially on the much longed-for MZ replacement, a Kawasaki ZZ-R1100, capable of massively out-accelerating every car on the road and reaching 175mph along Barassie beach.
And all this for less, brand new, than a basic Ford Fiesta.
I'm a long way from that, though.
I potter and practise on my newly-restored Orange Beast, my socket set in the sidecar and patience at the ready.
As long as the weather's fine.
Everybody's problem
EVEN in Dickens's London street crime was hardly new.
But, as today's funeral of the student Paul Sheldon, so needlessly killed, reminds us, it now seems to be more random, thoughtless.
The truth of that observation cannot be determined; what is beyond question, however, is that violence in our town centres has become so common that it is an expected, almost accepted, feature of urban life.
For younger citizens, going to the disco becomes a risky venture; householders in urban centres suffer disturbances as pubs and clubs with late licences disgorge their clients; car owners fight a daily battle against thieves.
There is an element of despair in the public's reaction to the apparent spread of the disease, though the current political and moral debate about crime in general may hold out hope of an antidote.
More police officers visibly going about their business is the most commonly advanced solution to street crime.
But even if that were the case — and the experience of the past 12 years, with an increase in police strength being matched by an increase in reported crime, casts some doubt on it — the authorities could not afford to apply it because of their limited resources.
They are, instead, using other strategies.
In Scotland these include a special campaign to make the carrying of knives an offence; the use of bullet-proof video cameras as a method of town centre surveillance; and, most widely applied of all, a curb on late-night licences.
For some tastes these measures, and particularly the last, might seem to be simplistic responses to public outrage — based on the old principle of having to be seen to be doing something, anything in a crisis.
Yet all the evidence is that most violent crimes occur between 11 pm and 3 am at the weekend, with the largest number happening on a Saturday.
Reducing drinking hours, therefore, would seem to be a sensible way of curbing some of the worst examples of drunken violence.
The installation of surveillance cameras also seems to work, if Airdrie's experience is anything to go by.
True, this remedy contains more than an element of ‘big brother’ and it may be that it does no more than turn the criminals away from the areas covered by the cameras' eyes.
Nevertheless it is clearly playing a useful part in a prevention campaign; indeed, the greater the number of elements in such a strategy the better.
Such measures may not tackle the root causes, but they may help everyone to recognise the seriousness of the problem.
Street crime, after all, is an assault on society as a whole.
Daily torture
JE Nicholson (Points of View, 10 February) has done more than 5,000 car journeys over the Forth Road Bridge into Edinburgh, only to be habitually overtaken by a man on a tricycle, and has concluded that a new road bridge is not the answer.
This is good as far as it goes, but it is a disappointingly mean harvest of wisdom from so much hard-won experience.
Why do so many thousands of other commuters go through such daily torture without concluding, not only that another bridge is not the answer, but that it would increase traffic flows into Edinburgh?
A good public transport system would be cheaper, faster, safer, more comfortable, and vastly more efficient in energy and space.
Perhaps they do not conclude this; if so, why don't they make their views known to the Secretary of State for Scotland before he approves this scheme?
Silence now is a vote for expense, inconvenience, accident risk, and further environmental degradation, as witnessed daily by thousands.
Twisted trails of blame
David Ott examines the UN's tortuous route to secure the prosecution of those committing atrocities in war-torn Bosnia
ADVOCATES of the rule of law in international affairs must welcome the decision of the UN Security Council to consider establishing a war crimes tribunal in the former Yugoslavia.
But if this is to prove more than gesture politics, a number of challenges must be faced.
Some of these are obvious.
How will prospective defendants be caught?
Will people be prosecuted when their co-operation is needed to implement an eventual peace agreement?
On the other hand, can peace really be allowed to depend on the goodwill of people who have already shown their contempt for even basic considerations of humanity?
And what chance will peace have if the enraged victims see the criminals escaping scot-free with the spoils of their crimes?
None of these problems should be minimised.
But even if they are overcome, other more fundamental difficulties will remain.
The first of these is crucial: will the prosecution and punishment of Yugoslav war criminals be fair?
Predictably, the leader of the Bosnian Serbs, Dr Radovan Karadzic, has already cried foul on the ground that war crimes in other parts of the world go unpunished.
Though not without merit, this argument is weaker here than it might be elsewhere, since the UN plan appears designed to punish all war criminals in the former Yugoslavia rather than to impose international law on one party only.
It will not be a case of ‘victor's justice’.
But problems remain in connection with the scope of the tribunal's remit.
The UN Security Council resolution 808 concentrates on ‘violations of international humanitarian law.’
That is much narrower than the jurisdiction given to the Nuremberg tribunal after the Second World War, which was allowed also to consider crimes against peace and crimes against humanity such as planning and waging of aggressive war and genocide.
If the Security Council excludes from the new tribunal's jurisdiction such larger crimes, which are perhaps more likely to be committed by higher state officials, the resulting trials may end up dealing only with the small fry while the big fish get away.
This in turn impinges on the problem of deterrents, a point which the French authors of resolution 808 were keen to emphasise.
A war crimes prosecution in which high-ranking commanders and political leaders were likely to escape justice would hardly deter people in such positions from continuing their outrages and it could encourage them to press their sometimes morally debased followers to obey orders regardless of their illegality.
The plan's success as a deterrent depends as well on how vigorously the UN will back it up with action.
The UN must now put its money where its mouth is.
Otherwise, raising the issue in the first place could in the end prove counter-productive: if an international war crimes tribunal is clearly revealed to have no teeth, potential offenders may be emboldened to do whatever they like.
Punishment of convicted war criminals is also problematic.
The Security Council has wisely ruled out the death penalty, however much it might seem justified as retribution.
This leaves the problem of where and under what conditions prisoners would serve their sentences.
Would those convicted have to be held in the national prisons of UN members?
This could expose willing states to charges of being unduly harsh or lenient in their treatment of prisoners and open to acts of reprisal or terrorism from sympathisers of those imprisoned.
SOME of these difficulties might be avoided if the United Nations would broaden its approach to consider the possibility of punishing what are now called international crimes.
A relatively new concept in international law, this involves the guilt not merely of the rulers and agents of a state but of the state itself.
Although proposed by the UN's International Law Commission, the idea has been widely criticised as legally unsound and practically unworkable.
But it does have the advantage of operating on a level where guilt or innocence might be easier to establish and where punishment could be imposed on a state basis.
Thus if Serbia were convicted of aggression or ethnic cleansing, its punishment might include enforced disarmament, the disgorging of illegally-seized territory, the payment of reparations, and the application of self-determination within its own borders.
This would seem to be a more constructive approach than simply locking up individuals.
It would also deal with the danger posed by ardent nationalists or super-patriots who might willingly run the risk of themselves being prosecuted for war crimes if they thought their state would gain some permanent benefit from their actions.
If these problems can be overcome by the planners who are now setting to work under the direction of the UN Secretary-General, the Yugoslav war crimes tribunal could be an important step in strengthening international law.
Role models as safe as houses?
Did history really end when the Wall came down?
A leading French economist believes that the defeat of communism has merely presented capitalism with a new crisis.
Keith Aitken examines the argument ‘Having no challengers, capitalism now has no mirror in which to examine itself’ Could the system which tossed British economic policy to the winds of avarice, be described as stable?
THERE was always something odd, not to say distasteful, about the triumphant claims in 1989 that what was happening in the awakening democracies of the former eastern bloc was the end of history.
For one thing, it proceeded from a peculiarly Marxist view of history as the conflict between capital and labour.
For another, it assumed a stability in the capitalist system which, then and since, seemed wildly optimistic.
Could the system which, one day last September, tossed two years of British economic policy to the winds of avarice, be described as stable?
How stable is a system which cannot employ an increasing proportion of the population, which leaves half the world destitute, which rides a switchback cycle between boom and bust, which piles up tottering mountains of debt?
How stable is a system where the amounts of money whizzing around the foreign exchanges in search of a quick fix are 50 times more than the total needed to finance the whole of world trade?
How stable, and how coherent?
There is a strand of social theory which says that society is defined by its transgressors, that we know the civilised values that bind us together only through their breach, which we call crime.
Something of the same analysis can be applied to capitalism.
Was it ever anything more homogeneous than the sum total of the systems which were not communism?
That might seem to be precisely the sort of querulous argument which the Left has familiarly been scorned for posing.
But it is also increasingly explored by the Right, concerned to explain the electoral disillusionment which drove Bush out of office and Major out of Thatcherism.
It has now been addressed with elegant passion by no more subversive a revolutionary than the president of Assurances Generales de France, Michel Albert.
‘Having no challengers, capitalism now has no mirror in which to examine itself, no alter ego against which to measure its performance.
Democracy, liberalism and capitalism are by definition unqualified to exercise any sort of monopoly,’ he writes.
‘How will they manage now that there is, literally, no contest?’
Now, this is a grand theme, which Albert's book develops with declamatory gallic panache (splendidly translated, incidentally, by Paul Haviland).
But he also gives it an edge and an urgency that turn it into much more than an abstract cafe debate.
He sees, in the post-communist age, a fresh ideological battle building between two competing bodies of capitalism in which the stakes, not least for Europe, are immense and the choices pressing.
This, he believes, is the new mirror image.
Albert calls the two rival forms the ‘neo-American’ model and the ‘Rhine’model.
Both labels, though as good as any others, are deceptive and need explanation.
But his identification of the species is persuasive.
The neo-American model might be called the Thatcher-Reagan model, while the Rhine model should also properly include Japan along with Germany, the Benelux countries, Switzerland, Scandinavia and, arguably, Australia and New Zealand.
What counts is the increasing divergence between them (and, for a Frenchman, France's continued indecision about which system to pursue).
For British readers, the first model — which has been in the political, if not the economic, ascendancy for the past decade and more — is the more familiar.
Its characteristics are personal acquisitiveness, set free by generous tax cuts for the rich and a licensed pursuit of the fast buck; markets, including foreign exchange, left unfettered to bestow their dynamism on the economy; a state rolled as far back as is electorally tenable; and a participatory capitalism, based on profit rather than ownership, where almost anything is a commodity to be traded.
The Rhine model, by contrast, values bankers more than brokers.
It sees far fewer categories of goods or services as being susceptible to trade, and in particular sees companies as communities rather than  commodities , basing wages on structured scales rather than market rates or productivity achievements.
It places high worth on loyalties — employee, customer, social — and sets a compassionate state at the centre of these values, providing both decent social provision and a regulated environment for fair competition.
What this is, at root, is the difference between the free market economy and the social market economy.
Albert has no doubts about the moral and social superiority of the latter.
It is structured to produce fewer victims.
Countries which follow the Rhine model, he says, evolve an economy culture: a consensus of common purpose, in which the economic cycle is insulated from the political cycle, partly through broad political agreement about economic ends and means, partly through independent central banks tied to strong currency policies.
Economically, he sees it as the difference between the hare and the tortoise: the free market model with its exciting instability, its romantic success stories, its idealistic zeal; the social market with its patient, unspectacular, benign growth, and its cultural cohesion.
Albert writes: ‘The inescapable conclusion is that the two models of capitalism diverge on the fundamental question of whether to live for the present moment — and to hell with the consequences for future generations — or to plan for a better tomorrow, though it may require sacrifices today.
This dilemma lies at the heart of the ethical choices facing every society as the 20th century draws to a close.’
The crucible of these choices is corporate finance.
It is a familiar, yet penetrating, criticism of free market economies that the imperatives companies face to satisfy the adolescent greed of the financial markets and the escalating expectations of shareholders — or else prepare for predators — has diminished the scope of strategic planning to buffing up the next set of interims.
The consequence, at worst, is a neglect of research and development, strategic investment and skills training.
By contrast, in the ‘well-managed consensus’ of the Rhine model, banks rather than stock markets are the guardians of the capitalist flame, Albert says.
Frankfurt's total capitalisation is only a third of the London stock exchange and a ninth of Wall Street, with many of the biggest German companies lacking even a listing.
Company finance is the province of the banks, generating the close and patient relationships that power the German economy.
The banks are benign, stable shareholders.
Most German manufacturers have their ‘house bank’, often a major shareholder and locked into an enduring relationship.
By the same token, big manufacturers are often shareholders in their chosen bank.
The drawbacks of this relationship are its stolid dullness and its tendency to focus power in a small circle of people.
The overriding benefit, however, is its readiness to take the long view.
‘One can almost imagine the German banker telling his client, the company president: ‘You just take care of improving production and increasing sales, and leave the financial problems to us’,’ Albert writes.
German — or Swiss, or Dutch — managers need not waste energy worrying about takeovers.
Their job is to build, not always rapidly, better products, systems and markets.
During the Eighties, it has been the Thatcher-Reagan model which has enjoyed the higher global vogue.
Albert remarks, a touch sniffily: ‘An evening at the Crazy Horse Saloon will always make for more compulsive viewing than a day in the life of a Benedictine monastery.’
Yet there is no question that, across the economic cycle, it has been the Rhine model which has shown far the most robust capacity for growth.
Albert's purpose in writing his book, published in the original French two years ago, was to warn a developing European Community against what he saw as the growing dominance of the American way of capitalism.
He was not optimistic.
He saw the torch which Reagan and Thatcher had lit being borne on by other, apparently unstoppable, hands, while the newer economies, like Walesa's Poland, flocked to its light.
Yet, in 1993, the picture is much less clear.
Bush has gone.
Major's attachment to free market doctrine has been loosened by the public's refusal to let short-termism shut Britain's pits.
Both economies have suffered grievously from  recession .
By the same token, however, they may now be tacking fitfully back to growth while Germany and, to a lesser extent Japan, linger in relative doldrums.
Albert would no doubt shrug philosophically, and say that his analysis concedes that the hare will sometimes run ahead of the tortoise.
What is certain is that the time for decision in Europe which he saw approaching then is nearer now, the question no less pertinent.
His is a book that deserves to be updated, and deserves to be read.
‘Suddenly what seems to be at stake is the Britishness of being Britain'
Never before has the nation's mood and morale been at such a low ebb, never before such a vote of no confidence in the country, writes Rob Brown
Prepared to vote with their feet
WOULD the last one out, please put off the lights!
Some people may remember those words being splashed across the front page of the Sun on the eve of last April's general election.
Rupert Murdoch's mass circulation tabloid stooped to a new level of vicious scaremongering when it seemed that Neil Kinnock might just succeed in leading Labour back into government.
Today, however, the Sun must be wishing that it had held that headline in reserve.
For it neatly encapsulates the state of public morale in Britain less than a year into the fourth consecutive Conservative term.
In an opinion poll published this week, 49 per cent of the British public said that they would emigrate if they could.
There has never been such a vote of no confidence in the country since Gallup began measuring the urge to emigrate in 1948.
Rival pollsters have argued that this finding should be handled with some caution.
They point out that disenchantment has been swollen no doubt by recent events such as the surge in unemployment past the three million mark, the murder of two-year-old James Bulger in Liverpool and even the February weather.
But no-one has dismissed it as a rogue poll.
Other polling organisations have also detected a profound and longer-term loss of faith in the way Britain is governed.
Christopher Harvie, Professor of British Studies at the University of Tubingen in Germany, has observed: ‘Britain, after a decade of Thatcherite greed-is-good radicalism is, in many respects, less competitive than it has ever been, its society bitterly divided and disorientated.’
Harvie penned those words at the beginning of last year.
Dramatic developments since then — most notably Black Wednesday and the scandals engulfing the Royal Family — have only served to heighten this sense of dislocation.
That is confirmed by Robert Worcester, chairman of the polling organisation Mori.
‘Over the last several decades, there has been a decline, no question about it, in the confidence people have in British institutions,’ he reports.
‘There is a declining belief in monarchy, in Westminster and Whitehall, in the judiciary and in the system of government as a whole.’
Henry Porter doubtless spoke for many when he wrote recently in the Guardian: ‘Little in the post-war years of decline in Britain has prepared us for the deep sense of unease now being experienced by its people.
Suddenly what seems to be at stake is not economic and material wellbeing, but the Britishness of being Britain…
‘We have begun to lose our confidence in our institutions, the traditions and bodies that constitute a very large part of the national culture — especially in the monarchy which a year ago appeared to be one of the unassailable certainties of British life.’
How can our fragmented society make itself whole again?
How can a culture permeated by possessive individualism restore the fraying bonds of community?
These questions are being asked now not just by political theorists, although some of them are giving the most considered answers.
David Marquand, one of Britain's most acute political analysts, has written that ‘only a notion of community, of fraternity, can make it a duty — as opposed to a compassionate whim — to help one's fellows’.
In his book, The Unprincipled Society, Marquand deplored the conception of power and authority that has underpinned Britain's political order since the 18th century.
He argued that our existing governmental arrangements are inimical to forging a sense of fraternity.
Talk of a new constitution may still be restricted largely to the so-called chattering classes, but the general public seems to have roused from what George Orwell called ‘the deep, deep sleep of England’.
In Homage to Catalonia, Orwell wrote despairingly of the fundamental contentment of those who sleep deeply in the belief that the fundamentals are secure.
He was referring to that curious mixture of kings, lords and commons which have been the essential elements of Britain's unwritten — and until now unchallenged — constitution.
Republicanism may not be rampant yet, but the Duchess of York's indiscretions and the Prince and Princess of Wales's separation have certainly made it more respectable.
Even prominent members of the Labour Party — traditionally timid on this front — have started to argue openly that the Royal Family's role must be streamlined and modernised if it is to survive for very much longer.
Perhaps the nation's mood would be cheerier if we simply had someone else in charge of our existing institutions?
Shirley Williams, former Cabinet minister and founder member of the SDP, put forward this thesis last week when she flew back to Britain to be introduced to the House of Lords.
Now Professor of Politics at Harvard University, she enthused in a BBC interview about how President Clinton has transformed the mood of America.
‘It's amazing what a change of government does,’ she stated.
‘Bill Clinton is not perfect, but the great thing I've seen in America is the lifting of the spirits, the sense of all things being possible again, just because they have brought to an end three administrations which were conservative.
‘It's the kind of feeling that a new world has broken, that you get after any very long period of office by one party.
I think it could happen in Britain, instead of this feeling of living under a grey blanket, which you somehow have when you're back here.’
THE vast majority of Americans, it seems, are now behind Clinton.
Even many voters who couldn't bring themselves to endorse him last November are prepared to believe in what he calls the politics of hope.
America, unlike Britain, is of course a believing culture.
As Richard Holloway, the Bishop of Edinburgh, has observed: ‘It is a culture that believes in belief…anyone who has worked on the other side of the Atlantic will recognise the syndrome.
It is one that patronising and superior Brits frequently sneer at.
The fact remains that for all its crassness and naivety, the American experiment is a colossal testimony to the importance of faith in human life.’
The US, of course, has a written constitution — the only one in the world where the pursuit of happiness is an enshrined goal.
Pat McCrystal: led asbestos campaign
A LEADING figure in the campaign to help former Clyde shipyard workers suffering from the effects of working with asbestos, Pat McCrystal, has died from the asbestos-related cancer mesothelioma.
Mr McCrystal, 68, of Langlands Road, Govan, appeared at many meetings and on television to argue that thousands of workers who had been exposed to asbestos were now being denied justice.
Mr McCrystal himself fought a tremendous battle for compensation which was the subject of a Newsnight special report.
Bert Connor, chairman of Clydeside Action on Asbestos described Mr McCrystal as unique.
‘Pat would never like to be regarded as special but even in his critical condition he was still in fighting spirit.’
There will be a mass at St Constantine's Church, Govan at 10am tomorrow and he will be buried at St Conval's Cemetery, followed by a reception at Crookston Hotel.
Relaxing: a vital part of a pupil's life
THE sigh always comes first and it's always a loud one.
The books are plonked on the table.
Then the elbow joins them as the head is firmly glued to the palm of the hand; it's as if that tired old head was too heavy to hold itself up.
This little drama — and other scenes like it — is played out method-acting style almost every day in this particular household.
Yes, it's homework time.
But the children here go to a school where a steady and regular dose of homework is the norm.
At other schools and in other households, it's different.
Many primary age kids are recommended by their schools to take a break from the first three R's and take up another one — relaxing.
Given that the homework routine of different schools varies, what can the anxious parent do to make sure that their child is getting enough, and what do they need to know about it, if anything?
Is the link between home and school strong enough and at what point do you intervene?
And can a parent become involved if they are dissatisfied with the homework programme of the school?
At secondary school the allocation of homework is usually uniform.
There are essays to be done, maths questions to answer and a still life to be drawn at almost every school across the country.
But there is no routine at primary school.
Sometimes one school will have a set policy and even a policy statement on homework while another will leave it to the individual whim of the teacher.
John McCabe, junior school headmaster at St Aloysius College, Glasgow, an independent school, says that homework is an integral part of what the school does.
‘It reinforces and give practice to what has been going on during the day,’ he says.
‘Primary 4 and 5 are given an average of 60 minutes conscious homework each evening.
In primary 6 and 7 that goes up to one hour l5 minutes.’
Children at St Aloysius College are given a home work diary which their parents must sign every day.
The diary tells the children and parents what is required to be done on any one evening.
Mr McCabe says: ‘The advice to parents is if a lower school child is struggling after 45 minutes, then don't let them continue.
The teacher will look at the problem the next morning.’
The school believes their homework scheme is very successful.
They say that parents who pay for their children's education expect them to be given homework.
‘It means children acquire a serious attitude to their school work and it's a good habit,’ says Mr McCabe.
‘It makes them more responsible for their own work and gets them into the idea that they have to work outside normal school hours.
They acquire the habit of studying and that is worthwhile.’
However, this very stringent pattern of homework is not one that many other state schools with primary age children adhere to.
At a non-denominational school in the west end of Glasgow a head teacher explained that the maximum time to be spent on homework was half an hour.
‘We are of the opinion that if a child is working hard in school they really should be relaxing and doing other things out of it,’ she said.
But what if the parent is not happy with this and believes that their child really ought to be doing more homework?
‘It is the school policy.
Parents looking for advice on what to do to help with their child's education will be told that the most important thing is to spend quality time talking to their children,’ the West End headteacher said.
She advises worried parents to take their children out to museums, the theatre and cinema, and to make sure that they are getting plenty of interaction with other children.
She adds: ‘Talking to children is the biggest advantage.’
At Sciennes primary in Edinburgh, head teacher Maureen Pollock tends to agree.
She says that her teachers are keen to make sure that all work should match individual children's needs.
Parents are given a school booklet, part of which outlines the school's policy on homework.
‘A child's formal education stops at the end of each school day but education continues at all times,’ it says.
‘It is important that children have time to play, pursue interests and hobbies and take part in informal organised activities with other children and alone.
For this reason we do not believe in formal homework on a regular basis.’
At Sciennes, homework is phased in as children approach high school age.
Children from Primary 3 upwards do have diaries to keep parents informed if there has been any homework set — but is rarely any until Primary 7 age.
Different schools have different policies and different children have different homework.
What becomes clear is that a parent must listen to the individual school's advice on what they see as the best sort of homework to give and in what amounts.
Homework should not be used as a means of controlling children but as a key to the development to their education.
And if a school feels that adding that fourth R to the old reading, writing, arithmetic routine then it seems a parent shouldn't expect more.
Audrey Gillan
Campbell targets emerging talent
By Roddy Mackenzie
ALLAN CAMPBELL, who took over his new post as national director of coaching and development for the Scottish Badminton Union (SBU) on Monday, has outlined his hopes for the future.
Campbell will be spending even less time with Scotland's international players.
Indeed, he confirmed yesterday that he would not be coaching Scotland at the forthcoming World Championships in Birmingham (where Scotland are in the same group as Australia).
Instead, he will concern himself chiefly on nurturing the grass-roots of the sport during his three-year contract.
‘In Australia, sport is geared towards the elite,’ he said.
‘There is no shortage of back-up and if there is a talented athlete, a lot of resources will be poured in to ensure that his or her potential is reached.
There are no obstacles put in the way of producing Olympic athletes.
‘Whereas the elite side is still very important, my role will be more on the developmental side.
I've spent 13 years travelling the world with badminton — I was coach to the Australian side at the last World Championships — and it will be nice to spend some time at home.
‘What we need in Scotland is an eight-court purpose-built badminton hall in every major centre of population.
If we can get that, then five or six years down the track we might be producing players who can do something at world level.’
Anne Gibson, who earlier this month won her fifth successive Scottish women's singles title, is the only Scot to be given a place in the main draw for next month's All England Championships at Wembley.
TAKE SIX: Would you emigrate.
If so, where would you like to go?
Grant MacPhee (18), student, Lawnmarket, Edinburgh.
‘No, not really.
All my friends and family are here so there's no need to emigrate.
I like to go on holiday but I always like to come back.’
Andrew Bridge (20), student, South Clerk Street, Edinburgh.
‘Yes.
I want to go to the United States to experience a different culture.
I'm doing Communication Studies which involves advertising and the media.
I reckon the US is geared more towards the media.’
Mick Bonynge (72), retired, Abbeyhill, Edinburgh.
‘I had my chance ‘way back in the Forties, but I didn't go.
I would not blame the young people for wanting to get away.’
Tracey Pringle (19), waitress, Bathgate.
‘Yes.
I'd like to go to Australia because they all seem that friendly and I've got relatives there.
Also because of the weather.’
Pauline Denholm (18), waitress, Bathgate.
‘Yes.
I'd like to go to America because there are better job prospects over there.
I'd like to get out of here and get a better job…as a funeral director?’
William Watt (26), joiner, Dumbiedykes, Edinburgh.
‘I'd love to emigrate to Australia to get a future and better money.
I've got family out there.’
What do you think?
Write to Evening News, Viewpoints, North Bridge, Edinburgh EH1 1YT.
BAN BUSTER: Rogue cleric to marry divorcees
Rebel priest in mission to Capital
by Ian Swanson NEWS REPORTER
A REBEL priest who defies church law by marrying divorced Catholics is to conduct a wedding in Edinburgh for the first time next year.
Father Pat Buckley, from Larne in Northern Ireland, has been to Scotland on three occasions to tie the knot for couples whom the church refuses to marry because one or both have been divorced.
He is due to conduct his first such service in the Capital in July next year.
He's also happy to officiate at mixed-religion weddings between Protestants and Catholics, or Christians and Muslims.
‘I'm the sort of Jim'll Fix It of marriage problems,’ he said.
‘Because of my liberal views and activities, the local bishop removed me from my duties in the parish of Larne eight years ago.
‘But I have been working away ever since and they have not done anything more to me.
‘They have stated they disagree with what I'm doing.
‘But thankfully the days of the rack and burning at the stake are gone, even in Ireland.’
He still stays in a church house and has converted part of it into a chapel, where he celebrates mass for 200 people every Sunday.
He is convinced he is doing the right thing, despite the disapproval of the church authorities.
‘All these people could have been married in a registrar's office, but they want a religious and spiritual dimension to their marriage, which I think is very noble of them.’
The couple from Edinburgh to be married by Father Buckley said they didn't want to talk about their wedding plans.
Father Tom Connolly, spokesman for the Catholic Church in Scotland, said any marriage involving a divorcee would not be valid in the eyes of the church.
Hair-raising
I THINK it is a great shame that people are still discriminated against because of their appearance.
Just recently the case of Malcolm MacKinnon was brought to my attention after you published his story.
He was told to have his hair cut or leave his job at Safeway.
Was such an ultimatum really necessary?
Are shoppers really going to be offended by a ponytail?
In my opinion such strict rules and regulations are totally uncalled-for and unnecessary.
Dirty
I AM disgusted with the inefficiency of our street cleaning operation and recently had to enlist the assistance of my local councillor to get a visitation to my street and surrounding area.
Even then they missed considerable stretches of gutter with accumulated dirt.
Pavements are a no-go area.
North-East Fife District Council operate the old-fashioned system of a man, barrow and brushes and the result is a very high standard of service.
The present system in the city of a vehicle with a team of operatives seems to be a costly investment.
It seems to be the right time to revert here to the old system.
Cool down
I HAVE been reading in the News about whether or not there is some justification for today's young men being a bit too pushy towards girls.
In other words sexual harassment.
All I can say is that there was a young couple putting on a display in an Abbeyhill park recently which would have made my auld granny's hair curl!
A pail of ice-cold water over the pair of them would have been the best idea.
The young woman was the one who seemed to be ‘making the running,’ but if the young chap had got a bit carried away, no doubt he would have been hauled up to court.
I am no prude.
I am in my 30s and married, but I am beginning to think the young men are not always to blame.
Before Sunday I would not have said that.
Danger
THE campaign for keeping open Rosyth Dockyard is all very laudable as long as it's not for servicing nuclear submarines.
These things are now both dangerous and obsolete.
At best, they can entangle the nets of a fishing boat and kill the crew.
At worst, they can sink or lose their nuclear warheads at sea.
Greenpeace has so far counted 50 nuclear weapons and nine reactors on the sea bed.
Both nuclear dockyards should be closed down.
The workforce should be retrained and given jobs growing food in greenhouses, as should anyone else who is desirous of employment.
nad;
Violence
I WAS disgusted to read Mr Wilson's reaction to earlier closing of the pubs in Edinburgh.
There has been more violence and stabbing on the streets since the hours were extended.
After all, tourists don't come here to frequent the bars, most stay in hotels anyway.
It's degrading to Edinburgh.
We are not safe on the streets, when drunk crazed animals are loose at 1.30am.
Poverty's grave luxury
WOMEN on low incomes were more than twice as likely to smoke as their better off counterparts, claims a new report out today.
It said poorer women saw cigarettes as a ‘necessary luxury’ to cope with the difficulties of caring for a family on a tight budget.
And while health education programmes had helped to reduce the habit among men and more affluent women, they had failed to reach females in poorer families.
The report, called Her Share of Misfortune and written by the ASH working group on women and smoking, recommends a number of measures to buck the trend.
But it said that to get at the root of the problem the Government had to tackle the whole issue of deprivation.
Alison Hillhouse, director of ASH Scotland, said: ‘Time and time again you hear these women say their first priority is to feed their family and pay their bills.
‘They don't have a lot left over for themselves and they see smoking as an affordable luxury which helps them cope.’
Health education programmes had to be targeted at poorer women and the wider issue of social deprivation tackled.
The report also recommends a total ban on all tobacco advertising and promotion, adequate funding for long-term smoking education programmes and legislation to create a smoke-free environment at work and in public places.
COPING: Alison Hillhouse says poorer women think smoking helps them cope.
CSV Media Action
Hypersomnia
Have you ever woken up from a full night's sleep still exhausted?
Do you often feel like dozing off during the day when you need to be awake?
The need for sleep varies from person to person — some require more than the average eight hours sleep a night be perfectly normal.
However, when the need to sleep interferes with daytime activities, this is a problem known as hypersomnia.
Hypersomnia has many causes and can vary in severity from slight drowsiness to falling sound asleep.
External factors include excessive heat or poor ventilation.
Psychological states such as boredom or depression can lead a person to escape into sleep.
Physical illness can lead to extra sleepiness too.
Many sleeping pills, antihistamines and other drugs leave the user drowsy during the day, so always check labels for warnings about this side-effect.
Lifestyle is important — irregular bedtime hours and spending too long in bed can contribute to over-sleepiness.
Lounging in bed long after waking can leave you feeling only half-awake all day.
Drinking alcohol during the daytime and over-eating can lead to an over-powering desire to nod off (just think of the average household after Christmas dinner).
Shift work can cause problem sleepiness since changing rotas and night duties befuddle body clocks.
Sleep taken during the day is less refreshing because body hormones triggered by daylight, which aid activity, are fighting against another type of hormone stimulated by sleep itself which aids rest and body repair.
With ‘sleep apnoea’(difficulty in breathing during sleep), sufferers literally stop breathing about 400 times a night leading to disrupted slumbers and daytime drowsiness.
There are 1.5 million recorded sufferers in Britain and an estimated 2,500 sufferers in Lothian.
This condition is recognised by chronic snoring and choking during sleep.
The good news is that not everyone who snores occasionally is a sleep apnoea sufferer and also the condition is curable.
If in doubt consult your doctor who can refer you for specialist treatment.
Dr John Eagles, of the Ross Clinic in Aberdeen, recommends that anyone suffering from excessive sleepiness only during the winter months should consider the possibility of Seasonal Affective Disorder (SAD).
SAD affects about one person in twenty and is caused by a hormonal reaction to the lack of natural sunlight in winter.
Apart from over-sleepiness, symptoms include: lethargy, overeating, depression, social problems and loss of libido.
These symptoms disappear in the summer months.
Your doctor will be able to refer you for treatment.
This takes the form of light therapy with daylight-simulating lightboxes and sometimes the use of non-sedative anti-depressants.
Daytime drowsiness and associated sleep disorders can affect the quality of your life and can cause accidents, especially among drivers.
They should never be left untreated.
Dr Neil Douglas, Director of The Scottish National Sleep Laboratory, says: ‘Anybody who is falling asleep once a day when not in bed should consult their GP to have their sleepiness sorted out.’
Info pack: Contact Julie Oswald, Media Action 031-557-3194 for your free info pack.
Phone lines are open until 7.30pm tonight, and from 9am to 5pm thereafter.
Your Evening News/Media Action pack includes:
Basic self-help for day-time drowsiness.
Treatment centres and helplines.
Useful publications.
Useful contacts.
930224
Now accentuate the positive
ELIMINATING the negative has not yet done the trick for Labour.
Neil Kinnock exorcised whole covens of militants, dumped the unilateralist millstone, and replaced the old guard of the seventies with eager young men in bright ties.
The red flag gave way to the red rose, the ‘Red Flag’ to Purcell and Queen.
And still Labour lost: not to Finchley's conquering Britannia, but to a fractious, demoralised Tory Party led by a man little celebrated for his charisma.
The search is now on for more negatives to eliminate.
Roy Hattersley wants the archaicism of Clause Four erased, a sensible change, though it might cause trouble from the die-hards.
There is a debate about whether a ministry for women is a liability.
Most importantly, John Smith has finally backed moves to rid the party of what is perceived to be the biggest unwanted legacy remaining of its heritage, the voting power of the trade unions.
The unions have become like a resident Grandad — no less embarrassing for enfeeblement, but still handy with his wallet.
Still capable, too, of making a scene if slighted.
So, Mr Smith cautiously  withheld support for eviction until such time as he felt the old boy was sufficiently reconciled to moving out.
While there is little doubt that reform is the right course, the old sneer about Labour being in the pockets of union barons has actually lost any real justification.
Legislation has reduced the barons to serfdom, and it is some time since they seriously hampered leadership policy (more often, lately, they have helped defeat constituency insurrection).
They are certainly a less pervasive influence than are the boardroom knights who sign over company funds to the Conservatives.
But they are much more conspicuous.
The block vote makes terrible television, as millions of votes are marshalled on behalf of union members with little or no loyalty to the party.
The Wembley electoral college formula, giving the unions a bigger say in electing Labour's leader than either activists or parliamentarians, was a triumph of defiance over common sense.
The unions, facing their own penury, have in any case proved decreasingly willing to bankroll a party incapable of winning elections.
Party leaders now hope that sufficient union members can be persuaded to affiliate in their own right both to keep the financial wolves from the door and to revitalise a sometimes decaying local structure.
It is the correct approach, but it is not enough.
Labour's real problem is not avoiding offence, but achieving product differentiation.
Its lacklustre showing in the opinion polls during the Government's recent travails shows that good reasons for not voting Tory are not the same as good reasons for voting Labour.
Mr Smith is right to shed old baggage, but he will have to offer voters something more than dull blamelessness.
The real test ahead is whether the policy review can generate a coherent body of distinctive ideas that afford electors positive incentives to vote Labour.
Preventing own goals is a prudent tactic, but it usually takes more to win.
Vulnerable
I am appalled at the mores that exist in this country today.
A young child brutally killed, a mother in anguish because she turned her back for seconds: it is a reflection of the society we now live in.
We do have a death penalty, but it's for the vulnerable, the young, the old and disabled.
Nowadays the victims are blamed for being vulnerable.
Morality in this land is a lame duck.
People of privilege abuse it blatantly.
The Government encourages exploitation of most of us by preying on the fears of the employed and the misery of the unemployed.
With models like these can humanity survive?
We are now living with the law of the jungle.
Diminishing role of psychiatric hospitals in many areas
The letter (16 February) on behalf of the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland gives a reasoned and balanced account of the present legal framework.
This can enable those who, because of mental illness, may pose a significant risk to their own health or safety or the safety of other people and who are limited in self-awareness, to accept treatment or care, whether or not including medication.
While the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 is undoubtedly superior to the English legislation in regard to the use of extensions of the leave of absence provisions, this seems to me to be a less than satisfactory way of addressing the problem for a number of reasons, both practical and philosophical.
Furthermore, though the number of persons suffering from a mental disorder who cannot be helped on a voluntary basis is relatively small, the number of such persons in the community is likely to increase.
This is because of the current emphasis on care in the community and the reduction in the number of beds, particularly long-stay or continued care beds, in the psychiatric hospitals.
Indeed the psychiatric hospitals themselves may, in many areas, cease to exist.
From the practical point of view, the use of the leave of absence provisions can cause problems in keeping track of the renewal documentation, particularly if a doctor has a number of patients on leave of absence.
It can cause problems if patients' case records are held at the place from which they went on leave of absence, but they are being seen for review elsewhere or are attending some other facility such as an out-patient clinic or a day hospital.
It can complicate the management of in-patients beds if beds have to be kept available to accommodate persons on leave of absence who may relapse and require urgent readmission and it can distort the patient statistics.
Despite the fact that current legislation does make some attempt to provide a legal framework governing the treatment of the mentally ill, its central focus remains that of detention.
Is it not time to look afresh at the foundations of our laws in relation to mental illness with a view to making the central focus that of providing a framework whereby those whose judgment is so impaired by their illness that they are unable to recognise the need for treatment will receive such treatment in as humane, sensitive and effective a way as possible.
This would be irrespective of whether that treatment involves hospitalisation or not.
I refer to a legal framework that protects without stigmatising, which recognises and takes account of the needs of society in general, the needs of the families and carers, and the needs of the individual and which provides as equitable a balance as possible between the individual's rights of autonomy and liberty and the right to have access to the best possible treatment, rehabilitation and care.
This would be with the minimum of bureaucracy and social alienation.
Security check
You published last week an account of our ordeal at the hands of burglars who left us barricaded for 37 hours in a tiny bathroom.
We have lived in this peaceful west Stirlingshire village for 32 years, and thought the risk of it happening to us was negligible.
Now we know differently, having opened our door after dark to persons we did not know or recognise.
Our hope is that this letter will be a warning to others and that some of your readers may be alerted to check on their security arrangements, whether it be simple precautions or advice about a security installation.
Our local police have been most helpful.
We have received so many messages and letters that it is just not possible to acknowledge them individually.
We would like to thank all those well-wishers most warmly for their support.
Homelessness
Glasgow University's recently published study of homelessness among the young in Scotland simply highlights the facts which have been known to anyone who had been working in the social security system in whatever capacity for a number of years.
The changes which came into place in April 1988 have had a devastating effect on young people.
At the stroke of a pen they removed hundreds of thousands of needy youngsters from the benefit system and condemned many of them to a life of mendicant poverty, many also slipped into prostitution.
In desperation, in many cases, young females deliberately become pregnant because they know that once they are in that state they are immediately restored to the benefit system.
Moreover, there is at least a possibility that local authorities will house them and their rent will be paid under housing costs.
However, there is a snag, even in this desperate solution, in that the changes also withdrew the facility which was available under supplementary benefit to make single payments for furniture etc.
Prior to 10 April, 1988, a young person in this situation could apply to the Department of Health and Social Security, as it then was, for a single payment grant for essential items of furniture.
The apparatus put in its place, of social fund grants and social fund loans, is widely and almost totally discredited.
I do not suggest that to restore benefit to 16 to 18-year-olds would solve this problem overnight, but it would go far down the road to alleviating this problem which surely must be unacceptable in 1993.
The UN was designed to oversee global peace and security, but how can it fulfill this primary task in the violent post-Cold War era? asks Paul Wilkinson
Nations must unite to close credibility gap
HOPES that the ending of the Cold War would lead to a new era of peace have been rudely dashed.
No-one should underestimate the enormous gain in freedom for millions who had been trapped in the oppression of communist dictatorships, but the speed with which the liberation of eastern Europe occurred was so stunning that it raised what we can now see to have been unrealistic expectations of the transition to peace, democracy, and prosperity.
Five of the successor states in the former Soviet Union are wracked by bitter ethnic civil war and rebellion.
In Somalia, Sudan, Ethiopia and many other poverty-stricken countries, the brutal violence of local warlords combined with the effects of drought, have brought death by starvation to hundreds of thousands.
And in Bosnia, in the very heart of a supposedly prosperous and civilised continent, we have seen acts of genocide and other war crimes comparable in horror to those of the Hitler and Stalin regimes.
As I survey the 25 conflicts raging in different parts of the world, I am haunted by Yeats' lines:
‘The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere The ceremony of innocence is drowned;’
Post-Cold War, the world is proving to be a more violent place.
In the Cold War, the nuclear balance of terror did bring a semblance of peace, based on mutual deterrence, alliance systems, and spheres of influence.
But now the international system is in a dangerous and unpredictable stage of transition.
The internal collapse of the Soviet super power has left America as the most powerful nation state, but there is no new global balance of power.
This leaves the US as the nearest thing the world has to a globocop, the only major power able to project its military forces on a global scale.
Starving Somalis, and now it seems, starving Bosnians, and many others have reason to be grateful that the generous conscience of America can still be roused to action, often at major risk to American lives.
President Clinton's decision to airlift desperately needed aid supplies into Bosnia, his first major foreign policy decision, shows that America still has an outward-looking, fundamentally internationalist, leadership.
But there are strict limits to what even American resources can achieve.
US citizens want their government to solve their huge domestic economic problems.
There is also an abiding reluctance to see America getting drawn in to another Vietnam, a bitter and protracted war exacting a huge price in US lives and treasure.
We should not underestimate the courage it must have taken for Clinton to give the go ahead to the Bosnian airlift.
IN the longer term, the only real hope of establishing an effective system of global peace and security is the UN.
This is the primary task for which it was originally designed.
For nearly 45 years, it was unable to function properly because it became a political battleground in the Cold War.
Time and again action by the Security Council was blocked by the veto power of the Soviet Union and other permanent members.
Yet the UN ideals embodied in the Charter still retained respect and moral authority because most people knew it was not the UN's fault that the Security Council was paralysed.
And, in spite of its huge handicaps, the UN was able to improvise some extremely successful peace-keeping operations, for example in the Middle East, and to show its effectiveness in social and economic development through the work of agencies such as the World Health Organisation (WHO) and the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO).
Now this has all changed.
Quite suddenly the UN has moved to the centre stage of world politics.
With the ending of the Cold War, Russia showed its willingness to co-operate with other permanent members on major issues of peace and security.
This was vividly demonstrated when the UN took steps to oppose Iraq's aggression against Kuwait.
The coalition against Saddam was able to operate under the aegis of the UN with the full authority of Security Council resolutions behind it.
This was a great boost to UN authority, but of course it has also
This has raised expectations of similar operations to deal with major challenges to peace and massive violations of human rights elsewhere.
But the harsh fact is that the UN was able to operate effectively in liberating Kuwait because it suited US national interests to undertake this task; and America and its allies clearly preferred to operate with the Security Council's approval.
Lacking any military forces of its own, the UN is pathetically dependent on the goodwill of its most powerful members.
This carries two great dangers: It risks damaging the UN's moral authority and reputation for impartiality if it is seen as the vehicle of superpower foreign policy; it causes huge embarrassment to the UN when, because of its own priorities, the US is unable to help, and the UN is then confronted with the question why have you failed to act decisively in our crisis while you were willing to do so in the case of Iraq's aggression?
Another important aspect of the changing role of the Security Council is its new attitude to the principle of absolute sovereignty of member states over their internal affairs.
In the bold decision to set up the Kurdish safe-havens and the no-fly zones in northern and southern Iraq after the Gulf war, and the decision to intervene militarily in Somalia, we see a significant departure from the principle of absolute sovereignty over domestic matters.
Peace-keeping operations have also significantly changed in emphasis.
The demand for the UN's peace-keeping services has risen alarmingly, overstretching the organisation's near bankrupt resources.
Since 1988, the UN has been called upon to mount 13 peace-keeping operations, as many as in the entire 23 years up to 1987.
Many of these new operations, such as United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) in Namibia have performed a whole range of difficult civilian tasks in addition to the military aspects of peace-keeping.
For example, in Namibia, UNTAG not only had to ensure that the ceasefire was observed; it also went on to tackle a programme of repatriation, and oversee the first elections for the new state.
It was a huge, though little known success for the UN and the people of Namibia.
Ninety-seven per cent of those qualified to vote did so and a new democratic constitution was adopted by unanimous vote.
The role of civilian experts, ranging from police to specialists in elections and administration, has become a crucial part of the UN peace-keeping package.
Despite such successes in imaginative shoestring operations, the UN is desperately in need of reform and strengthening if it is to meet the critical tests of the post-Cold War era.
The great merit of the UN Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali's Agenda for Peace report to the Security Council summit last year is its tough-minded and realistic assessment of the kind of reforms so urgently required.
The huge gap between the UN's resources and capabilities on the one hand and the expectations of UN help in every crisis around the world is highlighted by the organisation's financial crisis.
By May 1992, member states owed the UN a total of more than £1 billion towards the cost of its peace-keeping and regular budgets.
AGENDA for Peace estimates the current annual cost of UN peace-keeping at nearly $3 billion.
Yet, as the report points out, global defence expenditures of the member states are estimated to total almost $1 trillion per year.
The report makes the excellent proposals that member states should plan to finance their peace-keeping contributions from defence, rather than foreign affairs, budgets.
This makes excellent sense when one recognises that the UN's operations are actually helping to save further defence costs by preventing escalation into wider wars and by providing a form of collective burden sharing for peace-keeping purposes.
The report also calls for new reserve funds for UN peace-keeping to be urgently established.
One of Boutros-Ghali's most important proposals is for a strengthening of preventive diplomacy, particularly through the Chapter VI peaceful dispute revolution mechanisms of the Charter.
If greater efforts were put in at this level at an early stage, through early warning on emerging conflicts, many major wars could be prevented.
But Boutros-Ghali is no woolly-minded liberal.
He fully realises that there are situations when the world organisation must be able to use military force.
He wants the preventive deployment of UN peace-keeping forces in order to prevent hostilities breaking out, as is now being attempted in Macedonia.
The report also emphasises the need for the UN to face up to the responsibilities of peace enforcement when peaceful diplomacy, economic sanctions and all other measures have failed.
Currently, the UN as such has no way of implementing its enforcement powers under Chapter VII.
It depends entirely on the goodwill of America and other richer member states to take this on an improvised basis.
The Secretary General recommends that earmarked forces should be provided for the UN to give it a permanent rapid deployment force with all the requisite logistic and technical support and air and sea lift capabilities.
Former President Bush indicated America's readiness to offer US military lift, logistics, communications and intelligence capabilities to support peace-keeping operations.
This was a generous offer and the Secretary General is already, in the case of the Bosnian airlift plan, showing how dependent the UN continues to be on the generosity of Uncle Sam.
But is this really fair or desirable?
Is it not time that we took the Agenda for Peace seriously and gave the UN the resources it needs to save this and future generations from the scourge of war.
Boutros-Ghali's proposals are directed as much to the citizens of member states as to their governments.
If our peace-loving citizens really care about the future of our world organisation, they must help to create the momentum for reform by mandating our politicians to adopt, at least as a beginning, the urgently-needed measures recommended by the Secretary General.
Feel the force: peace-keeping operations have changed in emphasis and demand for the UN's services has risen alarmingly
Pressing need: Boutros Boutros-Ghali fully realises that there are situations when the world organisation must be able to use military force.
He wants the preventive deployment of UN peace-keeping forces in order to prevent hostilities breaking out, as is now being attempted in Macedonia
A criminal tendency to apportion blame
Increasing violence has led society to root out scapegoats, but new research in Scotland suggests that those fingered don't fit in the frame, says Mike Wilson
MORAL panic is one of the more enduring items on the domestic cultural menu and in a month of fatal stabbings, horrific child murder and economic gloom, society seems once again all too willing to frighten itself to death.
And to root out scapegoats.
This week's focus is on juvenile delinquents.
But not far behind in the firing line are welfare-dependent single-parent families, now so used to being vilified it seems time to offer a blindfold and last cigarette.
It is they, say critics, who most accurately reflect the health of the welfare state in the late 20th century: an underclass of the dependent, the criminal and the morally degenerate.
But according to research released yesterday, the facts don't quite fit the script.
Children of welfare-dependent single-parent families have neither a monopoly on juvenile crime nor a disdain for conventional values.
It seems the only thing which divides the underclass from the rest of society is cash.
The findings, which will appear later this year as a chapter of a book, are those of Edinburgh University's Richard Kinsey.
What they amount to is an appeal for calm.
His apparent heresy is not that of the smooth talking cleric, but the statistician specialising in the field of criminology.
Crime, Deprivation and the Scottish Urban Environment is a simple exercise in gathering facts, ‘a mapping the contours of crime in Scotland’, says Kinsey.
But in a debate often skewed by anecdote and rhetoric, its steady empirical analysis makes it one of the most significant critiques of the underclass to emerge.
Kinsey defines the underclass by turning to a bibliography spanning Social Darwinism to Monday's Daily Mail, via Sir Keith Joseph and the US political scientist Charles Murray, published recently in the Sunday Times.
‘Broadly speaking,’ says Kinsey, ‘these writers share the following claims: Firstly, for a section of the population — in practice the unemployed poor — the availability of state benefits provides a basic financial guarantee allowing choices to be made and actions pursued, which previously were unavailable due to the constraints of the labour market.
‘Secondly, the welfare state has unwittingly provided ‘incentives’ for non-participation in work, education and ‘family life’, evidence of which is visible in the rejection of the work ethic, the relaxation of moral standards and the emergence of the ‘dependency culture’.
‘And finally, evidence of the growing underclass is to be found in the increase in single-parent families, the increase in crime, and the lack of attachment to ‘conventional’ values.
These ‘symptoms’, it is said, are most prevalent among young people living in poor areas.’
TO test this, Kinsey has analysed the results of one of the biggest surveys of its kind in Europe, consisting of carefully-monitored questions put to 3,500 young people from all walks of life in Edinburgh and the Lothians.
If the underclass theorists have got it right, argues Kinsey, then nowhere will it be more apparent than among the children of welfare-dependent single-mother families.
It will be they who commit the most crime, it will be they who will stick two fingers up to conventional mores.
But the underclass theorists seem to have got it wrong.
Young people from welfare-dependent single-parent families just aren't artful dodgers ready to graduate into serious crime and a moral vacuum.
Sure, nearly 60 per cent of them admitted committing some sort of crime or incivility in the nine months prior to being questioned.
But at 60 per cent offending, such children were being no more criminal — and sometimes considerably less criminal — than their more affluent peers.
Such as latch-key kids from middle-class backgrounds.
In contrast, in single-parent families where the adult was working, the offending rate shot to 74 per cent.
In two-parent families, where no adults were in work, the corresponding figure was 46 per cent, which rose to 55 per cent when one of the adults was in work and 59 per cent when both adults were in work.
On the basis of these figures, the issue of juvenile crime seems less to do with welfare dependency, and more to do with after-school child care.
Where the findings are even more startling involves the social attitudes of young people.
Far from rejecting conventional values — for example towards family relationships, school work and the environment — underclass children expressed higher levels of concern than those from other backgrounds.
‘Of all the groups of young people questioned,’ says the findings, ‘the children of welfare-dependent single mothers consistently recorded the highest levels of anxiety about their prospects for:
their future (66 per cent);
their school work (75 per cent);
other members of their family (88 per cent);
personal relationships with others (90 per cent);
and even on green issues and the environment (74 per cent).’
SAYS Kinsey: ‘What we have seen in newspaper editorials and in political speeches over a period of time, is a latching on to the problem of crime and a series of assertions about the so-called welfare-dependent underclass.
In my view, those arguments are based on very little research, hyperbole and appeal to the most crude stereotypes.
And they have become a Trojan Horse to undermine some very basic and strongly-held principles of welfare and the welfare state.’
He is backed by Adrian Sinfield, professor of social policy at Edinburgh University, whose concern is that attacks on the welfare state are being carried out in a climate of increasing economic inequality and worsening poverty.
‘Poverty is increasing and it's being called dependency.
Over the last decade, benefits for the unemployed have been cut in some 50 different ways so that the living standards of those out of work have fallen even further behind those of other citizens.’
Since 1950 the number of those unemployed for more than a year has increased from 34,000 to more than a million at the start of this year.
According to information just released, only a quarter of the unemployed are supported by a National Insurance benefit, while two thirds are forced to rely on means-tested schemes.
If there is to be a debate about welfare benefits, argues Sinfield, it must include the benefits accorded to the well-off, such as mortgage relief.
‘For example, the £10 billion of revenue lost in supporting occupational and personal pensions for the generally better-off must be set alongside the £6 billion spent on means-tested benefits for the poorest old people.’
Richard Kinsey's final warning is that while it would be inappropriate to translate research conducted in Scotland to England, ‘vice versa you cannot generalise from the experience south of the Border to Scotland where we have a very different style of policing, a very different system of juvenile justice and a very different welfare structure.’
HISTORY is full of unexplained mysteries, for which no current solutions have ever been found.
Someone reported a long time ago that an old lady, on her deathbed, was heard to say: ‘Weel, it will be a great blessing to hear at last the real truth of the Gowrie conspiracy’.
Other mysteries abound, like what are the facts about Darnley's death?
And these Casket Letters?
And who wrote the Canadian Boat Song?
And, if it comes to that, what are the facts behind the publication of the song The Road to the Isles?
Or, still in history, what about the Douglas Larder?
We all carry a few purely personal mysteries, some of which will never be solved in this life, but may continue to gnaw for all our years.
My great one is: How did Jim MacDougall die?
There is a lesser one, which still remains an irritation.
It occurs in a book called The Scots Week-end, published by the Carswells in the late 1930s, and crying out for some other publisher to take it up and put it on the market, where it would be grabbed by many eager Scots.
Catherine and Donald Carswell were a husband and wife literary team who flourished at the same time as another pair, Willa and Edwin Muir.
Their book was published by Routledge, and a fine and stimulating rag-bag it is, with the best poems and songs and dance instructions and recipes and a whole round-up of the traditional  wisdom of Scotland, if there be any.
A section called An Examination Paper is where I met my downfall.
They set a number of questions on many subjects whose answers are readily available, but there is one above all which still scuppers me, especially as there are no solutions in the book nor in any subsequent edition.
They mention the poem Lord Ullin's Daughter, and the question they put is:
‘O who be ye would cross Loch Gyle, This dark and stormy water?’
(and then they go on)
’ Do you see anything in the boatman's question to suggest that he was the village idiot?’
I don't get it.
Crackdown against nuisance tenants
COUNCIL tenants in East Lothian were warned yesterday about terrifying their neighbours with anti-social behaviour.
The district council housing committee signalled a crackdown on those who used and dealt in drugs, caused nuisance and disturbance and threatened neighbours.
The action proposed could throw families out in the street.
They would then be tagged as intentionally homeless.
The hard line is part of a housing policy review on anti-social behaviour agreed by councillors.
‘Unfortunately there are people with a total lack of respect for anyone or anything and the problem has grown,’ Councillor Tom Ferguson said.
‘There has always been a problem, to a degree, of anti-social behaviour.
People are coming to us in great distress.
They are being frightened to death.’
Councillor Norman Murray said that the signal to unsocial tenants should be quite clear and had to be backed up with swift and firm action.
A report to the committee from the director of housing, Bruce Walker, said that complaints about bad neighbours in East Lothian had increased and become more serious.
Drugs were playing a bigger and more worrying part.
Councillors were told that a pilot scheme was to start in the Northfield-Coalgate area of Tranent in the spring with the support of Tranent Community Council, the police, Scottish Homes and the residents' association.
It would include a telephone helpline for bad neighbour complaints.
If it succeeds, similar schemes are likely across East Lothian.
The committee chairman, Councillor Pat Fawcett, said eviction would be the last resort as it showed failure.
It was Macaulay who said that there was no more absurd (and after the scenes in Liverpool I would say horrifying) spectacle than ‘the English having one of their periodic fits of morality’.
How salutary, therefore, after the hysteria of AA Miller's letter to find, immediately to hand, the antidote of Nigel Bruce's down-to-earth common sense.
Perhaps it is not generally known that David Farrington's research on criminal careers suggests that the single most effective crime prevention policy is nursery education, which is denied to so many children in inner city areas.
We also know that alcohol is the single most important cause of violence, not just directly, but also through the abuse committed on children by violently drunk parents.
It is time we acted, not on the basis of hysteria, but on the basis of these and other related findings.
As the communal conscience is examined, in an avalanche of detail, after the death of little James Bulger, there are certain aspects of  contributory neglect which must be of great concern to everyone.
First of all we must rid ourselves of the belief that punishment is wrong if it causes pain or inconvenience and does not have the full interest of the criminal at heart.
The criminal rarely considers ours.
A surfeit of sympathy for the offender has brought this country to a level of tolerance which is an affront to the ordinary person's conception of justice and retribution.
We must acknowledge, as we have done in the past, the fact that a physically painful experience at an early age, in the interests of discipline, is of more lasting value than a stream of compassionate understanding showered on a delinquent at a later stage.
On this score there is much to deplore and despise in the activities of those who have systematically contributed to the breakdown of our society by embracing policies which have removed, progressively, the props of discipline and authority.
A catalogue of misconceived ideas has preceded our descent into chaos.
They include the misguided, idealistic supporters of STOPP, who have eroded discipline in schools by describing a remedial stroke with a tawse or cane as a ‘beating’ or a ‘thrashing’.
Then there is the slack legislation passed by parliamentarians far removed from the sharp end of society and the liberal-minded intellectuals living in ‘Cloud-cuckoo-land’ where tolerance for the assailant takes precedence over the suffering of the victim.
We also have an over-compassionate bench and judiciary more concerned with the theory of justice than with its practical implementation.
Many parents, irrespective of class, must also stand condemned for similar dereliction of duty.
The fact that the average adult spends a minimum of 26 hours sitting in front of a  television set in any one week represents not only time lost in sharing activities with their children and young people, but time lost in influencing and controlling them.
Ailing economy
While I am only too well aware of the ailing state of the UK economy, I cannot help but agree with the comments made by both Scottish Liberal Democrat leader, Jim Wallace, and SNP employment spokesman, Roger Mullin, in response to yesterday's announcement of record Scottish unemployment figures of something in excess of 260,000.
In appropriately ‘watery’ metaphors, Mr Wallace spoke of the Government's economic strategy in Scotland ‘sinking beneath the waves,’and Mr Mullin expressed concern that ‘Scotland is being dragged down by the sinking ship of the UK’.
In response to R C Sneddon's letter today, I am afraid that I cannot offer any foolproof plan for economic recovery.
However, I can agree with comments made by others that the way forward lies in a package of investment in small business, training and education to enable us to capitalise on the skills which exist.
We cannot simply allow ourselves to cash in on private sector industry at the expense of the many unemployed and low-paid whose living standards will inevitably decline as a result of the spiralling costs of wholesale privatisation.
Finally, at the risk of once more being accused of expressing my opinions in emotive terms, I believe that we in Scotland must seek, by whatever means possible, to establish a Scottish parliament.
TV violence
I write on your article today on whether television affects children's behaviour.
In July 1972 I spent a whole afternoon discussing teaching and children with the headmaster of what corresponded roughly to a middle school.
It was in a remote rural area, Holmavik, a village of 300 inhabitants in the north-west peninsula of Iceland.
I asked about discipline, wondering how it compared with that at the central Scotland school where I taught.
The headmaster said that there had been no problems until the introduction of television.
After that they had begun to encounter the behavioural problems which had been occurring in Reykjavik and which are so depressingly familiar to us all.
As a youngster in the 1950s my greatest delight was to run on to the pitch at Murrayfield after the full-time whistle, pat my heroes on the back and not wash my hands for a week, much to the disgust of my mother.
For reasons unknown this privilege has only recently been denied the young rugby followers of today.
At the Scotland-Wales match I was severely reprimanded by a steward 30 years my junior for daring to place one foot on the hallowed turf as I made my exit from the ‘schoolboys’ enclosure’.
Does the alleged damage caused to the turf really warrant this control, as opposed to the pleasure gained by youngsters being allowed to run on to the pitch after the game?
Shrinking
A few years ago, I wrote expressing my concern that the village of West Linton, Peeblesshire, had ‘moved’ from being 18 miles outside the GPO in Edinburgh to 16 and then to 14 miles.
This fact was verified as being 16 by the road-sign in the village itself, but it had shrunk to 14 via an advertisement in your newspaper.
Needless to say, I was treated like a crank, was completely ignored by the so-called ‘experts’ and in general was subjected to ridicule by people who ought to know better, namely my own family!
Nonetheless I must stand my ground and restate that not only did it happen then, but it is getting worse!
In a recent advertisement for a house sale the same village of West Linton is now only 11 miles from Edinburgh.
How much longer will everyone ignore this phenomenon?
Scottish cringe
I am intrigued by James Rougvie's description of St Margaret, in today's report on Dunfermline's 900th anniversary celebrations, as ‘the Hungarian princess who civilised Malcolm Canmore’.
Is this Dunfermline's official line?
If so, it shows the town suffering more than its fair share of the Scottish cringe.
I doubt if many Scottish historians would take this line nowadays.
Personally, I tend to see Malcolm's marriage to Margaret as part of a process by which our king invited in a team of management consultants from the Continent in order to alienate the land even further from the people.
Well, that's one kind of civilisation; maybe.
Overheard on the Bathgate to Edinburgh train last Saturday, as a passenger observed rugby fans tucking into champagne and chicken legs in the Murrayfield car park: ‘Well, hen,’ she observed to her companion, ‘that's the biggest car-boot sale ah've ever seen.’
Michael Conway